
5. When ADX rallies above both Directional lines, it identifies an overheated market. When ADX turns down from above both Directional
lines, it shows that the major trend has stumbled. It is a good time to
take profits. If you trade multiple contracts, you definitely want to take
partial profits.
Market indicators give hard signals and soft signals. For example, a violation of a price low or a change in direction of a moving average are hard signals. A downturn of ADX is a soft signal. Once you see ADX turn down,
you ought to be very, very careful about adding to positions. You should start
taking profits, reducing positions, and looking to get out of your position
rather than adding to it.

142

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

28. MOMENTUM, RATE OF CHANGE, AND
SMOOTHED RATE OF CHANGE
When greed or fear grips a mass of traders, the crowd surges. Oscillators
measure the speed of that surge and track its momentum.
Technical indicators are divided into three main groups. Trend-following
indicators help identify trends. Oscillators help find turning points.
Miscellaneous indicators, such as the New High-New Low Index, track general changes in mass psychology.
Oscillators identify the emotional extremes of market crowds. They allow
you to find unsustainable levels of optimism and pessimism. Professionals
tend to fade those extremes. They bet against them, for a return to normalcy.
When the market rises and the crowd gets up on its hind legs and roars from
greed, professionals sell short. They buy when the market falls and the
crowd howls in fear. Oscillators help them to time those trades.

Overbought and Oversold

Martin Pring compares trend-following indicators and oscillators to the footprints of a man walking his dog on a leash. The man leaves a fairly straight
trail - like a trend-following indicator. The dog's trail swings right and left as
far as the leash allows - like an oscillator. When the dog reaches the end of
its leash, it is likely to turn and run the other way.
You can follow the trail of a man to find the trend of the pair. When the
dog deviates from that trail by the length of its leash, it usually turns around.
Usually, but not always. If a dog sees a cat or a rabbit, it may become excited
enough to pull its owner off his trail. Traders need to use judgment when
using oscillator signals.
An oscillator becomes overbought when it reaches a high level associated
with tops in the past. Overbought means too high, ready to turn down. An
oscillator becomes oversold when it reaches a low level associated with bottoms in the past. Oversold means too low, ready to turn up.
Overbought and oversold levels are marked by horizontal reference lines
on the charts. The proper way to draw those lines is to place them so that an
oscillator spends only about 5 percent of its time beyond each line. Place
overbought and oversold lines so that they cut across only the highest peaks
and the lowest valleys of an oscillator for the past six months. Readjust these
lines once every three months.

28. MOMENTUM

143

When an oscillator rises or falls beyond its reference line, it helps a trader
to pick a top or a bottom. Oscillators work spectacularly well in trading
ranges, but they give premature and dangerous trading signals when a new
trend erupts from a range. When a strong trend begins, oscillators start acting
like a dog that pulls its owner off his path.
An oscillator can stay overbought for weeks at a time when a new, strong
uptrend begins, giving premature sell signals. It can stay oversold for weeks
in a steep downtrend, giving premature buy signals. Knowing when to use
oscillators and when to rely on trend-following indicators is a hallmark of a
mature analyst (see Section 43).

Types of Divergences

Oscillators, as well as other indicators, give their best trading signals when
they diverge from prices. Bullish divergences occur when prices fall to a new
low while an oscillator refuses to decline to a new low. They show that bears
are losing power, prices are falling out of inertia, and bulls are ready to seize
control. Bullish divergences often mark the ends of downtrends.
Bearish divergences occur in uptrends- they identify market tops. They
emerge when prices rally to a new high while an oscillator refuses to rise to a
new peak. A bearish divergence shows that bulls are running out of steam,
prices are rising out of inertia, and bears are ready to take control.
There are three classes of bullish and bearish divergences (Figure 28-1).
Class A divergences identify important turning points - the best trading
opportunities. Class B divergences are less strong, and class C divergences
are least important. Valid divergences are clearly visible - they seem to jump
from the charts. If you need a ruler to tell whether there is a divergence,
assume there is none.
Class A bearish divergences occur when prices reach a new high but an
oscillator reaches a lower high than it did on a previous rally. Class A bearish divergences usually lead to sharp breaks. Class A bullish divergences
occur when prices reach a new low but an oscillator traces a higher bottom
than during its previous decline. They often precede sharp rallies.
Class B bearish divergences occur when prices make a double top but an
oscillator traces a lower second top. Class B bullish divergences occur when
prices make a double bottom but an oscillator traces a higher second bottom.
Class C bearish divergences occur when prices rise to a new high but an
indicator stops at the same level it reached during the previous rally. It shows

144

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

PRICE

~ k Pbh P'kb
5

- -- -- -- - - ------ -- --- - --- ------ - --- ln~umn

4bPbPb
!a

tl

DnrowiDla

Cuss A

Cuss A

Cuss B

Cuss B

CussC

Cuss C

BEARW

Buwvl

BEN~W

&LUSH

B w w

Buwvl

Figure 28-1.

Types of Divergences

Divergences between prices and indicators give some of the most powerful signals in technical analysis. Divergences are defined by the differences in height or depth of prices and indicators.
Class A bearish divergence-prices reach a new peak while an indicator
reaches a lower peak. This is the strongest sell signal.
Class A bullish divergence-prices fall to a new low while an indicator
stops at a more shallow low than before. This i s the
strongest buy signal.
Class B bearish divergence-prices trace a double top while an indicator
reaches a lower peak. This is the second strongest sell
signal.
Class B bullish divergence-prices trace a double bottom while an indicator traces a higher second bottom. This i s the second
strongest buy signal.
Class C bearish divergence-prices reach a new peak while an indicator
traces a double top. This is the weakest bearish divergence.
Class C bullish divergence-prices fall to a new low while an indicator
makes a double bottom. This is the weakest bullish
divergence.

28. MOMENTUM

145

that bulls are becoming neither stronger nor weaker. Class C bullish divergences occur when prices fall to a new low but the indicator traces a double
bottom.
Class A divergences almost always identify good trades. Class B and C
divergences more often lead to whipsaws. It is best to ignore them, unless
they are strongly confirmed by other indicators.
Triple Bullish or Bearish Divergences consist of three price bottoms and
three oscillator bottoms or three price tops and three oscillator tops. They are
even stronger than regular divergences. In order for a triple divergence to
occur, a regular bullish or bearish divergence first has to abort. That's
another good reason to practice tight money management! If you lose only a
little on a whipsaw, you will not suffer-and you will have both the money
and psychological strength to re-enter a trade.

Momentum and Rate of Change

Momentum and Rate of Change measure trend acceleration - its gain or loss
of speed. These leading indicators show when a trend speeds up, slows
down, or maintains its rate of progress. They usually reach a peak before the
trend reaches its high and reach a bottom before prices hit their low.
As long as oscillators keep reaching new highs, it is safe to hold long
positions. As long as they keep reaching new lows, it is safe to hold short
positions. When an oscillator reaches a new high, it shows that an uptrend
is gaining speed and is likely to continue. When an oscillator traces a lower
peak, it shows that an uptrend has stopped accelerating, like a rocket that
has run out of fuel. When it flies only because of inertia, you have to get
ready for a reversal. The same reasoning applies to oscillator lows in
downtrends.
Momentum and Rate of Change compare today's closing price to a price a
selected period of time ago. Momentum subtracts a past price from today's
price; Rate of Change divides today's price by a past price.

where M
ROC
Ptod
Ptod -

= Momentum.
= Rate of Change.
= Today's closing price.
= Closing price n days ago (chosen by trader).

146

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

For example, a 7-day Momentum of closing prices equals today's closing
price minus the closing price 7 days ago. Momentum is positive if today's
price is higher, negative if today's price is lower, and at zero if today's price
equals the price of 7 days ago. The slope of the line connecting momentum
values for each day shows whether momentum is rising or falling.
A 7-day Rate of Change (ROC) divides the latest price by the closing
price 7 days ago. If they are equal, ROC equals 1. If today's price is higher,
then ROC is greater than 1, and if today's price is lower, then ROC is less
than 1. The slope of the line that connects values for each day shows whether
Rate of Change is rising or falling (see worksheet, Figure 28-2).
A trader must choose the width of the time window for Momentum or
ROC. As a rule of thumb, it pays to keep oscillator windows fairly narrow.
Use wide windows for trend-following indicators whose goal it is to catch
trends. Use narrow windows for oscillators to detect short-term changes in
the markets.
Momentum and ROC share a flaw with simple moving averages- they
jump twice in response to each piece of data. They react to each new price,
and they jump again when that piece of data leaves the oscillator's window.
Smoothed Rate of Change takes care of this problem.

Crowd Psychology

Each price reflects the consensus of value of all market participants at the
moment of transaction. Momentum and ROCcompare today's price (today's
consensus of value) to a previous price (an earlier consensus of value). They
measure changes in mass optimism or pessimism.
To find out whether a child is growing fast enough, you can measure his
height each month and compare it with his height six months ago. Then you
find out whether your child is growing normally, growing so slowly that you
should take him to a doctor, or growing fast enough to think about applying
for a basketball scholarship. Momentum and ROC tell you whether a trend is
accelerating, slowing down, or moving at the same speed.
When Momentum or ROC rises to a new peak, it shows that the optimism
of the market crowd is growing, and prices are likely to rally higher. When
Momentum or ROC falls to a new low, it shows that the pessimism of the
market crowd is increasing, and lower prices are likely ahead.
When prices rise but Momentum or ROC falls, it warns you that a top is
near-it is time to think of taking profits on long positions or tightening
stops. If prices reach a new high but Momentum or ROCreaches a lower top,

147

28. MOMENTUM

Crude Oil
,

Date

1

Close

i Mtm:7

I RoC:7

j 13-EMA I S-ROC13/21 -

6/19
1 19.91 i -0.18 [ 99.10
20.33
96.07
1 20.17 i -0.03 1 99.85 ] 20.30 1
95.94
6/20
6/21
96.04
202, ......i......3:10...........99:51......1.....20:.29......'................................
...........................
99.95 1 20.25
95.90
20.00 i -0.01
6/24
..............................................
...............................
...................................................................
100.50 4..........
2023
95.72
20.10 i 0.10
6/25
:.........................................
........................................................................................
95.49
99.80 i 20.21
20.09 i -0.04
,
6/26
95.66
) 20.46 i 0.36 i 101.79 ! 20.24 [
6/27
1 20.53 i 0.62 1 103.11 ! 20.29 ! 95.67
6/28
1 20.65 i 0.48 1 102.38 1 20.34 1 95.88 7/01

1

f.

,

,

102.13 f 20.77
100.14
1103.77 1 20.87 [
100.93
7/12
21.48 i 0.78
101.65
7115
21.23 :i .....O:S!!...........103:31...........20.92.....................................
............................................
102.37
103.14 *...........................
20.99
21.37
0.65
7116
"..""..................
........................................................................................
7117
I :!103.21
!!
......i ......0:3!...........103:'1 .....; .....!?......................................
...........................
102.65
21.18
103.85
21.66 i 0.56
7118

.??!.:.el

!

!

--

Figure 28-2. Momentum, Rate o f Change, and Smoothed Rate
of Change Worksheet
Momentum (Mtm:7) is today's closing price minus the closing price 7
days ago.
Rate of Change (RoC:7) i s today's closing price divided by the closing
price 7 days ago.
You can use closing prices for the day in these formulas or median
prices (high plus low, divided by two). This also applies to most indicators described in this book. it is OK to use time windows that are wider
or narrower than 7 days.
To create a Smoothed Rate of Change (S-ROC 13/21 ), calculate a 13day exponential moving average of closing prices and apply a 21-day
Rate of Change to it.

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

that bearish divergence gives a strong sell signal. The reverse holds true in
downtrends.
There are times when Momentum and ROCact not as leading but as coincident indicators. Think what happens to a rocket when it hits an overhead
obstacle. Its speed and momentum stop rising and fall together as the rocket
crashes. This happens in the markets when the crowd gets hit by a major
piece of bad news and this "overhead obstacle" sends ROC and prices down
together.
Trading Rules

Leading indicators are like brake lights on a car ahead of you on a highway.
When they light up, you do not know whether the other driver is tapping his
breaks or slamming them. You have to be extra careful putting on trades
using leading indicators (Figure 28-3).
1. When the trend is up, buy whenever ROCdeclines below its centerline
and ticks up. It shows that the uptrend has slowed down -like a train
that slows down to pick up passengers. When the trend is down, sell
short whenever ROC rallies above its centerline and ticks down.
2. If you hold a long position and prices begin to slide, see whether ROC
has reached a record peak before this pullback. A new peak in ROC
shows a high level of bullish energy, which is likely to lift the market
to its previous high or higher. Then it is relatively safe to hold long
positions. On the other hand, a series of declining peaks in ROC is a
sign of weakness- it is better to sell immediately. Reverse this
approach in downtrends.
3. A break in a trendline of Momentum or ROCoften precedes a break of
a price trendline by a day or two. When you see a leading indicator
break a trendline, prepare for a break in the price trend.
Smoothed Rate of Change

This oscillator, developed by Fred G. Schutzman, avoids the major flaw of
ROC. It responds to each piece of data only once rather than twice. Smoothed
Rate of Change (S-ROC) compares the values of an exponential moving
average (EMA) instead of prices at two points in time. It gives fewer trading
signals, and the quality of these signals is better.

28. MOMENTUM

149

Figure 28-3. Seven-day Momentum (Mtm:7) and Rate of
Change (RoC:7)
When Momentum or ROC rises, it shows that a rally is accelerating.
When it falls, it shows that a decline i s accelerating. Peaks and bottoms
of these indicators show when a trend has reached its maximum speed.
Once Momentum or ROC turns, it is time to begin a countdown to a
reversal. These indicators give their best signals when they diverge from
prices (as marked by arrows on the chart).
Momentum and ROC can be analyzed using classical charting methods, which often give leading trading signals. Notice how ROC and
Momentum have sliced through their resistance in August, several days
prior to a price breakout. At the right edge of the chart, a bearish divergence shows that the uptrend has run out of steam. It is time to take profits on long positions and go short, with a protective stop a few ticks
above the September top.

150

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

To create S-ROC you must first calculate an exponential moving average
of closing prices (see Section 25). The next step is to apply Rate of Change
to the EMA. S-ROC is not very sensitive to the length of its EMA or ROC
parts. You can calculate a 13-day EMA of closing prices and then apply a
21-day Rate of Change to it (see worksheet, Figure 28-2).
Some traders calculate the Rate of Change of prices first and then smooth
it with a moving average. Their method produces a much jumpier indicator,
which is less useful than S-ROC.

Crowd Behavior

An exponential moving average reflects the average consensus of value of
all market participants during the period of its window. It is like a composite
photograph that reflects major features of the market crowd rather than its
fleeting moods.
S-ROC compares each reading of an EMA to a past reading from your
selected period of time. It compares the average mass consensus today to the
average consensus in the past. S-ROC tracks major shifts in the bullishness
and bearishness of the market crowd.

Trading Rules

Changes in the direction of S-ROC often identify important market turns.
Upturns of S-ROCmark significant bottoms, and its downturns mark important tops (Figure 28-4). Divergences between S-ROC and prices give especially strong buy and sell signals.
1. Buy when S-ROCturns up from below its centerline.
2. Sell when S-ROCstops rising and turns down. Sell short when S-ROC
turns down from above its centerline.

