observed.
5. Conclusion: Determining the meaning of the results is a matter of
statistical inference, the topic treated over the next three chapters.

RIGOROUS AND CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF
OBSERVED RESULTS
The fifth phase of the hypothetico-deductive method points to another important difference between science and nonscience. In science, observed
evidence is not taken at face value. In other words, the obvious implication of the evidence may not be its true implication. The evidence must be
subjected to rigorous analysis before a conclusion can be drawn from it.
The evidence of choice in science is quantitative data, and the tool of
choice for drawing conclusions is statistical inference.
An important scientific principle is the preference for simpler expla-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

147

nations (Okam's Razor). As such, astounding hypotheses are given serious
consideration only after more commonplace hypotheses have been rejected. Sightings of a UFO are not in1mediately interpreted as evidence of
an alien visit. More mundane accounts such as ball lightning, weather balloons, or a new aircraft must first be discredited before an invasion from
outer space is taken seriously.
Thus a scientific attitude toward an extraordinarily profitable rule
back test would first consider and reject other explanations before entertaining the possibility that a significant TA rule has been discovered. The
possible explanations of good performance unrelated to a rule's predictive
power are good luck due to sampling error (see Chapters 4 and 5) and systematic error due to data-mining bias (see Chapter 6).

SUMMARY OF KEY ASPECTS OF TIlE
SCIENTIFIC METHOD
The following is a summary of the key points of the scientific method:
• No matter how voluminous the evidence, the scientific method can
never conclusively prove a hypothesis to be true.
• Observed evidence used in combination with the deductive form falsification of the consequent can be used to disprove a hypothesis with a
specified degree of probability.
• Science is restricted to testable hypotheses. Propositions that are not
testable are not within the domain of scientific discourse and are considered to be meaningless.
• A hypothesis is testable if and only if predictions about yet-to-bemade observations can be deduced from the hypothesis.
• A hypothesis that can only explain past observations but that cannot
make predictions about new observations is not scientific.
• A hypothesis is tested by comparing its predictions with new observations. If predictions and observations agree, the hypothesis is not
proven, but merely receives tentative confirmation. If they don't
agree, the hypothesis is taken to be false or incomplete.
• All currently accepted scientific knowledge is only provisionally true.
Its truth is temporary until a test shows it to be false, at which point it
is replaced or subsumed by a more complete theory.
• Scientific knowledge is cumulative and progressive. As older hypotheses are shown to be false, they are replaced by newer ones that more
accurately portray objective reality. Science is the only method of inquiry or intellectual discipline which can claim that newer is better.

148 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Though knowledge, styles, and methods in other disciplines, such as
music, art, philosophy, or literary criticism, may change over time, it
cannot be claimed that new is necessarily better.
• Any set of past observations (data) can be explained by an infinite
number of hypotheses. For example, Elliott Wave Theory, Gann
Lines, classical chart patterns, and a roster of other interpretive
methods can all explain past market behavior according to their
own paradigm of analysis. Therefore, all these explanations are
said to be empirically equal. The only way to decide which ones are
better is by seeing how well they can predict observations whose
outcomes are not yet known. Those methods that cannot generate
testable (falsifiable) predictions about new observations can be
eliminated immediately on the grounds that they are scientifically
meaningless. Those methods that can generate predictions that are
found to conflict with future observations can be eliminated on
grounds that they have been falsified. Thus, only methods that can
make testable predictions that display genuine predictive power deserve to be retained in the body of TA knowledge.

IF 11\ WERE TO ADOPT THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
This section examines consequences of TA adopting the scientific
method.
The Elimination of Subjective TA
The most important consequence of TA adopting the scientific method
would be the elimination of subjective approaches. Because they are not
testable, subjective methods are shielded from empirical challenge. This
makes them worse than wrong. They are meaningless propositions devoid
of information. Their elimination would make TA an entirely objective
practice.
Subjective TA would be eliminated in one of two ways: by transformation into objective methods or abandonment. Perhaps Gann Lines, subjective divergences, trend channels, and a host of subjective patterns and
concepts embody valid aspects of market behavior. In their present subjective form, however, we are denied this knowledge.
Transforming a subjective method into an objective version is not trivial. To illustrate a case where this has been done, I discuss an algorithm
for the automated diction of head and shoulder patterns and test results in
the section "Objectification of Subjective TA: An Exan1ple."

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

149

Elirnimttion of' Meaningless Forecasts

It is not practical to assume that all subjective practitioners will follow
my call to objectify or close up shop. For those who continue to use
subjective approaches, there is an important step that can be taken to
make their output, if not their methodology, objective. Henceforth, they
would issue only falsifiable forecasts. This would at least make the information they provide meaningful and informative. In this context, informative does not necessarily mean correct but rather that the
forecasts have cognitive content that passes the discernable difference
test discussed in the Introduction. In other words, the forecast would
convey something of substance, the truth of which can be clearly determined by subsequent market action. In other words, the forecast will
make explicit or clearly imply which outcomes would show it to be
wrong. As stated previously, a forecast that does not make clear what
future events constitute prediction errors in essence says that any outcome can happen.
At the present time, most subjective forecasts, often referred to as
market calls, are meaningless. In all likelihood, this is not obvious to either consumers or the analysts issuing the forecasts. First, consider a
forecast that is clearly meaningless: "My indicators are now predicting the
market will either go up an infinite percentage, down 100 percent, or
something in between." On its face, the statement is unfalsifiable because
there is no outcome that could possibly conflict with the prediction. The
only good thing about the forecast is that its lack of meaning and lack of
falsifiability are transparent. A more typical market call goes something
like this: "On the basis of my indicators [fill in one or more TA methods], I
am bullish." This unfalsifiable statement is just as meaningless, but its lack
of substance is not obvious. Though there is a prediction of a rise, the prediction leaves unclear when it might occur or under what circumstances
the prediction would be wrong.
This bullish stance could have been made meaningful by clearly excluding certain outcomes. For example, I expect the market to rise more
than 10 percent from current levels before it declines by more than 5
percent from current levels. Any instance of a decline of greater than 5
percent before a rise of 10 percent would be sufficient to classify the forecast as an error.
If you ever suspect that you are being fed a meaningless prediction,
here are some good antidotes. Ask the following question: "How much adverse movement (opposite to the direction predicted) would have to occur for you to admit this forecast is mistaken?" Or "What outcomes are
precluded by your prediction?" Or "When, and under what conditions, can
the forecast be evaluated, such as the passage of time, change in price (ad-

.50 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
verse or favorable), or a specific indicator development?" Reader, I warn
you not to do this if you are squeamish about watching people squirm.
Making subjective forecasts meaningful with an up-front statement of
when and how the forecast will be evaluated would eliminate the market
guru's after-the-fact wiggle room. Some ways of adding meaning to a subjective forecast include (1) defining a future point in time when the forecast will be evaluated, (2) defining the maximum degree of adverse
movement that would be allowed without declaring the prediction wrong,
and (3) predicting a specified magnitude of favorable movement prior to a
specified magnitude of unfavorable movement (X percent favorable before Y percent unfavorable). Steps like these would allow a subjective
practitioner to develop a track record of meaningful market calls. Meaningful track records can also result from specific transaction recommendations made in real time.
One limitation of this recommendation is that it would still leave unclear what the profitable track record represents. This is because subjective forecasts are derived in an undefined way, so even if a profitable track
record of meaningful predictions is built up over time, it cannot be known
that they were the result of a consistent analysis procedure that can be repeated in the future. In fact, it is likely that the method of analysis is not
stable over time. Studies of expert subjective judgment indicate that experts do not combine infornlation in a consistent manner from one judgment to the next. "Intuitive judgments suffer from serious random
inconsistencies due to fatigue, boredom, and all the factors that make us
hunlan. "40 In other words, given the exact same pattern of market data at
different times, it is quite possible that a subjective analyst would not give
the same forecast. 41

Paradigm Shift
Refashioning TA into an objective practice would be what Thomas Kuhn
calls a paradigm shift. In his highly influential book, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Kuhn rejected Popper's notion that science evolves
strictly by falsification and conjecture. Instead, Kuhn saw the evolution of
a science as a sequence of paradigms, or world views. While a given paradigm is in place, practitioners indoctrinated in that point of view confine
their activities to posing questions and hypotheses that are consistent
with and answerable within that view.
A large number of TA analysts have been indoctrinated with the nonscientific, intuitive analysis paradigm developed by TA pioneers like Dow,
Gann, Shabacker, Elliott, Edwards and Magee, and so forth. They established the subjective research tradition and postulated the background
wisdom that is accepted as true and taught to aspiring practitioners. The

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

151

certification exam given by the Market Technicians Association to aspiring Chartered Market Technicians (CMT) exemplifies this tradition.
The shift to an evidence-based objective approach would challenge
much of this material as either meaningless or not sufficiently supported
by statistical evidence. Many of the teachings will go the way of early
Greek physics and astronomy. Some methods will survive objectification
and statistical testing and will warrant a position in a legitimate body of
TA knowledge.
Lest the reader think my position too harsh, I am not advocating that
the falsifiability criterion be used to cut off all research in budding TA
methods just as they are being formulated. Many of the brilliant theories
of science began as half-backed prescientific ideas on the wrong side of
the falsifiability criterion. These ideas needed time to develop, and one
day some turned into meaningful science. One example in TA is the new
field of socionomics, an outgrowth of Elliott Wave Theory. At the current
time, I regard this newly developing discipline as prescientific, though it
may have the potential to become a science. According to a conversation I
had with Professor John Nofsinger, who is working within the field of socionomics, at this time the discipline is not yet able to make testable predictions. This will require the quantification of social mood, the key
determinant of market movement according to socionomics.
Nascent areas of research such as this and others should not be shortcircuited simply because they are not at this time able to generate testable
predictions. One day they may be able to do so.

OBJECTIFICATION OF SUBJECTIVE 11\: AN EXAMPLE
One of the challenging aspects of moving TA to a science will be transforming subjective chart patterns into objectively defined testable patterns. This section presents an example of how two academic
technicians, Keving Chang and Carol Osler (C&O) objectified the headand-shoulders pattern).42 Not all elements of their pattern are included
here. Rather, I have included enough of their rules and the problems
they faced and solved to illustrate the challenges of transforming a subjective method into an objective one. For further details please refer to
their original articles.
Descriptions of the head-and-shoulders pattern can be found in many
TA texts43 and are typically accompanied by a diagram similar to the one
in Figure 3.8. It represents the pattern as a sequence of noise-free price
swings. When the pattern manifests in perfect textbook form, even a beginning student of TA can spot it.

152 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

The problem occurs when an actual chart pattern departs from this
ideal. Even seasoned chartists can debate whether a given pattern qualifies as a legitimate head and shoulders, an unavoidable consequence of
the lack of an objective pattern definition. Subjective pattern definitions
generally describe how the head-and-shoulders pattern should look, but
they do not provide clear rules for discriminating patterns that do qualify
as head and shoulders from patterns that possess some head-and-shoulderslike features but do not qualify. In other words, the definitions lack clear
rules for which patterns to exclude. This problem is conceptualized in
Figure 3.6.
Without objective rules for deciding what does and what does not
qualify as a legitimate head-and-shoulders pattern it is impossible to evaluate the pattern's profitability or predictive power. The solution to the
problem is to define objective rules that discriminate valid head-andshoulders patterns from those that are not. 44 This notion is illustrated in
Figure 3.7. The challenge of turning a subjective pattern into an objective
one can be thought of as the problem of defining the pattern as a clear
subset in the super-set of all possible TA price patterns.
C&O defined the head-and-shoulders top pattern as composed of five
pivot or price reversal points that, in tum, define the pattern's three peaks
and two troughs. These pivots are denoted by letters A through E on Figure 3.8. All eight texts consulted by C&O were clear that the head, denoted by letter C, must be higher than the two surrounding peaks
(shoulders) denoted by letters A and E. There has been some debate
among chartists about several auxiliary features including the Adam's apple, the double chin, and the cowlick. However, the TA manuals consulted
by C&O were inconsistent on these aspects and they were not included.

Set of All Possible Chart Patterns
FIGURE 3.6 Subjective patterns-no definitive exclusion rules.

153

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

Not H&S

~

Not DB

V

FIGURE 3.7 Objective patterns-definitive exclusion rules.

One challenge that faces the real-world chartist is the fact that actual
price oscillations do not trace out clearly identifiable peaks and troughs.
Rather, peaks and troughs occur at numerous oscillation scales from tiny
waves lasting minutes to very large ones lasting years or decades. This
property, called fractal scaling, imposes a burden on the subjective analyst trying to identify a head-and-shoulders pattern. The analyst must visually fllter the price behavior to isolate peaks and troughs at one particular
scale of interest. This is relatively easy in retrospect, but it is quite difficult
as the pattern is actually unfolding in real time.
C&O addressed this problem by using a percentage fllter, also known
as an Alexander filter4 5 or a zigzag indicator, which is discussed by Merrill

Price

Head

C
Neck Line

Cross
Sell Signal
....................Neck Line····""

o
Right
Trough

Time
FIGURE 3.8 Head and shoulders.

154 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

in Filtered Waves. 46 It is an objective method for identifying peaks and
troughs as prices evolve. Troughs are identified after prices have moved
up from a recent price low by an amount greater than a specified threshold percentage and peaks are identified after prices have moved down
from a recent price high by the threshold percentage. The problem is that
the identification occurs with a time lag, the time it takes for prices to
move the threshold amount. For example, if the threshold is set at 5 percent, then a peak is not detected until prices have fallen at least 5 percent
from the most recent price maximum, and troughs are not detected until
prices have risen at least 5 percent from the recent price minimum. The
minimum required price movement causes a lag between the time the
peak or trough actually occurred and the time at which it is detected by
the zigzag filter.
Next, C&O addressed how to determine the correct threshold percentage to define the zigzag filter. Different filter thresholds would reveal
head-and-shoulders patterns of different size (scale). For example, a 3
percent filter might reveal a head-and-shoulders pattern that a 10 percent
filter would completely ignore. This makes it possible for multiple headand-shoulders patterns of differing scale to exist simultaneously. C&O addressed this problem by subjecting each financial instrument (stock or
currency) to 10 different zigzag filters employing a range of threshold values. This allowed them to identify head-and-shoulders patterns on a variety of scales.
This raised yet another problem. What should the 10 filter thresholds
be? Clearly, a set of thresholds that would be good for one instrument
may not be good for another because they are characterized by different
levels of volatility. Realizing this, C&O take each instrument's recent
volatility into account to arrive at the set of 10 filter thresholds used for
that instrument. This insight allowed their head-and-shoulders algorithm
to generalize across markets with different volatilities. C&O defined a
market's volatility, V, as the standard deviation of daily percentage price
changes over the most recent 100 trading days. The 10 thresholds were
arrived at by multiplying V by 10 different coefficients; 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0,
3.5, 4.0, 4.5, 5.0, 5.5, 6.0. This resulted in 10 zigzag filters with varying sensitivity. The validity of the set of coefficients chosen by C&O were confirmed by visual inspection of price charts by TA practitioners who
agreed that the 10 zigzag filters did a reasonable job of identifying headand-shoulders patterns.
Next C&O addressed the problem of defining rules that qualify a candidate pattern as a valid head-and-shoulders. These rules were applied to
the instrument once its price had been zigzag filtered and the peaks and
troughs at a given scale had been identified.

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

155

First, the head and shoulders identified by C&O's algorithm had to satisfy the following basic rules:
t. The head of the pattern must be higher than both the left and right
shoulders.
2. The instrument must be in an uptrend prior to the formation of the
head-and-shoulders pattern. Thus, the pattern's left shoulder has to be
above the prior peak (PP) and the pattern's left trough has to be above
the prior trough (PT).
Next C&O grappled with more subtle and complex issues to qualify a
candidate pattern as a valid head-and-shoulders. They accomplished this
with a set of innovative measurements that qualified the pattern in terms
of its vertical and horizontal symmetry and the time it took for the pattern
to complete. These rules allowed them to definitively label a candidate
pattern as either head-and-shoulders or a non-head-and-shoulders.

Vertical Symmetry Rules
The vertical symmetry rules exclude patterns with necklines that are too
steeply sloped. The pattern in Figure 3.9 has acceptable vertical symmetry.
The rules compare the price levels of the right and left shoulders (A
and E) and the price levels of the right and left troughs (B and D) with a
price level defined by the midpoint of segment AB, designated as point
X, and the midpoint of segment DE designated as point Y. To qualify as a

Price

c

E>X&D<X
r---~+
Time
A>Y&B<Y
FIGURE 3.9 Good vertical symmetry.

156 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Price

Time
E'IGURE 3.10

Poor vertical symmetry-neckline slope too steep.

vertically symmetrical head-and-shoulders, the pattern must satisfy the
following rules.
t. The price level of the left shoulder peak, point A, must exceed the
price level of point Y.

2. The price level of the right shoulder peak, point E, must exceed the
price level of point X.
3. The price level of the left trough, point B, must be less than the price
level of point Y.
4. The price level of the right trough, point D, must be less than the price
level of point X.
Figures 3.10 and 3.11 show two head-and-shoulders patterns that
would be excluded because the vertical symmetry criteria have not been
satisfied.

Horizontal Symmetry Rule
Another feature used by C&O to distinguish head-and-shoulders patterns
from non-head-and-shoulders patterns was horizontal symmetry. A pattern with good horizontal symmetry is one for which the head, at point C,
is roughly equidistant from the peaks representing the pattern's two shoulders (points A and E). C&O's rule was that the distance from the head to
