SECOND EDITION

(continued from front flap)

KATHY LIEN is the Director of
Currency Research at Global Forex
Trading, Division of Global Futures
& Forex, Ltd. She is responsible for
providing research and analysis, including technical and fundamental
research reports, market commentaries, and trading strategies. Prior
to joining GFT, Lien was the chief strategist of DailyFX.
com and an associate at JPMorgan Chase, where
she worked in cross-markets and foreign exchange
trading. She has vast experience within the interbank
market using both technical and fundamental analysis
to trade FX spot and options. She also has experience
trading a number of products outside of FX, including interest rate derivatives, bonds, equities, and futures. Lien has written for Active Trader, Futures, and
SFO magazines and is frequently quoted on CNBC,
Bloomberg, Fox Business, and Reuters. She is also
the author of the first edition of Day Trading the Currency Market as well as Millionaire Traders, both of
which are published by Wiley.
Jacket Design: Loretta Leiva
Jacket Photograph: © Getty Images

LIEN

Praise for the First Edition
“I thought this was one of the best books that I had read on FX. The book should
be required reading not only for traders new to the foreign exchange markets,
but also for seasoned professionals. I’ll definitely be keeping it on my desk for
reference. The book is very readable and very educational. In fact, I wish that
Kathy’s book had been around when I had first started out in FX. It would have
saved me from a lot of heartache from reading duller books, and would have
saved me a lot of time from having to learn things the hard way. I look forward to
reading other books from her in the future.”
—Farooq Muzammal, Head of Foreign Exchange, MAREX Capital
“Kathy’s book is an indispensable tool for Forex traders, whether you are a professional or novice. It not only lays the groundwork for an in-depth understanding
of Forex trading, it also contains numerous fundamental and technical strategies
. . . . I suspect that many traders will be keeping Kathy’s book within arm’s reach
for many years to come.”
—Eddie Kwong, Executive VP/Editor in Chief, Tradingmarkets.com
“In Day Trading the Currency Market, Kathy Lien provides traders with unique,
thoughtful, and profitable insight on trading this exciting market. This book
should be required reading for all traders, whether they are novices to Forex or
experienced professionals.”
—Cory Janssen, cofounder, Investopedia.com
“There are aspects to trading currencies that are different from trading equities,
options, or futures. In this book, Kathy Lien provides deep insight into all the
mechanisms that take place in the currency markets. Any currency trader will
gain more confidence in their trading after reading this book.”
—Jayanthi Gopalakrishnan, Editor,
Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities
“Kathy has done a brilliant job with this book. She speaks directly to traders
and gives them guidance to improve their performance as Forex traders. I took
some notes and ideas from the book myself that are going to be very useful for
my business.”
—Francesc Riverola, CEO and founder, FXstreet.com

DAY TRADING & SWING TRADING the CURRENCY MARKET

Filled with proven trading strategies as well as detailed
statistical analysis, the Second Edition of Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market will help
you achieve unparalleled success in the most actively
traded market in the world.

DAY TRADING & SWING TRADING the CURRENCY MARKET

Technical and Fundamental Strategies to Profit from Market Moves

goes far beyond what other currency trading books
cover. It delves into consistently critical questions such
as “What Are the Most Market-Moving Indicators for the
U.S. Dollar” and “What Are Currency Correlations and
How to Use Them,” while touching on topics like “How
to Trade like a Hedge Fund Manager” and “The Impact
of Seasonality in the Currency Market” that could give
you a distinct edge in this competitive arena.

$70.00 USA/$77.00 CAN

SE C O ND EDI T I O N

;8PKI8;@E>
JN@E>KI8;@E>
k_\:LII<E:P
D8IB<K

:fdgc\k\cp
I\m`j\[
Lg[Xk\[

K\Z_e`ZXcXe[=le[Xd\ekXcJkiXk\^`\j
kfGif]`k]ifdDXib\kDfm\j

B8K?PC@<E

Director of Currency Research at GFT

EAN: 9780470377369

ISBN 978-0-470-37736-9

I

n only a few short years, the currency/foreign exchange (FX) market has grown significantly. With
institutions and individuals driving daily average
volume past the $3 trillion mark, there are many profitable opportunities available in this arena—but only if
you understand how to operate within it.
That’s why Kathy Lien—Director of Currency Research for one of the most popular Forex providers in
the world—has created Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market, Second Edition. Written for
both the experienced and aspiring trader, this updated
guide outlines the essential elements of the FX market
and reveals the latest trends, data, and strategies that
all traders, particularly day and swing traders, need to
be aware of in order to excel in this fast-moving field.
After an engaging introduction to how the foreign exchange market has evolved over the last few years and
a look at some of its historical milestones, this book
quickly moves on to address the innovative trading
insights that will enhance your profitability within
today’s FX market. Page by page, you’ll become
familiar with:

• New technical trading strategies, which include how
to trade news, effectively time market turns, and
capture new shifts in momentum
• Proven fundamental trading strategies, which involve
trading off commodity prices, fixed income instruments, and option volatilities; as well as interventionbased trades and macro event-driven trades
• The unique characteristics of each major currency
pair—from when they are most active to what drives
their price action
• Trading through different market conditions, by first
profiling a trading environment and then applying
specific indicators for that environment
• And much more
Both informative and accessible, the Second Edition of
Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market
(continued on back flap)

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

ii

Printer: Yet to come

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

Day Trading
and Swing
Trading the
Currency
Market

i

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe,
Australia and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market’s ever changing temperament and have prospered—some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
trader, professional or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

ii

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

Day Trading
and Swing
Trading the
Currency
Market
Second Edition
Technical and Fundamental
Strategies to Profit from
Market Moves

KATHY LIEN
Director of Currency Research, GFT

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

iii

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

C 2009 by Kathy Lien. All rights reserved.
Copyright 

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)
748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Lien, Kathy, 1980–
Day trading and swing trading the currency market : technical and fundamental strategies
to profit from market moves / Kathy Lien. – 2nd ed.
p. cm. – (Wiley trading series)
Rev. ed. of: Day trading the currency market. c2006.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-37736-9 (cloth)
1. Foreign exchange futures. 2. Foreign exchange market. 3. Speculation. I. Lien,
Kathy, 1980–. Day trading the currency market. II. Title.
HG3853.L54 2009
332.4 5 – dc22
2008034576
Printed in the United States of America.
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

iv

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

Contents

Preface

vii

Acknowledgments

xiii

CHAPTER 1

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing
Market of Our Time

1

CHAPTER 2

Historical Events in the FX Market

21

CHAPTER 3

What Moves the Currency Market in the
Long Term?

37

CHAPTER 4

What Moves the Market in the Short Term? 59

CHAPTER 5

What Are the Best Times to Trade for
Individual Currency Pairs?

67

What Are Currency Correlations and How
Do Traders Use Them?

75

Seasonality—How It Applies to the
FX Market

81

Trade Parameters for Different Market
Conditions

91

CHAPTER 9

Technical Trading Strategies

109

CHAPTER 10

Fundamental Trading Strategies

165

CHAPTER 6

CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER 8

v

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

vi

CONTENTS

CHAPTER 11

How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager 207

CHAPTER 12

Profiles and Unique Characteristics of
Major Currency Pairs

215

About the Author

273

Index

275

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

Preface

ince the first edition of Day Trading the Currency Market, which
was published in 2005, the foreign exchange market has changed dramatically. The most notable change is the fact that daily average volume now exceeds $3 trillion, a 70 percent jump over the past three years.
As a direct result of this surge in interest, more participants have flooded
the markets with different ways to trade currencies.
The popularity of the Day Trading the Currency Market book has encouraged me to give the second edition a twist—this time I have added
swing trading strategies!
After having taught seminars across the country on how to trade currencies, I have received a lot of good feedback about the book (thank you!),
and I hope that everyone will enjoy the new techniques in the second edition just as much as you have enjoyed the strategies and lessons in the first!

S

The original book focuses heavily on fundamentals, but the new edition includes chapters on trading methodologies, statistical analysis, and,
of course, additional strategies.
I have also added comprehensive sections on how to trade like a hedge
fund manager and the impact of seasonality in the currency market.
If you are picking up a copy of Day Trading and Swing Trading the
Currency Market for the very first time, you will not be disappointed. As a
trader first and an analyst second, in this book I focus on what matters most
to currency traders. The first edition has been one of the top resources for
those looking for a good primer on how the currency markets work—the
technical and fundamental drivers as well as actionable trading strategies.
There is something for everyone in this book, as it is designed for both
the beginner and the advanced trader. In this book, I try to accomplish two
major goals: to touch on the basics of the FX market and the currency characteristics that all traders, particularly day traders, need to know, as well
as to give you practical strategies to start trading. Day Trading and Swing
Trading the Currency Market goes beyond what other currency trading

vii

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

viii

PREFACE

books cover and delves into such interesting topics as the top marketmoving indicators for the U.S. dollar and what currency correlations are
and how to use them. Here’s a brief road map to whet your appetite on the
topics covered in this book.

FOREIGN EXCHANGE—THE
FASTEST-GROWING MARKET OF OUR TIME
If you are wondering whether you should get into the FX market, take a
look at some of the reasons why the largest market in the world has always been the market of choice for the big players such as hedge funds
and institutional investors. Learn about why the FX market has exploded
over the past three years and the advantages that the FX spot market has
over the more traditional equities and futures markets—something that the
most seasoned traders of the world have known for decades.

HISTORICAL EVENTS IN THE FX MARKET
How can you trade the currency market without knowing some of the
major milestones that helped to shape the market into what it has become today? There are countless events that are still talked about and
brought up despite the many years that have passed since they occurred.
This chapter covers Bretton Woods, the end of the Bretton Woods, the
Plaza Accord, George Soros and how he came to fame, the Asian financial crisis, the launch of the euro, and the bursting of the technology
bubble.

DIFFERENT WAYS TO TRADE
THE FX MARKET
Over the past few years, the FX market has evolved significantly. Many
products have been introduced as alternative ways to invest in or trade
currencies. Foreign exchange spot is the oldest of these markets and represents the underlying asset for a lot of the new derivative products. Options, futures, and forwards are the next oldest, but forwards are generally
limited to a nonretail audience. An entire book can be dedicated to the differences between all of the new derivative products, but for the purpose

Preface

ix

of this new edition, I provide some basic descriptions as well as general
advantages and disadvantages (there may be many others that are not included in this new section).

HOW TO COPY OTHER PEOPLE'S SUCCESS
& BUILD YOUR PEOPLE BASED PORTFOLIO
Would you like to save a lot of time, learn from Pros and see their strategies? From now on, you can copy the best performing traders you like with
a “click” of a button. Try out Social Trading, where everybody connects to
trade and talk about the latest financial trends. Tap into the wisdom of the
crowds as you learn and copy from other traders in the network.
Social trading platforms have applied a "Facebook meets Twitter"- like
approach in which users build communities to share and discuss trades,
while sites rank top players and offer the chance to duplicate the trades of
the most successful peers.

WHAT ARE THE BEST TIMES TO TRADE FOR
INDIVIDUAL CURRENCY PAIRS?
Timing is everything in currency trading. In order to devise an effective
and time-efﬁcient investment strategy, it is important to note the amount of
market activity around the clock in order to maximize the number of trading opportunities during a trader’s own market hours. This section outlines
the typical trading activity of major currency pairs in different time zones
to see when they are the most volatile.

WHAT ARE THE MOST MARKET-MOVING
ECONOMIC DATA?
For day traders, knowing which pieces of U.S. data move the market the
most can be extremely valuable. System traders need to know when it is
worthwhile to turn their systems off, while breakout traders will want to
know where to place their big bets based on what economic releases typically set off the largest movements. This section, with updated data, not
only ranks the importance of U.S. data, but it also reports on the knee-jerk

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

x

PREFACE

reaction in pip values and whether there is usually a follow-through over
the remainder of the day.

WHAT ARE CURRENCY CORRELATIONS AND
HOW DO TRADERS USE THEM?
Everything in the currency market is interrelated to some extent, and
knowing the direction and strength of the relationships between different
currency pairs can be an added advantage for all traders. When trading in
the FX market, one of the most important facts to remember in creating
a strategy is that no currency pair is isolated. Knowing how closely correlated the currency pairs are in your portfolio is a great way to measure
exposure and risk. Many traders may find themselves thinking that they are
diversifying their portfolio by investing in different currency pairs, but few
realize that many pairs actually have a tendency to move in the same direction or opposite to each other historically. The correlations between pairs
can be strong or weak and last for weeks, months, or even years, which
makes learning how to use and calculate correlation extremely important.
New correlations have been added for this edition.

HOW TO TRADE LIKE A HEDGE
FUND MANAGER
This new chapter on how to trade like a hedge fund manager is really about
the steps to developing a successful trading strategy. Having worked with
many money managers and been involved in the process of launching
managed fund products, I have realized that all money managers work in
a similar way. Their strategies may be different, but the way they go about
developing these strategies is not. This section includes the five steps to
thinking and trading like a hedge fund manager.

SEASONALITY IN THE CURRENCY MARKET
Most traders attempt to analyze the future direction of currencies by using
either fundamental or technical analysis or, if they’re feeling particularly
crafty, a combination of both. However, many traders may not realize that
the clearest way to analyze past price behavior may be to look at price
activity itself, without the noise of indicators. One way to do this is through

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

Preface

xi

seasonality, which may be a concept familiar to many stock traders. This
new chapter discusses seasonality in the currency market.

TRADE PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT
MARKET CONDITIONS
The most important first step for any trader, regardless of the market that
you are trading in, is to create a trading journal. However, the FX trading
journal is not just any trading journal. Aside from the typical listing of your
trade ideas and executed trades with targets and stops, the FX trading journal also teaches you how to create a currency pair checklist that takes approximately 10 minutes to fill out and gives you a near-immediate insight
on the exact technical picture for each currency pair. Trading effectively
means having a game plan, and we systematically dissect a game plan for
you in this chapter, teaching you how to first profile a trading environment
and then know which indicators to apply for that trading environment.

TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGIES
This is the meat of the book for advanced traders. This section covers some
of my favorite trading strategies for day and swing traders. Each strategy
comes with rules and examples. Three new strategies have been added to
this chapter, including how to trade news, how to effectively time market turns, and how to capture a new shift in momentum. Many of these
strategies exploit specific characteristics of the FX market that have been
observed across time. There are strategies for all types of traders—range,
trend, and breakout.

FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGIES
The fundamental strategies chapter is more for medium-term swing traders
who go not for 15 to 20 points but for 150 to 200 points or more. This section will teach you how to trade off commodity prices, fixed income instruments, and option volatilities. It also covers intervention-based trades,
macro-event-driven trades, and the secret moneymaking strategies used
by hedge funds between 2002 and 2004, which is the leveraged carry
trade.

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

xii

PREFACE

PROFILES AND UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS
OF THE MAJOR CURRENCY PAIRS
The final chapter of this book is probably one of the most valuable. This updated material goes over the unique characteristics of each major currency
pair: when they are most active, what drives their price action, and which
economic data releases are most important. A broad economic overview
and a look into each central bank’s monetary policy practices are given.
I hope you enjoy the book!

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

Printer: Yet to come

Acknowledgments

hank you to my wonderful team for their invaluable research and
support:

T

Boris Schlossberg
Richard Lee
Sam Shenker
Melissa Tuzzolo
Daniel Chen
Bosco Cheng
Jenny Tang
Vincent Ortiz
John Kicklighter
Ehren Goossens
