
Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

77

Swiss Franc
(CHF_A0-FX): 60-Minute
The next example of a Bullish Bat in the Swiss Franc shows another excellent harmonic pattern
at well-defined support in the currency markets (see Figure 5.6). The 60-minute chart possessed
a distinct pattern, clearly defining the critical support. The pattern formed the required Fibonacci
alignment to validate the Bat structure and the price action stabilized nicely after testing the
entire PRZ. The pattern marked an important continuation of the predominant intra-day trend.

Figure 5.6

These situations occur frequently in all currency markets on all time frames. Distinct patterns
such as the example of the Swiss Franc are common, but it is important to wait for the clearest
structural setups. Although the pattern possessed three numbers in a somewhat wide 50 pip
range, the 0.886 retracement defined the extreme limit of the PRZ. Furthermore, the clear stabilization after all the numbers were tested was another signal of a valid reversal in the works.

78

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Figure 5.7 of the Potential Reversal Zone is another example of ideal price action that validated
the reversal. The well-defined projected harmonic support held firm, as the pattern’s completion
point was an excellent entry level for any long positions seeking to capitalize on a resuming
bullish trend. Although patterns within trends will be addressed later in this material, it is
important to know that valid structural signals commonly form in the middle of well-established
trends. Although the relative position of all patterns should be considered, the price action after
all the numbers in the PRZ are tested is still the most important technical consideration.

Figure 5.7

Another aspect of this example is the severity of the price decline toward the PRZ—although
the preferred completion point with respect to time would have been more ideal if the price
action tested the support zone a bit more steadily. The CD leg declined sharply in the hours
leading up to the pattern’s completion. Despite the somewhat premature test of the PRZ, the
structure was still distinct and a valid setup.
This situation underscores the importance of PRICE over TIME. I would like to take a
moment to comment on this controversy. Technicians have argued the “price versus time”
debate for decades. Although time is an important element in many approaches of Technical
Analysis, I believe the emphasis within the realm of Harmonic Trading must be focused on price
measurements. I utilize time measurements with respect to patterns. In fact, the Harmonic
Analyzer is able to calculate effective time projections that complement harmonic pattern
structures. But, the time element of any technical method must include price as the primary
basis for trading decisions.

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

Goldman Sachs
(GS): Daily
Figure 5.8 is an example of a Bullish Bat in Goldman Sachs that shows a distinct PRZ that
utilizes an equivalent AB=CD pattern. It is important to note that the equivalent AB=CD is a
minimum target in the PRZ of a Bat pattern. The stock possessed the necessary Fibonacci
alignments to validate the Bat structure, including a 1.618 BC projection and a 0.886
retracement. The chart in Figure 5.9 of the price action in the PRZ shows the sharp reversal
from the completion of this pattern.

Figure 5.8

79

80

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Figure 5.9

The stock rallied convincingly after testing all of the numbers in the PRZ. Again, it is
important to note that the 0.886 retracement just above 61 was the defining limit in the PRZ,
and it should be considered as the most important number in the completion of the pattern.

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

81

Chevron-Texaco
(CVX): Daily
The next example of Chevron-Texaco shows a distinct Bullish Bat pattern that formed on the
daily chart (see Figure 5.10). The stock possessed the necessary Fibonacci alignments to
validate the Bat structure, especially the precise 50% B point. The stock reversed after testing
the entire range of the PRZ. Although the reversal occurred immediately after hitting the
completion point, this distinct pattern clearly identified a buying opportunity just under the $60.

Figure 5.10

82

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The chart in Figure 5.11 of the price action in the PRZ shows the sharp reversal after testing
the entire range of the PRZ. The 0.886 retracement converged exactly in the same area as the
2.0 BC projection, and the Bullish Alternate 1.618 AB=CD projection at 56.50. Although the
Alternate AB=CD was 2 points below the other two numbers, this example underscores the
importance of each number in the PRZ. The stock rallied convincingly after testing the entire
PRZ and confirmed the reversal within a few days after the initial test of the setup

Figure 5.11

Although some situations can be more difficult to gauge than others, this example demonstrates the importance of focusing on the entire range of the PRZ. In this case, Chevron-Texaco
possessed harmonic support just under the $60 level with the completion of the Bullish Bat.
As the stock fell under $60, the price action appeared to be quite severe. However, ChevronTexaco soon stabilized and reversed course after testing the PRZ. Even if the execution was
delayed a day or two, the pattern clearly marked a critical turning point for the stock and
defined an optimal entry for a long position within the overall trend of the price action.

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

83

The Bearish Bat Pattern
A B point that is less than a 0.618 retracement, preferably a 0.50 or 0.382 of the XA leg,
defines the Bearish Bat pattern (see Figure 5.12). Bearish Bat patterns are excellent 5-point
corrective structures that frequently form after retracing a critical high point. In addition, these
structures are excellent trading opportunities when they form at distinct levels of resistance.

X

D

0.886
0.3

8
1
.6

82

;0

.50 B

A

2
;
8

1
6
.
1

0.382;
0.886

C

Figure 5.12

The 0.886 XA retracement is the most critical level in the Bearish Bat. Since this
retracement occurs close to the prior high—which is the initial starting point (X) of the pattern—
the price action represents a substantial challenge of prior resistance. The structural signal
that the Bat pattern represents is a substantial technical factor that must be considered more
significant than simple retests. Bat patterns that form at distinct levels of resistance frequently
indicate substantial potential changes in trend—on any timeframe! It is important to wait for
clear opportunities like these. Not to mention, I prefer to wait for the entire PRZ range to be
tested to validate the completion of the pattern. Although this may delay a trade execution
slightly, valid reversals will provide definitive signals soon after the pattern is completed.

84

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

J. P. Morgan
(JPM): Weekly
J. P. Morgan Chase formed a distinct Bearish Bat on this weekly chart with a precise PRZ in
the $48 area (see Figure 5.13). The pattern possessed three numbers that defined a tight zone
between 47.20–48.05 to short the stock.

Figure 5.13

The pattern possessed a 1.618 AB=CD that converged in the same area as the 2.0 BC
projection. The 0.886 retracement at 47.70 was the defining upside limit for this setup, as the
stock reversed quickly after testing the entire PRZ.

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

85

The chart in Figure 5.14 of the price action in the PRZ shows an ideal reversal after the
0.886 retracement was tested. Ideally, the entire PRZ should be tested in valid reversals. In
fact, the Bearish Bat tends to test its entire PRZ in valid structures more than most other
patterns. This is different from other 5-point corrective structures like the Gartley, where a
less strict approach is employed with the price action in the PRZ.

Figure 5.14

This case of JPM exemplifies the advantage of waiting for an entire test of the Bat PRZ.
The stock rallied into the range of harmonic numbers between 47.20 and 48 as it completely
tested the PRZ and confirmed the ultimate reversal at 0.886 retracement. The following few
weeks confirmed the reversal, as the sock rolled immediately after completing the Bat pattern.

86

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Eurodollar
(EUR_A0-FX): 60-Minute
This Bearish Bat in the Euro illustrates an ideal structural scenario, where the pattern’s
completion point serves as the optimal entry level for a trade (see Figure 5.15). The ideal
symmetry and precise alignment of the structure’s ratios clearly validated the pattern.

Figure 5.15

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

87

The price action reversed from the entire test of the PRZ. After a temporary pullback from
the initial test, the Euro consolidated within the range of harmonic resistance between 1.4419
and 1.4437, and reversed after a second test of the entire PRZ. Again, the 0.886 retracement
in the 1.4437 area was the defining limit of the pattern and the most significant number in the
zone. In addition, the 0.886 retracement is typically the optimal area to execute a trade, as was
the case for the Euro. The chart in Figure 5.16 shows the price action in the PRZ. Despite the
strong rally that preceded the PRZ, the clear stalling that occurred after testing the harmonic
resistance validated the Bearish Bat pattern.

Figure 5.16

88

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

After rallying several hundred pips, the Euro formed a sharp Bearish Bat that not only
reversed at the completion of the pattern, but topped at nearly the exact high end of the PRZ.
The initial test yielded a valid short-term reversal. The more substantial move required a
secondary test and further consolidation before reversing dramatically. After consolidating in
this area, the Euro actually formed a smaller Bearish Bat on the secondary test (see Figure
5.17). This “pattern within a pattern” is just one of many types of multi-harmonic scenarios
that should be regarded as an additional structural confirmation of the setup. In this case, the
convergence of multi-patterns can have much greater implications for the reversal zone as a
critical turning point for the potential future trend. The smaller Bearish Bat completed at 1.3325,
which is the same level as the larger 88.6% retracement completes. The reversal following this
secondary test was a clear confirmation signal of the validity of these patterns as critical
harmonic resistance.

0.886

d

0.50

2.6

18

x

b

c
a

Figure 5.17

Although multiple harmonic patterns do not occur in every situation, it is common for many
valid reversals to experience some type of secondary test of significant setups before reversing
decisively. In fact, it is common to experience some type of reaction on the first test of an entire
PRZ. After some meaningful consolidation, a nominal retest of the PRZ often occurs that marks
the beginning of the reversal acceleration. These situations are excellent trading opportunities
because they provide ample time to analyze the price action and to execute the trade.

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

Coca-Cola
(KO): Weekly
Coca-Cola in Figure 5.18 shows a long-term Bearish Bat on this weekly chart. The pattern
possessed a precise PRZ with three numbers that defined a tight range zone between 34.55
and 36.30 (see Figure 5.17). The stock reversed after testing the entire PRZ (again) with the
0.886 retracement acting as the defining number within this range.

Figure 5.18

89

90

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

This example illustrates the ideal alignment that valid Bat patterns typically possess. The
exact 50% B point retracement with the Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern and the 2.0 BC
projection were ideal structural elements that defined this precise PRZ. Although the 0.886
was the defining element of this setup, the other two levels complemented this area ideally.
Figure 5.19 reveals the clear reversal that unfolded after a complete test of all of the numbers
in the zone.

Figure 5.19

The remarkable aspect of this example is the length of time required to form this structure.
This pattern formed over a period of seven years and incredibly the uptrend reversed on the
week it hit the completion point.

The Perfect Bat Pattern
The perfect Bat pattern is represented by a specific alignment of Fibonacci numbers within the
structure. The perfect Bat is a distinct structure with a tight range of three numbers that defines
the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ). The mid-point is primarily defined by an exact 0.50% B
point retracement. The Alternate 1.27 AB=CD and the 2.0 BC projection should complete close
to the 0.886 retracement, which is the most critical number in the pattern.

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

Perfect Bat Pattern Requirements:
1. Mandatory 50% B point retracement of the XA leg.
2. Precise 0.886 D point retracement of the XA leg as the defining limit within
the PRZ.
3. 2.0 BC projection.
4. Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern required.
5. C point should be in the 50–61.8% range.

The Perfect Bullish Bat
The perfect Bullish Bat pattern is primarily defined by a precise 50% retracement at the
B point (see Figure 5.20). The PRZ must possess an 0.886 retracement as the defining limit,
and this area should be complemented by a 2.0 BC projection with an Alternate 1.27 AB=CD
pattern. It is important to point out that the “0.50; 0.618” Fibonacci retracement range for the
C point is the only “discretionary alignment” permitted. This C point range is the most ideal
retracement to establish a 2.0 BC projection.

A

0
5
.

0.50;
0.618

C

B

2.0

0

0.886

X
Figure 5.20

D

91

92

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Intel
(INTC): 60-Minute
The intra-day example of the Intel in Figure 5.21 shows a perfect Bullish Bat pattern with a
precise Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ). The ratio alignment was quite precise, especially the
50% B point and extended BC projection. The three numbers of the PRZ defined a tight zone
in the 15.80 area to get long. Specifically, the setup possessed a 1.27 AB=CD pattern at 15.75,
with the 2.0 BC projection and the 0.886 retracement competing at 15.80.

Figure 5.21

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

93

In addition to an ideal alignment of Fibonacci ratios to validate the perfect structure, the
pattern’s distinct symmetry was another ideal element of this short-term setup. The chart in
Figure 5.22 of the price action in the PRZ shows the near-perfect reversal on the first test of
this support. After the price action entered the PRZ, the price action stabilized and reversed
from the 88.6% retracement. The stock rallied decisively over the next several sessions to
confirm the new intra-day up trend.

Figure 5.22

This example exhibits an ideal scenario. A distinct Bullish Bat pattern with a sharp reversal
from the PRZ is exactly the type of price action to expect in a valid harmonic setup. This pattern
possessed all the ideal elements for a valid buy signal. Not to mention, the tight alignment of
numbers in the PRZ and distinctively symmetrical pattern structure was further confirmation of
an extremely harmonic setup.

94

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The Perfect Bearish Bat
The perfect Bearish Bat pattern is primarily defined by an exact 0.50 retracement at the
B point. The PRZ must possess an 0.886 retracement as the defining upper limit, and this
area should be complemented by a 2.0 BC projection with an alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern
(see Figure 5.23).

X

D

0.886

50

0.

B

2.0

;
0.50
C
618
.
0
A
Figure 5.23

It is important to point out that the “0.50; 0.618” Fibonacci retracement range for the C point
is the only “discretionary alignment” permitted. This C point range is the most ideal retracement
to establish a 2.0 BC projection.

Chapter 5 The Bat Pattern

NASDAQ 100 Tracking Stock
(QQQQ): 5-Minute
The Bearish Bat in this example possesses a perfect structure with a precise alignment of
the required Fibonacci ratios to validate the pattern. Starting with a perfect 50% B point
retracement, the price action formed an Alternate 1.27 AB=CD pattern that completed in
the same exact area as the 2.0 BC projection. In combination with the 0.886 XA retracement,
the PRZ possessed three numbers in a 10-cent range that defined resistance just above $30
a share.
The chart in Figure 5.24 clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of the perfect pattern
structure to define critical turning points within any trend. In this case, the perfect Bearish Bat
defined an optimal execution area to short the Qs.

Figure 5.24

95

96

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The Bat Pattern Summary
The Bat pattern is a precise harmonic pattern that frequently yields exact and sharp reversals.
The 0.886 retracement is a powerful completion point and the defining limit within the PRZ.
Although a 0.50 or 0.382 retracement is preferred, any B point that is less than a 0.618 will
define a valid Bat structure. The Bat pattern incorporates a minimum AB=CD completion to
validate the structure, as well. However, an Alternate 1.27 AB=CD is most common and is
a defining element in the Perfect Bat structure. Furthermore, the BC projection should
complement the other numbers in the PRZ, and it must be at least a 1.618 extension.
1. B point retracement of the XA leg must be less than 0.618 with a 0.50 or 0.382
retracement preferred.
2. Precise 0.886 D point retracement of the XA leg as the defining limit within
the PRZ.
3. Minimum 1.618 BC projection with extreme extensions (2.0–2.618) possible.
4. Minimum AB=CD completion, although an Alternate 1.27 AB=CD is more common
and preferred.
5. C point retracement can vary between a 0.382 to an 0.886.
The Bat pattern is probably the best harmonic pattern of them all! Bat structures represent
powerful corrective signals that identify excellent trading opportunities that are retesting
significant levels of support or resistance. The best structures typically are distinct and
possess a precise alignment of Fibonacci ratios to validate the pattern.

Chapter 6

The Gartley Pattern

The Great Gartley Controversy
It is probably the best-known Harmonic pattern in the trading community—the Gartley.
Although many have written articles on this pattern, the origins of the Gartley pattern range
from erroneous to downright misinformation. H. M. Gartley first outlined the basic structure of
this pattern in his book Profits in the Stock Market (Lambert-Gann Publishing, 1935) on page
222. Although contrary to what many have claimed, Gartley was not responsible for assigning
Fibonacci ratios to this price structure. In fact, Profits in the Stock Market did not mention
anything about Fibonacci ratios in the entire book. I know because I own the book. It’s not in
there. I believe it is important to correct these prevailing misconceptions regarding this pattern.
It is important to note that others have assigned a variety of Fibonacci ratios to the
framework of the Gartley pattern. However, they have used a large gamut of Fibonacci
numbers at the D points, essentially labeling any AB=CD pattern as a Gartley. This
interpretation assumes that any reversal is valid if it completes at a 0.618 or a 0.786
without regard for the overall structural alignment. This has created much confusion among
the technical community and has challenged the reputation of the pattern.
This controversy was one of the earliest challenges that I faced when I initially refined the
pattern. I argued with many people that “all Gartley patterns are not the same.” If anything,
the most effective Gartley pattern required an exact specification of Fibonacci ratios to validate
the structure. Although the general structure has been outlined previously, it was not until The
Harmonic Trader was released in 1999 that the exact rules for specific retracements of the
B point at a 0.618 and the D point at a 0.786 were to be assigned to the pattern. This alignment
has now become the standard in the technical community and is now commonly referred to as
the Gartley pattern.

97

98

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The exact 0.618 B point requirement was just one condition in this interpretation of the
structure. The Harmonic Trader also outlined the importance of the AB=CD pattern and the BC
projection rules that required specific conditions to validate the structure.
The Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) of a Gartley possesses several other elements that
differentiate the structure from other patterns. The pattern should possess a distinct and
equivalent AB=CD pattern that converges in the same area as the 0.786 XA retracement. In
fact, the completion of the equivalent AB=CD pattern and the 0.786 retracement are minimum
requirements for a valid Gartley. Frequently, the 0.786 XA retracement overlaps the AB=CD in
the PRZ. In these cases, this convergence typically represents the defining level of the PRZ.
The BC projection is another specific condition to validate the structure, and it must not
exceed a 1.618. Although the BC projection is a less significant number in the PRZ than in
other patterns, the 1.618 limit helps to differentiate the Gartley structure. Typically, a BC
extension greater than a 1.618 is found in Bat structures. Regardless of the required numbers
in the PRZ, the Gartley must possess a precise 0.618 B point retracement to validate the
structure. In fact, the Gartley pattern requires the most precise B point alignment of all the
harmonic patterns to define the best trading opportunities.

Gartley Pattern Elements:
• Precise 61.8% B point retracement of XA leg.
• BC projection must not exceed 1.618.
• Equivalent AB=CD pattern is most common.
• 0.786 XA retracement.
• C point within range of 0.382–0.886 retracement.
It has been my experience that anything less than the ideal Fibonacci alignment for the
Gartley usually results in “deeper” corrective structures, favoring a Bat pattern completion.
Although this strict application of the Gartley alignment reduces the number of pattern
matches, it is critical in identifying valid patterns and effectively differentiating these two similar
structures.
It is important to note that the Gartley pattern is simply one type of “M” or “W” Elliott Wave
corrective pattern. Although similar in structure, the Bat pattern is a distinctly different entity,
utilizing other rules to define the setup. Such specification of price structures, quantified by
Fibonacci calculations, is essential in Harmonic Trading. In terms of the Gartley pattern, the
setup that yields the most valid reversals is the one illustrated in The Harmonic Trader.
As with all harmonic patterns, the specification of Fibonacci points within each structure is
extremely critical in determining valid trading opportunities. The Gartley pattern exemplifies
the necessity of such specification, as the structure frequently resembles a Bat pattern as it
completes.
On a final note about harmonic patterns, The Harmonic Trader outlined many
unprecedented strategies that distinguished patterns based upon specific price point
alignments. This differentiation increased the effectiveness and served to demystify the
confusion of the overall application of these methods. Again, I must emphasize that although
