
162

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

catastrophic losses. These folks in particular are better off avoiding the
trading game entirely than trying to turn a small retirement account into
a working fortune. At least our Keoghs, IRAs, and SEPs are cash accounts,
which offer a measure of protection against our darker instincts.
No similar safety net exists in a traditional margin account, which
becomes ground zero for excessive risk taking. Margin strategies have
become even more dangerous in our modern environment, if that’s possible,
through the addition of 4:1 intraday buying power in a typical equity
account and 10:1 or more in a typical futures account. To make matters
worse, newbie traders come into the game believing, falsely, they need to
use 100% of that margin on every position in order to make money.
In reality, margin is just another trading tool. Many times our sound
risk analysis doesn’t support the use of margin because it increases
total risk above the maximum loss that can be absorbed by our working
strategy or edge. In addition, margin implies a level of certainty that’s hard
to achieve in our trades because we’re managing various shades of gray
as opposed to distinct layers of black and white. This element of chaos
demands the use of multilayered “collaring” techniques. At its core, collaring determines the aggressive or defensive posture we initiate during
the market day, based on overall risk, movement of the major averages,
and affinity of the ticker tape with our predefined edge. For example, the
long side in a falling market requires defensive collaring, at least until an
instrument pulls into a support zone where a pullback play can be considered. Alternatively, a rising market for a trend follower offers ideal
conditions to make money, supporting an aggressive collar, which may
include more expansive use of margin and even options plays. Look in
Part Six for a detailed discussion on collaring techniques.
Margin becomes power in highly favorable markets. The 2003 and
2009 recoveries, as well as the tech, home-building, and commodity
bubbles, offered nearly ideal conditions for traders to ante up and turn
margin into profit. Our only challenge during these good times lies in recognizing when low-hanging fruit is hanging on the branch and waiting to
be picked. However, regardless of market conditions, margin use should
be avoided entirely until the trader establishes a track record that shows
consistent profits. In addition, the typical monthly statement should reflect
just moderate losses, with few spikes or catastrophes. In other words, performance over time indicates the trader is actually missing out on opportunities by not taking bigger risks and the firepower that comes with
margin use.
Day trading equities increases margin capacity, which works
extremely well for the select minority of traders who have cracked the

CHAPTER 7

Market Entry

163

code of the intraday markets. Not surprisingly, it’s a total disaster for
anyone aspiring to be a day trader but lacking the risk management skills
required to survive and prosper in that volatile arena. Consider that 4:1
intraday margin was a trade-off by the SEC after the establishment of
the pattern day trading (PDT) rule. The unfortunate decree assumes that
more liquid individuals have greater skills to assume intraday risk than
poorer traders, but that’s questionable. In any case, my advice to aspiring
day traders is the same advice I give to multiday swing traders—don’t
use margin until you can prove beyond a reasonable doubt that you’re
actually losing money by not using it.
Of course, it’s nearly impossible for futures or currency traders to
avoid margin. It’s less of an issue for futures traders because those folks
understand that extensive skills and risk management are an absolute
minimum for survival. Unfortunately, nothing could be further from the
truth in the currency markets. This worldwide market segment boomed in
the United States following the PDT rule. Undercapitalized traders had no
choice but to seek out new venues at that time because they were getting
their accounts frozen for violating the new rule’s capital restrictions. In
turn, this exodus triggered a massive bull market for the forex broker
industry. Hundreds of shaky operations sprang up overnight, all of them
willing to open accounts with as little as $1,500 equity. The new opportunity attracted a legion of underskilled and undercapitalized traders
looking for a way to turn their small stake into a big fortune. Unfortunately, lax regulation in the United States has allowed these brokers to
act as market makers, taking the other side of clientele positions. This
inherent conflict of interest continues unabated, robbing trading accounts
as quickly as they’re created.
Currency traders need margin to gain leverage over relatively small
oscillations in the currency pairs. But that’s nearly suicidal for small
accounts because risk functions as a percentage of total swing within an
equity curve. In other words, a $100,000 account margined at 2:1 can take
a 3% price swing and lose $6,000, or 6% of the account. A $1,500 currency
account margined at 20:1 will lose $900 on an identical swing, or 60% of
the account. This exposure demands that forex traders without proven
skills reduce their margin use. Ironically, they’re the group most likely to
lack a comprehensive understanding of this risk category.
It’s hard to tell traders not to trade because they have 100% chance of
failure, but that’s exactly my advice to undercapitalized currency traders.
It’s far better to wait and build a working stake than to take inadequate
funds and try to become a millionaire at a modern-day bucket shop.
Patience will eventually pay off because well-capitalized currency trading

164

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

works just as well as other liquid markets, at least when the house isn’t
stacked against you. To this end, currency futures offer a better alternative
because they’re more tightly regulated, ensuring that the price you see is
the price you’ll get when you hit the magic button.
New traders might need months or years to scrape together enough
capital to open their first equity accounts, but it’s a different game entirely
after you’ve made your fortune through career, inheritance, or just plain
good luck. Let’s say you’ve achieved typical net worth for a 40-year-old
in a technical or professional career. You’ve built a variety of investments
through a number of brokers, and now you want to improve your returns
with swing trading. Sadly, poor capital allocation in these fortunate
circumstances can place your entire nest egg at risk. In that regard, I
recall a woman being interviewed when the financial news was doing a
report on folks who lost money when the tech bubble burst. I almost fell
out of my chair when this individual told the reporter she had lost more
than $7 million through day trading. How absolutely insane! It doesn’t
take a rocket scientist to understand that you don’t day trade if you have
$7 million. In fact, you shouldn’t be trading at all, unless it’s someone
else’s money, because that level of wealth is more conducive to portfolio
management than to trading or technical analysis. Besides, someone who
risks $7 million due to personal greed or plain ignorance doesn’t belong in
the markets in the first place.
It’s your responsibility to protect the family fortune at all costs.
Without exception, a good portion of your wealth needs to stay off limits
to your trading endeavors, at least for the first five years. The bottom line:
you’ve got a family to feed, a mortgage to pay, and kids to put through
school. It’s just plain foolish to risk the cash you need to pay those bills
because you think you’re going to double or triple it with a few big trades.
Instead, set aside capital by opening accounts that align with different
goals and opportunities. Fund them with cash you can afford to lose, and
not a single penny more. The odds suggest only one or two traders out
of ten will succeed in the long run. Without a proven track record, your
desire to trade successfully may never overcome your lack of skill or the
demands of your nonmarket life.
Fund the main account with enough money to address the PDT rule,
even if you don’t intend to flip intraday positions. Current settlement
rules are so convoluted that you need a comfortable cushion above the
$25,000 minimum requirement. I recommend at least $50,000 to start. Open
this account with a direct access broker rather than a discount broker.
This is the arena where you’ll make the majority of your trades. It’s also
the place where you’re going to lose the most money in the shortest time

CHAPTER 7

Market Entry

165

period. Stating the obvious, your account interface needs to be open and
right in front of your nose from the premarket through the postmarket
sessions.
I don’t recommend a discount broker for your main account
because these brokers are too expensive, they treat settlement unfavorably, and they limit access outside of regular market hours. However,
these companies serve an important purpose for secondary accounts, i.e.,
they can be used for hands-off trades where positions will swing through
greater price ranges without stopping out. At its core, this is a proactive
way of using benign neglect to overcome risk aversion. A second purpose for this account requires solid market-timing skills. Use it as a cash
horde for those rare times when the broad market or specific sectors are
running in very strong trends and you want to “park” a chunk of working capital.
Many well-heeled individuals set aside a tiny portion of their big
family accounts for trading and mentally keep their fingers off the mother
lode. Unfortunately, this just doesn’t work, except as a fun hobby. The
trader’s goal is to make money through market speculation, but this
scenario masks poor performance due to passive returns emanating from
the big chunk of capital. In other words, dividends, interest, and longterm investments may cover up your trading losses, making you feel like
a winner when you’re not. Realistically, there’s a level of capital accumulation where trading prospects diminish considerably. Successful traders
are driven individuals who are fully market-focused. It’s tough to achieve
this level of commitment when personal wealth already provides life’s
greater gifts. This capital cushion transforms the goal from a lifelong
obsession into a pleasant mental diversion. The subsequent lack of
intensity turns you into a major target for committed traders who are still
seeking their life’s good fortunes.

Anticipation versus Reaction
Most traders wait for confirmation signals before entering new positions,
but that’s a risky strategy in a modern market environment where
whipsaws and fakeouts are the rule of the day. Learning to anticipate
price movement lets you take early positions and then use the reactionary
crowd to your advantage. Of course, it sounds easier than it is in practice
because traders are social creatures looking for other warm bodies before
they assume risk. In other words, they don’t feel secure in executing their

166

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

strategies until the time and sales screen and a fast moving market tell
them the coast is clear.
The majority of market players get fixated on the charts or tickers,
waiting to see how everyone else reacts at key price points before they’re
willing to enter the market. However, it’s often too late to act by the time
they observe the movement or behavior that confirms the breakout or
breakdown they want to trade. Well, that’s not exactly true. They can
enter the market, using a momentum strategy, but that execution style
requires a different mindset and reward:risk analysis from the typical
swing trade.
Anticipation presents traders with lower risk opportunities than
buying a new high or selling a new low. In essence, it means to act without waiting for the actions of other traders. It’s a price-based strategy
that requires confidence and a strong stomach because it feels like shooting in the dark, especially during the early stages of the new position.
It also demands a careful reading of the market landscape to pick out
the most advantageous time to assume risk. Anticipation is the preferred execution strategy for the survivalist trader because it responds
to specific dangers in our modern markets, like pattern failures and
rinse jobs.
Early trade entry doesn’t always make money. In fact, it can trigger
more frequent losses than a reactionary market strategy. However, average
loss size will be considerably smaller as long as tight stop losses are utilized
for new positions. On the flip side, multiple shots can be taken at a promising pattern until the trade finally “sticks” and moves into a substantial
profit. This strategy works especially well with patterns that look great but
show few obvious entry levels. The trader addresses this ambiguity with a
campaign that’s willing to take a series of small losses before giving up and
moving on to the next opportunity. The biggest variable, i.e., number of
losses, is defined by the maximum drawdown for a single position forecast
in the broad plan.
Narrow range patterns offer a nearly perfect fit with anticipatory
trading strategies. These include triangles and other scenarios in which
an active trend goes dead while price action shakes out profit takers and
moves into place for the next rally or selloff wave. The coiled spring setup,
outlined in Chapter 9 of The Master Swing Trader, is a low-risk anticipatory
play because you can place a stop loss on the other side of the NR7 bar,
with the assumption that a hit stop will signal a larger-scale move against
the position. If you’re proven wrong and the market whips back in the
other direction, you just wait for the next narrow range signal to set up
and then reenter the position.

CHAPTER 7

Market Entry

167

Market dynamics work against reactionary traders because, by the
time they’re willing to act, the smarter folks who took early positions are
already booking profits and heading back to the sidelines. This natural
conflict sets up ideal conditions for a reversal into the price level that drew
their attention in the first place. This counterswing opens up the pullback
trade or pattern failure, depending on the outcome of the test at new
support or resistance. This price evolution follows the action-reactionresolution cycle outlined in the second chapter.

F I G U R E

7.1

Strong emotions take control at major conflict levels, generating “rock and a hard place” trade setups. The
Nasdaq-100 Trust (previously the Powershares QQQ Trust) sells off through the 50-day EMA in July and comes
to rest at the 200-day EMA. It grinds sideways for three sessions, attracting a wave of long and short positions,
with both groups equally committed to their points of view. The fund pushes above the two-day high on July 13,
trapping short sellers and issuing a strong buy signal ahead of a massive summer rally.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

168

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

Learn to anticipate trades by focusing narrow attention on the
buy-sell swing and looking for clues about which side is winning the latest
battle. The biggest trends erupt when one side gets trapped and needs to
capitulate. Certain patterns and events, like narrow range bars against the
neckline of a broken head and shoulder pattern, can signal entry opportunities well before an actual buy or sell signal. The question to ask is
so simple that it’s missed by most traders—how would I feel and what
would I do if I were long (short) this stock, right here and right now? If
the answer is to panic and run for your life, then you know you’re onto
something special.
A great way to play anticipatory trades is through stocks that are
caught between the rock and hard place. Look for patterns that show strong
conflict between buyers and sellers and little room for either side to prevail.
It’s important to act quickly when this scenario sets up because the conflict
eventually forces one side to lean too far and get trapped. The capitulation
offers ideal dynamics for a breakout or breakdown. In fact, it isn’t even necessary to choose price direction in this scenario, just like the bilateral setups
outlined in the last chapter. Instead, wait for the battle to play itself out and
take a position after one side of the market gains the advantage. Couple this
stalking behavior with volatility contraction that supports a stop loss close
to the entry price. The combination invariably yields an excellent rewardto-risk profile. Follow the pattern closely whenever you see a trap in the
final stages of development and put together a game plan that will get you
positioned ahead of the crowd as soon as one side “blinks.” This predatory
workflow might sound like common sense, but only a handful of traders
exercise this systematic approach.

Pulling the Trigger
Does this sound familiar? You stare at the market for days, watching
one good trade after another pass you by. You get so frustrated by your
inaction that you finally force yourself into a basket of new positions. Like
magic, the market turns south at the exact time you get aggressive, forcing
you into one loss after another. In total desperation, you head back to the
sidelines and the whole cycle starts all over again.
Yes, it’s easy to forget that good positions are like commuter trains—
if you happen to miss one, another one will be coming down the tracks,
right on schedule. Sadly, market players hate the thought of waiting and

CHAPTER 7

Market Entry

169

wind up throwing themselves onto the empty rails just before the next
choo-choo arrives. Clearly, you can’t make money when you don’t pull the
trigger, but you’ll lose it even faster if you’re too aggressive and trading
when there’s no opportunity.
How do you overcome this negative loop and learn to pull the trigger
at the right time? First, make sure the cards aren’t stacked against you.
High commissions and slow execution systems can put you into a deep
hole as soon as you get filled in a new trade. Simply stated, you don’t
need to pay more than $1 per 100 shares, bought or sold, in our modern
market. In fact, it makes perfect sense to lower your transaction costs first
and find out if your fear in pulling the trigger actually stems from the high
cost of doing business. This is especially true with data and news feeds,
where you can spend a fortune or nothing at all. Logically, your software
investment needs to match your stake size and market risk. For example,
it makes no sense to pay $500 a month for information if you’re risking just
$100 in a typical trade.
In most cases, the failure to pull the trigger arises from the fear of
losing money. Unfortunately, we get stuck in the mindset that losing is
bad, no matter how many times we’re told it’s just part of the trading
game. So one of the first things that a gun-shy trader needs to do is to “get
in there” and lose money, enjoying it while it happens. I know, it sounds
crazy to enjoy losing money. My point is that traders need to raise their
pain tolerance when it comes to taking losses. A great way to accomplish
this task is to open a fresh account with a cheap broker and start trading
50 shares at a time. Place a tight stop on each new position, and then walk
away. Enter enough trades so that you’re in the market 100% of the time.
Then sit back and watch how the process unfolds. You’ll get stopped out
of most positions for tiny losses that won’t hurt too badly, but a few will
actually make money. Over time, this desensitizing exercise should net
out to about even, if you’ve done the job correctly. No, your bottom line
won’t change, but watch what happens to your experience level. In a very
short time, you’ve become a bona fide market wizard with hundreds or
thousands of trades under your belt.
Realistically, many traders don’t have the financial resources to open
educational accounts, or they get beat up so badly that even small positions
are tough to carry emotionally. So is there any way to regain confidence
without risking capital? Try setting goals instead of performance objectives.
These can include measures of your ability to predict market movement
when you receive fresh data, or how thoroughly you examine the charts
each night during your quiet time. Your job in goal setting is to give

170

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

yourself a supportive environment that doesn’t require real-time performance testing with your own capital. Of course, the underlying goal is
to get you back on your feet and into the market with more confidence and
the right measure of animal aggression.

8

C

H

A

P

TE

R

Positions, Markets,
and Trading Styles

C

hoosing markets to trade was a relatively easy task 20 years ago.
High transaction costs, costly data, and convoluted rules designed
to keep public hands off the golden goose led nearly all aspiring traders
to open an equity account at Merrill Lynch or a futures account at LindWaldock. In both cases, the cost of doing business made trade frequency
an impossible luxury and ensured that the brokers would get rich a long
time before their clientele.
The Net revolution then came along and changed the face of Wall
Street, Chicago, and a few dozen other market venues, opening them up
to at-home traders and part-time speculators. Ironically, the results of
these dramatic changes have been mixed because it’s just as hard to make
money trading 500 stocks or futures contracts in a typical year as it was
trading just 5 or 50 two decades ago. I guess that’s the nature of the market
beast, i.e., adapting in Darwinian fashion to systemic changes and closing
market inefficiencies as quickly as they’re created.

171

172

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

With so many venues in our modern markets, traders need to devote
great effort to properly matching their skills, lifestyles, and capitalization
levels to market centers that offer the greatest opportunity and the most
favorable reward-to-risk profile. This custom fit becomes a definable
market edge as experience grows, because the trader will become a master
tape reader for his or her markets of specialization. The flip side of this
equation is equally important. In the real world, trading too many markets
places the trader at an extreme disadvantage to the specialists in the population for that instrument, exchange, or contract.
This is a problem because traders naturally gravitate toward playing
too many markets. After all, the grass is always greener on the other
side of the hill, which makes the index futures look really good when
equity performance is poor, and vice versa. Of course, everyone has flirtations with the forex markets from time to time, even though the specialization required for success in that venue is extremely challenging due
to 24-hour liquidity. We’re also born multitaskers, believing our skill sets
need to work across a variety of instruments because, you know, playing
just one market wouldn’t use all that wonderful gray matter we have at
our disposal.
Newer traders need to experiment with a thousand ideas and
markets, exploring what works and what doesn’t. But the natural course
of evolution dictates that we eventually focus on what makes us the
most money. Invariably, this leads to narrow specialization in relatively
few types of speculative instruments. It also means leaving behind the
entertainment aspect of our trading careers. This poses another challenge
because secondary reinforcements, i.e., the adrenaline rush and wish
fulfillment, induce us to try new things whenever the old things aren’t
working out so well.
Traders may choose one market over another because they perceive
it to be more or less risky, but, in truth, all markets contain equal risk.
Obviously, a tick in the index futures yields a bigger price move than an
equal tick in Microsoft or General Electric, but we have full control over
the dollar, euro, or yen we’re trading through position sizing and stop
placement. Price action within each venue is vastly different, although
the technical charts follow the same rules of the road. For example, the
index futures are notorious for violent swings that occur rarely in blue
chip equities. And forex markets are exposed to continual news shocks,
with all sorts of foreign ministers in faraway places capable of triggering
rapid price change across dozens of currency pairs.
