moves. Therefore, the lower-priced stocks should have more leeway for their
gyrations. We will need a wider stop for them than we will for the less
volatile “blue chips.”
Similarly, we can take our Sensitivity Indexes (EN: Betas in considering a
stock relative to the market, and Volatilities for absolute measure of one stock against
another) to give us a picture of the individual habits of the stock. Although
two stocks may be selling at the same price at a given moment, you would
expect a high-beta, high-volatility stock to make wider swings than a
low-beta, low-volatility stock; therefore, you will set your stops wider on
the higher-volatility stock.
We must take these factors into account and work out some sort of simple
rule of thumb that we can follow. Let us arbitrarily assume an imaginary
stock of “average” habits and a price of 25. Let us further assume that we
will be satisfied, in this particular case, with stop protection 5% below the
last established Minor Bottom.
For a stock of the same sensitivity selling at 5, we would need about
half again as much stop leeway (on a percentage basis). That is, the stop
would be placed 7.5% below the last Bottom (EN9: Significant low). We arrive
at this by taking the normal expected range of an average stock at price 25,
which is represented by the Index Figure 15.5, and comparing it with the
normal range of a stock selling at 5, which is 24. These are merely relative
indexes and mean only that the stock selling at 5 will normally move about
24%, while the stock selling at 25 is making a move of about 15.5%. We
multiply the basic stop distance of 5% by the fraction 24/15.5, and we get
approximately 7.5%.
In exactly the same way, we introduce the relative sensitivity of the stock,
using the Sensitivity Index. If this Index should be 1.33, we multiply the stop
distance again by this figure and get 10%. In the case of a stock having a
sensitivity of 2.00 at this same price, our stop distance would be 15%. If the
sensitivity of the stock were only 0.66, we would get 5%.
In any case, the stop distance, expressed as a percentage, is obtained by
dividing the Normal Range-for-Price by 15.5, then multiplying by the Sensitivity Index, and multiplying this result by 5%. (This operation can be done
most easily and quickly with a calculator or computer routine.)
All of the foregoing may seem needlessly complicated to the average
reader. We realize that many will not care to take the time and trouble to
work out an exact, scientific stop level for each of their occasional commitments. However, the method of determining where stops should be placed
in a systematic and consistent way has been given in some detail here, so
that the principles involved will be perfectly clear, and so that you can change
or adapt the various factors if you feel your experience justifies changes.
For most ordinary purposes, a simplified table of stop distances will be
sufficient. This table, which follows, gives you the approximate stop distance
you would get by the method outlined above, for stocks in various price
classifications and of various degrees of sensitivity.

AU3772_book.fm Page 437 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-seven:

Stop Orders

437

Table of Stop Distances
(Expressed in Percent of the Price of the Stock)

Price
Over 100
40 to 100
20 to 40
10 to 20
5 to 10
Under 5
a

Conservative
Sensitivity
under 0.75

Median
Sensitivity
0.75 to 1.25

Speculative
Sensitivity
over 1.25

Implied
Volatility
under 0.40

Implied
Volatility
0.41–0.79

Implied
Volatility
over 0.79

5%
5%
5%
5%
5%a
5%a

5%
5%
5%
6%
7%
10%

5%
6%
8%
10%
12%
15%

Note: Ordinarily, stocks in these price ranges would not be in the
conservative group.

EN: The informed reader may consider an alternative to Magee’s Sensitivity
Index which I have conjectured here — that is, basing the stop distance on implied
volatility, which would present a dynamic method of adjustment. Implied volatility
is produced from, for instance, the Black–Scholes Model when the model is solved
for volatility rather than price, taking the market price as the given.
The stop level should be marked on your chart as a horizontal line as
soon as an actual or theoretical transaction has been entered into, and it
should be maintained until the transaction is closed, or until progressive
stops (which we will explain in a moment) have been started in order to
close it out. In the case of purchases, the stop level ordinarily will be at the
indicated distance below the last previous Minor Bottom. In the case of short
sales, it ordinarily would be at the indicated distance above the last Minor
Top.
To determine the position of this stop level, simply figure what the
percentage distance would amount to at the price of the stock. If you are
dealing with a stock selling at 30 and the stop distance comes out 10%, then
allow 3 points under your last Minor Bottom.
To make this even easier, if you are using the TEKNIPLAT paper, you
will see that it is possible to divide each of the two cycles making up a chart
sheet into five spaces. If the center of the paper were numbered 10, then
these spaces would be from 10 to 12, 12 to 14, 14 to 16, 16 to 18, and 18 to
20. Each of these “jumps” is made up of 16 of the smallest vertical spaces.
In the lowest section, it will take about four of these small spaces to make
5%. It will take five in the second position, six in the third position, seven
in the fourth, and eight in the top position. You will soon learn to count out
an approximate stop interval of 15% or 8% or 12% at any price level, without
a moment’s hesitation.

AU3772_book.fm Page 438 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

438

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

In no case would we ever set a protective stop level at less than a 5%
interval, even for the most conservative, high-priced stocks.
These questions remain: “What constitutes a Minor Bottom? What makes
an established Minor Top? How do we know how to choose the basing point
(EN9: cf. Chapter 28) from which to measure off our stop level interval?”
What constitutes a Bottom or a Top will be taken up in the next chapter. For
the present, let us accept the proposition that we will determine the correct
basing point and that we will always, always set our stop level at the moment
we make the commitment.
It is understood, of course, that protective stops under long stock are
never moved down, nor are protective stops over shorts ever moved up. As
soon as the stock has moved in the right direction far enough to establish a
new basing point, the stop level is moved up (on longs) or down (on shorts),
using the same rules for determining the new stop level as were used in
fixing the original level.

The Progressive Stop
There is another use of the stop which is properly considered here. This is
the progressive stop, used to close out a stock that has made a profitable
move, or in some cases where a stock has given a danger signal before either
completing a profitable move or violating a previous Minor Bottom.
You will find that on many moves, the stock will progress in the primary
direction for several days, and then may develop exceptional volume. Often,
this occurs just as the stock reaches an important trendline or pattern border
or Resistance Area. This heavy volume means one of two things. Usually it
means that the Minor Move has come to an end, that this is the top of the
rise for the moment. Occasionally, however, the volume may signal the start
of a breakaway move that may run up several (and perhaps many) points,
almost vertically. (The reverse situation, of course, may develop on downside
moves.)
If, noticing the heavy volume following a good rise, and assuming that
this day marks the end of the move, you sell the stock at the market or at a
limit, you are going to be dreadfully disappointed if this should be one of
those rare cases where the stock opens next day on an upside gap and
continues 3, 5, or 20 points up in the following days. On the other hand,
experience will have shown you that it will not pay to expect that sort of
move very often. You will know that, nine times out of ten, you will be better
off out of the stock.
Very well. After such a day when volume is exceptionally high (provided
this is not the first day of breakout into new high ground beyond the last
previous Minor Top), cancel your protective stop and set a stop order for
the day only, just ⅛ point under the closing price. For example, you have
bought a stock at 21. It goes up on moderate volume, smashes through the
old Minor Top one day at 23 on very heavy volume, the next day continues
to 23¾ on moderate volume, the third day advances on moderate volume

AU3772_book.fm Page 439 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-seven:

Stop Orders

439

to 24¼, and, finally, the fourth day makes a rise to 25 on much heavier volume
than it has shown on any day of the rise except the day it broke through 23.
The morning after this close at 25, you will notice the volume signal. You
will cancel your protective stop, which may be at 18, and you will place a
stop order, for the day only, to sell on stop at 24⅞. In most cases, this will
mean that your stock will be stopped out on the first sale of the day. And
you may get a slightly lower price than you would get with a straight market
order. On the other hand, after a day of high volume activity, you are not
likely to be left in a thin market; there should be bids enough, near the top,
to get you out at or near your stop price.
Meanwhile, you are protected against losing the stock if there should be
a continued move in the right direction. Suppose the opening the morning
after you set your stop at 24⅞ should be a gap at 25¼, and that prices then
move up further, closing at 26. (On “runaway” moves of this sort, the closing
for the day during the move is likely to be at the top.) You will then set your
stop, again for a single day only, at 25⅞. If the stock then opens at 26⅜ and
moves up to 28, you will set another day stop at 27⅞, which, let us assume,
is caught at the opening the following day at 27⅝. In this example, you risked
only ⅛ point on the first day, and eventually netted an extra gain of 2⅝
points. This, it should be pointed out, is all net gain, since your commissions
are approximately the same in either case.
A progressive stop of this sort can be indicated on the chart by any mark
you choose to use; for example, a band of short diagonal lines. When a stock
moves for several days in a runaway move, you may repeat this mark each
day, indicating a tight stop ⅛ point under the close for each successive day,
until finally, one of these stops is caught. In the case of short sales, a buy
stop is used in precisely the same way as the selling stop we have discussed,
to follow the stock down on a sharp runaway dive.*
This use of stop orders is indicated wherever a stock has reached its
reasonable objective on high volume, or where it has exceeded its objective
and is moving out of the Trend Channel in free air, so to speak, and in some
cases, where the stock has failed to reach its objective.
If your stock, for instance, is rising in a Trend Channel, and, about
halfway between the lower and upper trendlines, suddenly develops great
volume, then a progressive tight stop will protect you against the threatened
failure of the move. Extreme volume in such a case, before there has been a
breakout to a new high above the last Minor High, is definitely a warning
and a threat. This would be especially true if there were also a gap or a OneDay Reversal at this point.
* In the case of a stock which has presumably completed its profitable move and has given a
Minor Top signal by volume, you may place a near (EN: or “Hair-trigger” Stop) (⅛ point) stop
the first day. If the stock moves up the next day, without abnormal volume, you may leave the
stop at this same point each day until another “blowoff” or Top signal appears; that is, until
you see another day of heavy volume, a gap, or a One-Day Reversal, and then move the stop
up to ⅛ point below the close of that day. This method often works out somewhat better than
the continuously progressive near stop.

AU3772_book.fm Page 440 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

440

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

The one day on which a tight stop would not be applied after heavy
volume had appeared would be the day the stock made a new high, running
entirely through the previous Minor Top and closing above it. This action
generally means the move is not yet completed. However, should the move
continue higher and again show heavy volume, even if it is the very next
day, we would then protect with a progressive stop.
In this chapter, as throughout the book, the expression “heavy volume”
means heavy only with respect to the recent volume of sale in the stock you
are watching. A thousand shares may be significantly heavy volume in some
thin issues, whereas 10,000 shares would be no more than a normal turnover
in more actively traded stocks. The volume chart itself will show, by a market
peak, when a day of abnormally heavy volume occurs.
It should be understood that the progressive stops we have been discussing are intended to take short-term gains, or to close out an exceptionally
profitable runaway move terminating in an Intermediate Climax. While the
extreme conditions that call for this type of operation are by no means rare,
they are not the usual, everyday action of the market. In the case of ordinary
Minor Tops, even when they are fairly apparent on the basis of Trend Channels, volume peak, and other indications, many traders and investors will
prefer to wait out the expected reaction rather than pay additional commissions and lose a position that is still presumably in a favorable Major Trend.
In short, the progressive stop is a device which may be very useful on
occasion, but it is intended to cope with a special and somewhat unusual move.
The protective stops, on the other hand, offer the average trader, the
man who is not able to spend his entire time studying the market, or who
has not had long experience, a device by which he can limit his possible loss.
He will be protected from his own unwillingness to close out the bad holding,
and so, he will avoid the ruinous condition of becoming frozen into a hopeless situation. Since he will be taken out automatically, regardless of whether
he has an ultimate gain or loss, he will have the capital to use in better-looking issues and will not have to worry about the prospects of recovery in his
stock after it has gone many points against him.
However, if one has sufficient knowledge and sufficient determination to
get out as soon as the trend has shown convincing evidence on a turn, there is
less need for the stop orders. EN: This editor believes that only the proven
trader-investor should trade without a stop in the market. The reader may determine
if he meets this criterion by examining his portfolio to see if he has ever let a loss run,
or allowed a significant profit to slip away. If so he, or she, or they, or it, is not proven.
It is possible for such a person to operate successfully without them; and there
are some advantages in doing this, since a stop order will occasionally be caught
by a false move or an extended dull reaction. There are also advantages in not
using stop orders for the experienced technician who is looking toward a
possible long-term gain and who is willing to wait out a Secondary reaction.
But it is a thousand times better for the person who is not sure of his methods
to be stopped out early, then to be left holding a stock bought at, say 60, when
it has declined to 29 — or to 5!

AU3772_C028.fm Page 441 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

chapter twenty-eight

What Is a Bottom — What
Is a Top?
EN9: In this extremely important chapter I have left intact Magee’s usage of “Tops
and Bottoms.” It will be less potentially confusing for the reader to think of “highs
and lows” as that terminology is commonly used in the business in the modern era.
Also, thinking in terms of highs and lows is an important concept in itself. Thus,
for a bull trend, higher highs, higher lows. And when this pattern is broken in an
important way the trader should be alert for a trend change. And, as the use of
eighths is of the essence in Figure 210, I have left the discussion in eighths while
the reader knows that decimals are now used in the markets.
In this chapter, we are not talking about what makes a Major Top or Bottom,
nor what makes an Intermediate Top or Bottom. We are speaking of the Minor
Tops and Bottoms that give us important hooks on which to hang our
technical operations. Stop-order levels, trendlines, objectives, Supports and
Resistances are determined by these Minor Tops and Bottoms. They are of
prime importance to us as traders.
Usually, these Minor Tops and Bottoms are well marked and perfectly
clear. Often they are not. Sometimes, it is not possible to say definitely that
this or that place is or is not a Top or Bottom. But it is possible to set certain
standards, practical working rules, that will help us in making these points;
and these rules will not fail us too often.
A good rule for setting stop levels is to consider that a Bottom has been
made when the stock has moved “three days away” from the day marking
the suspected low of the Bottom. If a stock reacts for some days and finally
makes a low at 24, with a high for that day at 25, then we will not have an
established Bottom until we have had 3 days in which the stock sells at no
lower than 25⅛. The entire price range for 3 full days must be entirely above
the top price for the day making the low. This is the “three days away” rule,
and it would apply in reverse in declining markets, where the range for
3 days must be entirely below the entire range of the day making the high.
This gives a rule for setting an original stop order. It also gives a rule
for changing the stop order. As soon as the stock has moved 3 days away
from a new Bottom, we move the stop order to a position below that Bottom.
(We have already explained in Chapter 27 how we determine the distance
this stop level should be below the Bottom.)
441

AU3772_C028.fm Page 442 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

442

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

17
16
AMERICAN CABLE & RADIO

ACR

15
14
1945–1946
13
12
11
10
Sales
100’s

250
200
150
100
50
JULY
AUGUST
SEPTEMBER OCTOBER
NOVEMBER DECEMBER
7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 1 8 15 22 29 5

FIGURE 210. Advance of a protective stop order in a long commitment. The daily
chart of American Cable and Radio in the summer of 1945 made a Rounded Bottom,
part of a long period of Consolidation following the advance which ended in July
1944. A breakout on heavy volume occurred September 12, and purchases were then
possible on any Minor Reactions.
The first protective stop would immediately be placed 6% below the previous
Minor Bottom of August 21, using the table given in Chapter 27. This would put the
stop level at 9⅞. On September 19 and 20, we would have 2 days of market action
entirely “away” from the September 17 Minor Bottom, and, on September 28, a third
day. We would then move the stop up to 6% under the September 17 Bottom, or to
10⅝. The next move would come after the new high closing of October 11, which is
more than 3% higher than the October 1 Minor Peak. The stop would now be placed
at 11⅞. On November 2, a new high close was registered more than 3% over the
October 15 Minor Peak; the stop would be raised to 12¾. On November 15, another
high closing topped by over 3% the Minor Peak made on November 7. The stop
would be moved up again, this time to 13½. November 29 made the third day the
entire range was “three days away” from the November 26 Bottom, and the stop
was upped to 13¾. The closing on December 5 gave us a 3% advance over the
November 17 high, and again we moved the stop, raising it to 14⅞. Finally, on January
3, 1946, this stop was caught as shown on the chart. In a Bear Market, protective
stops would be moved down in exactly the same manner to protect a short sale. EN9:
A number of inconsistencies exist in this figure and caption which are clarified later in the text.

AU3772_C028.fm Page 443 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter twenty-eight:

What Is a Bottom — What Is a Top?

443

Protective stops for long stocks can move only up. A stop level, once
established, is never to be moved down except when the stock goes ex-dividend or ex-rights; then the stop may be dropped the amount of the dividend
or rights. Similarly, protective stops for short sales are to be moved only
down, and may not be raised. (In the case of ex-dividends and ex-rights, the
short-sale stop would be dropped the amount of the dividend or rights.)
There are certain situations where it is difficult to determine Bottoms
and Tops; where, indeed, it seems as though a Consolidation or Correction
had been made without any significant move in the Secondary Direction. In
such cases (as contrasted to the obvious situation where the stock moves up
or down in series of well-marked steps and reactions, like a staircase), you
will need all your judgment and experience to determine where the Minor
Basing Points actually occur.

Basing Points
Let us call the levels which determine where stops should be placed Basing
Points. In a Bull Market Move, we will consider the Bottom of each Minor
Reaction as a Basing Point, from which we will figure our stop-order level
as soon as the stock has moved up to “three days away.” We will also use
each Minor Top as a Basing Point in a Bull Move. In a Bear Market, we will
consider the Tops of each rally and also each Minor Bottom as Basing Points
for the protective stops, in the same way.
Where a stock makes a substantial move in the Primary Direction, say
a move of 15% or more, and then moves back at least 40% of the distance
covered from the previous Basing Point to the end of the Primary Move, that
surely gives us a Basing Point as soon as the stock again starts off in the
Primary Direction. However, if the stock reacts less than 40%, perhaps even
marks time at the same level for a week or more, that should also be considered a Basing Point as soon as the move in the Primary Direction is
continued (provided the volume indications are right).
The daily volume, as we have seen, is like the trained nurse’s clinical
thermometer; it tells a great deal about what is happening in a stock, more
than the superficial symptoms of price alone. There are three times at which
you may look for exceptionally heavy volume: (1) on the day of breakout
from a pattern or a period of inaction, especially if the breakout is on the
upside; (2) on the day on which the stock goes into new ground in the
Primary or Intermediate Direction, that is, goes above the last Minor Top in
a Bull Market, or below the last Minor Bottom in a Bear Market; and (3) the
day on which the Minor Move is completed or nearly completed, that is, the
new Minor Top in a Bull Market and the Minor Bottom in a Bear Market.
To this we might add that extra heavy volume on any other day during a
move in the Primary Direction is likely to indicate that the move is at an
end and will not complete the hoped-for advance or decline.
