
FIGURE 8.10
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Setups and Triggers

225

Intraday Triggers on Stocks
Let’s look at a 15-minute chart on IBM, a fairly popular stock, and see how
this method applies for day traders. Figure 8.11 shows a double bottom
formed with the primary low formed by a doji followed by a hammer. The
higher close occurs at 81.24, with immediate results following. Prices peak
at 12 noon around 81.50, only to fade back after the crowd decides to take
profits before lunchtime. The initial risk target has not been challenged
during that time frame. Then, as volume picks up as traders return in the afternoon, another doji forms, followed by a second HCD signal. See how the
market hugs the daily S-1 pivot support as well. The market enjoys a nice
gain with the very sequence we like when we are in a long position: higher
highs, higher lows, and higher closing highs, right up to the daily pivot point
R-1 target high.
Let’s look at another stock example. For those stock traders not looking to trade commodities but wanting to participate in the action, here is a
novel opportunity. One consideration should be to buy stock in the Chicago
Board of Trade. That way you will own a piece of the exchange! Figure 8.12
shows a 15-minute chart on CBOT holdings. Notice that the HCD trigger is
made by a higher close than open hammer candle pattern; and as you can

FIGURE 8.11
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

226

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.12
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

see, the market reacted strongly as the trend sequence developed once
again with higher highs, higher lows, and higher closing highs. This stock
generated a buy at 91.70, closed at 93.00, and kept following the money trail
into the next day’s trading session. In fact, the market kept trading higher
up to 119 as of February 24, 2006, when I was editing this book. I would
imagine that as volume increases, this stock can trade higher for years to
come. It has a pretty good track record staying in business; it has been
around for over 155 years.
Let’s look at another commodity-related stock; this one is Exxon. By
now, everyone knows that this company generated the highest profit in a
given quarter of any company in the world. As energy prices bounced
around, so did this stock. In Figure 8.13, we have a 60-minute chart for a
swing trade, showing the weekly and monthly pivot points that are helping
to illustrate and uncover the hidden support value. As the market declines,
the doji formations develop at these confluence levels of supports. Then, as
the moving average crosses and as prices close above the doji highs, we
have a confirmed buy signal.
There was never any pressure of loss on the trade; but even if you were
bored with the trade, a secondary trigger was generated three days later at
57.00. Notice the trending market condition and the sequence of events that

Setups and Triggers

227

FIGURE 8.13
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

we are looking for when in a long position; higher highs, higher lows, and
higher closing highs. Also note that the white candles signify that the market is closing above the open on each time period, demonstrating that buyers are dominating the market. This chart pattern resembles a “W” bottom
pattern, which is quite similar in formation to the IBM chart in Figure 8.11.
It is interesting that these two stocks showed this formation on different
dates as well.
I have illustrated how the setup and signal work for intraday time periods. Let’s take a look at how we can apply the methods combining all the
techniques, including the pivot point moving average crossovers, pivot
point support targets, stochastics, and the high close doji. In Figure 8.14 we
are looking at Alcoa; the stock went into a nasty tailspin, as most markets
did in October 2005. However, after long price declines, you do not want to
get too bearish in the hole, so to speak, especially on high-quality companies implementing the longer-term monthly pivot point methods. We uncovered that there was support at 22.15 and a potential bottom or end of
the decline. Granted, the low was 22.28, so we were off by a small margin.
But notice how when using my methods, the signal to go long was triggered
once the market closed above the moving averages; a high close doji trigger prompted a long position; and the stochastics confirmed the long trigger, as %K and %D both crossed and closed above the 20 percent line. If you

228

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.14
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

follow the flow of the market, you will see that the sequence of events that
transpire is higher highs, higher lows, and the most important feature:
higher closing highs! Now, that was a gem of a move! The best part about
this method is that it keeps you focused on specific targets and keeps your
risk to a minimum, allowing you to be a more relaxed and a more confident
trader, letting the trade mature and generating bigger profits.
So far we have demonstrated that dojis form more times than not at
pivot point support and resistance targets. In most of the examples, we
have not seen a classic morning doji star pattern develop at bottoms; however, high close doji setups have developed. As you have identified the “hidden” support target by calculating the pivot point target levels, you had a
much clearer view of timing the market reversal. Stacking the odds in your
favor by including analysis from other time frames, in addition to the aid of
knowing the right way to read the confirming indicators, will continue to
help you with your entries. Combining that with the knowledge of what to
look for in identifying trending conditions and what signals a trend to run
out of momentum will help you with your exits. That is what will increase
your profits.

Setups and Triggers

229

Figure 8.15 is a chart on Dell. As the market was plummeting, an exhaustion gap developed. For some traders, buying sharply lower gap openings, such as those that occurred at the end of October, is their bread and
butter. Most traders buy the lower opens and look for the gap to be “filled”
on the charts. In other words, they buy the market looking for prices to
move back up to test the prior day’s settlement. In this situation, that would
have been a bad strategy because the market remained on the defensive for
another week and a half. In fact, the market made a lower low. However, instead of playing the “catch the falling knife” guessing game, if you were patient and practiced discipline by waiting to see what the market’s behavior
was at the confluence of weekly and monthly supports levels, you would
have seen a high close doji setup develop. Even the stochastics indicator
confirmed the trigger to buy. As you can see, the %K and %D crossed and
closed back above the 20 percent line at the same time as the high close doji
trigger occurred.
The high close doji helps add simplicity to your trading. Aided by the
use of pivot points analysis, stochastics, and MACD indicators and the moving average method, you have a beautiful system that should help generate
reliable buy signals for forex, futures, and stock traders, whether they are
short-term or long-term in nature.

FIGURE 8.15
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

230

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

LOW CLOSE DOJI
The next trading signal is the opposite of the high close doji. It is a setup developed on the premise that once the market has rallied and established a
high, when a doji forms, it is indicating there is indecision; and once we establish a lower closing low below the doji’s low, as shown in Figure 8.16,
which establishes that there is a loss in bullish momentum, we can initiate
a short position.

FIGURE 8.16

Characteristics
When the market is in an extended trend to the upside and the market is
overbought, a doji appears, indicating indecision and weakness of buyers to
maintain the upward trend. Pay particular attention if the candle preceding
the doji is a tall white candle, which would be a two-candle pattern called
a bearish harami doji cross. Watch for increased volume, as this also confirms a blow-off-top formation.

Trading Rules
When a doji appears, you should:
• Sell on the close or the next time period’s open once a new closing low
is made from the previous time period’s doji’s low, especially when the
market is against a key pivot point resistance target number.
• Place stops above the highest high point of the initial doji candle. Stops
should be initially placed as a stop-close-only, meaning you do not exit
the trade unless the market closes back above the doji’s high.
• Buy or exit on the open of the first candle after the previous candle
makes a higher closing high than the previous candle.

Setups and Triggers

231

You can use a filter confirming the signal, such as a bearish divergence
stochastic or MACD pattern.
Here is a secondary guideline for the exit and risk management strategy. Get out of half of your positions on the first shift in momentum, which
in a low close doji (LCD) trade would be after the initial trigger. The market moves in your favor; and at times we see a consolidation period, similar to a bear flag formation. Covering your shorts and booking profits on
half of your positions will keep you in a profitable position for the remainder of the trade. You initially placed a stop-close-only; but for an intraday
time period, this would have been a mental stop-close-only because most
order platforms do not have that feature for day trading. As the market has
moved in your favor, you can place a hard stop above the doji high. There
will be times when you have to make a judgment on whether the risk is too
excessive by the distance of the proposed entry and the stop-close-only.
Therefore, you may want to scale out of two-thirds of a position at the first
sign you see the trend lose momentum.

Spot Forex Triggers
Let’s examine market price action and how to execute this signal. You
have your predetermined pivot point resistance levels already mapped out
for you. RealTick has the feature that automatically sets the daily pivot
point levels on the charts. Genesis Software has the Person Pivot with
the COMAS triggers programmed in a library feature that highlights
the buy and sell signals with the red and green arrows. Some charting
packages have pivot points available as well. If you do not have either of
these two software packages, you can do an Excel program; or at the very
least, you can use my pivot point calculator included on the CD or on my
web site www.nationalfutures.com to program any market for any time
frame you want. The key is that once you have the predetermined support
and resistance numbers, it is the second variable that is more important,
which is looking for a signal that triggers a call to action. That would be
the LCD signal.
The chart in Figure 8.17 is a spot forex euro currency that shows once
again why it is important to wait for sell signals at resistance rather than
buying breakouts. The euro currency chart shows the market breaking out
above the R-1 level. As a standard rule, I do not like to take buy signals at
resistance (we have covered that in the pivot point section). I would rather
wait for a sell signal to develop and go with the declining momentum. I believe that one reason why this signal works so well is that many traders are
trying to trade breakouts of pivot point resistance and, therefore, go long
once they see the breakout above the R-1 level. Once there is little followthrough and prices start to retreat, then they are trapped and scramble to

232

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Don’t take buy signals at resistance.

FIGURE 8.17
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

sell to get out of their losing trade. In this example, notice where we have a
moving average crossover—not only do prices close below the doji, but
also below both moving average values.
The trigger to sell short was executed at 118.67, and we saw an immediate reaction as prices plunged. The sequence of events that we want to
see once we are in a short position, as in this example, is lower highs, lower
lows, and the most important lower closing lows. Finally, the market
pauses at 118.30, where we would look to cover half to two-thirds of our position, banking a quick 37-point (or PIP) gain per position. Now we can
make a decision instead of placing a hard stop above the initial doji high.
We could decide, since the move was a decent distance away from our initial entry, to place a stop at breakeven on the balance of our position. As the
market enters a consolidation phase, we see that prices never close above
the high of the first reactionary low’s high. That keeps prices contained in
a sideways channel, which is similar to a bear flag formation. As we follow
the flow of the market, notice how the market declines by the end of the
day to the S-2 of 117.80. As a day trader, there is no question on where you
need to exit the position. It is the end of the day, and you have managed a
trade all day and rode a very nice trending market condition.
Using a half-position scale-out method, you obviously need to trade at
least a minimum of two contracts. In this example, when you cover half of

Setups and Triggers

233

your positions at 118.30, you pick up $370 per 100,000 full-size contract. You
can now afford to ride the balance. That generates the bulk of your profits,
as you would be covering the other half of the trade at the 118.00 level for
a 67-PIP gain, or $670. Combined, you have a profit of $1,040 on just a twolot position.
In Figure 8.18, I want to look at a textbook setup in the Japanese yen.
This is a 5-minute chart without the pivot point moving averages overlaid to
help you see the progression of the trade and the sequence of the
open/close relationship that candlestick charts display.
As the market advances toward the projected pivot point daily R-2,
traders may assume the market conditions are in a bullish mode. When you
get in that mindset, you tend to forget about looking at the current market
conditions. The top pattern is not a traditional or classic morning doji star
formation because the third candle does not close below the midpoint of
the tall white candle. However, it does close below the doji’s low; that is the
conditional change that takes place giving us the clue that the bullish momentum has dried up and that a reversal is imminent. First, there is a lower
closing low; then, the market closes below the open; and finally, prices reversed direction—all after the market tapped the pivot point resistance
level. Therefore, we want to sell on the close or on the very next time pe-

FIGURE 8.18
Used with permission of esignal.com.

234

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

riod’s open, placing our stop (initially) as a mental stop-close-only above
the high of the doji, which is 118.18. That is just three PIPs above the daily
pivot point resistance level, too.
Again, what we want to see is almost instant follow-through for the
price to decline. As you can see with this trade, there was immediate follow-through. Notice the progression of the market as it declines from the
entry price at 118.07 straight down to 117.87, for a quick 20-PIP gain. The
market then trades back and forth, creating small-range candles, which
form a sideways channel. If you look carefully at each candle’s close, you
will see that it does not close back above the high of candle that established
the first reactionary low. As a trader, you may want to hold all positions at
this time or at least cover half of your positions for small gain. One reason
to do that is because, as powerful and reliable as these triggers are, we still
do not know how far prices can or will actually move. Remember that the
patterns recur; the outcome is what is different each time.
The markets could easily reverse back and challenge the highs. By taking money out of the market immediately on half of your positions, you
have profits; and more important, you reduce your risk exposure in
the market.
Always remember that every time you are in the market, you face risk.
So by establishing a profit and following the flow of the market, you can
manage the balance of your trade with less stress, knowing you have made
money. See how the candles in Figure 8.18 show the true direction of the
market: The dark candles reflect closes below the open. For the most part,
there are more of the dark, or negative assigned, candles, which are establishing lower closing lows, than there are white, or positive assigned, candles. Not only do they have smaller ranges, but they do not make higher
closing highs. This shows that every time the market rallies just a little bit,
sellers are present. Long real-body, or negative assigned, candles represent
sellers, who dominate this market. Therefore, staying short on the balance
of the position is warranted. Now, as the market price disintegrates,
demonstrating the conviction of sellers, we can place a hard stop at
breakeven on the balance of the position and start to adjust the stop to protect profits accordingly. This is what managing the trade is about and what
we will go over in Chapter 9.
As a short-term trader, it is imperative to trade with the current flow or
momentum of the market. Because there are so many variables that can influence your trading decisions, using the methods described here will help
you keep focused and will alleviate the problem of trading on emotional
impulses.
When you are armed with what the potential resistance levels are, then
once you identify a low close doji signal and then apply trade management
techniques, you can certainly increase your chances to consistently capture

235

Setups and Triggers

profits. It is literally up to you to pull the money out of the markets. In Figure 8.19, we have a 10-minute chart, just to illustrate that dojis form on various time frames as well. As you can see, the market starts to rally and
closes above the pivot point resistance. By not allowing emotions to interfere with your better judgment, just by applying one mechanical rule—do
not take buy signals at resistance—you will have eliminated the greed factor that often causes a trader to chase after a market. Therefore, just wait,
and practice patience to look for a sell signal to develop. As you can see in
Figure 8.19, after the long white candle forms, a doji forms. Then, as the
method dictates, you do not enter a short position until you see confirmation of a breakdown in the bullish momentum by a lower closing low below
the doji’s low. Once that occurs, you enter a short position on the close of
that period or on the next open. Remember that this does not tell you how
much money you will make on each trade. Every outcome is different.
There is a strong possibility that, based on historic reference, you should
see a decline in prices; the question is by how much.
In this chart, you see an immediate reaction, as you would have entered a short from 122.94; and the bears take over almost immediately.
There is a sequence of lower highs, lower lows, and lower closing lows. In

Stop-close

,

FIGURE 8.19
Used with permission of esignal.com.

236

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

fact, using the moving averages, notice the confirmation of a negative
crossover and prices closing below the moving averages. This short-term
downtrend ends when you see a change in conditions once the moving averages cross back up and prices start to close above both moving average
values. This is a sign that the negative momentum, or selling pressure, is
fading and that it is time to exit your position. Also, notice that a doji forms
at the bottom of this downturn; it is the candle that closes above the doji’s
high that makes you commit to exiting all positions. This trade results only
in an 11-PIP gain; but not all outcomes will be grand-slam home runs. The
key is in being able to identify true conditional changes that will make you
act on facts, triggering a call to action by a set of rules rather than by emotional impulses. If you have the discipline to trade by a set of rules and to
follow those rules, you will reap some juicy trading profits consistently
over a long period of time.

Triggers on Futures Markets
Let’s look at implementing a confluence of pivot points and see how the
market behaves at these longer-term resistance projections. In Figure 8.20,
we have the daily, weekly, and monthly numbers all concentrating near 115
in the bonds. This chart is a 5-minute time period that illustrates again why
it is important to look for sell signals at resistance and for buy signals at
support.
Many traders fail to see the bigger picture and get caught up in the excitement of a trending market condition. As prices trade above the daily R2 pivot point, some traders look at their R-3 numbers and think they are on
a “cash cow” train ride that will never stop climbing higher. By examining
the higher-degree time periods, such as the weekly and monthly numbers,
you can get a better idea that the market may soon run out of steam as there
is hidden resistance from longer-term pivot analysis. Practicing discipline
by not following the herd mentality and demonstrating patience to wait for
a sell signal will lead to a more fruitful opportunity.
As you can see, once the market closes below the double doji formations triggering a short position, the moving averages cross and the market
closes below both values. Once again, here is the market reaction as bulls
scramble to sell out their longs. The trigger to sell short was 11428⁄32, and the
market plunged to 11415⁄32, for a quick 13⁄32-point decline (each point is $31.25),
or a gain of nearly $400 per position. Notice how the market pauses or consolidates forming a bear flag. Here is where tightening your stops and covering half or two-thirds of your positions would again come into action and
be a wise and profitable decisison.
The LCD signal works on most active markets, as long as there is
volatility and price movement. In late 2005, as commodity markets came

Setups and Triggers

237

FIGURE 8.20
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

alive, the Chicago Board of Trade’s electronic gold contract allowed easy
access to take advantage of some pretty good intraday moves. With the statistical study done in Chapter 7, it makes good sense to diversify in other
markets that respond to certain technical patterns, such as dojis, hammers,
and shooting stars. It is also rewarding to see how robust this method is, as
it works in no- to low-correlation market relationships and in various time
periods. In Figure 8.21, as bullish as gold was in 2005, there were periods of
consolidation. No market ever goes straight up. A sector or market segment
trading with such high interest as gold attracted many traders. In this example, a sell signal was triggered at 559.70, and we started to see a progression of price deterioration down to the pivot support of 544.00.
Utilizing the stock index futures is one of the better markets for day
traders, as we have discussed. The low close doji trigger is a highly effective pattern in these markets. Figure 8.22 displays the e-mini–Standard &
Poor’s (S&P) on a 15-minute candle chart illustrating an entry based on the
close below the doji low, a negative crossover from the moving averages,
and confirmation that prices closed below both moving average values.
Here we have a trigger to sell short at 1239.25. Prices continue to follow
the same progression of a pause or consolidation, and then continuation of
