
286

Inside the Currency Market

options against Micro U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar and U.S. dollar/Swiss
franc. Traders should look at option-strike prices with the understanding that
American options are the vast majority of trade.
COT Reports

The weekly COT report is still a valuable tool studied by market professionals to determine market direction, sentiment, and trend. Two types of
reports are released weekly for ﬁnancial futures and options. Legacy reports
for currency pairs highlight commercial and noncommercial positions,
longs and shorts for each currency pair, open interest, open interest as a percentage by trader type, and weekly changes. Commercials could be hedgers
or wish to manage risk, while non-commercials are everybody else. Futures
only and futures and options combined reports are available weekly free of
charge from the CFTC.
The recommendation is to view each report separately to determine
open interest for futures and options because futures and micro contracts are
reported together. U.S. dollar/Japanese yen must be viewed critically due to
the Japanese yen/U.S. dollar futures arrangement. This is why options must
be viewed separately to determine sentiment. COT reports are without question a vital tool and worth every trader’s time and effort. The report to view
should always be reportable positions.
August 2010 marked the ﬁrst publication of Traders in Financial Futures
(TFF). The reports contain the same information but classiﬁcation of traders
are identiﬁed and their market activity.
The ﬁrst of four categories of large traders are Dealers/Intermediaries
who represent the sell side of the market. Asset Managers/Institutional are
pension funds, portfolio managers, and mutual funds to name a few. This
category represents the buy side of the market. Third are Leverage Funds,
who are money managers and hedge funds who represent the buy side of the
market. Finally Other Reportables represent hedgers.
A category of spreading was introduced to both the legacy and TFF
reports. The CFTC “computes spreading amount equal to offsetting longs
and shorts held by a trader. It’s calculated as the amount of offsetting in different calendar months or offsetting futures and options in the same or different
calendar months” (CFTC).
Since COT reports all futures and options for all traded instruments, conﬁrmation of proposed or ongoing currency pair trades can be validated by its
respective instrument. For example, euro/U.S. dollar can be validated by oil.

Technical Analysis

287

Both are risk assets that move together. Agricultural commodities are risk assets
and conﬁrmed by Australian dollar/U.S. dollar and New Zealand dollar/U.S.
dollar since both move together.
Australian dollar/U.S. dollar prices are moved more by coal and metal
prices for exports more so than any other commodities. New Zealand
dollar/U.S. dollar prices respond to logs, dairy, wool, and meat. U.S. dollar/
Canadian dollar is a commodity currency that must be measured critically against oil and speciﬁc commodities inherent to Canada’s trade ﬂows.
Corporations, importers, exporters, and central bankers with oil interests can
swing Canadian dollar prices as they seek to lock a respective oil price. Metals
are risk assets and can be measured against all risk currencies. For example,
industrial gold exported from Australia is another measure for Australian
dollar/U.S. dollar risk.
Bollinger Bands

John Bollinger recently celebrated the twenty-ﬁfth anniversary of his
Bollinger Band introduction. Its wide use in all markets attests to its success, and forex is no different because it has survived the test of time. The
purpose of Bollinger Bands is to capture highs and lows on a relative basis
using standard deviation to measure volatility and a moving average to measure time series.
To understand Bollinger Bands methodology is to know Bollinger’s rules
for use.
Bollinger Bands conﬁrm W and M market patterns. They can be used for
buy and sell decisions. Closing prices outside the bands don’t necessarily mean
market reversal; they may mean price continuation. Yet prices that touch the
upper or lower band doesn’t always translate to a buy or sell. Bandwidths can
be adjusted. As moving averages increase or decrease so must standard deviations increase or decrease. Bollinger recommends two standard deviations for
a 20-period moving average, 2.1 standard deviations for a 50-period moving
average, and 1.9 standard deviations for a 10-period moving average. Moving
average refers to simple moving averages and factored in the formula. Yet true
sample size standard deviations are small so distributions are not normal.
Indicators are normalized with percent b.
Parker Evans in the 2008 Journal of Technical Analysis performed a study
employing percent b as adopted in the Bollinger Band calculation. He deﬁnes
percent b as an oscillator that measures closing prices in relation to the upper
and lower bands.

288

Inside the Currency Market

Many traders employ two sets of Bollinger Bands with various moving
averages and standard deviations. Bollinger recommends conﬁrmation by a
sentiment or momentum indicator.
Simple Moving Averages

Precisely when a simple moving average was applied to a chart remains a mystery. It probably occurred after the ﬁrst reported open interest in the 1920s
but before the 1960s introduction of exponential moving averages. What is
known as a simple moving average is an old indicator that survived the test of
time for its effectiveness.
To calculate: add closing prices over X days and divide by X. A 20-day
simple moving average is calculated by adding 20 closing prices and dividing
the sum by 20. On the next day, the ﬁrst day drops from the calculation and
a new day is added to smooth the average.
Traders should focus on 10-, 20-, 50-, and 100-day averages and employ
those as support and resistance levels as well as crossovers. Long crossovers
occur when a 10-day crosses above a 20-day average and short crossovers occur
when the 10-day crosses below a 20-day average. The same phenomena
occur for 50- and 100-day averages. Many employ the 200-day average as
well, but its accuracy deserves mention.
The most important simple moving average for a yearly view of the market has been the 200-day average. Factor trading days in the United States
minus weekends and holidays, the 200-day average is actually 253 days, 249
for Canada, 249 for Australia, 253 for New Zealand, 245 for Japan, 258 for
the euro, and 255 for the Swiss.
The 200-day average not only doesn’t exist, but any yearly calculation
based on it for trading purposes will be off by at least 45 days, possibly more,
depending on the currency pair calculated.
The recommendation is to deploy the proper sized average to the currency pair in the respective market. For example, a long euro/U.S. dollar
in Europe should employ the 258-day average, while a long U.S. dollar/
Swiss franc in the United States should employ the 253-day average. Further,
employ the proper period for 100-day crossovers from above or below.
To employ a standard deviation moving-average indicator, subtract the
moving average from each of the data points used in the moving-average
calculation. This is a list of deviations from the average. Square each deviation and add them all together. Divide the sum by the number of periods
selected and take the square root. This is a volatility indicator where high

289

Technical Analysis

standard deviations will see prices fall and low standard deviations will see
prices rise. The indicator will move opposite of prices.
Ichimoku Kinko Hyo

Ichimoku is an old Japanese indicator purportedly invented by a Japanese
trader in the 1940s. Purportedly because the English and Japanese translation
of the book can’t be found, so it’s assumed that Ichimoku methods exist today
based on past Japanese tradition.
The widespread use of Ichimoku as a primary indicator in Japan and
throughout Asia was highlighted by Nicole Elliott in her 2007 book Ichimoku
Charts. It’s imperative to understand the methodology of Ichimoku to measure not only Japanese yen pairs, but Ichimoku can be employed on any
ﬁnancial instrument. The success and further methodologies of Ichimoku
can be found in a study in the Summer 2008 Journal of Technical Analysis.

Ichimoku Highlights
Ichimoku incorporates ﬁve moving average lines that work based on market highs and lows rather than closing prices. The Tenkan line is the shortest moving average and provides trade signals. The calculation is as follows:
Subtract the lowest low over the past 9 days from the highest high in the same
time period, then divide the sum by two. The Kijun line is a medium-term
moving average calculated as follows: Add the highest high of the past 26
candles or days from the lowest low of the same time frame and divide that
sum by two (Elliott).
Senkou Span A and Senkou Span B begin formation of the cloud, Kumo
in Japanese, that provides an upper boundary of support and lower boundary
of resistance. Senkou Span A calculation is:
Tenkan  Kijun/2 plotted 26 days ahead
Senkou Span B calculation:
Highest high in last 52 days  lowest low of the past 52 days/
2 offset 26 days ahead
Chikou Span is the momentum line calculated as today’s closing price plotted
26 days back.

290

Inside the Currency Market

The basics of Ichimoku say buy when Tenkan crosses above Kijun and
sell when Tenkan crosses below. Prices above the cloud signify a bullish situation while prices below the cloud is a bear situation. Tenkan and Kijun
crossovers above and below the cloud must be managed due to its short-term
duration and relation to cloud support and resistance. Ichimoku is a trend
indicator that employs Fibonacci time series as a measure of price targets and
wave pattern measurement. (Elliott).
As a personal favorite indicator, my sincere recommendation for the
9-, 26-, and 52-day periods is not to shorten the lengths of the periods,
especially if a trade is managed throughout all markets. These are special timetested numbers to measure time, price, and waves, that the overall features
of Ichimoku use (Elliott). The inventor worked tirelessly for many years to
perfect Ichimoku. Additionally, these numbers can measure currency-price
congestion using the special day-count numbers. Used correctly, Ichimoku
can stand alone as a primary indicator as the Japanese intended.
Baltic Dry Index

An important barometer to monitor commodity currencies and exportdependent nations such as Australian dollar, New Zealand dollar, and Japanese
yen is the Baltic Exchange located in London. The Baltic Exchange advertises
itself as the only independent source of maritime-market information. And
rightly so since its existence traces back more than 250 years.
With a 550-member organization, the purpose of the group is arrange
ocean transportation of bulk cargoes such as oil, coal, grain, iron ore, and
sugar, to name a few categories, on behalf of ship owners and charterers
(Baltic Exchange). The Baltic Exchange provides daily market information
for the dry market for Capesize, Panamax, Supramax, and Handysize vessels
(Baltic Exchange). Wet market products such as oil are also reported.
The main question for traders to monitor commodity currencies is who
is shipping and where are shipments delivered or placed in storage. Most
important is what is the price of shipping costs and is it rising or falling.
A downturn in the number of orders for freight deliveries and freight
rates may mean a downturn in commodity prices, a downturn in expected
proﬁts for commodity currencies, and a downturn in spot prices. Likewise, a
healthy commodity market is a rise in orders. Current 2010 dry-side orders
in the ﬁrst four months amounted to 18.8 million dry weight, while all 2009
saw 33.6 million dry orders. Compare that to Australian dollar/U.S. dollar
and New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar and notice a rise in spot prices. Dry

Technical Analysis

291

Supramax routes are reported during Asian sessions as of September 2010
while market information is reported Monday through Friday at 13:00
London time. Dry side orders are no longer reported due to the introduction
and ﬁrst trade on Baltex.
Baltex is an electronic marketplace introduced by the Baltic exchange to
trade dry freight derivatives. The ﬁrst trade began June 2011 and the exchange
is regulated by the FSA in the UK.
The four Baltic indices include the Capesize, Panamax, Supramax,
and Handysize with a separate category for Baltic International Tanker
Routes. Currently 19 routes are mapped for oil deliveries, though a change
is expected as the U.S. Gulf Coast oil route was closed for seven years. Oil
routes will be rerouted from the United States to Brazil to China as new
oil ﬂows into China. U.S. oil rigs closed in the Gulf reopened in Brazil,
and Brazilian oil ﬂow is expected to ﬂow to China (Baltic Exchange Site).
The Baltic Dry Index (BDI) is the most prominent, as traders trade forward rate agreements against its price. The BDI is calculated by taking
time-charted components of all indices. Currently 20 routes are covered
within the BDI. Generally as the BDI rises, commodity currencies and
major export nations’ spot prices rise. The conﬁrmation for any market is
monitoring the respective nation’s transportation indices and the indices of
major export destinations.
IMF and Special Drawing Rights

Special Drawing Rights (SDR) traditionally never deserved special attention
since their inception in 1969 but a number of recent developments may have
implications for the future in terms of nation-to-nation trade, prices of commodities bought and sold in world markets, and central bank reserves.
From 1944 to 1973, the world operated on a ﬁxed gold system—currencies
were pegged to the price of an ounce of gold. Member nations of the IMF
contributed a portion of their reserves to support the SDR system of trade on
a voluntary quota system. Least-developed nations lacked gold and reserves
so couldn’t afford contributions in gold terms as a means to exchange their
currencies. Plus gold was priced in U.S. dollars. So least-developed nations
lacked the means to participate in global trade.
The main mandate of the IMF is ensure exchange rate stability. Their
mandate worked for developed nations only so they devised the SDR as a
“reserve asset to supplement reserves of all members” (IMF). The IMF deﬁnition of SDR is a “claim on freely usable currencies of members.” The IMF

292

Inside the Currency Market

