
Are the statistics on fund holdings readily available?
Yes, the SEC requires them to report it. [He buzzes an assistant to
bring a sample sheet showing the fund holdings for Dell.]
What are you looking for in these numbers?
I'm looking for someone with a huge share position that is beginning
to sell. We may trade around a position. The big mutual funds don't
do that. They either buy, sell, or hold. If Magellan is beginning to sell
a 100-million-share position, what is going to happen to the stock—
particularly since many other funds will suddenly become likeminded, exacerbating the supply?
You just asked for the numbers on Dell. I assume that is another
company whose stock you consider overvalued.
That is an understatement. Dell recently was selling for a market capitalization greater than the entire sales of the PC market. Now it's
down 30 percent from that point, and I submit it will go even lower,
because PCs are the quintessential commodity, with supply being
unlimited and demand finite.
What drove the stock so high?
The indexation phenomenon we spoke about and the generally selfreinforcing feedback cycle, wherein people buy a stock precisely
because it is going up. If you look at the stock, it's a crowded trade.
Everyone owns it. For example, in the Janus 20 fund, which as its
name implies holds only 20 stocks, Dell accounts for almost 10 per-

'MICHAEL L A U E 8

cent of the total portfolio. Certainly Dell is a wonderful company. But
what we short are unreasonable Wall Street expectations, not inferior
quality companies.
I challenge you to defend the valuations of those companies that
account for the largest holdings in the most prominent mutual funds
in this country. You may tell me "they are great companies." That is
one of the biggest misconceptions in this business. With all due
respect to Warren Buffet, this business is not about investing in great
companies; it's about profiting from inefficiently priced stocks.
[At this point, an assistant brings in the fund holding statistics for
Dell. The numbers show that the large mutual funds have been reducing
their substantial positions.] You see, everybody here is basically selling.
It's no coincidence that the stock is down 30 percent from its high. I
submit to you that within six months Dell Computer will cease being
among the top ten holdings for most of the largest mutual funds.
Here we have an example of a stock whose price your analysis
showed was grossly overvalued, and there was evidence that
the large mutual funds were beginning to divest. Did you go
short?
If you go short a stock when there is no news to activate a decline,
then it could go against you for some time. Therefore, one has to time
the short in line with some event, such as the quarterly earnings
report. During the past several quarters, we felt that we wouldn't be
hurt going short Dell into a quarterly earnings report because the

stock has shown that it needs a spectacular positive surprise to go up.
If it just meets expectations, it goes down. If you get a situation where
the numbers are slightly disappointing, the stock plummets. That's
the type of situation we look for.
In a situation like that, do you time the short sale right before
the release of the earnings report?
That's a bit tricky because if the numbers are really disappointing,
there could be a preannouncement, which means you could miss the
opportunity if you wait too long. On the other hand, if you sell it too
far in advance of the report, you run the risk of the stock going sharply
against you before the report is released. In this case, we went short a
week or two before the report. The earnings were actually okay, but

T H E W I S D O M OF V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y OF F A D
revenues were slightly below estimates, and the stock fell 30 percent
in three days.
When did you cover?
We got out immediately when the stock opened sharply lower after
the report.
How do you gauge when a stock is likely to have poor earnings?
This is an area where good contacts are invaluable. The only situation
in which we use brokerage firms' input frequently is on the short side.
If you get an analyst whose opinion you value saying, "It's a great company, but the earnings this quarter may be a bit light," you know that
the stock will probably be very vulnerable. You have to read between
the lines because, for political reasons, analysts are unlikely to actually change their ratings.
Assume you are short and the stock is going up against you, but
the fundamental reasons why you believe the stock is overpriced
have not changed. At what point do you throw in the towel?
It's the price of the stock that makes the trade right, not my visions of
what it should be. If the company comes in with results that are in
line with my expectations and that I consider to be disappointing visa-vis the Street's forecast, but the market does not respond as I had
anticipated, I cover.
Give me an example.
Last year, I went short Intel a couple of weeks before the earnings
report because I thought the market expectations were unrealistically
optimistic. Not surprisingly, the company issued a preannouncement
that earnings would be close to 90 cents per share, which was way
below market expectations of about $1.15, and the stock fell sharply.
About a week later, they issued the official earnings figure, which was
92 cents, and the stock rallied sharply, more than recovering its entire
loss because the figure was considered "better-than-expected." Now, I
may think that's ridiculous, but if the news I expected is out, and the
market still does not respond as I had anticipated, I am not going to
fight it.
What is the selection process for the stocks you buy?
The basic theme that underlies three-quarters of our trades is buying
a dollar's worth of assets at a substantial discount. For purposes of

MICHM L A U E R ;

simplification, I would abbreviate our strategy on the long side by
emphasizing six elements of our selection screening process.
First, we must be knowledgeable about the industry and have
ready access to senior management—ideally in relationships that have
been developed and cultivated. This familiarity gives me a sense of
comfort about my assessment of what a stock's true value should be.
The second thing we look for is a market-adjusted decline of at
least 50 percent. I say market-adjusted because if the market is down
50 percent, then the stock being down 50 percent doesn't mean anything. If the market is down 10 percent, 1 want to see the stock down

60 percent.
I find that interesting, because I know that statistical studies
show that buying stocks that demonstrate relative strength—that

is, that are stronger than the market average—tend to do better
than the general market. Yet you are only buying stocks that are
relatively weak.
Relative weakness is a gradual Chinese torture-type of decline. I'm
not talking about relative weakness; I'm talking about a catastrophic
plunge. To use the example of one of our recent holdings, Tektronix,
when a stock goes from nearly $50 to $15 at the same time the market has been moving sharply higher, you have a debacle, not relative
weakness.

So you're looking for a collapse, not a stock that has done just
poorly over time.
I wait for the market to create a pricing inefficiency. That's what Warren Buffet talks about—Mr. Market giving him the opportunity. Well
we actually practice that, whereas most others just seem to preach it.
What gives you the opportunity is a few of the major funds deciding
that owning the stock is so stigmatizing that they don't want to be
associated with it. They would prefer to blow out of their position at
almost any price rather than have to answer for having the stock in
their portfolio at the end of the month.
But don't many of the stocks that crater just stay depressed or
drift even lower?
This is just the starting point of our screening process. We will get on
to the rest of my screen in a minute. Right now, I'm only focusing on

T H E W I S D O M OF

T H E F O L L Y OF FAD

the question of how I make sure I don't lose money. I'm not talking
about making money yet.
Then if a stock is doing okay, you're not even going to be looking
at it.
For our bread-and-butter—type of holding, which accounts for 75 percent of our portfolio, it's not even going to show up on the screen.
The third element in the selection process is the balance sheet. I
will compromise on disappointing reported earnings—that's usually
why the stock got blasted in the first place—but I won't compromise
on the balance sheet. The debt has to be manageable relative to the
cash flow. Also, in my industries of interest, book value matters. Ideally, I like to buy a stock at near, or even under book value. One of the
sad things about the current stock market environment is that it is so
driven by earnings expectations that balance sheets are practically
ignored.
Fourth, I want to see either company share repurchases or insider
buying. When the senior executives are buying shares for themselves,
and particularly when the company is repurchasing its stock for the
treasury, it sends a strong message that the downside is often limited
and provides an added safety net. What safety net does one have buying AOL? The stock could go down 90 percent and still be only fairly
priced.
That's a pretty radical prognostication. Before you go on with
your list of stock selection factors, can you explain why you consider AOL so extremely overpriced?
AOL, which by the way is the third largest holding of Fidelity Magellan, is the blue chip of the Internet world. The bulls argue that the
company is growing very quickly in a sector that is the industry of the
future, and therefore valuation is practically inconsequential. Well, as
a value investor partial to reason, I take issue with that viewpoint. In
the long run, there has to be some economic rationale for the price of
a stock. The barriers for entry into any ISP Internet business are low,
with several thousand service providers in the United States alone.
Some of them are even offering the service for free. No matter how
generous I make my growth estimates for AOL, and even allowing for
a historically high price/earnings ratio of 40 to 1 , 1 still cannot come

LAUEIi
up with an implied market capitalization greater than $15 to $20 billion. Yet the market currently values AOL at about $ 160 billion, and it
was as high as $200 billion. This figure is higher than the entire ISP
Internet business is going to be for some time to come.
If a stock routinely has daily trading ranges of 20 percent or more,
without any substantive news, you know that the market has no idea
how to value it. It's all driven by flow of funds, and if the flow of funds
into the highest capitalization stocks diminishes, then AOL will certainly suffer disproportionately. It is interesting how rational money
managers become in a bear market. Only then do they begin to question the underlying valuations.
Okay, continue with your list of stock selection factors.
The fifth screen is value. The value has to be extremely compelling.
How do you measure value?
We use some conventional measures, such as price to sales, cash flow,
book value, but not necessarily price to earnings because, as I pointed
out before, the company could actually be losing money on a reported
basis. The most important measure of value, however, which I admit
is somewhat subjective, is price to intrinsic, or private market, value.
What do you mean by private market value?
It is my assessment of what the company would be worth to an
acquiring company in the same business that may decide it is cheaper
and more expeditious to buy its earnings growth on Wall Street than
to develop it internally. In other words, private market value is what I
estimate I can sell the business for to a competitor or possibly a financial buyer.
What is the final element in your selection process?
All five of the factors we discussed so far are defensive in nature,
focused on capital preservation. They are designed to diminish risk
but do not automatically translate into a significant money-making
opportunity. All five could be in place and the stock may still fail to
move. The key question is: What is going to make the stock go up? It
is our task to identify and time that catalyst. Based on experience, the
more severely depressed the valuation and the more pessimism that
surrounds the stock, the less it actually takes to reverse the market's
perception and trigger a price recovery.

IHE W I S D O M OF V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y OF F A D
Give me some examples of catalysts.
A company restructuring that significantly addresses the isolated
problem that drove the stock down in the first place, a realization that
the company will shift from deficit to profitability, or any other such
significant corporate development. It needs to be an event that will
change the investment community's expectations for the company.
Can you provide an example of an actual stock you bought based
on this selection process?
Let's stay with Tektronix, which we bought in late 1998. It met each
of the six screening criteria.
First, the company is in a niche technology sector that is easy to
follow, and we have known key management personnel for a decade.
Second, the stock had dropped from nearly $50 in early 1998 to
$15 later that year—a decline of 70 percent.
Third, the company had an easily manageable debt level and a
positive cash flow.
Fourth, Tektronix had already repurchased three million shares
and had board approval for the repurchase of another five million.
These were sizeable quantities relative to the approximate fifty million total shares outstanding before the buyback commenced. In
addition, key management had also made meaningful purchases.
Fifth, the value was compelling. As I mentioned earlier, the total
capitalization of the company was equal to less than 25 percent of its
annual revenues. It was also selling at a discount to its book value and
at a fraction of its private market value.
Sixth, there was an identifiable catalyst that could be timed. The
company had three businesses: printers, measurement instrumentation, and video-editing equipment. The first two of these businesses
were sound, with strong market shares and good profit margins. The
third, the video-editing unit, although by far the smallest and least
significant of the three, was bleeding profusely and the key culprit
behind the company's woes. Through our research, we concluded
that a decision would be made to extricate the company from this
underperforming unit. We felt that once the market realized that Tektronix would get rid of its video-editing business, its stock would soar,
based on its remaining healthy printer and instrumentation divisions,

itif W I S D O M O F V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y O F F A D

which we estimated were worth $35 per share on their own, with a

private market value substantially north of that.
You've been pretty specific about how you select your stocks.
How do you decide when to get out? When and why did you get
out of Tektronix?
My typical target is a double within twelve months. Unless I believe
the stock has that potential, I probably will not be interested. In the
case of Tektronix, the stock hit the double less than six months after
we bought it, and we significantly reduced our position. Usually,
when I get out of a stock, I still believe there is at least 20 or 30 percent left on the upside, but the key question is whether I can get a
better risk-adjusted return somewhere else.
So once a stock you buy approximately doubles, the question is
no longer, "Will it move higher?" but rather, "Can I buy something else that will give me a higher return with less risk?"
Yes, it comes back to the notion that we restrict ourselves to fifteen
stocks. If we have a position in the portfolio, it means that it still has
to be more attractive on a risk-reward basis than any other opportunity we could find as a replacement.
The methodology you described obviously only applies to stocks
you buy. What is the difference between the way you approach
short positions versus long positions?
In our typical long position, we are looking to buy stocks that are
grossly undervalued, and we are prepared to hold those positions for
twelve months, or even longer. In contrast, in our short positions, we
are looking for stocks that will experience a shortfall relative to Wall
Street's expectations in the near term, and our anticipated exposure
period is, at most, a couple of weeks.
Also, on the long side, we never use stops because we are so intricately familiar with the companies we buy and the stocks are so lowpriced relative to their intrinsic value that we consider the risk
manageable. On the short side, however, because the risk is theoretically unlimited, we will use stops to limit our losses, no matter how
persuasive the bearish argument may be.
Sometimes this backfires. For example, one of our shorts several
years ago was Thermolase. The company had developed a laser hair-

removal treatment. Our information was that the treatment didn't
work well and was painful. The very fact that one could make an
appointment without any waiting told me that something was wrong.
Only one clinic—and you could get an appointment right away—and

the market is valuing the stock at over $1 billion! It was absurd. We
sold the stock at around $31 to $32. After I got short, I didn't like the
price action, and I was concerned about a short squeeze. I ended up
covering the position at around $35 to $36. The stock eventually collapsed to $1. I had it nailed. I was dead right in my analysis, but let's
be honest, I chickened out.
On the long side, you only buy stocks that your analysis tells you
have very limited risk. On the short side, you will stop yourself
out before a stock goes very far against you. Did your risk control
strategy ever fail? Was there ever a situation where you took a
large loss?
I sustained a terrific loss in my personal account during the October
1987 crash. All the stocks that I owned at the time were very cheap,
using the same criteria we talked about earlier. However, there was a
technical breakdown in the market. In one day, the Dow was down
over 25 percent, and the small caps [small capitalization stocks],
which is what I owned, were down by a third. In that type of market,
where there are no bidders, it doesn't make any difference what you
own; everything collapses. That in itself might not have been catastrophic, as the market eventually recovered. The problem was that I
was heavily leveraged, and I had a huge margin call. Although I could
have borrowed the money to cover my margin call, I thought doing so
would be unwise. It was a valuable, albeit traumatic, lesson in the

evils of leverage.
How much did you lose?
I don't remember the exact intramonth figures, but I can tell you that
I was up over 100 percent for nine months going into the fourth quarter, and I finished the year only slightly above breakeven.
How did you feel during the October crash, especially given the
fact you were so heavily leveraged?
It didn't seem to hurt at all. It was quite surreal, a bit of that anesthetized feeling. It was such a universal phenomenon that it certainly

MiCHJEL LAUE1

did not feel like a personal debacle. I knew I had the privilege of living through a historical event. It was a priceless education—the fact
that you could lose control of a portfolio because of exogenous factors, such as a technical breakdown in the markets—and it also created a lifelong aversion to leverage.
You were an analyst before you were a money manager. Is there
an inherent sense of conflict being an analyst for a stock when
you don't like the company, because it's politically incorrect to
say that?
It's much more than that. There is an inherent conflict between you
and your client. Your client wants to make money, and you want to
generate maximum commissions; that is the sell-side [brokerage firm]
analyst's number one priority. Hence there is a bias for recommendations that are easily saleable by the sales force—stocks that enjoy positive market perceptions and are ultraliquid so that firms can transact
a maximum number of shares. Any exceptional money-making potential of the idea, or risk to capital if market perceptions turn negative,
is strictly an afterthought. Recommending stocks that are deemed as
potentially stigmatizing in a client's portfolio because of recent disappointments, or recommending stocks that offer less-than-optimal
trading volumes, is not a fast-lane strategy for an analyst in the sellside popularity derby. In fact, the institutional sales force would be
openly critical of an analyst who wasted time on stocks that were
more difficult to sell.
What made you decide to make the transition from analyst to
money manager?
I had done well trading my own account for many years, and I wanted
to devote full time to stock picking, which had always been my passion. As a sell-sider, nearly 80 percent of my time was spent on marketing, and the research was often too oriented on maintenance.
Another attraction was that, as a portfolio manager, my universe of
potential ideas would expand dramatically. Also, although I certainly
wasn't underpaid as an analyst, I was well aware of the economic
potential implied by the remuneration-for-performance structure of a
hedge fund. Finally—and I hesitate to say this because I don't want to
sound arrogant—one of the things that gave me confidence in going

T H E W I S D O M O F VffllF., T H E F O L L Y O F F A D

out on my own was that the fund managers were my clients when 1
was an analyst, and I thought they would not be particularly difficult
to compete against.
Your company literature states that you have a policy of not disclosing your positions. Why?
There are three reasons. The first applies only to shorting stocks. If a
CEO sees that you are shorting his stock, he will likely never again be
easily accessible. I remember in the days when I was an analyst, there
were several occasions when I wrote what could be termed as bearish
reports. Ironically, almost all of these reports involved companies
whose stock I originally liked and had recommended for purchase.
In one typical example, the stock nearly tripled because of huge
earnings advances during the recovery phase following a previous
earnings shortfall. At that point, the market was assuming this growth
rate, which was clearly unsustainable, would be a permanent fixture. I
wrote a report stating that the company would see respectable growth
rates, but would not come close to matching the inflated expectations
of the market. Mind you, I only recommended taking profits, not
going short. After that report, the management suddenly became
much less accessible. The same thing happened to me as a fund manager when I listed my short positions—the access to these companies
would be permanently compromised. And, remember, frequent contact with companies' executives^ an essential part of what we do.
Second, when I disclose my positions, there is a lot of coattailing.
Wouldn't that help you? If you were already long, wouldn't others following your position by buying the stock push it in your
favor?
We don't normally put on an entire position at one time. If I disclosed
my positions, a stock would show up on the list as soon as the initial
purchases were made, well before the entire intended position was
implemented. Therefore, having others coattail my trades could actually prevent me from being able to buy the bulk of a stock position at
a desirable purchase price.
And, the third reason for not disclosing your positions?
I think of myself as a reasonably courteous person. If an investor
called and asked me why I owned a certain stock, I would probably
