
125

c04.indd 125

1/13/09 10:01:44 AM

Fundamental Analysis

News traders in the foreign exchange markets seek to exploit
these economic data releases by trading currencies based on how the
actual data figures may deviate from the predetermined consensus
figures. In this way, these traders are using the twin concepts of market expectation and surprise to dictate their trading. There are many
difficulties involved in this type of trading, but those who are able
to overcome the significant obstacles often find news trading to be a
worthwhile pursuit.
Regardless of whether one is classified primarily as a technical analyst or a fundamental analyst, it is absolutely essential for any
foreign exchange trader who wishes to have a reasonable chance
at success to pay at least some attention to the fundamentals. The
more a trader learns about fundamental market drivers, the better
that trader will be prepared for the often unpredictable nature of the
foreign exchange markets.

126

c04.indd 126

1/13/09 10:01:44 AM

CHAPTER 5

Foreign Exchange
Trading Methods
and Strategies
After reading this chapter, you will be
able to:
●

Appreciate the many methods and strategies commonly
used by experienced foreign exchange traders.

●

Comprehend the logic and reasoning behind the most
popular forex trading styles.

●

Execute specific, high-probability strategies in a foreign
exchange trading account.

●

Understand the basics of backtesting and autotrading.

127

c05.indd 127

1/13/09 10:04:50 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

R ules to Trade By
Here is where all that has been learned thus far, especially with
regard to basic trading mechanics and technical/fundamental analysis, can be combined to form cohesive trading methods and strategies with definitive rules to trade by. Knowledge of market analysis
alone is simply not enough to trade foreign exchange effectively.
In order to be successful, each trader must necessarily integrate the
principles of market analysis into structured, workable trading processes that offer the best chances of consistent profitability. This is
where trading methods and strategies come in.
When reading this chapter, keep in mind that the lines between
each trading method/strategy/system/style can often be excessively blurred. For example, swing trading shares many similarities
with range trading. The same may be said for position trading and
long-term trend trading. Similarly, point & figure trading is sometimes considered breakout trading at its finest. The point is that each
of these ways of tackling the foreign exchange market will have its
own separate heading, but the overlap among them can be substantial. This is due to the fact that there are almost as many ways to
trade currencies as there are traders in the financial markets, and
each particular way of trading does not always fit precisely into one
neat bucket. This chapter will provide an overview of some of the
main methods of trading forex that have proven themselves over
time, as well as some specifics regarding how to go about applying
those methods.
It should also be noted here that none of these methods can be
considered the “holy grail” of forex trading. In fact, there is no such

128

c05.indd 128

1/13/09 10:04:52 AM

R u l e s t o Tr a d e B y

thing as a holy grail in the trading world. No trading method or
strategy could ever offer any trader a guaranteed promise of success
and profitability. The closest thing that comes to anything resembling
a holy grail would be a combination of several factors, including:
broad trading experience, extensive market knowledge, sufficient risk
capital, prudent money management, a good trading plan, and a firstrate trading strategy with a positive expectancy. To a degree, this book
can help with the crucial aspects of knowledge, risk/money management, a trading plan, and a trading strategy. But obviously, experience
and capital are entirely in the hands of each individual trader.
What the following trading methods and strategies will provide
is a head start into the world of real, hands-on currency trading.
Armed with the methods and strategies contained herein, as well as
a free practice trading account from any online forex broker, prospective traders can immediately begin to explore the ways in which
experienced traders approach the foreign exchange markets. It is
highly recommended that traders practice any new method extensively on a demo practice account before attempting to apply it on
a real money account. Again, successful trading is not just about a
great trading strategy. If a trader is to be successful, that individual
must necessarily synchronize many positive attributes in conjunction with a good method or strategy.
In no particular order, the foreign exchange trading styles, methods, and strategies to be discussed in this book will begin with three
general approaches to forex trading in common use: position trading, swing trading, and day trading. Traders generally choose (or
evolve into) an approach based on their personality, experience, and
risk appetite, among other factors.

129

c05.indd 129

1/13/09 10:04:52 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

P osition Trading—Settling in for the Long Term
As its label suggests, position trading is all about taking a directional market position and holding it for as long as the trade makes
sense from a trend standpoint. This usually means that positions are
held longer-term. In the fast-moving, impatient world of foreign
exchange trading, longer-term could mean anywhere from as short
as a week or a month to as long as a year, or possibly more. Most
individuals trading foreign exchange on a retail basis do not have
the patience to be position traders. This is somewhat unfortunate,
as position trading can be one of the most profitable styles of trading due to the fact that many currencies tend to trend exceptionally well on a longer-term basis. Only those position traders who
have the patience to stick with the trend and let their profits run are
generally able to capitalize substantially on these longer-term price
moves.
Unlike swing trading and day trading, which will both be discussed later in this chapter, position trading usually relies substantially on fundamental analysis, along with longer-term technical
analysis. Other than in the realm of ultra-short-term news trading,
which will also be discussed later in this chapter, fundamental analysis is usually geared toward longer-term price forecasts rather than
toward the short-term swing-to-swing movements that are primarily the domain of technical analysis. As discussed in Chapter 4, fundamental analysis concerns itself with the economic conditions that
drive the major market movements. These economic conditions,
which include interest rates, inflation, and economic growth, help
to determine the value of a national currency over time. The general

130

c05.indd 130

1/13/09 10:04:52 AM

P o s i t i o n Tr a d i n g — S e t t l i n g i n f o r t h e L o n g Te r m

direction of change in this currency value over the long run is what
interests position traders the most.
As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, position trading
can be considered very similar to trend trading. One of the differences between these two approaches is the type of analysis that is
generally emphasized. Whereas position traders may often rely to a
significant extent on long-term fundamentals along with technicals,
trend traders (or trend followers) are very often almost exclusively
technical in nature. Of course, this generalization is far from a clearcut delineation, but it describes the broad characteristics of these
two approaches sufficiently. Similarly, carry trading, where traders
hold interest-positive positions in order to benefit from both regular
interest payments and exchange rate profits, can be considered yet
another form of position trading. Both trend trading and carry trading will be discussed later in this chapter.
How exactly does a position trader in the foreign exchange market decide which position(s) to take? Although there are countless
factors and nuances that may enter into the decision-making picture,
the basic concept can be relatively simple. Forex position traders
weigh strength and weakness in currencies by looking into a myriad
of underlying fundamental and technical factors. They then establish
positions in currency pairs according to these views. Here, the discussion will focus on the fundamental aspects of position trading. In
the section on trend trading, the technical aspects will be discussed.
Let us suppose that a position trader performs ongoing analysis on economic conditions surrounding the major currencies, and
decides that the U.S. dollar is indicating significant fundamental weakness going forward, while the euro is indicating significant

131

c05.indd 131

1/13/09 10:04:52 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

fundamental strength going forward. This conclusion could have
stemmed from any number and combination of information sources
from both countries/regions, including comments on central bank
policy by a bank president, the state of inflationary pressure in the
economy, the recent rate of economic growth, the likelihood of an
impending recession, and so on.
After this fundamental analysis is duly performed, the trader may
decide that there is sufficient evidence supporting overall weakness
in the U.S. dollar combined with overall strength in the euro, and
that this will be the likeliest projected scenario for at least the next
six months. The next step is for the position trader to seek to establish a long position in the EUR/USD currency pair, which simultaneously provides the trader with a long euro position and a short
dollar position. This combined trade positioning fulfills the trader’s
fundamental outlook on both currencies.
Pinpointing the most advantageous trade entry timing, as well
as setting risk-managed exit strategies, would then be best accomplished with the use of technical analysis. But the longer-term
directional basis for the position trade is sufficiently served by fundamental analysis alone.
The true strength of position trading using fundamental analysis
in this manner lies in the concept of pairing strength with weakness. This concept fits the foreign exchange market extremely well
because of the simple fact that all currencies are traded in pairs,
unlike in other financial trading markets. Since trading forex requires
a directional commitment on two currencies for each trade, position
trading with the strength/weakness model is perhaps the most logical
fundamental method for approaching long-term foreign exchange

132

c05.indd 132

1/13/09 10:04:53 AM

P o s i t i o n Tr a d i n g — S e t t l i n g i n f o r t h e L o n g Te r m

trading. Buying one currency because it looks like it will become
stronger is a good way to trade. But buying one currency because
it looks like it will become stronger while simultaneously selling
(or shorting) another currency because it looks like it will become
weaker is an even better way to trade.
The first step in the process of forex position trading is to perform ongoing fundamental research and analysis on all of the major
tradable currencies. This can be accomplished through careful scrutiny of central bank policy statements, objective assessments of economic growth factors, and close monitoring of global economic
news. When the currencies with the strongest positive future prospects and the ones with the strongest negative future prospects at
any given point in time are identified, the opposite currencies can
then be paired.
So, for example, within a pool of well-researched currencies, let
us suppose that AUD and JPY happen to be deemed the strongest
potential gainers in the group for the foreseeable future, while the
CAD and CHF are deemed to be the strongest potential losers.
The opposites could then be paired together for potential position
trades consisting of long AUD/CAD, short CAD/JPY, long AUD/
CHF and/or short CHF/JPY. After these trades are entered with the
help of technical analysis, the positions would then be held for as
long as they continued to move in the correct general direction, disregarding minor corrective swings and market noise.
From the standpoint of disciplined trading, as will be discussed in
Chapter 6, position trading may perhaps be the most difficult method
for approaching the foreign exchange markets, especially for beginners. It requires a great deal of patience and faith in one’s own analysis

133

c05.indd 133

1/13/09 10:04:53 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

to weather the inevitable swings against one’s entrenched positions,
not to mention excellent risk and money management. But if mastered properly along with some well-planned entry and exit techniques, this style of trading can be one of the most effective methods
for extracting long-term profits from the foreign exchange markets.

S wing Trading — Riding the Waves
Also among the most popular methods of trading forex, swing
trading differs considerably from position trading in almost every
way. For the most part, swing traders generally ignore fundamental information and concentrate almost exclusively on the technicals. The only time swing traders will generally pay any attention to
the fundamentals is when they check the schedule for fundamental
news announcements so that they can avoid trading during marketmoving economic data releases.
Much like its label suggests, swing trading is all about trading
swings, or turns, in the market. Any price action that occurs over
time in any financial trading market will be made up of countless
short- to medium-term swings both up and down. This will occur
whether the market is in trending mode (overall price movement
in one general direction) or ranging mode (sideways price action).
Swing traders attempt to capitalize on all of these swings.
Another way in which swing trading differs considerably from
position trading lies in the general duration of trades. Whereas position traders will attempt to ride a trend as long as it remains intact,
swing traders will have slipped in and out of a long-term trend
many times over before the trend is finally exhausted.

134

c05.indd 134

1/13/09 10:04:53 AM

S w i n g Tr a d i n g — R i d i n g t h e W a v e s

However, many traders like to define swing trading strictly
in terms of the duration of each trade. Some would say that the
ideal swing trade should be held for two to five days, while others may say it should be one to four days. This viewpoint is very
common, but perhaps somewhat misinformed. Much more important than the duration of the trade are the goals and principles
behind this method of foreign exchange trading. The primary
goal of swing trading is to exploit the natural advances and declines
that are inevitable in any market, regardless of the timeframe. The
time span of the trade is infinitely less of a factor in defining successful swing trading than the timing of the trade. Timing is one
of the primary keys to executing good swing trades. After executing
a well-timed entry, the trader should then determine the duration
of the trade by how much the market is willing to offer on that
particular swing, and not by some arbitrarily predetermined period
of time.
As a classic technical approach to the markets, swing trading utilizes the most salient aspects of technical analysis as its main tools.
This includes the pillars of support and resistance, trend, momentum,
and volatility. With these tools, swing traders tackle the markets by
identifying short-term, tradable turns (or swings) within the context
of a larger trend or trading range. In a trend, this could mean trading
pullbacks in the direction of the trend. In a trading range, this could
mean trading the up-and-down price oscillations between support
and resistance. Specific technical tools used in swing trading include
trendlines, horizontal support and resistance lines, moving averages,
and oscillators. As for charting timeframes, perhaps the most popular
ones for swing traders are generally anywhere from the one-hour

135

c05.indd 135

1/13/09 10:04:53 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

chart (where each bar/candlestick is worth an hour of price movement) to the four-hour and daily charts.
Swing trading allows traders to pinpoint precise, high-probability
entries and exits for each and every trade, based soundly upon the
technicals. A typical swing trade begins with a perception by the
trader that a market turn might be in the midst of occurring. This
perception could be fueled by a host of different triggers, whether
it is an oscillator reaching severely overbought or oversold, a priceoscillator divergence occurring (described later in this chapter),
a reversal chart pattern forming (also described later in this chapter), a break of a trendline occurring, or price reaching a significant
support/resistance level. Any or a combination of these events, or
other technical indications, could trigger the trader’s perception that
an impending turn could potentially occur.
Once the initial perception is triggered, the prudent swing
trader immediately searches for confirmation. For example, if the
initial perception is triggered by a divergence indication, the trader
will check to see if any other patterns, support/resistance levels and/
or oscillators are confirming an impending swing. If there is indeed
confirmation, the experienced swing trader would then consider
possible entries and exits (stop losses and profit targets) to determine
if the trade is viable from a risk/reward perspective (as discussed in
Chapter 6).
Given the prevailing trade conditions, if the reward-to-risk ratio
appears to be sound, the swing trader would then decide upon the
size and leverage of the trade if these factors have not already been
predetermined. The final step in the swing trading decision process
would then be to prepare to enter the trade with either a market

136

c05.indd 136

1/13/09 10:04:53 AM

D a y Tr a d i n g — I n a n d O u t , D a y I n a n d D a y O u t

order or a stop/limit entry order. Simultaneously, the trader would
also set stop loss and/or trailing stop parameters, as well as an appropriate profit target according to the trading plan.
For short- to medium-term timeframes, swing trading can potentially be a very-high-probability approach to forex. Price swings are
extremely prevalent in every financial trading market and on every
charting timeframe. The up and down swings occur naturally during all market conditions, whether in a trending market or a trading
range. Moreover, setting risk management controls in the form of
stop losses, as well as determining optimal risk/reward parameters,
can be extremely precise and straightforward for the typical swing
trade.

D ay Trading — In and Out, Day In and Day Out
The majority of beginning forex traders try their hand first at day
trading. This is perhaps due to the fact that this style of trading is
generally the most exciting and fast-paced of the different styles.
There are certainly traders who have made a consistently profitable
living through day trading currencies, but it is definitely not as easy
as it may initially appear to be.
Day trading is usually defined as the entering and exiting of
positions within a single trading day. This means that few, if any,
trades are held over to the next trading day. It also means that day
traders must necessarily attempt to extract small profits from quick
movements on the shortest of charting timeframes, usually anywhere
from the 1-minute chart (where each bar/candlestick is worth one
minute of price movement) to the 5-minute, 10-minute, 15-minute,

137

c05.indd 137

1/13/09 10:04:54 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

30-minute, and everything in between. Occasionally, timeframes as
long as the 1-hour chart are used for day trading.
Trading on the shortest timeframes in this manner works well
only if the trader possesses the requisite discipline, technique, and
money management skills to overcome the formidable odds surrounding this style of trading. One rather considerable difficulty
with short-term day trading is the fact that a necessarily small
number of pips is targeted for each trade’s profit objective, making
the cost of the bid/ask spread a very significant prohibiting factor.
For example, if a typical profit objective is around 20 pips for a day
trade, a 3-pip spread alone accounts for an immediate handicap of
15% of the projected profit. This occurs even before there is actually any price movement on the trade. The day trader therefore has a
distinct statistical disadvantage from the outset. In contrast, the 3-pip
spread on a targeted 60-pip swing trade or a 300-pip position trade
would represent an immediate handicap of only 5% or 1% of projected profit, respectively.
That being said, day trading can still be a viable method of
approaching forex for experienced and determined traders. The techniques employed by day traders vary widely. Often, these techniques
involve breakouts of short-term support and resistance levels. This
could mean a breakout of a low volatility trading range, or a sharp
move at the opening of an active currency market like London or
New York. Breakouts are discussed in more depth later in the chapter.
Other times, day traders will trade purely based upon indicator confirmations. For example, a day trader may have a rule
to open a long trade if the 5-period exponential moving average
(EMA) crosses above the 20-period EMA, but only if the 14-period

138

c05.indd 138

1/13/09 10:04:54 AM

D a y Tr a d i n g — I n a n d O u t , D a y I n a n d D a y O u t

Relative Strength Index (RSI) has also crossed above 30 and the
slope of the MACD histogram is up. (Note: These trading rules were
meant to serve as an arbitrary example, and were not actually tested
as part of a trading strategy.)
Because day trading currencies can be extremely fast and intense,
there is usually insufficient time or opportunity to perform discretionary market analysis in a leisurely manner. Therefore, more than
with any other trading style, day trading often requires concrete
trading rules that can be followed without much thinking on the
part of the trader. Clear and simple rules that are meant to be followed to the letter generally work best for ultra short-term day traders. For these traders, quick thinking and quick reactions are among
the most important traits to possess.
As mentioned, day trading currencies is often indicator-based.
Traders may overlay several indicators on their price charts such as
moving averages, Bollinger Bands, or a host of others. In addition,
they will also frequently add an oscillator or two running vertically
above or below price such as the MACD, RSI, or Stochastics. Using
this type of methodology, trading foreign exchange becomes as rote
and straightforward as waiting for the various indicators to point in
the same direction at the same time. Although the rules here may be
simple, however, this style of trading is anything but easy. It requires
a great deal of discipline to follow strict, indicator-based day trading
rules without allowing emotions to interfere in the process.
Besides indicator-based trading, many day traders will trade
purely based upon breakouts of support and resistance. To denote
these support and resistance levels, these traders may manually draw
horizontal lines on their charts depicting levels where price turned
