
100
4

4

Historical Perspective

their willingness to lend was impaired, precipitating the crisis of
1982. The crisis brought the reflexive connection between net
resource transfers and willingness to pay into play, leading to a
permanent breakdown in voluntary lending. What happened afterward will be the subject of the next chapter. Here we are concerned with analyzing the system that prevailed until 1982.
Why the commercial banks were willing and able to sustain
such explosive growth in their international loan portfolios is a
fascinating question that will be hotly debated for years to come.
Part of the answer is that banks did not consider themselves responsible for the soundness of the system. Banking is an intensely
competitive business, whichis, however, subject to regulation.
It is the job of the central banks to prevent excesses. Commercia1 banks operate under a protective umbrella; they seek to maximize their profits within the framework of existing regulations
and they cannot afford to pay too much attention to the systemic
effects of their activities. A commercial banker who refuses to go
after what seems like profitable business is liable to be pushed to
the side, and even if a bank decided to abstain there are many
others anxious to take its place. Thus, even those who realized
that the international lending boom was unsound found themselves obliged to participate or lose their places.
There is an important lesson here: participants are not in a
position to prevent a boom from developing even if they recognize that it is bound to lead to a bust. That is true of all boomhust
sequences. Abstaining altogether is neither possible nor advisable. For instance, in my analysis of mortgage trusts I clearly
predicted a bad end, yet mv advice was to buy now because the
shares would have to rise substantially before they crashed. As it
happened, a certain class of investors responded with alacrity.
But even if they had not done so, the boomhust sequence would
have occurred, albeit more slowly.
The best that a participant can do is to cease to be a participant
at the right time. But that may not always be possible. For instance, in a system of fluctuating exchange rates, holders of financial assets have an existential choice in deciding what currency
to hold: they cannot avoid holding some currency, except by buying options. In the case of international lending, Citicorp deliberately reduced its market share in the later stages of the boom; but
that did not stop the drama from unfolding and Citicorp from
being caught up in it. Toward the end most banks knew that the

The International Debt Problem

101

position of the debtor countries was rapidly deteriorating, yet
they could not disengaie themselves.
The lesson to be learned is that financial markets need to be
supervised. Only some,kind of intervention, be it legislative, regulatory, or a gentle hipt from a central bank, can prevent boom/
bust sequences from getting out of hand.
The history of centrtflbanking is a history of crises followed by
institutional reform. It is truly surprising that the lessons of the
international debt crisis have still not been learned. The champions of unregulated competition are more vocal, and more influential, than ever. They base their case on the inefficiency of
regulators and i$ must be admitted that they have a point. The
participants could not have prevented the international lending
boom from getting out of hand, but the monetary authorities could
have. Why did they fail to do so?
There is no clear answer to this question. Central banks were
aware of the explosive growth of the Eurodollar market, although
they lacked reliable st,atistics. They recognized their responsibilities as lenders of last resort and mapped out their respective
spheres of responsibility as early as 1975, but they did not deem
it necessary to regulate the growth of Eurodollar lending. Why?
The question requires more thorough historical research than it
has received so-far. I shall hazard two tentative hypotheses.
One is $at the central banks themselves were influenced by the
competitive pressures that affected the commercid banks under
their aegis. Had they imposed regulatory restrictions, the banks
under their supervision would have lost business to others. Only
concerted action by all the central banks could have brought the
burgeoning Eurodoiliw market under control. That would have
required institutional reform, and the monetary authorities did
not recognize the need for reform. Reform usually occurs after a
crisis, not before.
That is where the second hypothesis comes into play. I contend
that the central banks were acting under the influence of a false
ideology. It was a time when monetarism was gaining ground
among central bankers. Monetarism holds that inflation is a function of money and not of credit. If monetarism is valid, the growth
of money supply needs to be regulated, not the growth of credit.
Accordingly, there was no need to interfere with the Eurodollar
market: as long as the central banks regulate their own money
supply, the market will regulate itself.

102

'

t

Historical Perspective

The issue is arcane and I cannot claim to understand it fully.
Money shows up on one side of the balance sheet of banks and
credit on the other. Milton Friedman tells us that it is the money
side that counts because the other side is determined by the
money side.2The theory of reflexivity leads me to believe that his
theory is wrong. I would expect that the two sides influence each
other in a reflexive fashion, and his dream of controlling the
money supply is impractical. I lack sufficient expertise to take
him on directly, but I can point to the empirical evidence that
shows that the money supply always fails to behave in accordance with the regulators' wishes.
\What role the growth of the Eurodollar market has played in
the worldwide inflation of the 1970s has never been decided. For
that matter, we do not know the extent to which the contraction
of international lending is responsible for the deflationary pressures that seem to dominate the world economy at present. I
firmly believe that both the expansion and the contraction of international lending have been important influences on the world
economy, but my view is far from being generally accepted, and
the issue remains unresolved to this day. If my view is correct,
the volume of international credit ought to be an important consideration in setting economic policies. Monetary authorities
committed a serious error in allowing it to get out of hand during
the late 1970s. The crisis of 1982 is as much a failure of regulation
as a failure of the free market.
We shall return to this issue again later. The imperfection of
both regulated and free markets is one of the main themes of this
book. Now we have to deal with the new system of international
lending that evolved in response to the crisis of 1982.

- - -

-

-

THE COT.T.ECTIVE SYSTEM OF LENDING

4

There can be no doubt that without the active and imaginative
intervention of the authorities the international debt crisis would
have led to the collaise of the banking system, with disastrous
consequences for the world economy. The last time such a collapse occurred was in' the 1930s. Because of that experience, an
institutional framework was established with a mandate to prevent a recurrence. Therefore it is inconceivable that events would
have been allowed to unfold without intervention. It is the form
that the intervention took that created a situation without parallel
rr*
in history.'
The institutional setup gives central banks the authority, and
obligation, to act as lenders of last resort. But the debt problem
was too big to be handled by providing liquidity to the banks. The
amounts involved far exceeded the banks' own capital; if &e
countries in question had been allowed to go into default, the
banking system would have become insolvent. Accordingly,
the central banks exceeded their traditional role and banded together to bail out the debtor countries.
A precedent of sorts had been established in England in 1974,
when the Bank of England decided to bail out the so-called fringe
banks that were outside its sphere of responsibility rather than to
allow the clearing banks, from whom the fringe banks had borrowed heavily, to come under suspicion. But the crisis of 1982
was the first time that the strategy of bailing out the debtors was
applied on an international scale.
The central banks did not have sufficient authority to execute

104

I

Historical Perspective

such a strategy, and makeshift arrangements had to be made in
which the governments of all the creditor countries participated
and the IMF played a key role. A rescue package was put together
for one country after another. Typically, commercial banks extended their commitments, the international monetary institutions injected new cash, and the debtor countries agreed to
austerity programs designed to improve their balance of payments. In most cases, the commercial banks also had to come up
with additional cash enabling the debtor countries to stay current
on their interest payments. The rescue packages constituted a
remarkable achievement in international cooperation. The participants included*theInternational Monetary Fmd, the Esnk for
International Settlements. a number of governments and central
banks, and a much larger number of commercial banks. In the
case of Mexico, for instance, there were more than 500 commercial banks involved. I shall refer to the participants as "the Collective."
The process was repeated several times over a short period of
gme. The story of what actually happened would make fascinating reading, but here we must confine ourselves to examining the
outcome.
The system of lending that emerged from the crisis is in many
ways the opposite of the system that broke down in 1982. The
prior system was competitive: banks were lending willingly, in
pursuit of profit and in sharp competition with each other. The
new system is cooperative: banks are lending under duress, in the
hope of protecting their already committed assets, and they act
jointly with other banks to this end. The prior system was reflexive in a positive direction: the banks' willingness and ability io
lend were both reinforcing the debtor countries' ability and willingness to pay, and vice versa. In the present situation, reflexivity
works in the opposite direction: it is the banks' inability and
unwillingness to lend and the debtor countries' inability and unwillingness to pay that are mutually self-reinforcing. The system
could not survive without the various participants actively cooperating to prevent a collapse. Action by the lenders takes the form
of extending new credit in order to enable debtor countries to
service their existing debt; action by the borrowers consists of
accepting austerity programs that keep the amount of new credit
needed to a minimum. What that minimum is depends on delicate negotiations between lenders and borrowers. The IMF has
taken the lead in conducting these negotiations, although debtor

The Collective System of Lending

105

countries are generally reluctant to allow the IMF a permanent
role in monitoring thelagreements.
The system is highly precarious because it requires both lenders and borrowers to ,override their narrow self-interest for the
sake of remaining paq of the system. In the case of debtors, the
sacrifice is measured 6y negative resource transfers;in the case of
the banks, by the amount of new credit extended. The sacrifice is
not symmetrical, however, because the borrowers pay interest on
the newly extended credit, while the lenders receive it. Only if
the banks forgave some of the interest or principal would they
suffer an actual loss. But the Collective system of lending is based
on the principle that the integrity 3f !hm debt must be preserved
-that is the principle that holds the Collective together. Unfortunately, it leaves a crucial problem unresolved: debtor countries
need concessions to service their debt, but each concession adds
to their future obligations. Recognizing the problem, banks are
building bad debt reqerves; but no way has been found to pass
these reserves on to tfie debtor countries without destroying the
principle that holds the Collective together.
The Collective system of lending came into existence unplanned and unannobnced. It has been transitional from its inception and it is bound to lead to something else. The most
interesting question that can be asked about it is what its eventual
outcome will be. Unfortunately, this is not a question that can be
satisfactorily answered. For one thing, reflexive m e s s e s do not
have a predeteryined outcome: the outcome is determined in the
course of the process. For another, the prediction itself can influence the outcome. In this case, the hope that the Collectives will
accomplish their mission is one of the main forces holding them
together; any statement that has a bearing on that hope immediately becomes a part of the situation to which it refers, so that it
is impossible to keep the discussion objective. Nevertheless, the
question is pressing. Can the approach I have taken help to provide an answer? And can an answer help to develop a theory of
reflexivity?
I published two papers1-one in July 1983 and one in March
1984-in which I tried to analyze the international debt problem
using a theory of reflexivity but not spelling it out. This is what I
said (with minor modifications):
For heavily indebted countries, the collapse of voluntary lending
has forced a drastic readjustment. The readjustment can be divided

106
4

Historical Perspective

into four phases. In the first phase, imports decline; in the second,
exports increase. During the first two phases, domestic economic
activity slows. In the third, domestic economic activity recovers
and both imports and exports rise. In the fourth phase, the advance
in GDP and exports exceeds the increase in debt service requirements and the adjustment is complete.
The first phase is involuntary. When the flow of credit is cut off,
the trade deficit is automatically eliminated by a cut in imports.
Living standards are reduced, the production process may be disrupted, and the country is plunged into depression. The amount of
lending required of the Collective is determined by the inability of
the debtor country quickly to generate a trade surplus sufficient to
cover debt service requirements.
It is in the second phase that the real adjustment begins. The
currency is devalued in real terms, and productive resources, idled
by the reduction in domestic demand, are reoriented toward exports. The trade balance improves, and the ability to service the
debt improves with it.
It is at this point that the willingness to pay and the willingness
to lend become crucial. The country in question must increase its
imports in order to support a domestic recovery. That means a
reduction in the amount available for negative resource transfer. If
the hurdle is passed, the third phase begins. Domestic recovery
renders negative resource transfer more palatable. As the economy
expands, the creditworthiness of the country begins to improve,
provided that exports grow faster than the GDP. When that happens, the adjustment process has been accomplished.
On the lending side, Collectives operate with a chronic shortage
of resources. Commercial banks can be divided into two categories:
those whose very survival is at stake and those who are only marginally involved. The first category co~stitutesthe sore cif ;El Collectives. They can be counted upon Po participate, but their
capacity to do so is limited. Marginal members need more persuasion. As the sense of urgency diminishes, the marginals wish to
withdraw, leaving only majors to provide the flow of fresh credit.
The categories are flexible. The large U.S., U.K., and Japanese
banks will always remain core members; U.S.regionals and many
continental banks are marginal to start with. In between the two
groups there are many banks whose existence is at stake today but
who may be able to build up sufficient reserves over a period of
time to qualify as marginal in the future.
Because of the actual or potential shrinkage of membership, the
resources of the Collectives are liable to remain fully stretched.
The Collectives cannot meet the demands made upon them with-

The Collective System of Lending

107

out the injection of additional funds from international lending
institutions, but the institutions also are fully stretched. Thus, the
Collectives are bound to push for the maximum resource transfers,
making the hurdle between Phase 2 and Phase 3 difficult to pass.

I concluded that the'collective system of lending "is a system
born of emergency. It needs emergency conditions to survive, and
it is so constructed as 'to generate the emergency conditions that
are needed to keep it in existence."
By and large, this analytical framework stood the test of time,
although in retrospect+I did make two serious mistakes. First, I
argued that dsbtcr csuzttries were willing to tolerate negative resource transfers for two reasons: (1)to maintain access to capital
markets and (2) to avoid seizure of assets. I neglected to consider
what turned out to be the most important reason: (3) to maintain
access to export markets. With domestic markets in shambles, the
threat that export markets might be closed off was a potent one.
Argentina was relatively the best situated to overcome an embargo because most of 'its exports were fungible commodities, but
even Argentina sells many items, such as shoes and steel, that are
destined for specific markets. Moreover, the newly elected Argentine government did not want to be isolated from the Western
world. It was determihed to avoid an "economic Falklands." As a
result, the threat of default never became as serious as I expected.
In my analysis I did not put much store in the &st two inducements. As regards free access to capital markets, I maintained that
the system of lending that prevailed prior to 1982 had broken
down for g o o d ~ I thad been based on certain misconceptions
which had been recognized es such. The pasitive bias had been
replaced by a negative one, and it would take a long time to
overcome it. Events have borne out this analysis: bank lending to
less developed countries is far below projections. As regards the
seizure of assets, I dismissed it as a more or less empty threat.
Having
Since then this point of view has been fully doc~mented.~
ignored the third and most potent inducement, I concluded that
"the only way to ensure that the debtor countries will honor their
debt is to make credit available in quantities that approximate
their debt service obligations."
This conclusion was false. In 1984 less than half the interest
had to be advanced in the form of new credit, and much of the
new credit came from sources other than the commercial banks.

108

'

t

Historical Perspective

As a result, the cash drain on commercial banks was less severe
than I had envisioned, and the strain between core members and
marginal members never reached the breaking point. In fact, even
core members have been able to begin building reserves against
bad debts and improving their capital ratios.
The second mistake I made was to underestimate the ability of
debtor countries to increase exports. The world economy turned
out to be much stronger than I expected, for reasons that will be
discussed in the next chapter. Brazil, in particular, produced a
much larger trade surplus than I had expected. The official target
for 1984 was $9 billion; the actual figure exceeded $12 billion.
The strength in exporb led "i a modest domestic recovery and
enabled Brazil to enter Phase 3.
These two mistakes together were sufficient to render my analysis unduly pessimistic. In February 1984 I asserted that "it is
increasingly unlikely that much progress can be made in Phase 3,
and Phase 4 appears increasingly unattainable under the present
system." Yet by 1985 several of the major debtors had entered
Phase 3, and the worst seemed to be over. Then came the precipitous drop in oil prices in 1986,and Mexico became a casualty.
The emergency could be attributed to external causes, but recent
developments in Brazil are much more ominous. As a result of
the Cruzado Plan the economy became overheated in no time and
the international trade balance deteriorated dangerously. As soon
as the government was reelected in a landslide victory, it started
to rein in the economy. Even so, it is clear that domestic political
considerations take precedence over international debt obligations, and 1987 is likely to be a year of crisis in Brazilian debt
negotiations.
Positions have softened considerably on the part of the creditor
countries. U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker recognized the
need for domestic growth in the debtor countries in the plan he
launched at the Seoul meeting of the World Bank in October 1985.
Subsequently, the Bradley Plan expressly advocated forgiving a
portion of the interest and principal on the accumulated debt.
The fact is that the trade surpluses of the debtor countries have
become troublesome for the United States. The banks are better
reserved than they were a few years ago, so that 1987 may well
bring some measure of protection coupled with some measure of
loan forgiveness. If the experience of the last five years is any
guide, the changes will not be radical enough to cause a breakdown of the system.

The ColIective System of Lending

109

Although it was faulty in its details, my analytical framework
remains valid in its broad outlines. It is not a blueprint for successful adjustment but rather a model for surviving failure. As we
have seen, the Collective system is held together only by the
threat of a breakdown.,As we shall see, this is a characteristic of
many arrangements wgich have prevailed since 1982.

REAGm'S IMPERIAL CIRCLE *

At the time of the international debt crisis I was working with a
rather crude and inarticulate model of credit expansion and credit
contraction similar to a boom/bust sequence in the stockmarket. I
thought that 1982 was the end of a period of worldwide credit
expansion and failed to anticipate the emergence of the United
States as the "borrower of the last resort."
The large and growing U.S. budget deficit emerged as the unintended consequence of conflicting policy objectives. On the one
hand, President Reagan sought to reduce the role of the federal
government in the economy by reducing taxes; on the other, he
wanted to assume a strong military posture in confronting what
he considered the Communist menace. These two objectives
could not be pursued within the constraints of a balanced budget.
To make matters worse, fiscal and monetary policies were dominated by two conflicting schools of thought. Fiscal policy was
influenced by "supply-side" economics, whereas monetary policy was guided by the precepts of monetarism.
The supply-siders believed that a tax cut would have such a
stimulating effect both on output and on willingness to pay taxes
that the economy could grow at a rapid rate without exacerbating
inflation and the budget would be brought back into balance by
higher tax receipts. It was a thoroughly reflexive line of reasoning,
and it contained serious flaws, as such reasoning usually does. Its
* This chapter, finished in August 1985, has not been updated. Developments
since then are dealt with in the real-time experiment (Part 111).
