
that way unless they either hit significantly negative news or significant resistance levels that prompt
selling from profit takers and short sellers.
Here's an example of how forex markets are influenced by the major stock indexes. These indexes
are risk assets. Some currencies move up and down with these and other risk assets, and so are called
risk currencies. Some behave in the opposite way, and so are called safety or safe haven currencies.
Here again is the table (shown earlier) of how they rank on the risk to safety spectrum.

Thus when the S&P 500 is higher, we expect to see currencies that are higher on the risk spectrum
(like the AUD and NZD) outperforming lower-risk and safe haven currencies like the JPY and USD.
When the index is falling, we'd expect the opposite.
Again, the rankings are a useful guide, not an ironclad rule. Currencies rarely perform exactly as
their risk ranking over the short term because daily or weekly events can influence one or more
specific currencies more than others.
For example, in Figure 6.4, even though risk appetite as per the S&P 500 (top) was in a mild
downtrend in early September, the more risk-sensitive AUDUSD performed better than the EURUSD,
a relatively safer haven pair, which dropped more sharply. Why? Most of the bad news was related
to the EU debt and banking crisis, which hit the EUR particularly harder than the AUD.
FIGURE 6.4 Daily Charts of S&P 500 (top), AUDUSD (middle), and EURUSD (bottom), July 22 to
September 7, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Major Sovereign Bond Prices or CDS Spreads
Since the advent of the EU debt crisis in early 2010 and rising risk of numerous sovereign defaults,
these have been critical barometers of anxiety about the solvency of specific states, the EU in general,
and the very survival of the EUR and Euro-zone as we know it., Unless you hear otherwise,
discussions of bond prices, yields, and CDS spreads (measures of default insurance cost) focus on the
benchmark 10-year bonds (or more technically speaking, bills). Though they are not the headline
numbers like the major stock indexes, you can find their price data and charts easily enough on any
major financial media outlet. Top-rated bonds are classic safe haven assets and as such move in the
opposite direction of stocks. As with stocks, the U.S.-based barometer, the 10-year Treasury bond
(technically, a Treasury bill), is the most widely followed indicator of bond prices and yields though
German Bunds and Japanese government bonds are also followed. Sovereign bonds of major
economic powers have long been considered to be the ultimate safe haven asset, and U.S. bonds are
first among these due to various factors, the first of which is the liquidity (availability) of U.S. bonds
and stability of the U.S. economy. Even the loss of the AAA rating from S&P 500 hasn't changed that.
Because the EU crisis has been the single greatest threat to the global economy, the bond prices and
yields of the EU nations that have been in greatest danger of economic collapse and insolvency
(Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain, aka the GIIPS or PIIGS) have also become important risk
barometers.
Here's a brief bit of background information for those not familiar with the basics of bonds. A

bond's periodic coupon payment is fixed. Thus when a bond's price falls, its yield rises, and vice
versa. One of the main reasons (we'll ignore the others for the sake of simplicity) bond prices fall is
when they're deemed riskier so changes in creditworthiness of the bond's issuer can be expressed in
terms of bond prices or yields. The terms are used interchangeably. For example, if one media outlet
reports that Italian bond yields are rising and another says Italian bond prices are falling, they're
reporting on the same thing with the same implication—falling confidence in Italy's creditworthiness
and thus its rising borrowing costs.
Related to these are CDS (credit default swap) spreads, which are the difference or spreads
between the cost of insuring a bond against default versus the cost of insuring some safer benchmark
bond (like German Bunds). The higher the spread or difference between CDS (default insurance) cost
of a given bond versus the safer benchmark bond like the German Bund, the riskier the bond. When
there are questions about the solvency of individual sovereign states or large companies, CDS
spreads serve as a barometer of market confidence in them.
Rising spreads for the bonds of a given sovereign state or private business indicate that confidence
is falling in that entity's creditworthiness. For example, throughout the EU crisis, the CDS spreads of
the bonds of the weaker EU members and the major EU banks became a prime barometer of the state
of the EU and EUR. When a given country's bond yield or CDS spread started spiking, that signaled
the country was in trouble.
Taken together, the movements of both the stock indexes and CDS spreads of the GIIPS or other
Euro-zone nations have literally defined the level of fear or calm about the EU debt crisis. Because
the EU crisis has been the dominant driver of the dominant fundamental market driver-overall market
sentiment or risk appetite, these two measures have been among the very most important barometers,
even drivers, of market sentiment. As long as the EU crisis remains unresolved, a spike in Spanish
bond yields or CDS spreads can send markets plunging; a drop in Italian bond yields or CDS spreads
can spark a global rally. While changes in CDS spreads are a superb barometer of debt crisis related
fear, they suffer from one significant disadvantage. Unlike the other risk barometers, it's harder to find
free sources for tracking their daily changes. The popular financial press mostly ignores them except
to mention when specific ones are making dramatic moves related to the EU debt crisis.
There are two subscription services that do provide a degree of free information:
cmavision.com
Markit.com
Check these sites for their current free and subscription offerings.

Indexes of the Major Currencies
The relative performance of risk or safe haven currencies provides a quick look at risk appetite.
The USD has its own index. Because the USD is a safe haven currency, a rising USD index is a sign
of pessimism and vice versa. Its usefulness is somewhat limited by its structure, which only includes
certain currencies, each given a specific weighting. Each major currency has at least one ETF that
tracks its performance, though you need to check whether that ETF compares that currency to the USD
or to a basket of currencies.
A more demanding but more thorough way to check the performance of a given currency is by
comparing charts of its different pairings in one window. Most decent charting platforms, provided

free from forex brokers when you have an account with them, allow you to do that.
For example, on the popular Metatrader 4 charting software, I set up a special USD “profile”
window, which shows me how the dollar is fairing versus other majors, as shown in Figures 6.5 and
6.6.
FIGURE 6.5 Clockwise: EURUSD, GBPUSD, USDCHF, and USDJPY Weekly Charts
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

FIGURE 6.6 Top to Bottom: NZDUSD, USDCAD, and AUDUSD Weekly Charts
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Considering that the USD is a safe haven currency, what do the charts tell us about risk appetite?
The USD gained against all the currencies that are higher on the risk spectrum, and this tells us this
was a “risk off” period. As we see from the S&P 500 chart (Figure 6.4 top), that was indeed the case.
As a side note, the USDCHF and USDJPY charts are another illustration of how charts alone don't
provide enough of a basis for a trade, and that you need to attempt an understanding of what
fundamentals are behind them. The USDCHF showed a spike higher in early September 2011, and the
USDJPY did the same thing later that November. Both of these spikes radically altered the trend.
What happened? Both price spikes were due to central banks, the Swiss National Bank, and the Bank
of Japan (BOJ) selling the CHF and JPY to devalue them after the strength of these currencies had
become a hindrance to their nations' exports.

Growth-Related Commodity Prices Like Copper and Oil
Copper is often referred to as “Dr. Copper” because copper prices are supposed to accurately
diagnose economic activity given copper's widespread applications in manufacturing, infrastructure,
and other growth-related activities. Oil consumption is tied tightly to market perceptions of the future
pace of economic activity. When investors believe better times are coming, prices of growth-related
commodities tend to rise. Their big disadvantage is that at times their prices are subject to temporary
manipulation by big players or speculators rather than by genuine supply and demand.

Gold and Silver for Gauging Confidence in the Most Widely Held
Forms of Cash, the USD and EUR
Contrary to popular belief and what you see in most of the financial press, gold is neither a safety nor
a risk asset. Instead, it is an inflation hedge that rises and falls with the level of fears about inflation
and confidence in the value of fiat money (currency not backed by any hard asset).3
When markets are pessimistic about either the USD, EUR, or both (rare but can happen), gold tends
to rise and vice versa. See Chapter 9, the section on intermarket analysis, for details on this
correlation and how you can use it. I've written extensively on the causes and interpretation of gold
price movements. Just use the search term: Cliff Wachtel AND Gold to find further details and
applications of the concepts covered here and in Chapter 9 regarding gold.
Again, the previous list of risk barometers is a partial list meant to include some of the most
popular and easily accessible measures of risk appetite. There are many others, like rail traffic, Dow
theory-related indicators, the Baltic shipping index, and so on, all worth research as time and
priorities permit.
The previous sentiment barometers generally apply to all major asset markets. As we'll discuss
later, having a basic awareness of intermarket analysis, how and why different asset classes tend to
move in similar or opposite directions, is something you'll need to learn.
Though market sentiment may be the most influential fundamental driver of currency and other asset
prices, there is no single universally agreed-upon means of measuring it, and in the end, it's really an
aggregate result of a combination of other fundamental factors.
Now let's move on to more specific and easier to measure fundamental drivers of asset prices.

Short-Term Interest Rates
After overall market sentiment, the single most influential driver of currency prices is central bank
benchmark interest rates and any data that change expectations about the direction, timing, or size of
increases or decreases in these benchmark short-term rates. Indeed, one could argue that most of the
other fundamental drivers of currency prices that follow below are influential only to the extent that
they influence interest rate expectations or the rates themselves. They are influential because rising
yields allow traders to profit in two ways:
1. “Carry Trade” profiting on interest rate differences between currencies.
2. Capital appreciation (much of that driven by carry trade).

Carry Trade: Forex for Income Investors
One reason that interest rates influence currency pair movements is carry trade. We'll return to carry
trading in Chapter 12, but here are the basics so you can understand how interest rates affect demand
for a currency via carry trade.
The carry of an asset is the return or cost from holding it due to related interest rates. Whenever you
buy or sell a currency pair, your broker credits your account for the interest you earn at the prevailing
short-term rate for the currency you bought. The broker also debits your account for the interest you
owe on the currency you sold because, as covered in Chapter 2, you borrowed that currency to pay

for the one you bought.
The goal of carry trading is to earn income on the interest rate difference between two currencies by
either:
1. Buying a currency pair with a higher interest rate base currency (the one on the left) and lower
interest rate counter currency (the one on the right).
2. Selling a pair with a higher interest counter currency and lower interest base currency.
In either case, the investor earns interest income on the difference between the two yields. The more
leverage used, the more daily income earned because you get paid based on the total amount
controlled and not on the margin deposit.
For example, let's say we buy the AUDJPY using 100:1 leverage, committing a $1,000 margin
deposit to control 100,000 AUD (see Chapter 2 if these terms are unfamiliar). If the Reserve Bank of
Australia's benchmark annual rate for the AUD is 4.75 percent per year, and the BOJ's is 0.10 percent
for the JPY, then those holding the AUDJPY earn a net return of 4.65 percent per year.
The rate differential is magnified by the leverage. Using 100:1 leverage with a $1,000 margin
deposit to control $100,000 of AUD via having borrowed $100,000 of JPY (as covered in Chapter
2), that annual income is based on the full $100,000 of AUD controlled and not the $1,000 margin
deposit. The annual income here is 4.65 percent of $100,000 or $4,650, (paid out on a daily basis)
using $1,000 allocated to that position, meaning a 465 percent return before considering changes in
the AUDJPY's price.
The net return of 4.65 percent per year is on the interest, before considering changes in the price of
the pair.
There lies the high risk. If the JPY starts appreciating against the AUD, at a high leverage of say,
100:1 (a 1 percent move brings a 100 percent profit or loss), an entire year's interest income is
quickly wiped out. For leveraged carry trades to work, the higher-yielding currency needs to hold
steady or appreciate against the lower-yielding currency.
When risk assets are trending higher, this trade is a real win-win situation as you gain interest
income and capital appreciation.

Carry Trade Requires Flat or Rising Risk Asset Trends
Because higher yielding currencies are risk rather than safe haven currencies, carry trade only works
when risk assets, and hence higher yielding currencies, are flat or rising. That's because any drop in
the price for the currency you're holding via leverage will usually outweigh your income gains. Carry
trades work best when risk assets are in long-term uptrends, and carry trades can be held for long
periods if your account has enough capital to handle the normal price swings. If not, you can settle for
shorter holding periods and move in and out long positions in carry trade pairs (discussed later in
Chapter 11) as you would with any trade, picking up income when the pair is trending higher or flat as
long as you use the full RAMM techniques to keep losses low relative to gains from interest and price
appreciation.

Higher Yields Support Demand Because They Discourage Short
Positions

For example, this interest rate differential not only encourages traders to be long high-yield
differential pairs like the AUDJPY whenever possible for the sake of the interest income, it also
discourages shorting the pair because that would involve owning the low-yield JPY while needing to
pay much higher interest for the borrowed AUD. In other words, a trader shorting the AUDJPY must
pay out 4.65 percent annual interest on a daily basis while holding a short AUDJPY position. For the
big institutions that do much of the total trading volume and trade in huge blocks of currency pairs,
that daily carry charge becomes a material consideration.

Capital Appreciation
The other reason that interest rates are the single biggest fundamental driver of currency prices is that,
all things being equal, the higher the yield, the higher the demand for a given currency. (As always,
there are exceptions to this rule.)
In addition to the support lent from carry trade, and from the higher cost of shorting high yielding
currencies, higher interest rates by their very nature raise demand for a given currency, because:
1. Higher yields tend to suggest higher growth as central banks raise interest rates to keep healthy
growth from becoming too rapid and causing inflation.
2. Assets denominated in that currency, like bonds and commercial paper, will yield higher
returns than comparable assets denominated in currencies with lower central bank benchmark
rates. That's because central bank rates are for relatively low-risk assets, and so as these rise
they push up yields on higher-risk assets.
For example, the primary driver behind the EURUSD uptrend in the spring of 2011 (in Figure 6.7)
was that the European Central Bank (ECB) was expected to raise its benchmark short-term interest
rate in April and later in the year. At the same time, the Fed was expected to leave its rates unchanged
at much lower levels.4 Though the EU sovereign debt crisis was worsening, there were no immediate
threats of defaults and markets focused on the shorter-term benefit of carry trade income from being
long the EURUSD.
FIGURE 6.7 EURUSD Daily Chart, February 23 to May 3, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

All else being equal, currencies with a higher benchmark overnight lending rate will be in demand
and in an uptrend versus currencies with lower rates, unless markets turn pessimistic. In risk off
environments, higher yielding currencies tend to sell off versus the lower yielders, as carry traders
close their positions, selling high-yield currencies and buying lower yielders.

What Drives Short-Term Interest Rates?
Why do central banks change short-term interest rates? Generally speaking, they lower them to
stimulate growth, and they raise them to keep inflation low. Their benchmark overnight lending rate is
typically an attempt to strike a balance between these two needs. Economic conditions determine
which need takes priority. In bad times, promoting growth is usually the main concern, hence lower
rates. In good times, cooling inflation is the priority, hence higher rates. It's common to see nations
with stronger economies have stronger currencies because their central banks will be raising rates,
both to minimize inflation threats and to buy themselves more room to lower rates (which encourages
growth) when their economies weaken.
From a trading perspective, forex movements are more influenced by changes in market
expectations about the direction or pace of rate change than actual rate changes themselves (which are
usually anticipated and already priced in when they actually do occur). For example, imagine central
banks A and B announce equal interest rate increases. Currency A shoots higher, and currency B sells
off. Why? The two most common reasons would be:
1. The rate hike for currency B was expected and priced in, whereas for currency A, it was a
surprise and markets view it as more valuable and bid up its price.
2. For whatever the reasons (usually correct), markets believe the rate hike from central bank A
is just one in an ongoing series of future rate increases. However, for currency B, markets believe
the rate hike will not be followed by further increases, or worse, the next move may be rate cuts,

so it's time to take profits and sell currency B.
This situation is analogous to earnings announcements for equities. Whether or not a given stock
rises after its quarterly earnings announcement depends on both whether the announcement beats
expectations and whether it raises or lowers expectations for the future. Even if a company reports
stellar results, if it doesn't beat analysts' expectations, or if the company issues lower guidance for
coming quarters, the stock is likely to sell off, because markets reflect expectations about the future.
News that affects interest rate expectations affects currencies just like news that affects earnings
expectations influences stocks. If expectations remain unchanged, the currency is likely to remain
stable versus others currencies. If expectations are lowered, the currency is likely to fall.
Similarly, any change in conditions that suggests a central bank is more or less likely to change its
rate policy can also influence interest rate expectations and thus forex prices.
For example:
Inflation data influences rate expectations because rising inflation makes central banks more
likely to raise interest rates in order to keep inflation acceptably low.
Reports related to growth, like jobs, spending, or GDP influence rate expectations because strong
growth makes central banks more likely to raise rates, both to minimize the risks of inflation that
can come with faster growth, and to buy themselves room to cut rates when growth slows.
Indeed, it's no exaggeration to say that the importance of a given, new item is typically a function of
how strongly it's believed to influence central bank interest rate decisions.
In sum, expectations of rising rates are a reliable and potent fuel for higher currency prices, and
expectations of falling rates are the opposite.
What causes market expectations around rates about to change? Funny you should ask.

Watch Monthly Central Bank Announcements on Rates and Economic
Outlook
Central banks issue monthly rate statements along with their views about economic conditions.
Though many data points influence market expectations about rate changes, none are as important as
the monthly central banks' comments on its outlook for the economy.
Though changes in rates don't occur that often and are rarely surprises when they do (markets are
good at predicting them), the real newsworthy events are these comments about their economies
because they contain hints about the gradual evolution of central bank policy. These alone can move
markets. Any subtle change in the wording from prior months that hints of changing rate policy will be
widely reported and can be enough to move a given currency or group of currencies as in these
examples:
On March 3, 2011, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet convinced markets that he'd raise interest
rates the following month by adding the phrase “strong vigilance” to his comments on the ECB's
attitude toward fighting inflation.
On September 8, 2011, when commenting on Trichet's post-monetary policy meeting press
conference, Kathy Lien of Bkassetmanagement.com wrote:
EUR/USD bulls were sorely disappointed when Trichet said uncertainty in the market
was unusually high. The number of times that he used the words “downside risks” in
