
8

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

had just put in a huge year in what was then the middle of
the great bull market of the 1990s. Cab drivers shared stock
tips, bus boys traded between shifts—the age of the day
trader had dawned. The smell of quick proﬁts was in the
air, and I wanted to inhale as deeply as possible. So I opened
an online brokerage account that summer and put the
entire $5,000 into it. In those days, there were no pattern
day trader rules, so with $5,000 you could buy up to
$10,000 worth of stock on margin and trade it repeatedly
throughout the day.
I decided that with such a small amount of capital to
work with I had better stick with lower-priced stocks. So I
scanned the chat rooms and investor threads for ideas. I
soon found one. On all the major sites, traders were
buzzing with talk about a small public company that was
developing a process by which to turn sewage into safe
drinking water. There were rumors that the CEO was
going to be interviewed on a network news show sometime
that week, and that he would drink a full glass of former
sewage in front of the cameras to prove his conﬁdence in
his company’s system. Speculation ran wild that this exposure to millions of viewers would drive institutional
investors to buy up shares in droves.
This seemed about as close to a sure thing as I could
ﬁnd. So I decided to make my ﬁrst real-money stock purchase in this wastewater treatment company. This small-cap
Nasdaq issue was trading around $2.00 at the time, so I
bought a starter position of 1,000 shares. I anxiously
watched the news that night, but there was no mention of
the company. The rumors persisted, and on the next day the
stock opened around $2.50. In my euphoria, I bought 1,000

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

9

more shares. When just before the close the stock hit a high
of $3.00, I bought 1,000 more shares, bringing my position
to 3,000 shares at a total investment of $7,500, one-third of
which was borrowed from my broker on margin.
That night my heart raced as the news promo mentioned a feature story on a “miracle” water puriﬁcation system that could revolutionize the way water is used and
supplied around the world. This puriﬁcation process was
heralded as having the potential to save the lives of millions
of children around the world who would otherwise have no
access to clean drinking water. At that moment I clicked
onto the discussion thread monitoring the stock and shared
in the preannouncement revelry along with dozens of other
investors who, like me, had bought thousands of shares in
anticipation of this moment. I had never imagined trading
stocks could be this easy, or this fun. We were all going to
“clean up” on this one, pun intended!
I waited restlessly through the other stories of the evening until Tom Brokaw ﬁnally announced the feature we
were all waiting for. The preview clip even showed the
CEO of an “innovative water treatment company” being
challenged by Brokaw to drink a glass of what was formerly
sewage, puriﬁed by his system. The CEO announced,
“Sure, I’ll drink that!” With those words, I began a mental process that I have repeated numerous times since: I
began calculating what I would do with my sudden windfall. My conservative estimate was that the stock would
double overnight, giving me a paper return of at least ⫹125
percent. I planned to sell half my shares and hold the rest
as a free trade as the stock ramped up into double digits.
With a fresh account of $7,500 in cash, I would then begin

10

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

stalking my next conquest and do the same thing over
again—and again and again—until, like so many of the
other day traders I had been hearing about, I would retire
young to a seaside mansion and spend my days lounging
poolside.
The commercials ended, and Brokaw stood again on
screen, ready to introduce the ﬁnal story of the night. He
began by outlining the global problem of polluted water,
which accounts for a massive number of deaths in developing nations. With that segue, he ushered in the concept
of using ultraviolet radiation along with microﬁlters to
sanitize wastewater. At that moment, there ﬂashed over
Brokaw’s right shoulder a company logo and name, a company that held the patent on and exclusive marketing rights
to a machine that is capable of transforming raw sewage
into something that even Evian could bottle. There,
plainly visible to millions of television viewers—including
hundreds of hedge fund managers, mutual fund analysts,
brokers, and day traders—was the logo and name, not of
the company whose shares I owned, but of its primary
competitor!
Once the initial shock wore off, I immediately plunged
into denial. Surely there must have been some mistake.
NBC miscued the name of the company, and tomorrow a
public relations campaign would swing into action to correct the misinformation. Or perhaps, I quickly reasoned,
this is, in fact, very good for our company. People will now
invest in the whole sector, and our little company will get
swept up in what would become the great water puriﬁcation bubble of 1996!
As I tuned back in to Brokaw’s interview, I watched

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

11

intently as the CEO drank a full glass of water taken from
his machine. We were told that the water had been
reclaimed runoff from the city’s drainage system. No doubt
this display of conﬁdence in the capacity of the process to
produce potable product would go far with industry analysts. I imagined thousands of calls being placed the next
day to brokers asking about any and all companies working
in this niche market. Again, my euphoria returned.
All was well and good—until Brokaw asked one ﬁnal
question: “So just when will your machine be available to
the market?” It was a reasonable question, the kind of question one would expect a top-notch journalist like Brokaw
to ask. And to this day every bit of the CEO’s answer—the
tonality, the meter, the syllabiﬁcation—remains embedded
in my brain. “Oh, the process is too expensive right now to
make it marketable.” “So . . .” Brokaw pressed, “just how
long will it take to get the costs down?” “Well, we are 15,
maybe 20 years out,” replied the CEO.
And that was it. There was nothing to be done about
it. In those days there was no postmarket trading available
to make a quick exit. All I could do was wait it out. I knew
that throughout the night, traders would start piling up the
sell orders, and in the morning at the market’s open the
price of the stock would plummet—and along with it, all
my hopes for early retirement! Sure enough, the stock
opened the next day at $1.75 per share, well below my average cost basis for the position. There were far too many
orders ahead of mine to get so many shares out easily, and
by the time my order ﬁlled, I received $1.38 per share, for
a loss of over $3,500 if you include the commissions. My
trading account was devastated. In a ﬁt of shame and self-

12

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

disgust, I wired the money out of the account and closed it
the next day.
Well, even after that embarrassing experience I simply could not shake the trading bug. The next summer I
taught summer school again, and again I opened a small
trading account with my extra $5,000. This time, I decided
I would do things the right way. I would transform myself
into a long-term buy-and-holder, a value investor, a champion of sound fundamentals and ﬁscal responsibility. I read
just enough Lynch, Buffett, Zweig, and O’Neil to know
that what I was looking for was a company with that magic
combination of regularly increasing earnings, increasing
pricing power, lots of cash on hand with little debt, a hot
new set of products, and solid growth prospects. I believed
the road to market riches lay in ﬁnding the next Microsoft,
Wal-Mart, or Starbucks before the rest of the investing
world. You buy before the growth phase hype hits the
streets and then hang on until, after a dozen splits, you sell
your nest egg for a small fortune.
Bolstered by this hope, I went searching for the next
big thing. What I found was a series of stocks destined,
through no fault of their own, to separate me from my
hard-earned money. There is no way I could have known
it at the time, but that summer of 1997 was not the most
opportune time to initiate new long positions. Despite a
raging bull market in tech and Internet stocks, the broader
markets were overdue for a consolidation, and they sure got
one: the S&P chopped sideways for four months and then
midyear began a decline that took it 13 percent below its
high. It was in that environment that I had determined I
would begin my career as a successful long-term investor.

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

13

So after several days of research, I bought a small
company that provided diagnostic equipment to the airline
industry. The stock’s press releases referred to the company as holding exclusive contracts with several large carriers. New management on board had been weaned away
from successful careers elsewhere. There was little debt
and plenty of cash on hand to begin buying up the competition. This company had the smell of Buffettology all over
it. It had the right products, under the right management,
and with the right business plan to take me and my nest egg
to the zenith of ﬁnancial security; unfortunately, it was in
the wrong sector. As proﬁts for the airlines began to dry
up, my little company and its exclusive contracts were
quickly shown the door. The stock went from $5 per share
to under a buck and was then delisted from the Nasdaq,
before the company eventually went bankrupt.
Next I bought a boutique electronics dealer with an
absurdly low price/earnings (P/E) ratio, no debt, and lots
of great press. It had weathered the market pullback well
and had recently hired a new CEO. Moreover, the company had just ﬁnished a series of small acquisitions, which
would ensure their stronghold in the industry. But, as luck
would have it, Wal-Mart, Best Buy, and Circuit City were
just beginning to expand their operations, and my little
ﬁrm just couldn’t compete. Again, I lost money.
I decided to give the buy-and-hold strategy one more
try. With what little cash I had left (about $1,000), I bought
into a company that, after DELL and CSCO, was supposed
to be the must-own stock of 1997. The stock was in a company that went by the unusually Latinate name of Qualcomm.

14

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

In late October, the broader stock indexes had rallied
off their lows and looked to be breaking out to new highs.
So with what was left of my trading stake, I bet it all on
QCOM. Within three weeks, it dropped 40 percent. But
this was a long-term hold, so I dutifully held on to my
shares. I held the stock for six more months. It went up; it
went down. It went up and down again. And again. Finally,
at just slightly worse than a break-even price, I sold my
shares just to get rid of the nausea. Imagine how heartbroken I felt when less than a year later the stock ramped up
by 2,500 percent! Had I held on to those few shares worth
around a thousand bucks, I would have had the opportunity to cash out within the year with a quarter-milliondollar nest egg. Arrggh!
It was at this point that I decided to formulate three
rules that I have held to ever since:
1. Don’t trade on chat room tips.
2. Don’t trade on news reports.
3. Don’t trade on economic or business forecasts.
I decided that I needed, in all humility, to admit the
shortcomings in my preparation as a trader. Although I
possess an embarrassing amount of formal education, I am
trained in neither economics nor business management. I
remember the supply-and-demand curve from my bonehead economics class in college, but the ﬁner intricacies of
micro- and macro-economic relationships escape me.
Thus, I decided to leave fundamental analysis to the pro-

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

15

fessionals. As for hot stock tips or trading news ﬂashes,
there is already a healthy crowd moving in on that action
and I’ve never had much of a liking for crowds.
No, if I was going to succeed in the trading game—
and by now this was a matter of resolute determination—
I would have to come up with a trading methodology that
was well suited to my experiences, my temperament, and
the constraints on my time and energy as a full-time professor. Following several weeks of research, I decided that
what I needed to learn more about was technical analysis, a
methodology that relies on simple mathematical relationships along with intuitive price pattern recognition.
Think about this for a moment: fundamental analysis
relies on an almost inﬁnite array of inputs, from balance
sheets and earnings projections to changes in management,
sector cycles, product development, and a whole host of
other things too numerous to mention. How can any single human mind, however well trained in business theory,
keep track of it all? And not only do you have to know
everything about the company you want to invest in, you
also have to know everything about its competitors, its sector, its industry . . . and then you have to weigh this knowledge against a background of national, and indeed global,
economic analysis. Frankly, who has the time for all that?
Now consider this idea: what if everything you needed
to know about a company’s future prospects were already
there in the price of its shares? This is the key assumption
of technical analysis. If the price of your shares is going up,
the market likes your company’s prospects. If the share
price is going down, it doesn’t. It’s as simple as that. Tech-

16

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

nical analysis saves a ton of time, is accessible to anyone
regardless of education, and, if rightly applied, works pretty
darn well.
So I decided then and there that I would focus exclusively on technical analysis to trigger my buy and sell signals. The combination of disciplines inherent to technical
analysis seemed to mesh well with my academic training:
as a scholar of ancient texts, I had experience both in the
objective discernment of linguistic relationships and in the
more subjective art of interpretation. Technical analysis
seemed to me to be the closest thing to putting these two
skills to work on the markets.
Instead of income statements and balance sheets, technical analysts work with price charts. Price charts graphically portray the historical movements of a stock’s price and
trading volume. They are ﬁxed pictures of a stock’s past
price behavior over time. The analyst who works with
charts is thus part historian, part psychologist, part philosopher: with an experienced eye, she reads the chart to
understand its past price patterns, which then allows her to
generate a psychological proﬁle of the stock’s current state,
as well as project a conceptual framework within which the
stock is most likely to move going forward. In other words,
technical analysts are to the ﬁnancial world what liberal arts
professors are to the world of academia: highly experienced
in the arts of evaluation, interpretation, and application.
So with my newfound commitment to learning the
ﬁner points of technical analysis, I went in search of mentors. The ﬁrst thing I did was enroll in a seminar taught by
a fellow whose name I won’t mention here, since he was later
convicted of fraud by the Securities and Exchange Com-

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

17

mission (SEC). Nevertheless, while this trader’s marketing
tactics were suspect, he did, in fact, teach a valid, if basic,
technical methodology, the skeleton of which forms the
basis of several of the systems outlined in this book. In the
seminar I was taught how to use moving averages to determine trend direction and strength, and the stochastics indicator to time entries and exits. To this day, I use both to
advantage and consider this particular setup the most reliable of all possible setups. To this fellow I truly owe the
foundation of my entire “befriend the trend” system.
An Amazon.com search led me to a second mentor,
Alexander Elder. His 1993 best-seller, Trading for a Living,
now deemed a classic in the ﬁeld, is a highly readable introduction to both the mathematics and the meaning of the
various tools used by technical analysts. Elder is himself a
professional psychologist, so I immediately felt at home
with someone who, like me, came to the world of trading
without a Wall Street or B-school background.
From Elder I learned most of what I now know about
the most common technical indicators. I learned what technical oscillators and price patterns tell us about the psychological state of equity markets. I learned about trendlines and how to use them to apply patterns of containment
to future movements in price. Most important, perhaps, I
learned to recognize and evaluate divergences between
price and oscillator behavior. These disjunctions between
price trends and the visually portrayed mathematics of
those trends provide important psychological clues to the
current health and likely forward projection of trends.
Other seminars were to follow. I spent time with
Welles Wilder, learning how to combine various indicators

18

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

with projection trendlines. I learned the ﬁner points of
Japanese candlesticks from Steve Nison. In addition to
reading all the best-selling books about day trading, I read
widely about the stock market itself, the history of Wall
Street, and the biographies of several of its biggest players.
With these resources under my belt I began to put together
and experiment with various technical systems that could
be used to recognize proﬁtable market probabilities. It is
this set of systems that I am referring to in this book when
I talk about trend trading. I use the technical systems I have
personally developed to determine the nature and strength
of a stock’s trend, and then use those systems again to alert
me to short-term buying and selling opportunities.
There are four different sources of input used in these
systems (in no particular order):
• Price patterns (as determined by the use of

trendlines and channel lines)
• Moving averages
• Technical oscillators (the exact mix I use changes
with the markets, but the core ﬁve are MACD,
stochastics, RSI, CCI, and OBV)
• Japanese candlesticks
Essentially, successful technical reads of stock charts
are all about two things: present price and past price. Price
patterns supply the historical context portrayed by past
price that in turn gives meaning to present price. Moving
averages give us a visual smoothing of the changing temporal relationship between the two. The various technical
oscillators render a visual account of the mathematical rela-

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

19

tionships between the two. Japanese candlesticks graphically mark the relationship between the current closing
price and the range within which the stock traded on an
intraday basis.
Deﬁnition: A price trend refers to the general
direction a stock price displays on a price chart
when it is moving either up (bullish trend) or
down (bearish trend). When a stock is not in a
trend but is merely moving up and down within
a trading range, we call that a trendless or rangebound market.
Together, these four vectors map out the relationship
between a stock’s past and its present state much in the
same way the tools of the philosopher (logic, theories of
knowledge, metaphysics, etc.) allow him or her to apply
ancient wisdom to the issues of the day.
So I set to work hammering out my systems in realtime trading. In order to do this right, I knew I needed the
support of an experienced community. To that end, I joined
an online trading forum called Silicon Investor. In July of
1998, I started a discussion thread there named “Befriend
the Trend Trading,” and it soon became one of the most
popular threads on the site. In dozens of daily posts, I
thought out loud about how to best combine these elements
into a series of workable, proﬁtable systems. I posted my
picks for the day and followed up with a record of proﬁts
and losses. Soon other, more experienced traders joined
me, offering their advice and contributing to the overall
methodology. We became a tight, mutually supportive net-

20

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

work. And within a year, we were consistently, even at times
radically, proﬁtable.
Though no one knew it at the time, 1999 will always
be remembered—by traders at least—as the year of the
infamous tech bubble. The Nasdaq market was ramping up
in parabolic fashion. Waiters and barbers were retiring on
their investments in Qualcomm, Cisco, Yahoo, and Amazon. Everyone was trading stocks, talking stocks, hyping
stocks. Traders were trendy, sexy, and (so everyone thought)
rich. They were treated by the media like rock stars, making appearances on Good Morning America and The Tonight
Show. Bankers, doctors, dentists, and lawyers were leaving
their six-ﬁgure salaries to stay at home, sit in front of computers in their bathrobes, and day-trade. A year and a half
later, the markets would crash and day trading would become
a dirty word. Until that time, however, the party was on and
there was no shortage of revelers.
A few made an amazing amount of money in those
heady days. One well-known example was Dan Zwanger.
In 1999 he turned $11,000 rescued from his greedy but
incompetent broker into a $14 million fortune. Another
fellow who goes by the name of “Waxie” sold his trading
card collection for $150,000, and after his broker reduced
it to $30,000, he took control of his portfolio and turned
it into $7 million.
We did okay, too. The Silicon Investor thread narrates
my experimental venture into the world of high-turnover
trading. Because my capacity to stomach market ﬂuctuations is not that strong, I mostly stuck with well-known,
larger-cap issues as I continued to reﬁne my systems. We
did not yield as much return as the Nasdaq did that year

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

21

(⫹86 percent), but we managed to turn in our ﬁrst full year
of proﬁtable trading.
Then came the year 2000, a year of reckoning. Once
all the Y2K fuss had died down, several words that hadn’t
been heard much the previous year began to be tossed
about on the ﬁnancial shows: words like valuation, sustainability, and that dreaded “b” word, bubble. The intraday
volatility increased ﬁvefold as prescient proﬁt takers clashed
with bullish latecomers. The get-rich-quick gold rush was
over, but it took about six months before most traders and
investors realized it. During that time there were regular
intraday swings on a scale of wildness that would have made
even the late Steve Irwin, the Crocodile Hunter, recoil in
fear.
It was in that environment that I began to experiment with a trading system I called BTTT-MAX. BTTT
stood for Befriend the Trend Trading (our company
name), and the MAX part of the acronym stood for Moving Average Crossover. In this system you were fully
invested 100 percent of the time in one or more of the
most volatile stocks trading. You watched the intraday
hourly chart, and on bullish crossovers, you went long; as
soon as a bearish crossover was spotted, you sold the
shares and immediately went short. Since in that environment signals came every few hours, and given the violent nature of the intraday swings during that period,
BTTT-MAX quickly piled up huge returns.
I’ll never forget my ﬁrst real-money experiment with
BTTT-MAX. I was on spring break from the college and
spent the week glued to my computer, trading stocks. In
my ﬁrst experiment with MAX, I traded NOVL, then
