
methodology?
Because it is a dumb game. Anybody who puts on a basket of stocks to earn 80 basis points above
the T-bill yield is an idiot! They are the same idiots I tried to get away from when I left security
analysis. Who the hell needs to earn 80 basis points over Treasury bills? The brokerage firms sell
them this bill of goods because it is a way of creating more order flow, which on Wall Street today
has become the ultimate power.
Are you saying program trading is wrong, even for some entity that is not trading customer
money?
I grew up being a security analyst, analyzing things and buying something for value. Trading stocks
against stock index futures, in and out, serves no useful purpose.
They are buying and selling, and you are buying and selling. What's the difference?
I am trying to earn infinity when I trade.
What makes that style any more right than the style which is trying to arbitrage the market?
I guess it is their constitutional right and they are able to do it, but there are some incredible abuses
as a consequence. I scream at the kids who work for these brokerage firms: "You SOBs have no
integrity, no ethics! You know what will happen? You are going to kill the game." Now they are
swearing at me. When they stopped doing proprietary program trading they said, "Are you happy?
You got your wish!" I said, "No, it is not quite finished yet." I didn't tell them the conclusion, which
comes when they are no longer earning $300,000 or more a year, and they find out what they are
really worth; when they are hitting the bricks and can't get a job for $50,000. Then it will have
come full circle.
Speaking of circles, we seem to be moving in one on this subject. Let's go on. What stands out
as your most dramatic trading experience?
The most gut-wrenching time was in November 1982. I had a much smaller net worth then, and I
took a $600,000 loss in one day.
What happened?
It was Election Day, and the Republicans did much better than expected in the congressional races.
The market ran up 43 points, which at that time was one of the largest point advances in history. I
was short, and like an imbecile, I sold more with the S&P locked at the 500-point limit against me
and less than an hour left in the trading session.
My wife, who was working with me at the time, was out that day. The next day she came into
work, and every ten minutes she would say, "Get smaller, get smaller." I kept taking losses, just
getting out of the position.
Whenever you get hit, you are very upset emotionally. Most traders try to make it back
immediately; they try to play bigger. Whenever you try to get all your losses back at once, you are
most often doomed to fail. That is true in everything—investments, trading, gambling. I learned
from the crap table at Las Vegas to keep only X dollars in my pocket and never to have any credit,
because the worst thing you can do is to send good money after bad. If you can physically remove
yourself from the premises, which is the same thing in futures trading as getting flat, you can see
things in a whole different perspective.
After a devastating loss, I always play very small and try to get black ink, black ink. It's not how
much money I make, but just getting my rhythm and confidence back. I shrink my size totally—to
a fifth or a tenth of the position that I trade normally. And it works. I think I ended up losing only
$57,000 in November 1982, after taking a $600,000 hit on November 4.
Is there any trading mistake that you could isolate as responsible for that Election Day, 1982,
loss?
Adding to shorts when the futures market is already locked-limit against you and the cash market
looks like it is 200 points higher is pretty stupid.
When you look back, do you say, "Why did I do it?"
I think because I had huge gains the month before. I've always had my biggest setbacks after my
biggest victories. I was careless.
132

Do you still make trading mistakes? By that, I mean deviations from trading principles you
consider valid—not losing trades.
You always make trading mistakes. I made one just recently—a terrible mistake. I was short the
S&P and short the bonds, and I got nervous be- cause the bonds moved above their moving
average. However, T-bills had not followed suit. One of my rules is not to have a position when my
moving averages in T-bills and bonds diverge—that is, when one moving average is above the
price and the other below—because interest rates can't move very far until one confirms the
movement of the other. According to my rales, I should have moved my bond position from short
to flat; instead, I reversed from short to long. I paid dearly for that mistake. Whereas, I had lost
only about $20,000 on my original short position, the next day I had a six-figure loss—my largest
loss of the year.
The great thing about being a trader is that you can always do a much better job. No matter how
successful you are, you know how many times you screw up. Most people, in most careers, are
busy trying to cover up their mistakes. As a trader, you are forced to confront your mistakes
because the numbers don't lie.
From time to time, you have alluded to your trading rules. Can you list them?
[Reading from a list and extemporizing] I always check my charts and the moving averages prior to
taking a position. Is the price above or below the moving average? That works better than any tool I
have. I try not to go against the moving averages; it is self-destructive.
Has a stock held above its most recent low, when the market has penetrated its most recent low? If
so, that stock is much healthier than the market. Those are the types of divergences I always look
for.
Before putting on a position always ask, "Do I really want to have this position?"
After a successful period, take a day off as a reward. I've found it difficult to sustain excellent
trading for more than two weeks at a time. I've had periods where I can be profitable for twelve
days in a row, but eventually you just get battle fatigue. So, after a strong run of profits, I try to
play smaller rather than larger. My biggest losses have always followed my largest profits.
This next rale is a major problem for me; I'm always trying not to break it. The rale: Bottom fishing
is one of the most expensive forms of gambling. It's OK to break this rale on occasion if you have
sufficient justification. For example, today, I bought the S&Ps when they were down sharply. Two
weeks ago, I had written down the number 248.45 as the best entry for the S&P. The low today was
248.50. Consequently, I was able to buy into weakness today and make a good deal of money. I had
a plan, I carried it out, and it worked. It doesn't always work. It was risky, but I wasn't pyramiding
wildly into it, and I knew how much I was risking.
That brings me to my next rule: Before taking a position, always know the amount you are willing
to lose. Know your "uncle point" and honor it. I have a pain threshold, and if I reach that point, I
must get out.
When T-bonds and T-bills differ in respect to their individual relationship between price and the
moving average—one above the moving average, the other below—have no position until one
confirms the direction of the other. [Generally speaking, a price above its moving average implies a
price uptrend, while the reverse case implies a price downtrend.]
Then, the last words I have at the bottom of the page are: Work, work, and more work.
Is there anything to add to that list?
The most important thing is money management, money management, money management.
Anybody who is successful will tell you the same thing.
The one area that I am constantly trying to improve on is to let my gains ran. I'm not able to do that
well. I'm always working on it. To my dying day, I'll probably still be working on it.
Is that because you do something wrong?
I just love to take profits. I hear music when the cash register rings. The irony is: How can I be
willing to risk 400 points on the downside and only take 200 points of a 1,000-point move on the
upside?
On the risk side, you have a method, a plan. Have you experimented with trying to use
133

similar discipline on the profit side?
Yes, but I haven't been able to perfect it. I have had varying degrees of success, but it is my greatest
criticism of myself.
Why the difficulty in this area?
I think it all relates to my fears of some cataclysmic event. I'm like W. C. Fields: I have several
bank accounts and a few safe deposit boxes with gold and cash. I'm extremely well diversified. My
thought process is that if I screw up in one place, I'll always have a life preserver someplace else.
Any other rules you can think of?
Yes. If you're ever very nervous about a position overnight, and especially over a weekend, and
you're able to get out at a much better price than you thought possible when the market trades,
you're usually better off staying with the position. For example, the other day I was short the S&P
and got nervous because the bond market was very strong on the night session. The next morning,
the stock market was virtually unchanged. I was so relieved that I could get out without a loss, I
covered my position. That was a mistake. A little later that day, the S&P collapsed. When your
worst fears aren't realized, you probably should increase your position.
What has been your worst drawdown percentage wise?
My records were just evaluated for a money management deal. Over my entire career as a full-time
trader, based on month-end data, my biggest drawdown was 3 percent. I had my worst two months
around the birth of my two children, because I was worried about whether I was going to get the
tennis ball in the right place in Lamaze class.
My philosophy has always been to try to be profitable every single month. I even try to be
profitable every single day. And I've had some extraordinary runs—over 90 percent of my months
have been profitable. I'm particularly proud of the fact that, in virtually every year, I didn't have a
losing month before April. I probably don't make as much money as I could because of that, but I'm
more concerned about controlling the downside.
You start off every year with a clean slate?
That's my philosophy: January 1, I'm poor.
Do you trade smaller in January?
Not necessarily. It is just that my attention is greater.
Do you take your losses more quickly in January?
No, I always take my losses quickly. That is probably the key to my success. You can always put
the trade back on, but if you go flat, you see things differently.
Greater clarity?
Much greater clarity because the pressure you feel when you are in a position that is not working
puts you in a catatonic state.
Getting back to managed money, I wonder, after years of making plenty of money trading on
your own, what possible motive could you have for bothering with managing other people's
money?
I felt that I was getting a little stale, and this presents a whole new challenge. Also, after October
1987,1 realized that downside risk can't be adequately measured. The way to get more personal
leverage is with an outside pool of money.
How much money are you going to be managing?
I don't want to be specific about the amount, but I'm only taking on one or two large pools of
money. I don't want to deal with multiple investors, even though I'm certain I could raise a great
deal more money if I went with a public underwriting.
The more people you have involved, the more potential headaches. For example, when I met a
large fund manager, he asked me how many employees I had. I told him, "None." He told me he
had seventy. When he wants to quit, it will be more difficult because he'll have their lives in his
hands. I don't want that kind of pressure.
You seem rather isolated here. Do you like working alone?
134

It took me several years to be able to accept working alone. I used to go to a downtown office
because a lot of my friends were there. But, as time passed and fewer of those people were still
there, the attraction diminished significantly. Now, I have half a dozen people I talk to on the phone
daily. I've taught my methodologies to a number of them, and they have methodologies of their
own.
Have you ever tried training people to be traders working for you?
I hired four people, but nobody lasted. They all became intimidated. I tried to clone myself and it
didn't work. I taught them all my methodologies, but learning the intellectual side is only part of it.
You can't teach them your stomach.
Why do most traders lose money?
Because they would rather lose money than admit they're wrong. What is the ultimate
rationalization of a trader in a losing position? "I'll get out when I'm even." Why is getting out even
so important? Because it protects the ego. I became a winning trader when I was able to say, "To
hell with my ego, making money is more important."
What do you tell people who seek your advice?
I always try to encourage people that are thinking of going into this business for themselves. I tell
them, "Think that you might become more successful than you ever dreamt, because that's what
happened to me." I have the freedom I always wanted, both financially and structurally. I can go on
vacation at any moment. I live in Westhampton Beach half of the year and in New York the other
half. I have a wonderful lifestyle. My kids think all fathers work at home.
What is the best advice you can give to the ordinary guy trying to become a better trader?
Learn to take losses. The most important thing in making money is not letting your losses get out of
hand. Also, don't increase your position size until you have doubled or tripled your capital. Most
people make the mistake of increasing their bets as soon as they start making money. That is a
quick way to get wiped out.
Marty Schwartz's story should encourage those whose initial attempts at trading have met with
failure. Here is a trader who was unsuccessful over a ten-year period, managing to lose enough
money to keep himself near broke, despite consistently earning good salaries. Yet, Schwartz was
eventually able to turn things around and become one of the world's best traders.
How did he do it? There were two essential elements. First, he found a methodology that worked
for him. Throughout his losing years, Schwartz used fundamental analysis to determine his trades.
It was not until he immersed himself in technical analysis that he became successful. The point here
is not that technical analysis is better than fundamental analysis, but rather that technical analysis
was the methodology that was right for him. Some of the other traders interviewed in this book,
such as James Rogers, have been very successful using fundamental analysis to the complete
exclusion of technical analysis. The key lesson is that each trader must find his or her own best
approach.
The second element behind Schwartz's transition to success was a change in attitude. As he
describes it, he became successful when his desire to win took precedence over his desire to be
right.
Risk control is an essential element of Schwartz's trading style, as attested to by his incredibly low
drawdowns. He achieves this risk control by always knowing his "uncle point" on any trade. No
doubt, his approach of sharply reducing position size after large losses, as well as extended winning
streaks, contributes heavily to his success. The rationale for reducing position size after a
destabilizing loss is apparent.
However, the reason for taking the same action after a winning streak deserves further elaboration.
As Schwartz explains it, he has always experienced his biggest losses after his biggest gains. I
suspect this is true for the majority of traders. Winning streaks lead to complacency, and
complacency leads to sloppy trading.
Most traders cite similar rules (such as discipline and hard work) as the reasons for their success.
Therefore, it is always a treat when a top trader provides a rule that is unique and rings true. I was
fascinated with Schwartz's observation about maintaining a position that you are worried about,
135

when the market action doesn't justify your fears. The implicit concept is that if the market is
letting you off the hook easily on a position for which there was a basis for fear (such as a
fundamental development adverse to the position or a technical breakout in the opposite direction),
there must be strong underlying forces in favor of the direction of the original position.

136

137

Part III-A Little Bit of Everything

138

James B. Rogers, Jr.-Buying Value and Selling Hysteria
Jim Rogers began trading the stock market with a paltry $600 in 1968. In 1973, he formed the
Quantum Fund with partner George Soros. The Quantum Fund proved to be one of the bestperforming hedge funds, and in 1980, having amassed a small fortune, Rogers retired. "Retired" is
the word Rogers uses to describe the management of his personal portfolio, an endeavor that
requires considerable ongoing research. His retirement also includes teaching investment courses at
the Columbia University Graduate School of Business.
I was eager to interview Rogers because of his stellar reputation as one of the shrewdest investors
of our time and because his comments on television financial interview shows and in the print
media always seemed to strike a note of common sense with rare clarity. Since I did not know
Rogers, I sent him a letter requesting an interview, explaining that I was working on a book on
great traders. I included a copy of my previous book on the futures markets, which I inscribed with
a quotation from Voltaire that I deemed particularly appropriate: "Common sense is not so
common."
Rogers called a few days later to thank me for the book and to indicate his willingness to
participate. "However," he cautioned, "I am probably not the person you want to interview. I often
hold positions for many years. Furthermore, I'm probably one of the world's worst traders. I never
get in at the right time." He was referring to the distinction I had made in my letter, indicating that I
was interested in great traders rather than great investors.
As I use the term, a "trader" would be primarily concerned with which direction the stock market
was heading, while an "investor" would concentrate on selecting stocks with the best chance of
outperforming the market overall. In other words, the investor was always long, while the trader
might be long or short. I explained my use of these terms to Rogers and stressed that he was indeed
the type of person I wished to interview.
I arrived at Rogers' home, a baronial, eclectically furnished townhouse, on a fall-like spring
afternoon. The atmosphere seemed more reminiscent of a comfortable English manor than a home
in New York City. In fact, if my only exposure to New York City was that afternoon's conversation
with Rogers in his antique-filled sitting room, with its pleasant views of the Hudson, I would
conclude that New York City was an eminently peaceful place to live. After greeting me, Rogers
immediately stated, "I still think you have the wrong man." Once again, he was referring to the fact
that he did not consider himself to be a trader. This is the note on which the following interview
begins.
As I told you in our phone conversation, I don't consider myself a trader. I remember when I went
to buy German stocks in 1982,1 said to the broker, "I want you to buy me X, Y, and Z stocks." The
broker, who didn't know me, asked, "What do I do next?" I said, "You buy the stocks and send me
the confirmations." He asked, "Do you want me to send you some research?" I said, "Please don't
do that." He asked, "Do you want me to send you opinions?" I said, "No, no, don't." He asked, "Do
you want me to call you with prices?" I said, "No, don't even give me prices, because if you do,
once I see that these stocks have doubled and tripled, I might be tempted to sell them. I plan to own
German stocks for at least three years, because I think you are about to have the biggest bull market
you've had in two or three generations." Needless to say, the broker was dumbfounded; he thought I
was a madman.
Now I don't consider that trading; it was determining that there was about to be a major change in a
market and taking a position. By the way, I got that one right. I bought the German stocks at the
end of 1982 and sold them out in late 1985 and early 1986.
What made you so bullish on Germany at that time?
The bull market had started here in August 1982. More important, Germany had not had any kind
of bull market since the previous all-time high in 1961, twenty-one years earlier. The German
market had crumbled in 1962 and had essentially gone sideways since then. In the meantime, the
German economy had boomed. So there was basic value there.
Whenever I buy or sell something, I always try to make sure I'm not going to lose any money first.
If there is very good value, then I'm probably not going to lose much money even if I'm wrong.
139

But you could have bought that market ten years earlier on the same theory.
That's absolutely right. You could have bought it in 1971 for exactly those reasons and watched
German stocks sit for ten years, while we had a major bull market in the U.S. But this time there
was a catalyst. You always need a catalyst to make big things happen. At the time, the catalyst was
the upcoming German elections. I figured the Socialists were going to be thrown out, and I knew
that the opposition party, the Christian Democrats, had a platform designed to encourage
investment.
My basic assessment was that if the conservative Christian Democrats won the election after having
been out of power for so many years, they were going to make major changes. I also knew that
many German companies were holding back from investing in capital equipment and expansion in
1982 in anticipation of a conservative victory. Therefore, if the conservatives did win, there would
be a real explosion of pent-up capital investment.
Was the election a toss-up at the time?
Not in my mind.
I mean in terms of the polls.
I guess so, because when the conservatives did win, the market exploded flmt same day.
What if they had lost?
I still didn't think I would have lost any meaningful money for the reasons I mentioned before. I
had every anticipation that there was going to be a major change, and that the bull market would
last for two, three, or four years.
It sounds like you have a great deal of conviction when you put on a trade.
Yes, I usually do; otherwise, I don't bother doing it. One of the best rales anybody can learn about
investing is to do nothing, absolutely nothing, unless there is something to do. Most people—not
that I'm better than most people—always have to be playing; they always have to be doing
something. They make a big play and say, "Boy, am I smart, I just tripled my money." Then they
rash out and have to do something else with that money. They can't just sit there and wait for
something new to develop.
Do you always wait for a situation to line up in your favor? Don't you ever say, "I think this
market is probably going to go up, so I'll give it a shot"?
What you just described is a very fast way to the poorhouse. I just wait until there is money lying in
the corner, and all I have to do is go over there and pick it up. I do nothing in the meantime. Even
people who lose money in the market say, "I just lost my money, now I have to do something to
make it back." No, you don't. You should sit there until you find something.
Trade as little as possible.
That is why I don't think of myself as a trader. I think of myself as someone who waits for
something to come along. I wait for a situation that is like the proverbial "shooting fish in a barrel."
Are all your trades fundamentally oriented?
Yes. Occasionally, however, the Commodity Research Bureau charts will provide a catalyst.
Sometimes the chart for a market will show an incredible spike either up or down. You will see
hysteria in the charts. When I see hysteria, I usually like to take a look to see if I shouldn't be going
the other way.
Can you think of any examples?
Yes. Two years ago, I went short soybeans after they had gone straight up to $9.60. The reason I
remember it so vividly is because that same evening, I went to dinner with a group of traders, one
of whom was talking about all the reasons why he had bought soybeans. I said, "I really can't tell
you why all the bullish arguments are wrong; all I know is that I'm shorting hysteria."
How do you pick the time to go against the hysteria?
I wait until the market starts moving in gaps.
In the midst of it all, or do you wait for some sign of an end to the move, for example, a
reversal day?
140
