
Objective Rules and Their Evaluation

29

ever, there are problems with computing returns as percentages. These
problems can be eliminated by computing daily returns as the logs of daily
price ratios which is defined as:
La (current day's price)
9 prior day' 5 price

The log-based market returns are detrended in exactly the same way
as the percentage changes. The log of the daily price ratio for the market
being traded is computed for each day over the back-test period. The average is found, and then this average is deducted from each day. This eliminates any trend in the market data.

OTitER DElf\1LS: THE LOOK-AHEAD BIAS AND
TRADING COS1'S
It is said the devil lives in the details. When it comes to testing rules, this
truth applies. There are two more items that must be considered to ensure
accurate historical testing. They are (1) the look-al1ead bias and the related issue, assumed execution prices, and (2) trading costs.

Look-Ahead Bias and Assumed Execution Prices

Look-ahead bias,14 also known as "leakage of future information," occurs
in the context of historical testing when information that was not truly
available at a given point in time was assumed to be known. In other
words, the information that would be required to generate a signal was
not truly available at the time the signal was assumed to occur.
In many instances, this problem can be subtle. If unrecognized, it
can seriously overstate the performance of rule tests. For example, suppose a rule uses the market's closing price or any input series that only
becomes known at the time of the close. When this is the case, it would
not be legitimate to assume that one could enter or exit a position at the
market's closing price. Assuming this would infect the results with
look-ahead bias. In fact, the earliest opportunity to enter or exit would
be the following day's opening price (assuming daily frequency information). All of the rules tested in Part Two of this book are based on market data that is known as of the close of each trading day. Therefore,
the rule tests assume execution at the opening price on the following
day. This means that a rule's daily return for the current day (dayo) is
equal to the rule's output value (+ 1 or -1) as of the close of dayo multi-

30 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
plied by the market's change from the opening price of the next day
(open day+1) price to the opening price on day after that (open day+2)'
That price change is given as the log of the ratio defined as opening
price of daY+2 divided by the opening price on day+l' as shown in the following equation:

Poso x

Log

Where:
POS o = Rule's market position as of the close of dayo
0+ 1 = Open S&P 500 on daY+1
0+ 2 = Open S&P 500 on daY+2

This equation does not show the detrended version of rule returns, as
shown here:

Log [O+J - ALR
[O+IJ
Where:
POS o = Rule's market position as of the close of dayo
0+ 1 = Open S&P 500 on daY+l
0+ 2 = Open S&P 500 on daY+2
ALR = Average Log Return over Back Test

Look-ahead bias can also infect back-test results when a rule uses an
input data series that is reported with a lag or that is subject to revision.
For example, the back-test of a rule that uses mutual fund cash statistics, 15
which is released to the public with a two-week delay, must take this lag
into account by lagging signals to reflect the true availability of the data.
None of the rules tested in this book use information reported with a lag
or that is subject to revision.

Objective Rules and Their Evaluation

31

Trading Costs

Should trading costs be taken into account in rule back-tests? If the intent
is to use the rule on a stand-alone basis for trading, the answer is clearly
yes. For example, rules that signal reversals frequently will incur higher
trading costs than rules that signal less frequently and this must be taken
into account when comparing their performances. Trading costs include
broker commissions and slippage. Slippage is due to the bid-asked spread
and the amount that the investor's order pushes the market's price-up
when buying or down when selling.
If, however, the purpose of rule testing is to discover signals that contain predictive information, then trading costs can obscure the value of a
rule that reverses frequently. Since the intent of the rule studies conducted in this book are aimed at finding rules that have predictive power
rather than finding rules that can be used as stand-alone trading strategies
it was decided not to impose trading costs.

The Illusory
Validity of
Subjective
Technical
Analysis
The difference between a crank and a charlatan is
the charlatan knows he is dealing in snake oil, the
crank does not.
-Martin Gardner

he chapter has two purposes. First, it is intended to encourage an attitude of skepticism toward subjective TA, a body of propositions
that are untestable because they lack cognitive content. Second, it
underscores the need for a rigorous and objective approach to knowledge
acquisition, to combat the human tendency to form and maintain strong
beliefs in the absence of solid evidence or even in the face of contradictory evidence.
Besides what we take on faith, most of us are under the impression
that our beliefs are justified by sound reasoning from good evidence. It
can be said that we know something when we have a belief that is true
and we hold it because we have drawn a correct inference from the right
evidence. l We know that ice cream is cold, gravity is real, and some dogs
bite, on the basis of first-hand experience, but without the time or expertise to acquire all requisite knowledge directly, we willingly accept wisdom from secondhand sources we deem reliable. However we come by it,
we do not adopt knowledge willy-nilly, or so we believe.
Unfortunately, this belief and many others that we hold are erroneous.
Without realizing it, by a process that is as automatic as breathing, we
adopt all sorts of beliefs without rational thought or reliable evidence. According to a growing body of research, this is due to a variety of cognitive
errors, biases, and illusions. This is a serious liability, because once a

T

33

34

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

)

(
B

)>-------«
A
FIGURE 2.1

Senses can deceive us.

falsehood is adopted, it tends to persist even when new evidence shows it
to be wrong. This longevity is also attributable to various cognitive errors
that lead us to defend existing beliefs.
A visual illusion is an example of an erroneous belief that persists
even after it has been pointed out. In Figure 2.1, line segment A appears
longer than segment B, but if you apply a ruler, you will see they are of
equal length. However, this knowledge does not undo the illusion. Seeing
can be deceiving, and the deception lasts.
Figure 2.2 2 depicts another visual illusion. The table top on the right
appears more elongated. If you compare them you will see they have the
same dimensions.
Under normal circumstances, sensory impressions as interpreted by
the brain produce accurate beliefs about the world. The selective pressures of evolution assured the development of such a vital capability.
However, as well adapted as the eye/brain system is, it is not perfect. Under adverse conditions, conditions outside of those that shaped its evolution, the system can be fooled.
Just as there are illusory perceptions, there is illusory knowledge. It
seems valid, but it is not, and similar to perceptual illusions, false knowledge tends to occur in situations beyond those that shaped the evolution

R
FIGURE 2.2 Both table tops have same size and shape.
''Turning the Tables" from MIND SIGHTS by Roger N. Shepard. Copyright © 1990
by Roger N. Shepard. Reprinted by permission of Henry Holt and Company, LLC.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

35

of our cognitive abilities. Under such adverse conditions, our generally
successful learning strategies fail, and we come to "know" what is not SO.3
Over the last 30 years, cognitive psychologists have discovered that
erroneous knowledge is often the result of systematic errors (biases) in
the way we process information about complex and uncertain situations. Financial market behavior is complex and uncertain, so it should
be no surprise that informal (subjective) analysis would produce illusory knowledge.
A systematic error, unlike a random error, occurs over and over again
in similar situations. This is good news because it means the error is predictable and steps can be taken to avoid it. The first step is realizing that
such errors are common.

SUBJECTIVE 'fA IS NOT LEGITIMATE KNOWLEDGE
As defined in Chapter 1, subjective TA is any method of analysis that, be-

cause of vagueness, cannot be defined as an algorithm that can be back
tested by computer. Though the subjective domain of TA is comprised of
many different methods, they share a faith that valid knowledge about financial markets can be discovered in an informal and nonscientific manner. I contend this faith is misplaced.
As discussed in the Introduction, subjective TA cannot be called
wrong, because to call a method wrong implies it has been tested and contradicted by objective evidence. Subjective TA is immune to empirical
challenge because it is untestable. Thus, it is worse than wrong; it is meaningless.
Beliefs that cannot be tested must be accepted on faith, anecdotal evidence, or authoritarian pronouncement. In this way, subjective TA is similar to practices such as New-Age medicine, astrology, numerology, and a
host of other untestable claims, none of which can legitimately be classified as knowledge.
However, many TA practitioners and consumers believe strongly in
the validity of subjective methods, and if asked, no doubt each would assert that their belief is justified and supported by evidence. I contend this
is a consequence of the same cognitive flaws that underlie erroneous beliefs in general and the unscientific manner in which traditional TA is
practiced.
TA is certainly not the only field to suffer the ill effects of nonscientific methods. Medicine and psychology, where the penalties for faulty
wisdom are much greater, are also burdened with erroneous knowledge.
This has spawned an emerging movement called evidence-based medicine

36

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

that appeals to doctors to restrict themselves to practices with proven efficacy. There is a similar movement in psychotherapy. A journal called the
Scientific Review of Mental Health Practicrt! describes its mission as ridding the field of unsubstantiated and untested treatments. Unfortunately,
it is unlikely that traditional doctors and psychotherapists will abandon
their ingrained ways. Old beliefs are hard to change. However, new practitioners may be persuaded, and it is their patients who will benefit from
methods with proven efficacy.
Although this chapter is a critique of subjective TA, objective TA is
also vulnerable to erroneous knowledge. However, it comes about in an
entirely different manner. Whereas subjective TA suffers from a lack of
quantitative evidence, objective TA suffers from faulty inferences drawn
from quantitative evidence. This problem and possible solutions are explored in Chapter 6.

A PERSONAL ANECD01'E: FIRS1' A TRUE 11\ BEUEVER,
THEN A SKEPTIC
A book on the necessity of quantitative objective evidence may be a
strange place for personal anecdotes. Nevertheless, I offer a firsthand account of my initial conversion to a true believer in TA, my fall from faith,
and my rebirth as a scientific skeptic who believes TA can offer value
when researched in a disciplined manner.
I first learned of TA as a teenager and wanted to believe its claims
were true. Making money from chart patterns seemed magical yet
plausible. Until that time, my earnings were derived from summers
spent tending lawns, digging clams on Long Island's North Shore, and
working on a garbage truck at a local resort. Though I've never shied
away from physical labor, the idea of making money without sweat
had great appeal.
Like most TA true believers, my initial convictions came secondhand,
reading the revealed wisdom of the field's self-proclaimed authorities. It
never occurred to me that their clain1s might not be grounded in sound research. The very term technical analysis had a scientific ring to it. Later it
became clear that in many instances the authorities were not basing their
claims on firsthand research but merely regurgitating what they had read
from even earlier self-proclaimed experts. Humorist and philosopher
Artemus Ward has said, "It's not so much the things we don't know that
get us into trouble as the things we know that just ain't so."
My first read was How I Made Two Million Dollars in the Stock Market by Nicholas Darvas, a professional dancer. He attributed his success to

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

37

a charting method called the Box Theory. As my first exposure to TA, the
idea that buy-and-sell signals could be derived from a stock's behavior
was entirely novel and exciting. Darvas based his analysis on a staircaselike arrangement of price ranges that he called boxes. Soon I learned this
was old wine in a new bottle-the good old-fashioned support and resistance zones of TA. My enthusiasm was undeterred. Next I studied Chartcraft's Point and Figure Method and began keeping charts on a large
stable of stocks. For my sixteenth birthday my parents gave me the bible,
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, by Edwards and Magee, and my conversion was complete.
Before long, I was giving stock tips to my chemistry teacher, Mr. Com.
My initial success with a stock called Cubic made several other teachers
fans of my mysterious charts. I picked several more winners. No one, not
even I, considered the possibility that these early successes might have
been nothing more than a run of good luck. There was no reason to. None
of the TA books I studied ever discussed the roles of randomness in market behavior or luck in the performance of an investment method. My
early scores were plausible because they were consistent with the anecdotes that filled the books, but it did not last. My track record began to
blemish and my fans faded. However, my enthusiasm for TA continued to
grow because it was always possible to explain away my failures. After
the fact, I could always see where I had misread the chart. I'd get it right
next time.
In high school I was a good science student, although I now realize I
was scientifically illiterate. Later, college courses in the philosophy of science taught me that science is more than a set of facts. First and foremost,
it is a method for distinguishing real from illusory knowledge. It would
take me the better part of 40 years to see the connection between the philosophy of science and TA.
My skepticism grew out of my experience as a proprietary or "prop"
trader for the firm of Spear, Leeds & Kellogg from the fall of 1996
through the spring of 2002. Prop traders have the ultimate fun job. They
are given the freedom to speculate with a firm's capital. My trading strategy was based on what I had learned about TA over the prior 35 years. I
made profits during the first three and one-half years, October 1996
through February 2000. Because my trading methods were subjective, it
is not clear if these gains were the result of my abilities with TA or my
ever-bullish bias coinciding with an upward-trending market. I suspect it
was the latter because an analysis of my monthly returns relative to a
market benchmark indicated I was not beating the market but merely
matching it. In other words, I had not generated a significantly positive
alpha. 5 Also suggestive was the fact that I gave back all my gains in the
two years after the market trend turned down in March 2000. Over the

38

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

full five-and-one-half-year period, my results, to put it generously, were
lackluster.
Prior to joining Spear, Leeds & Kellogg, I had been a proponent of
objective trading methods, so while at Spear, I made efforts to develop
a systematic trading program in hopes that it would improve my performance. However, with limited time and development capital, these
plans never came to fruition. Thus, I continued to rely on classical barchart analysis, supplemented with several indicators that I interpreted
subjectively.
However, I was objective in several ways. Early in my trading career
with Spear, I began keeping a detailed journal. Prior to each trade I would
note its TA rationale. In addition, each trade was based on an objectively
falsifiable prediction-a defined point of adversity where I would admit
the trade was wrong. My managers insisted on this. I maintained the journal daily over the five-plus years of trading. After each transaction was
completed, I did a postmortem analysis. This practice made it hard for me
to rationalize my failures. There they were staring me in the face. This accelerated my fall from faith in subjective TA.
Because my results were for only one person, I considered the possibility I was not properly implementing the dictates of the TA texts I had
been studying for the past 30+ years. Yet, I also began to wonder if what
they said was correct or if what they said was even substantive.
When I discussed my growing skepticism with colleagues, their response was that TA was obviously valid. Trends and patterns in historical
charts were simply too evident to be illusory. A widely used TA text6 asserts that TA is valid on these grounds. This did not satisfy me. When I
learned that the same patterns and trends,7 to which TA attributes such
significance, also appear with regularity in purely random data, my faith in
chart analysis was shaken to the core. Moreover, it came to my attention
that studies have shown that expert chart readers cannot reliably distinguish actual market charts from charts produced by a random process. s
Such charts, which are generated by random draws from a sample of actual price changes, are, by design, devoid of authentic trends and patterns
and, therefore, impossible to predict, but, to experienced chartists, they
looked just like authentic price charts. On this basis, it would seem that
predictions based on authentic charts could not be trusted. Clearly, "obvious validity" is an inadequate standard for judging the validity of market
patterns.
With inspiration from two books, How We Know What Isn't So by
Thomas Gilovich,9 and Why People Believe Weird Things by Michael Shermer,1O I came to the realization that TA must be approached with the skepticism and rigor of the scientific method.

The Illusory Validity of Subjective Technical Analysis

39

TIlE MIND: A NATURAL PATTERN FINDER
We are predisposed to look for and find predictive patterns. Human nature
is repulsed by the unpredictable and the unexplained, so our cognitive
machinery tends to perceive order, pattern, and meaning in the sensory
stimuli we receive from the world regardless of whether it truly is ordered, patterned, or meaningful. "In many instances, what we experience
is nothing more than the vagaries of chance at work." I I "The appearance
of a face on the surface of the moon, the perception of Satanic messages
when rock music is played backwards, or seeing the face of Jesus in the
wood grain of a hospital door are examples of the mind imposing order on
random visual sensory stimuli."12
The tendency to perceive order evolved because this ability was crucial for our survival. 13 The early humans who were best at it produced the
most offspring, and we are descended from them. Unfortunately, evolution did not endow us with an equal ability to distinguish valid from invalid patterns. AE a consequence, along with the valid knowledge came
many falsehoods.
Acquiring knowledge, whether in prehistoric times or today, can fail
in two ways: learning a falsehood or failing to learn a truth. Of these two
mistakes, we seem to be more prone to adopting falsehoods than we are
to overlooking vital truths. Evolutionary biologists speculate that the acquisition of false ideas was less detrimental to the survival of early humans than failing to learn something vital. The belief that a ritual dance
prior to a hunt would promote success is a learned falsehood with minimal cost-a little wasted dancing-but the failure to learn the importance
of standing downwind of an animal during a hunt was an error with a significant survival cost.
AE a result, our brains evolved to have a voracious, although indiscriminate, appetite for predictive patterns and causal relations. The false
beliefs that accumulated along the way were a price worth paying. Sometimes, a successful hunt did follow a ritual dance, so the superstitious
practice was reinforced. Also, performing a ritual reduced anxiety by giving an illusory sense of control over outcomes that were largely a matter
of chance.
Modern civilized life has changed this picture considerably. Not only
are decisions more complex today, but the costs of learned falsehoods are
greater. Consider the debate on global warming. Are rising temperatures
indicative of a real long-term danger or are they a false alarm? If those
convinced that it is a false alarm are later proven wrong, future generations will pay dearly. However, the cost of treating global warming as a serious threat would be more modest if that view turns out to be mistaken.

40

METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

The evolution of human intelligence has been a slow process. Our intellectual capacities developed over a several-million-year period, most of
which took place under conditions referred to as the ancestral environment of adaptation. In this environment, the mandates were few and
clear: Survive and reproduce. Human intellectual capacities and thinking
strategies were adapted for those conditions, not for the complexities of
modem civilization, which date back a mere 10 to 15 thousand years. In
other words, 99 percent of human evolution took place in an environment
dramatically less complex than the one we face today. It is not surprising,
then, that our intelligence would be maladapted to the complex judgment
and decision-making tasks we face today. We seem to be as superstitious
today as the cave dweller who believed in ritual dances.
