
 Stocks Initial dividend yield Growth in earnings Change in valuation (increase in P/E ratio) 3.1 8.0 –5.5 
 Average annual return 5.6 
 Bonds Initial yield Effect of increase in interest rates 5.9 –2.1 
 Average annual return 3.8 

 Because the inflation was unanticipated and allowance for it was not incorporated into yields, investors in bonds suffered disastrous results. In 1968, for example, thirty-year, long-term bonds offered a yield to maturity of about 6 percent. This provided protection against the going inflation rate of about 3 percent and an anticipated after-inflation real rate of return of 3 percent. Unfortunately, the actual rate of inflation over the period 1969–81 was almost 8 percent, wiping out any positive real rate of return. That’s the good news part of this dreary story. The bad news was that there were capital losses. Who wanted to buy a bond yielding 6 percent in the late 1970s, when the rate of inflation was in double digits? No one! If you had to sell your bonds, you sold at a loss so that the new buyer could get a yield consonant with the higher rate of inflation. Yields rose even further as the risk premium on bonds rose to take into account their increased volatility. To make matters worse, the tax system delivered the unkindest blow of all to bond investors. Even though bond investors often actually earned negative pre-tax rates of return, their bond coupons were taxed at regular income tax rates. 
 The failure of bonds to protect investors against an unanticipated inflationary episode is hardly surprising. The common-stock flop was something else. Because stocks represent claims on real assets that presumably rise in value with the price level, stock prices—according to this line of logic—should have risen also. It’s like the story of the small boy on his first trip to an art museum. When told that a famous abstract painting was supposed to be a horse, the boy asked wisely, “Well, if it is supposed to be a horse, why isn’t it a horse?” If common stocks were supposed to be an inflation hedge, then why weren’t they? 
 Many different explanations involving faltering dividends and earnings growth have been offered that simply don’t hold up under careful analysis. One common explanation was that inflation had caused corporate profits to shrink drastically, especially when reported figures were adjusted for inflation. Inflation was portrayed as a kind of financial neutron bomb, leaving the structure of corporate enterprise intact, but destroying the lifeblood of profits. Many saw the engine of capitalism as running out of control, so that a walk down Wall Street—random or otherwise—could prove extremely hazardous. 
 The facts are, however, that there was no evidence that profits had been “sliding down a pole greased by cruel and inexorable inflation,” as some in the financial community believed in the early 1980s. As the preceding table shows, profit growth accelerated over the 1969–81 period and increased to an 8 percent rate, comfortably ahead of inflation. Even dividends held their own, rising at close to the same rate as inflation. 
 Movie buffs should recall the marvelous final scene from Casablanca . Humphrey Bogart stands over the body of a Luftwaffe major, a smoking gun in his hand. Claude Rains, a captain in the French colonial police, turns his glance from Bogart to the smoking gun to the dead major and finally to his assistant, and says, “Major Strasser has been shot. Round up the usual suspects.” We, too, have rounded up the usual suspects, but we have yet to focus on who shot the stock market. 
 The major reason for the poor equity returns during the 1970s was that investors’ evaluations of dividends and earnings—the number of dollars they were willing to pay for a dollar of dividends and earnings—fell sharply. Stocks failed to provide investors with protection against inflation, not because earnings and dividends failed to grow with inflation, but rather because price-earnings multiples quite literally collapsed over the period. 
 The price-earnings multiple for the S&P Index was cut by almost two-thirds during the 1969–81 period. It was this decline in multiples that produced such poor returns for investors in the 1970s and that prevented stock prices from reflecting the real underlying progress most companies made in earnings and dividend growth. Some financial economists concluded that the market was simply irrational during the 1970s and early 1980s—that multiples had fallen too far. 
 It is, of course, quite possible that stock investors became irrationally pessimistic in the early 1980s, just as they were possibly irrationally optimistic in the mid-1960s. But although I do not believe the market is always perfectly rational, if forced to choose between the stock market and the economics profession, I’d put my money on the stock market every time. I suspect that stock investors weren’t irrational when they caused a sharp drop in price-dividend and price-earnings multiples—they were just scared. In the mid-1960s, inflation was so modest as to be almost unnoticeable, and investors were convinced that economists had found the cure for serious recessions—even mild downturns could be “fine-tuned” away. No one would have imagined in the 1960s that the economy could experience either double-digit unemployment or double-digit inflation, let alone that both could appear simultaneously. Clearly, we learned that economic conditions were far less stable than had previously been imagined. Equity securities ( dare I say equity insecurities) were, therefore, considered riskier and deserving of higher risk compensation. * 
 The market provides higher risk premiums through a drop in prices relative to earnings and dividends; this produces larger returns in the future consistent with the new, riskier environment. Paradoxically, however, the same adjustments that produced very poor returns in the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s created some very attractive price levels in the early 1980s, as I argued in earlier editions of this book. The experience makes clear, however, that if one wants to explain the generation of returns over a decade, a change in valuation relationships plays a critical role. The growth rate of earnings did compensate for inflation during 1969–81, but the drop in price-dividend and price-earnings multiples, which I believe reflected increased perceived risk, is what killed the stock market. 
 ERA III: THE AGE OF EXUBERANCE 
 Let us now turn to the third era—the golden age of financial asset returns, from 1982 through early 2000. At the start of the period, both bonds and stocks had fully adjusted—perhaps even overadjusted—to the changed economic environment. Stocks and bonds were priced not only to provide adequate protection against the likely rate of inflation but also to give unusually generous real rates of return. 
 Indeed, in late 1981, the bond market was in disgrace. The Bawl Street Journal , in its 1981 annual comedy issue, wrote, “A bond is a fixed-rate instrument designed to fall in price.” At the time, the yield on high-quality corporate bonds was around 13 percent. The underlying rate of inflation (as measured by the growth of unit labor costs) was then about 8 percent. Thus, corporate bonds provided a prospective real rate of return of about 5 percent, a rate unusually generous by past historical standards. (The long-term real rate of return on corporate bonds has been only 2 percent.) To be sure, bond prices had become volatile, and it was therefore reasonable to suppose that bonds ought to offer a somewhat larger risk premium than before. But panic-depressive institutional investors probably overdiscounted the risks of bond investments. Like generals fighting the last war, investors had been loath to touch bonds because experience over the past fifteen years had been so disastrous. Thus, the initial conditions were such that bond investors could expect very generous returns in the years ahead. 
 What about stocks? As I mentioned above, it is possible to calculate the anticipated long-run rate of return on stocks by adding the dividend yield of the stock averages to the anticipated growth of earnings per share. The calculations I performed in 1981 suggested a total expected rate of return from common stocks of more than 13 percent—a rate well above the core rate of inflation and very generous by historical standards. 
 Common stocks were also selling at unusually low multiples of cyclically depressed earnings, at below-average price-dividend multiples, and at prices that were only a fraction of the replacement value of the assets they represented. Small wonder that we saw so many corporate takeovers during the 1980s. Whenever assets can be bought in the stock market at less than the cost of acquiring them directly, there will be a tendency for firms to purchase the equities of other firms, as well as to buy back their own stocks. Thus, I argued that in the early 1980s we were presented with a market situation where paper assets had adjusted and perhaps overadjusted to inflation and the greater uncertainty associated with it. The following table shows how returns developed during the 1982–2000 period. 
 THE DEVELOPMENT OF STOCK AND BOND RETURNS (APRIL 2000–MARCH 2009) 

 Stocks Initial dividend yield Growth in earnings Change in valuation (increase in P/E ratio) 5.8 6.8 5.7 
 Average annual return 18.3 
 Bonds Initial yield Effect of increase in interest rates 13.0 0.6 
 Average annual return 13.6 

 This was truly an age of investor exuberance, with both stocks and bonds producing unusually generous rates of return. Although the nominal growth in earnings and dividends was not any greater during this period than in the unsatisfactory period of the 1970s, two factors contributed to produce spectacular stock-market returns. First, initial dividend yields of nearly 6 percent were unusually generous. Second, market sentiment went from despair to euphoria. Price-earnings multiples in the market almost quadrupled, from 8 to 30, and dividend yields fell to just over 1 percent. It was the change in valuation that lifted stock returns from unusually good to absolutely extraordinary. 
 Similarly, the initial yield of 13 percent in the bond market guaranteed that long-term holders would achieve double-digit returns. As I have said, what yield long-term holders see is what they get. In addition, interest rates fell, augmenting the returns further. Moreover, because the inflation rate moderated to the 3 percent level, real returns (returns after inflation) were well above their long-term average. The 1982–early 2000 period offered a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to be invested in financial assets. Meanwhile, hard assets such as gold and oil produced negative rates of return. 
 ERA IV: THE AGE OF DISENCHANTMENT 
 The Age of Exuberance was followed by one of the worst decades for the stock market ever recorded. The period was widely considered to be “the lost decade” or “the naughties.” It was a decade most stock-market investors would prefer to forget. The Internet bubble was followed by a crushing bear market. Later in the decade another bubble and crash rocked world stock markets as tumbling real estate prices destroyed the value of the complex mortgage-backed securities that were dependent on rising home prices. Investors were again reminded that the world was a very risky place. Valuation relationships changed accordingly. 
 Price-earning ratios fell and dividend yields rose. The investor who diversified her portfolio with bonds was able to mitigate the suffering, however, as bonds produced positive returns over the decade. The following table shows how returns developed during the Age of Disenchantment. 

 Stocks Initial dividend yield Growth in earnings Change in valuation (increase in P/E ratio) 1.2 5.8 –13.5 
 Average annual return –6.5 
 Bonds Initial yield Effect of increase in interest rates 7.0 –0.6 
 Average annual return 6.4 

 THE MARKETS FROM 2009 THROUGH 2014 
 By the trough in the market in 2009, the P/E multiple for the S&P 500 had fallen to less than 15 times cyclically depressed earnings. The dividend yield had increased to almost 3 percent. These changes in valuation relationships created the conditions for positive stock-market returns over the next five years. As earnings grew at double-digit rates, prices rose even more, aided by falling dividend yields and rising P/E multiples. Bonds also did reasonably well. U.S. Treasury yields ranged between 3 and 4 percent in 2009. In mid-2014, the ten-year U.S. Treasury bond yielded about 2½ percent. Thus, bonds offered some capital appreciation as their yields fell. 
 HANDICAPPING FUTURE RETURNS 
 So what’s ahead? How can you judge returns from financial assets for the years ahead? Although I remain convinced that no one can predict short-term movements in securities markets, I do believe that it is possible to estimate the likely range of long-run rates of return that investors can expect from financial assets. And it would be unrealistic to anticipate that the generous returns earned by stock market investors during the 2009–14 period can be expected during the years ahead. 
 What, then, are the reasonable long-run expectations for returns? The same methods that I used in the past can be used today. I will illustrate the long-run return projections as of late 2014. The reader can perform similar calculations by using data appropriate for the time the projection is made. 
 Looking first at the bond market, as of late 2014, we can get a very good idea of the returns that will be gained by long-term holders. Holders of good-quality corporate bonds will earn approximately 4½ percent if they hold the bonds to maturity. Holders of ten-year Treasury bonds until maturity will earn just over 2 percent. Assuming that the inflation rate does not exceed 2 percent per year, both government and corporate bonds will provide investors with a positive but quite meager rate of return. These yields, however, are considerably lower than they have been since the late 1960s. Moreover, if inflation accelerates and interest rates rise, bond prices will fall and bond returns will be even lower. It is hard to imagine that bond investors will be well served by the yields available in 2014. 
 What returns can we project for common stocks as of late 2014? We can make reasonable estimates of at least the first two determinants of equity returns. We know that the 2014 dividend yield for the S&P 500 Index was about 1.9 percent. Suppose that earnings can grow at about 5 percent over the long term, a rate consistent with historical rates during periods of restrained inflation and similar to estimates made by Wall Street securities firms in late 2014. Adding the initial yield and growth rate together, we get a projected total return for the S&P 500 of just under 7 percent per year—higher than bond yields but somewhat below the long-term average since 1926, which had been close to 10 percent. 
 Of course, the major determinants of stock returns over short periods of time will be changes in the ways equities are valued in the market, that is, changes in market price-earnings multiples. Investors should ask themselves whether the valuation levels in the market during late 2014 will in fact hold up. Price-earnings multiples in late 2014 were in the high teens, higher than their long-run historical average. And dividend yields at 1.9 percent were well below their 4½ percent historical average. 
 To be sure, interest rates and inflation were both relatively low during 2014. When interest rates (and inflation) are low, somewhat higher price-earnings multiples and lower dividend yields are justified. Still, we can’t simply assume that rates will always be so low and that inflation will always be benign. The unexpected frequently happens. 
 There is one predictable pattern in the stock market that also augurs for at best modest stock-market returns over the longer term. Depending on the forecast horizon involved, as much as 40 percent of the variability of future market returns can be predicted on the basis of the initial P/E multiple of the market as a whole. 
 An interesting way of presenting the results is shown in the diagram on page 347. The diagram was produced by measuring the P/E of the broad U.S. stock market each quarter since 1926 and then calculating the market’s subsequent ten-year total return through 2014. The observations were then divided into deciles depending upon the level of the initial P/E multiple. In general, the exhibit shows that investors have earned higher total rates of return from the stock market when the initial P/E of the market portfolio was relatively low, and relatively low future rates of return when stocks were purchased at high P/E multiples. 

 Source: The Leuthold Group. 
 In measuring the P/E for the market, these calculations do not use actual earnings per share but rather cyclically adjusted earnings. Thus, the measured P/Es are often referred to as CAPEs—cyclically adjusted P/E multiples. The CAPEs are available on Robert Shiller’s website, and the earnings are calculated as average earnings over the last ten years. (Similar calculations can be obtained by averaging the past five years of earnings.) The Shiller CAPE in 2014 averaged just over 25. CAPEs do a reasonably good job of forecasting returns a decade ahead and confirm the expectation presented here of modest single-digit returns over the years ahead. But if your investment period is for less than a decade, no one can predict the returns you will receive with any degree of accuracy. 
 As a random walker on Wall Street, I am skeptical that anyone can predict the course of short-term stock-price movements, and perhaps we are better off for it. I am reminded of one of my favorite episodes from the marvelous old radio serial I Love a Mystery . This mystery was about a greedy stock-market investor who wished that just once he would be allowed to see the paper, with its stock-price changes, twenty-four hours in advance. By some occult twist his wish was granted, and early in the evening he received the late edition of the next day’s paper. He worked feverishly through the night planning early-morning purchases and late-afternoon sales that would guarantee him a killing in the market. Then, before his elation had diminished, he read through the remainder of the paper—and came upon his own obituary. His servant found him dead the next morning. 
 Because I, fortunately, do not have access to future newspapers, I cannot tell how stock and bond prices will behave in any particular period ahead. Nevertheless, I am convinced that the moderate long-run estimates of bond and stock returns presented here are the most reasonable ones that can be made for investment planning decades into the twenty-first century. The point is not to invest with a rearview mirror projecting double-digit returns from the past into the future. We are likely to be in a low-return environment for some time to come. 

 * Economists often put the proposition in terms of the risk premium—that is, the extra return you can expect from an investment over and above the return from perfectly predictable short-term investments. According to this view, the risk premiums in the 1960s were very small, perhaps 1 or 2 percentage points. During the early 1980s, risk premiums demanded by investors to hold both stocks and bonds expanded to a range of probably 4 to 6 percentage points, as I shall show below.

A Random Walk Down Wall Street 

 14 

 A LIFE-CYCLE GUIDE TO INVESTING 
 There are two times in a man’s life when he should not speculate: when he can’t afford it, and when he can. —Mark Twain, Following the Equator 
 I NVESTMENT STRATEGY NEEDS to be keyed to one’s life cycle. A thirty-four-year-old and a sixty-eight-year-old saving for retirement should use different financial instruments to accomplish their goals. The thirty-four-year-old—just beginning to enter the peak years of salaried earnings—can use wages to cover any losses from increased risk. The sixty-eight-year-old—likely to depend on investment income to supplement or replace salary income—cannot risk incurring losses. Even the same financial instrument can mean different things to different people depending on their capacity for risk. Although the thirty-four-year-old and the sixty-eight-year-old may both invest in a certificate of deposit, the younger may do so because of an attitudinal aversion to risk and the older because of a reduced capacity to accept risk. In the first case, one has more choice in how much risk to assume; in the second, one does not. 
 The most important investment decision you will probably ever make concerns the balancing of asset categories (stocks, bonds, real estate, money-market securities, and so on) at different stages of your life. According to Roger Ibbotson, who has spent a lifetime measuring returns from alternative portfolios , more than 90 percent of an investor’s total return is determined by the asset categories that are selected and their overall proportional representation. Less than 10 percent of investment success is determined by the specific stocks or mutual funds that an individual chooses. In this chapter, I will show you that whatever your aversion to risk—whatever your position on the eat-well, sleep-well scale—your age, income from employment, and specific responsibilities in life go a long way toward helping you determine the mix of assets in your portfolio. 
 FIVE ASSET-ALLOCATION PRINCIPLES 
 Before we can determine a rational basis for making asset-allocation decisions, certain principles must be kept firmly in mind. We’ve covered some of them implicitly in earlier chapters, but treating them explicitly here should prove very helpful. The key principles are: 

 1. History shows that risk and return are related. 
