
145

Stochastics

B
A

C

FIGURE 8.6

Divergence signals change. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

in the upper end of that time period’s trading range. When the momentum
starts to slow, the settlement prices will start to fade from the upper boundaries of the range, and stochastics will show that the bullish momentum
is starting to fade. The exact opposite is true for bear or downtrending
markets.
The two lines in stochastics are referred to as %K and %D. These are plotted on a horizontal axis for a given time period, and the vertical axis is plotted on a scale from 0 percent to 100 percent. The formula to calculate the
first component, %K, is:
%K = (c – Ln/Hn – Ln) × 100
where

c = closing price of current period
Ln = lowest low during n period of time
Hn = highest high during n period of time and
n = number of periods

146

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

The second calculation is the %D figure, which is the moving average of %K.
Here is the %D calculation:
%D = 100(Hn/Ln)
where Hn is the n period sum of (c – Ln).
Wow, isn’t that something?! Is the formula worth knowing and doing by
hand? No way! Fortunately, computers calculate stochastics for us, and
most software vendors include stochastics in their services.
What is important is understanding the rules about how to interpret
buy or sell signals:
• When the readings are above 70 percent and %K crosses over the %D
line and both lines are pointing down, a hook sell signal is generated.
• When %K crosses above %D when the reading is below 30 percent and
both lines are pointing up, a buy signal is generated.
Some people adjust the 30-70 parameters, and there are other techniques
associated with using stochastics. One is a trading pattern called bullish
convergence, which is used in identifying market bottoms. The market price
itself makes a lower low than a previous low, but the underlying stochastic
pattern makes a higher low, indicating that the low is a false bottom and
can result in a price reversal.
Another signal is a trading pattern called bearish divergence, which is
used in identifying market tops. The market price itself makes a higher high
than a previous high, but the underlying stochastic pattern makes a lower
high, indicating that the second high is a weak high and can result in a lower
price reversal.
These patterns are similar to those of the MACD indicator. Stochastics
can be programmed for trading on a one-minute, daily, or monthly basis.
Short-term professional day traders and long-term traders can and do use
this indicator. Stochastics do well in volatile or choppy market conditions,
unlike moving average studies, which do not. However, in trending market
conditions, stochastics may generate false buy or sell signals.
Visual observation of your charts combined with the help of computercalculated price indicators can be powerful aids for traders. The general rule
is to trade and use signals that coincide with the overall trend. For example,
if the trend is down, wait for a correction and then watch for a sell signal to
develop.
As seen in Figure 8.7, the trend is clearly lower on the S&P 500 futures
chart in the first week of May when the stochastics generates a bullish divergence buy signal and the market shows a 50-plus point gain. By the end of

Stochastics

FIGURE 8.7

147

Stochastics show divergence. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

May a bearish divergence developed as the market trend continued lower
and stochastics made an even steeper decline. Notice that during the whole
downtrend that followed, the stochastics indicator continued to generate
buy signals. There are small gains that are tradable for a one-day or two-day
swing trader, but the difficulty is that the only classic stochastics signal
where the %K and %D cross over is the sell signal back in late May when the
stochastics readings were above 75 percent.
Figure 8.8 is a classic example of bearish divergence on a weekly chart
of the euro currency futures contract. A little background on the fundamentals will help you understand the importance of this chart. The U.S. stock
market was in a severe decline, and foreign investors were pulling their capital out of the United States—things looked bleak. Remember, as the U.S.
dollar declines, foreign currencies increase in value. Looking at the chart, notice how the stochastics signaled bearish divergence as the euro hit 101.80,
a new high, in the week ending July 19, 2002, but stochastics did not make
a new higher high.

148

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

Market price makes higher highs.

Stochastic signals
bearish divergence
makes lower highs.

FIGURE 8.8

Divergence at the top. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

In addition to stochastics indicating a bearish divergence sell signal,
euro prices for the following week, ending July 26, had formed a long dark
candle and closed lower and below the previous week’s close and low. Further, if you had the monthly pivot point price projections, you would have
known that the R1 target high for the July time period was 101.40. The actual high was 101.80. Yes, this chart should be used as an example under
pivot point analysis, but the stochastics bearish divergence was a powerful
influence as well.
Look at the euro picture again a few weeks later as shown in Figure 8.9.
After the combination of sell signals, the market tumbled back to the
96.00–96.50 level, failing to continue higher and consolidating in a lower
trading range. This is a good example of how to use the verification from
stochastics to exit long positions or, at the very least, to not enter a long position at the very top. Using candlestick charting may have given you the visual pattern recognition alert to help you identify a top or turning point in
the trend. Combined with pivot point monthly analysis, these signals again
provided a proven winning technique, verified by the stochastics signal.

149

Gann Theory

Euro rally stalled with advanced warning
from the monthly pivot point R1 of 1.0140
and the stochastics indicator signaling
bearish divergence.

FIGURE 8.9

Stochastics verification. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

GANN THEORY
William D. Gann was a trader in the first half of the 20th century who died
in 1955 and left behind a legacy of instrumental and complex trading theories. His philosophy of trading was considered to be a mixture of mathematical, geometrical, and astrological analysis. Truly a legend, the secrets
behind his trading tools and methodology consisted of two things, hard work
and common sense.
Gann’s techniques were based not only on measurements of price but
also on time and cycles. Time turns or counts are as important and significant for the market’s price behavior as cycles are for nature. Look at the
changes from night and day, high tide and low tide, winter and summer seasons. These times can be determined by mathematical calculations, and
Gann believed the markets could be as well.
Among the concepts Gann used were price corrections based on percentages derived by dividing the market’s price action into eighths as well
as thirds. He is also famous for developing the importance of a 45-degree

150

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

trend-line angle, the Gann “Cardinal Square,” and the timing of market events
based on the degrees of a circle such as 30, 60, 90, 180, and 360 degrees. If
the market made a bottom today, he would try to calculate the next turning
point using these numbers to project into the future.
Gann also was big on anniversary dates of big events—for instance, 1
month, 3 months, and 12 months. There was also the 144-day period, the
only square Fibonacci number. Some chartists believe in filtering out a lot
of these calculations and just using the basics. Gann methods alone would
make a book and are far too extensive to cover here. Gann wrote a book,
How to Make Profits in Commodities, which would be a great place to start
if you want further information on his teachings.

FIBONACCI NUMBERS
Thirteenth-century Italian mathematician Leonardo Fibonacci concluded
that a number sequence reflected human nature and that patterns repeated
themselves in a certain order. The Fibonacci series, as it is called, is an infinite series of numbers that adds each number to the previous number such
that 1 + 1 = 2, 2 + 1 = 3, 3 + 2 = 5, 5 + 3 = 8, and so on to get a number sequence of 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, . . . . These numbers are used
to help cycle analysts time market turns and lengths of price moves. Major
tops or bottoms are often calculated by starting with the event of a high or
low and then calculating out in time and price increments that correspond
to the Fibonacci series.
Fibonacci’s work can be applied to trading in various ways. You can look
at time cycles, searching for a coincidence of a reoccurring pattern that develops on a historic basis such as every 21, 34, 55, or 144 days or perhaps 3,
13, 21, 34, . . . weeks. If you do a little math, you will see that the numbers,
other than the first few smaller ones, all have the same consistent ratio to
each other. These ratios—0.382, 0.50, 0.618, 0.768, 1.00—show up often in
analysts’ research as price retracement levels, wave lengths, time projections, and in other ways. For example, you can take the distance in time
from price peak to peak and then apply these ratios to help predict the timing of the next potential peak or smaller or larger peaks.
Figure 8.10, the S&P 500 futures chart, shows a five-month cycle count.
Not only did the low on July 24, 2002, fall on the five-month number but also
on the day of a full moon. The significance of the five-month cycle is that it
is a Fibonacci series number and is approximately 100 trading days, which
is a Fibonacci ratio figure and the length of a moving average that many
traders watch. Not all of the lows on the chart are monumental lows, but
more times than not they are distinctive lows. Pivot point analysis pinpointed
the R2 target weekly low for the July low at 781.67, close to the actual figure.

151

Fibonacci Numbers

5-month cycle lows

FIGURE 8.10

Five-month cycles in S&P 500 index. (Source: FutureSource.

Reprinted with permission.)

This market had many good clues for a potential bottom to occur. However, keep in mind that picking bottoms can be hazardous to your wealth.
This information might have at least kept you from selling short in the hole.
When looking for a cycle occurrence—in other words, a repetitive
pattern—go back to historical price moves. This research may prove to be
enlightening for your trading. Here is an example taken from an article that
was e-mailed to clients and posted on my web site on Tuesday, July 23,
2002, the day before the Dow made a bottom at 7450 and the S&P 500 index
low was 771.30.
The seven worst months for the S&P 500 since the inception of stock
index futures in 1982 were, in calendar order:
1. October 1987, 152 points
2. October 1997, 148 points
3. August 1998, 175 points

152

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

4. April 2000, 201 points
5. March 2001, 182 points
6. September 2001, 219 points
7. July 2002 (as of July 23), 208.5 points (996.5 high to the low right
now of 788)
Is it wrong buying near such an extreme decline, knowing what the
results were every time the market experienced such declines of this
magnitude? If you were wondering why I am not bearish now, it is
because of historical standards. The market price usually dictates a
substantial rally after severe monthly declines. Odds of being right
that the market will rebound when the market declines between 150
and 219 points are good. In fact, all declines before the 201-point decline in April 2000 resulted in a continuation of a bull market. The
April 2000 decline still resulted in sharp advances before the downtrend continued.
There are chartists who see the head-and-shoulders formation on a
monthly chart, and that is one reason for their price projections to 550.
It is possible, but I do not believe it will be this month or this year. Elliott wave theorists believe we will never see 10,000 in the Dow ever
again. Well, that could be, but let me share with you one thought. Joe
Granville (older investors may remember that name) was a major
doom-and-gloomer back in 1980 when I got in the business. He was
warning that the Dow would crash even back then. The Dow was at
900. As we know now, it is at 7700. That crash he warned about? Never
happened.
What’s my point? Try not to get bearish in the hole, and never
follow the herd mentality. Use common sense and always—I mean
always—use stops.
By identifying the five-month cycle low count and looking at the historical price record, I was able to make a keen observation and share it with
my fellow investors. A good plan based on good analysis does pay off!
This book was not intended to go much into cycle studies. However, the
amazing repetitiveness of another timing cycle is worth mentioning. The equities market seems to respond to what I identified as an 11-week cycle low
back in late 2001. The relevance of the 11-week cycle is that it is approximately 55 trading days—the number 55 is a Fibonacci series number, and it
is approximately half or 50 percent of the five-month cycle. The 50 percent
Fibonacci ratio number also interacts as a reference with the 11-week cycle.
So there is a connection with the Fibonacci series and ratio numbers.
Futures magazine printed an article I wrote in the December 2002 issue
predicting that the week ending December 29 would be the date to expect

Fibonacci Numbers

153

a low to occur in the stock market. This article was written in the middle of
October to make the printing deadline. There was no turning back—after
all, who wants to be wrong in their predictions? Most analysts expected the
traditional “Santa Claus rally” prior to the holiday season. The fact of the
matter is that the market did make a low in the last week of December, as
the 11-week cycle projected (Figure 8.11), and the S&P 500 index proceeded to gain more than 50 points (nearly 600 points in the Dow)!
An interesting point regarding this 11-week cycle: 11 is not a Fibonacci
series number. However, it has Fibonacci connections, as previously noted.
A good point to raise now is that shorter-term cycles within the Fibonacci
framework do occur within longer-term cycles. The term referencing this
tie is called a harmonic timing event. Cycles do not react exactly the same
way. Not all moves will be proportionally equal. The charts with the 5-month
and 11-week cycles will certainly point this out.
So why study cycles and use the Fibonacci series or time counts? In this
case, they seem to have a bearing on when the equity markets rally. Once
again, following a repetitive trend or pattern is what a technician is after.

FIGURE 8.11

Eleven-week cycles in S&P 500 index. (Source: FutureSource.

Reprinted with permission.)

154

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

Back to Fibonacci methods. One more study Leonardo is credited with
is the common retracement percentage figures. They are rounded off at 0.38
percent, 0.50 percent, 0.618 percent, 0.786 percent, 1.272 percent, and 1.618
percent. These numbers are actual ratios within his Fibonacci series. For
example, 1 divided by 2 is 50 percent, 2 divided by 3 is 66 percent, 144 divided by 233 is 0.618, 0.786 is the square root of 0.618, 1.00 subtracted from
0.618 equals –0.382.
The theory behind Fibonacci price retracements is that, when a market
makes an initial move from, say, a low to a high, it is normal for that market
to make some corrections with retracements of 0.382, 0.50, 0.618, or 0.786
of that upmove and to then continue the original trend. These calculations
are also good for establishing profit objectives, which are derived from a
sound and reasonable mathematical application. The cattle futures chart
provided as Figure 8.12 is a good example of a 50 percent correction in prices
from a longer-term perspective on a weekly chart. The 50 percent retracement target price (dashed line) was established from the high in February
near $71.00 to the low that was established in April at $59.92. The 50 percent

FIGURE 8.12
with permission.)

Fifty percent retracement in cattle. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

155

Fibonacci Numbers

calculation for the market to bounce back from the low provided a good
price objective for planning a trade.
There are many Fibonacci experts. One such expert in Fibonacci ratio
work is Joe DiNapoli of Coast Investment Software. DiNapoli was a guest
on the “Personal Investors Hour” on August 6, 2003, and described a technique using Fibonacci ratios to help calculate potential price moves by extending out the value of a move and applying the ratio numbers to that
figure. For example, let’s say that prices move 10 points from Point A to
Point B. The market makes a 50 percent retracement to Point C. Take the
value of the A–B move (10 points) times the Fibonacci numbers 0.618 percent, 1.00 percent and 1.618 percent and then add the results to Point C to
give you price projections or possible resistance levels that the market may
test (Figure 8.13).
I have often used this method and find an uncanny coincidence with the
pivot point calculations. When that occurs, it absolutely gives me a stronger
reason to exit a position near that projected resistance and even gives me an
idea that a reversal of my position may be in order from that area.
Figure 8.14 shows an application of projected Fibonacci measurements
on a daily S&P futures chart. With a low at 957 (Point A) and a high at 1010
(Point B), the move was 53 points. The Point C low was 980. Multiplying 53
by the Fibonacci ratio of 0.618 and adding that number to the Point C low
produced a target of 1012.75. Adding a full 100 percent extension of 53
points to Point C resulted in a target of 1033.
Applying pivot point analysis was slightly more accurate in pinpointing
the high. Using the weekly target method, if you take the prior week’s
numbers—week ending September 5, 2003, when the high was 1028, the
low was 1003.50, and the market closed at 1020.2—and calculate the pivot
point formulas, you would have had 1030.97 for the R1 calculation and
1006.47 for the S1 calculation.

1.618%
100%
B
High

.618%

C
Low
A
Low

FIGURE 8.13

Projecting Fibonacci targets.

156

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

Point A to B = 53 points
53 × .618 = 32.75 + 980 = Fib target of 1012.75
53 × 1.00 = 53 + 980 = Fib target of 1033
53 × 1.27 = 68 + 980 = Fib target of 1050

1030.8

B

1010

C

A

FIGURE 8.14

980

957

Reaching Fibonacci and pivot point targets. (Source: FutureSource.

Reprinted with permission.)

The actual high was 1030.80. The last low before the chart was copied
was 1009. The margin of error was quite a bit smaller using the pivot point
numbers, but here was a phenomenal validating combination using the Fibonacci and pivot point analysis methods together.
Another method for applying Fibonacci ratios is in calculating an extension of a price correction. Sometimes markets may go beyond the traditional 0.50 percent, 0.618 percent or 0.786 percent move. They can and do
retrace back 100 percent of a move. This action would be considered a
retest of the low or the formation of a double bottom. Sometimes you may
wonder why a market made a newer low, only to bounce back, and you
swear that it only made the new low to hunt for your stops. Fibonacci price
extensions can help solve that mystery. If you apply a Fibonacci ratio multiplier of 1.272 percent or 1.618 percent of the initial move, you can determine potential support beneath the market once it has taken out the initial
low (Figure 8.15).
Using Fibonacci price objectives is similar in theory to pivot point
analysis but does not have as detailed a mathematical equation. It deals
with a relative length of a move rather than the time constraints such as a
daily, weekly, or monthly range calculation that pivot point analysis needs.

157

Elliott Wave Theory

B
High

A
Low

1.272%
1.618%

2.618%

FIGURE 8.15

Fibonacci price support

extensions.

The difficult part about using the Fibonacci ratios is identifying the points
of peaks and troughs.

ELLIOTT WAVE THEORY
Ralph N. Elliott began to develop his theories and views that prices move in
waves in the 1920s. He identified impulse waves as those waves moving
with the main trend and corrective waves as those waves going against the
main trend. Impulse waves have five primary price movements, and corrective waves have three primary price moves (Figure 8.16).
Elliott presumably used some of Fibonacci’s work because of the way
he described a wave cycle in a series of 5 and 3 waves, both Fibonacci numbers. The fundamental concept behind Elliot’s theory is that bull markets
have a tendency to follow a basic five-wave advance, followed by a threewave decline. The exact opposite is true for bear markets.

5
B
3
A
1
4

C

2

FIGURE 8.16

Basic Elliott wave pattern.

158

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

More experienced chartists, of course, might recognize that point five
could possibly be considered the number one point of a 1-2-3 formation or
the head of a head-and-shoulders formation. The one thing Elliott most
wanted chartists to recognize is that his wave theory worked on long-term
charts as well as intraday charts. A wave is a wave. Each wave contains
lesser-degree waves while at the same time being a subset of a higherdegree wave.
Each wave has its own set of rules. Here are the basic ideas:
• The first wave is derived from the starting point and usually appears to
be a bounce from a previous trend.
• The second wave usually retraces the entire previous trend. This is what
technicians generally consider the makings of a W or M (1-2-3 patterns), double tops or bottoms, or a head-and-shoulders chart pattern.
• The third wave is one of the most important. It is where you see the trend
confirmation occur. Technicians jump on the trend and place market
orders to enter a position from the breakout above the number one
wave. You usually see a large increase in volume and open interest at
that point. One rule that needs to be followed: For the third wave to be
a true wave, it cannot be the shortest of the five waves.
• The fourth wave is a corrective wave. It usually gives back some of the
advance from the third wave. You might see measuring chart patterns
such as triangles, pennants, or flags, which are continuation patterns
and generally break out in the same direction as the overall trend. The
most important rule to remember about the fourth wave is that the low
of the fourth wave can never overlap the top of the first wave.
• The fifth wave is usually still strong in the direction of the trend, but it
is also during this final phase that the price advance begins to slow.
From the rule of multiple techniques, indicators and oscillators such as
RSI and stochastics begin to show signs of being overbought or oversold and the market begins to lose momentum.
• Wave A is usually mistaken as a regular pullback in the trend, but this is
where you could possibly start seeing the makings of a W or M (1-2-3 patterns), double tops or bottoms, or a head-and-shoulders chart pattern.
• Wave B is a small retracement back toward the high of wave five, but it
does not quite reach that point. This is where traders exit their position
or begin to position for a move in the opposite direction.
• Wave C confirms the end of the uptrend. When confirmation is made
by going beyond wave A, then another cycle begins in the opposite
direction.
Figure 8.17 shows an example of a bearish Elliott wave pattern. Using
trendline analysis to help uncover the waves, you can see how clear the pat-
