These are the only possibilities. Immediately I put my stop in without any hesitation, so in essence I avoid the big loss (except there will be times of gaps that I can’t

145
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

control how you react to the situation. The situation is just the event. Our reactions
are what are detrimental to our psyche. When you have a well‐thought‐out plan that
you follow exactly, you build to some degree immunity to your personal reactions.
We have accepted the risks that are inherent in the market. There is no fear, greed,
or ego that inhibits us.
I have accepted the risk of the trade even before I put it on.
I know that I cannot avoid losses. All I can do is define what I am willing to
lose on a trade and let the probabilities work out over time. There is no sense in trying
to avoid something that is unavoidable. I have absolutely no fear or hesitation. Fear is
immobilizing and works to the contrary; I simply go with the flow. I ask myself, “How
much is this going to cost to see if this trade will work?” Using the wording will work is
a lot different than saying make money. Everything is in how you think.
I have heard these words countless times from my mentors: Remain confident in
the face of constant uncertainty.
The reality is that one needs absolute trust in one’s abilities as well as one’s trading
plan. Without these two attributes success will never be achieved.
Too many traders assume the more indicators, the better.
Many traders start for all the wrong reasons. They are bored, or they are seeking
adventure or challenge.
I have a simple reason for trading. First, I love it and it is my passion.
Second, I need to support a wife, three children, and two dogs.
My goal is to compound money over long periods of time.
The more analysis, the better, so say the masses!
The more CNBC or Bloomberg or other financial news you take in, the better!
However, I am a proponent of keeping it simple. Everything is represented in price.
My trading plan is solely based on that with strong measures of risk.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

146

control). It is very rare that on any given day the markets will open exactly at the price
at which they closed the day before. Most times the opening range of prices is above
or below the prior day’s close. This is called an opening gap. There are traders that
specialize only in trading these opening gaps. Most times these opening gaps are not
large. However, when we are dealing with trading, the only certainty is uncertainty.
There are times, as rare as they are, in which there are huge opening gaps.The implication to traders can be adverse. Many times this happens in the currency markets when
there is government intervention to support or depress currencies. Last year trend
followers got hit with both the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen. Late on Sunday night
the central banks went into actions to suppress their currencies. Trend followers who
were long these currencies got whacked. I was one of these unlucky traders. The magnitudes of these moves were intense.Thousands of dollars per contract were vaporized
within minutes. Every trader that was long these currencies going into the weekend
encountered a huge hit at the commencement of trading.
Situations like these, even as six sigma as they are, need to be included in the trading plan.
Before the first Gulf War the general consensus was that the prices of crude would
go through the roof at the onset of war. As usual you had the predictors on Bloomberg
and CNBC calling for crude to exceed $200 a barrel. Traders bought into the story,
counting their profits beforehand. On my mother’s birthday on January 16, 1991,
crude closed at $30.29 a barrel. After the initial bombing of Iraq, it became clear to
the world that the United States and its allies had clear superiority. On January 17,
1991, crude opened down $7.50 a barrel or $7,500. All the traders who bought into
the fear were shocked. They woke up $7,500 a contract poorer. There are limits in
the markets but they can get locked (limit locked). You cannot exit markets like this.
The good news with markets with daily price limits is that you can only lose that fixed
amount in any one particular day. However, there is a tomorrow and you might experience another day in which you are locked and cannot exit. This scenario is reality
and can cause you much greater losses than you could have ever anticipated. There
is no way to predict or know or even prevent being on the wrong or right side of
such dramatic moves. There is no certainty. We are dealing with the unknown. For the
inherent risks in the markets it is strongly suggested to undertrade. Always calculate
your risks on all levels. Risk per trade, risk per sector, and risk on the open trade level
always needs to be calculated on a constant basis, as shown in Figures 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3.

FIGURE 9.1 Examples of Small Losses and Small Profits

Source: TradingBlox.

FIGURE 9.2 Another Example of Small Losses and Small Profits

Source: TradingBlox.

FIGURE 9.3 Examples of Small Losses With a Rare Large Profit

Source: TradingBlox.

■ Think Probabilities
When one thinks in this mindset, it becomes easy to put on trades. What also lets
one put on the trades effortlessly is trust in a robust methodology and knowing that
over time one will make money. Sometimes it is easier said than done when one goes
through the inevitable period in which eight or more trades do not work in a row
(I promise you it will happen and as long as you have small losses it will not matter).
Many times I have seen traders that think the market is wrong, it will come back.

147
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

I also know as a trend follower that most of my trades will not work (they will lose
small money). Big deal! It is not that I did something wrong or negative; rather, the
fact is that the majority of trades when trend following are not profitable.
I laugh when I hear that trend following is not a viable strategy or that trend following is over. Yes, you will go through periods in which you do not make money as well
as periods of extended duration in which you will have losses.
In reality, what has happened to me over the last 18 years is that I
have had a lot of small losses, small profits, and some rare big profits,
which more than make up for the effort that will enable me to compound my money over time.
Another way to think when putting on a trade is how much this is going to cost me
to see if the trade will work. I know I have said it already but I really want to reiterate
it! Thinking in this manner forces me to take low‐risk bets. I know that the majority of
the trades will not work and I know exactly what I am risking.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

148

The market is never wrong. Do you want to be right or do you want to make money
over time? Trend following success is more dependent on discipline than any pure
academic achievement.
When you have three or four trades in a row that are profitable, is it easier to put on
the next trade? In most cases yes, but it should not be that way. So why should trades
that don’t work impact you? Every trade has its own statistical outcome and should not
cause you any fear, greed, or pain.
Successful trend followers are focused on executing every trade flawlessly. This is
what you need to internalize. They are relaxed as they let the probabilities work over
time. Every trade is statistically independent from the next trade.
The people who run casinos do not try to predict or know in advance the outcome
of any particular hand of cards; however, they know over time they anticipate to make
X percent.
Otherwise they would not have all of those wonderful modern casinos.You need to
think like the owner of a casino. Take small risks; realize that any trade or any month
does not mean anything. Realize that you will make your money over long periods of
time, and if you really convince yourself of this, you are on your way to compounding
money and wealth.
Professional gamblers as well as the casinos know and understand probabilities.
They know that they need a large series of hands to be played and that there will statistically reliable outcomes over time. Ask yourself how many traders think like this.
Not many, that is why most traders fail. I want to help you be one of the successful
trend followers!

Believe in Uncertainty
Believe in the uncertainty and unpredictability of every single trade.
Any trade, any month, and even any year really does not mean anything. There
will be flat years, flat periods, bad periods, and exceptional periods. This is the reality.
Trend following is not a get rich quick plan to wealth. It is a compound your way to
wealth over long periods of time plan.
Losses are simply the cost of doing business or the amount of money I need to make
myself available for eventual big winning trades.
Successful trend followers are in the “Just Do It” mode in which there is no fear
or stress. When you get in your car and start driving are you stressed? Probably not
as you have a seat belt and you understand the concept of defensive driving.There
is no fear or stress when you trade because they have a well‐thought‐out plan and
there is nothing at risk other than their small bet that you are willing to spend to
see if the trade will work. There is no being right or trying to avoid a loss. Basically
they are not trying to prove anything other than to make themselves available for
potential profitable trades and compound money over time.

Accept the Risk; Stick to the Plan

Expect Anything
Any market can do virtually anything at any time.
Once you truly grasp this, you realize the utmost need to have stops both for losses and
to follow trades that work beyond our expectations. Successful trend followers cut their
losses without any hesitation when the trade is not working. Successful trend followers have
an exact plan, are organized and systematic, and have determined their risk thresholds.
Successful trend followers have eliminated costly trading errors
caused by fear or greed.
Successful trend followers have internalized that they do not need to know the
future in order to be profitable and know to expect the unexpected.

149
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

Successful trend followers accept the risk, follow their plan, and have reasonable expectations without fear or stress.
The pillar of successful trading is accepting the inherent risks, accepting the uncertainty, accepting that you will have countless losses.You must keep the losses small.
You do not need to adversely affect your lifestyle. I know this is easier to say than do.
My broker gave me a suggestion one day after I was complaining about my trading. I
thought he was crazy, but later saw he wanted to teach me to accept the risk. He suggested that I withdraw $5,000 in single bills. Go to the top of a building and throw the
money off.Watch the money fall and watch the lucky people on the ground pick up my
money. Afterwards be introspective and ask myself how I feel and move on.
This is trading. You do something without a plan, the 10 percenters pick up your
money. You need to accept the risk and the uncertainty. If you can learn something
from this exercise, you are starting your learning curve about trading. You are both
emotionally and financially prepared to trade. You have internalized what is at hand.
You must be able to lose money.You must be able to move on and dust yourself off.
Successful trend followers know that most trades will not work, yet they know that
they have an edge and know that there will a random distribution of trades that work and
those that don’t.
Remember, a trade does not have to work.
It will be a random outcome.
This brings us to believe that anything can happen when we put on a trade,
and there will be an uncertain outcome. This makes us do several things in
order to be a successful trader including immediately putting in your stops to protect.
By doing so you are following your plan exactly because you expect that virtually
anything can happen.
Think of all of those investors who in their wildest dreams would never have expected the NASDAQ to fall as it did or all of the dot‐com investors who watched all
of their profits evaporate.

Salem Abraham, one of the most successful trend followers since the1980s, through
his long work has instilled in me the idea that trend following is a marathon, grinding
it out over the years, and the following statement:

Plan for the Unexpected

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

150

I have an unshakable belief that anything can happen and will happen.
Basically the only certainty in trading is uncertainty.
You define your risk in advance because you know there will be uncertain situations and things can go to extremes.
My goal is to eliminate the emotional baggage when trading. This methodology of
thinking will help you, as it did me.
One thing that helped me to eliminate the emotional baggage was to mitigate my
expectations. I have no expectation that any trade will work. I mitigate my expectations of profits.
I believe that I will make money over time, but I never know in which market or
stock or when. There are no guarantees as we do not know the future.
Most people when they put on a trade expect it to be profitable or otherwise why
would they put on the trade? Successful trend followers know that they will make
money over a long series of trades. They have an edge but never expect that any one
particular trade has to work.
In order to compound money over time we need to force ourselves out of the unrealistic expectation mode. Every trade is a random event. Because the last X number
of trades did not work, who says that trade Y will not be the trade of the year?
Trade Y could be the trade when you sit back and say to yourself, Wow,
I would never have expected that to happen.
This leads to the understanding that anything can happen and will happen, trades
can go to extremes. Since we know trades can go to extremes, this reinforces why we
immediately have stops to protect to the negative and why we have trailing stops that
follow big winners to lock in profits for the positive.
Use the NASDAQ chart in Figure 9.4 as an example. No one ever believed the
NASDAQ could fall from approximately 5,600 down to below 1,000 and stay down
now for more than 13 years.
Markets can go to EXTREMES!
Many are not aware of the action of the Japanese stock market from the late 1980s
to the present. In the 1980s Japan was an economic superpower. They were buying
real estate throughout the world, especially in the United States.
The Japanese stock market reached a high in 1989 of approximately 39,000.
Today, 20+ years later, the Japanese stock market is hovering around 8,500 (Figure
9.5). Can you imagine buying and holding?
Things can and will go to extremes!

FIGURE 9.4 Nasdaq Stock Crash

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

151

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

The majority of investors never considered the cotton market as an area to invest
in. Cotton went from a low of approximately 6 to a high of 180 on a back‐adjusted
basis. Fortunes were made and lost with cotton.
Cotton was one of the reasons in 2010 I made close to 40 percent in one of my
managed accounts. I entered in the end of July 2010 and was able to stay with the trade
until the end of November 2010.You will note that cotton continued to climb but the
volatility and risk were too great to take on (Figure 9.6).

THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

FIGURE 9.5 Japan Stock Market Crash

FIGURE 9.6 Cotton Massive Rally

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

152

Do you remember what you were paying for gas in 2008 when everyone was calling
for peak oil? There were calls that gas would go over $7 a gallon or even more. Crude
oil got up to approximately $147 a barrel to crash down to the $34 dollar a barrel range
(Figure 9.7). Where were the experts? They were wrong. Trend followers made money
as crude oil went up as well as down. Fortunes were made and lost. T. Boone Pickens,
the oil guru, lost a fortune while his neighbor Salem Abraham (whom I invest with), the
trend follower, made a fortune.
Since we know (or I hope you will learn) that anything can happen, what makes
you think you can predict it?

FIGURE 9.7 Crude Oil Rally and Crash

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

Predicting is a complete waste of time. One does not need to know the future
in order to make money. All we need to do is take low‐risk bets and stumble into
trends. The market will do whatever it wants; it is not about you or me. The
market does not care.
Successful trend followers know that they do not know what will happen.
They think in terms of probabilities and possibilities. Once one thinks in terms of
probabilities one becomes more confident, less stressed, and less fearful.
We are programming our minds to be successful trend followers. In order to be a
successful trend follower we need to trade without fear or overconfidence. We must
see what the market is offering us, take action on this, and make ourselves available
for opportunities.
When one is in fear, opportunities are blocked. For example, your last trade did
not work, so you do not take the next trade?
If you do not take that trade, you had fear of losing money.
To make matters worse and to beat yourself up, that next trade could have made up
for all of the other small losses or been the big rare winner of the year.

■ Traders Lose Because of Fear

FIGURE 9.8 Losses Greater Than We Anticipate Due to Gaps or Limit Moves

Stay focused and “just take the trade if it fits your trading plan.” You have a plan,
you follow the plan, you take low‐risk bets, you have realistic expectations, and you
compound your way to wealth over time.

153
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

Accept the fear!
Accept that fact that most trades will not work!
Big deal, you are taking low‐risk bets that are between .5 percent and 1.5 percent
of your whole account size.You are able to take many small losses. Small losses do not
ruin your mental state or at least they shouldn’t. Be extremely wary of system sellers
who claim their system or methodology has a high win rate.You will experience losses
in a row multiple times. This is why we attempt to keep losses small. However, you
will see in Figure 9.8 that one trade we incurred -1.9 percent loss. This loss was much
more than we target however this loss was probably due to a gap up/down or limit
days. These type of losses can’t be avoided.

■ It Is All Perception
Take the threat of fear or pain out of your market information.
Successful trend followers don’t feel anything painful nor do they experience fear
about putting on a trade. They “Just put the trade on!”
Successful trend followers have internalized that there is an endless stream of opportunities and that many of these trades will not work. I even say to myself, “ How
much will this trade cost me to see if it will work”!
Internalize and start truly believing in the following statements. If you need to
write them down and put them next to your computer.
There is abundance in the markets.
There are always oppurtunities
Successful trend followers are objective in their trading.
They just flow with the markets without trying to control or predict anything.
Successful trend followers will go long or short and never try to
impose their opinions or belief systems on their trading.
They are focused on opportunities and follow their plan flawlessly!
THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

154

They perceive opportunities!
They know what an opportunity looks like.
The markets are constantly offering us opportunities!
We are surrounded by potential abundance and opportunities, not pain or fear.
Fear is irrational and almost stupid when one is the “Just do it” mode.
Successful trend followers know when they are in the “just do it” mode.

■ Just Take the Trade Mode
Each trade is a probable event. Statistically it is independent from every other trade,
and investors should simply follow their plan.They perceive the opportunities as a way
to compound their way to wealth over time.
There is no threat of pain or fear.

The Key Is to Be Consistent
Successful trend followers are consistent in their plan and execution. They do
not have any magical indicators nor are they gurus. In simple terms, they have a

plan and focus on executing the plan. In contradiction, the novices put on trades
without any plan. Sometime they work and they make a lot of money. These trades
empower them and at times lead them to trade recklessly. This reckless trading
leads to large unexpected losses.
This is why is trading is so hard to master.
In order to be consistent one must first have a well‐thought‐out plan and even
more so follow it meticulously.
There is no fear, greed, boredom, or even having fun. Trend followers
with a plan “Just Do It,” trend followers focus on execution.
Successful trend followers trade in order to compound money over time. They are
not looking for action or seeking to relieve boredom.
They are consistent.
They do not have to try to be consistent, they are consistent. It all comes naturally.
It just flows. Being consistent is not something that you can try to be, you must be
consistent. You take every trade that your methodology presents you. You do not second guess your methodology. You don’t try to get anything from the market; rather,
you make yourself available for the next opportunity. You take advantage of what the
market is offering you at any particular time.
You stay in the moment and be consistent.
You have accepted the risks when you are consistent.

155
Basically fear will cause you to make more errors and cost you more money. One
cannot avoid losing trades. They are as natural as breathing. You take responsibility
for your actions when you are consistent. There are no limitations or expectations
when you are consistent. You are just putting trades on and saying to yourself “Let’s
see what happens.” I promise you there will be numerous losing trades. As long as
you keep them small, they mean nothing.
One of the overriding issues that I gleaned from the Market Wizards book by Jack
Schwager was not only the profits these unique traders made but the fact that all the
successful traders stressed the need to cut losses and keep all losses small. Sadly, most
traders do not get this message. Many traders are confused about using tight stops or
wide stops or even no stops. There is no exact right answer except the exit stops need to
be thought out ahead of time before one trades. Once one commences trading one needs
to have the stops in place and needs to stick to one’s exact plan and not move the stops.
Stops are used to protect your trading capital. Stops are the basis of risk control.
Risk control is what gives you the strength to stay in the marathon of trading. Taking
small losses is a lot easier on the pocket and the emotions.
Some traders are blinded by greed and only look at the profits. You will not have
profits if you do not manage the risks. On one level I can understand. No one wants
