
1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

115

Champion at yearend 1990 as worth about what we paid, Gillette
as worth somewhat more, and USAir as worth substantially less.
In making the USAir purchase, your Chairman displayed exquisite timing: I plunged into the business at almost the exact moment that it ran into severe problems. (No one pushed me; in
tennis parlance, I committed an "unforced error.") The company's
troubles were brought on both by industry conditions and by the
post-merger difficulties it encountered in integrating Piedmont, an
affliction I should have expected since almost all airline mergers
have been followed by operational turmoil.
In short order, Ed Colodny and Seth Schofield resolved the
second problem: The airline now gets excellent marks for service.
Industry-wide problems have proved to be far more serious. Since
our purchase, the economics of the airline industry have deteriorated at an alarming pace, accelerated by the kamikaze pricing tactics of certain carriers. The trouble this pricing has produced for all
carriers illustrates an important truth: In a business selling a commodity-type product, it's impossible to be a lot smarter than your
dumbest competitor.
However, unless the industry is decimated during the next few
years, our USAir investment should work out all right. Ed and
Seth decisively addressed the current turbulence by making major
changes in operations. Even so, our investment is now less secure
than at the time I made it.
Our convertible preferred stocks are relatively simple securities, yet I should warn you that, if the past is any guide, you may
from time to time read inaccurate or misleading statements about
them. Last year, for example, several members of the press calculated the value of all our preferreds as equal to that of the common
stock into which they are convertible. By their logic, that is, our
Salomon preferred, convertible into common at $38, would be
worth 60% of face value if Salomon common were selling at
$22.80. But there is a small problem with this line of reasoning:
Using it, one must conclude that all of a value of a convertible preferred resides in the conversion privilege and that value of a nonconvertible preferred of Salomon would be zero, no matter what its
coupon or terms for redemption.
The point you should keep in mind is that most of the value of
our convertible preferreds is derived from their fixed-income characteristics. That means the securities cannot be worth less than the
value they would possess as non-convertible preferreds and may be
worth more because of their conversion options.

116

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Berkshire made five private purchases of convertible preferred stocks during the 1987-91 period and the time seems right to
discuss their status.
In each case we had the option of sticking with these preferreds as fixed-income securities or converting them into common
stock. Initially, their value to us came primarily from their fixedincome characteristics. The option we had to convert was a kicker.
Our $300 million private purchase of American Express
"Peres" . . . was a modified form of common stock whose fixedincome characteristics contributed only a minor portion of its initial value. Three years after we bought them, the Peres automatically were converted to common stock. In contrast, [our other
convertible preferred stocks] were set to become common stocks
only if we wished them to-a crucial difference.
When we purchased our convertible securities, I told you that
we expected to earn after-tax returns from them that "moderately"
exceeded what we could earn from the medium-term fixed-income
securities they replaced. We beat this expectation-but only because of the performance of a single issue. I also told you that
these securities, as a group, would "not produce the returns we can
achieve when we find a business with wonderful economic prospects." Unfortunately, that prediction was fulfilled. Finally, I said
that "under almost any conditions, we expect these preferreds to
return us our money plus dividends." That's one I would like to
have back. Winston Churchill once said that "eating my words has
never given me indigestion." My assertion, however, that it was
almost impossible for us to lose money on our preferreds has
caused me some well-deserved heartburn.
Our best holding has been Gillette, which we told you from
the start was a superior business. Ironically, though, this is also the
purchase in which I made my biggest mistake-of a kind, however,
never recognized on financial statements.
We paid $600 million in 1989 for Gillette preferred shares that
were convertible into 48 million (split-adjusted) common shares.
Taking an alternative route with the $600 million, I probably could
have purchased 60 million shares of common from the company.
The market on the common was then about $10.50, and given that
this would have been a huge private placement carrying important
restrictions, I probably could have bought the stock at a discount of
at least 5%. I can't be sure about this, but it's likely that Gillette's

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

117

management would have been just as happy to have Berkshire opt
for common.
But I was far too clever to do that. Instead, for less than two
years, we received some extra dividend income (the difference between the preferred's yield and that of the common), at which
point the company-quite properly-called the issue, moving to do
that as quickly as was possible. If I had negotiated for common
rather than preferred, we would have been better off at yearend
1995 by $625 million, minus the "excess" dividends of about $70
million.
In the case of Champion, the ability of the company to call our
preferred at 115% of cost forced a move out of us last August that
we would rather have delayed. In this instance, we converted our
shares just prior to the pending call and offered them to the company at a modest discount.
Charlie and I have never had a conviction about the paper
industry-actually, I can't remember ever owning the common
stock of a paper producer in my 54 years of investing-so our
choice in August was whether to sell in the market or to the company... , Our Champion capital gain was moderate-about 19%
after tax from a six-year investment-but the preferred delivered
us a good after-tax dividend yield throughout our holding period.
(That said, many press accounts have overstated the after-tax
yields earned by property-casualty insurance companies on dividends paid to them. What the press has failed to take into account
is a change in the tax law that took effect in 1987 and that significantly reduced the dividends received credit applicable to insurers.
For details, see [Part V.H.].)
Our First Empire preferred [was to] be called on March 31,
1996, the earliest date allowable. We are comfortable owning stock
in well-run banks, and we will convert and keep our First Empire
common shares. Bob Wilmers, CEO of the company, is an outstanding banker, and we love being associated with him.
Our other two preferreds have been disappointing, though the
Salomon preferred has modestly outperformed the fixed-income
securities for which it was a substitute. However, the amount of
management time Charlie and I have devoted to this holding has
been vastly greater than its economic significance to Berkshire.
Certainly I never dreamed I would take a new job at age 60-Salomon interim chairman, that is-because of an earlier purchase of a
fixed-income security.

118

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Soon after our purchase of the Salomon preferred in 1987, I
wrote that I had "no special insights regarding the direction or future profitability of investment banking." Even the most charitable commentator would conclude that I have since proved my
point.
To date, our option to convert into Salomon common has not
proven of value. Furthermore, the Dow Industrials have doubled
since I committed to buy the preferred, and the brokerage group
has performed equally as well. That means my decision to go with
Salomon because I saw value in the conversion option must be
graded as very poor. Even so, the preferred has continued under
some trying conditions to deliver as a fixed-income security, and
the 9% dividend is currently quite attractive.
Unless the preferred is converted, its terms require redemption of 20% of the issue on October 31 of each year, 1995-99, and
$140 million of our original $700 million was taken on schedule last
year. (Some press reports labeled this a sale, but a senior security
that matures is not "sold.") Though we did not elect to convert the
preferred that matured last year, we have four more bites at the
conversion apple, and I believe it quite likely that we will yet find
value in our right to convert.

III.

COMMON STOCK

[O]ccasional outbreaks of those two super-contagious diseases, fear and greed, will forever occur in the investment community. The timing of these epidemics will be unpredictable. And the
market aberrations produced by them will be equally unpredictable, both as to duration and degree. Therefore, we never try to
anticipate the arrival or departure of either disease. Our goal is
more modest: we simply attempt to be fearful when others are
greedy and to be greedy only when others are fearful.
As this is written, little fear is visible in Wall Street. Instead,
euphoria prevails-and why not? What could be more exhilarating
than to participate in a bull market in which the rewards to owners
of businesses become gloriously uncoupled from the plodding performances of the businesses themselves. Unfortunately, however,
stocks can't outperform businesses indefinitely.
Indeed, because of the heavy transaction and investment management costs they bear, stockholders as a whole and over the long
term must inevitably underperform the companies they own. If
American business, in aggregate, earns about 12 % on equity annually, investors must end up earning significantly less. Bull markets
can obscure mathematical laws, but they cannot repeal them. 27
A.

The Bane of Trading: Transaction Costs28

It is likely that in a few months Berkshire shares will be traded
on the New York Stock Exchange. Our move there would be
made possible by a new listing rule that the Exchange's Board of
Governors has passed and asked the SEC to approve. If that approval is forthcoming, we expect to apply for a listing, which we
believe will be granted.
Up to now, the Exchange has required newly-listed companies
to have a minimum of 2,000 shareholders who each own 100 shares
or more. The purpose of this rule is to insure that NYSE-listed
companies enjoy the broad investor interest that facilitates an orderly market. The 100-share standard corresponds to the trading
unit ("round lot") for all common stocks now listed on the
Exchange.
Because [in 1988] Berkshire ha[d] relatively few shares outstanding (1,146,642), it [did] not have the number of 100-shares-ormore holders that the Exchange has required. A ten-share holding
27

28

[Introductory paragraph, 1986.]
[Letter dated August 5, 1988 sent to Berkshire shareholders and reprinted 1988.]

119

120

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

of Berkshire, however, represents a significant investment commitment. In fact, ten Berkshire shares have a value greater than that
of 100 shares of any NYSE-listed stock. The Exchange, therefore,
is willing to have Berkshire shares trade in ten-share "round lots."
The Exchange's proposed rule simply changes the 2,000 shareholder minimum from one measured by holders of 100 shares or
more to one measured by holders of a round lot or more. Berkshire can easily meet this amended test.
Charlie Munger, Berkshire's Vice Chairman, and I are delighted at the prospect of listing, since we believe this move will
benefit our shareholders. We have two criteria by which we judge
what marketplace would be best for Berkshire stock. First, we
hope for the stock to consistently trade at a price rationally related
to its intrinsic business value. If it does, the investment result
achieved by each shareholder will approximate Berkshire's business result during his period of ownership.
Such an outcome is far from automatic. Many stocks swing
between levels of severe undervaluation and overvaluation. When
this happens, owners are rewarded or penalized in a manner wildly
at variance with how the business has performed during their period of ownership. We want to avoid such capricious results. Our
goal is to have our shareholder-partners profit from the achievements of the business rather than from the foolish behavior of their
co-owners.
Consistently rational prices are produced by rational owners,
both current and prospective. All of our policies and communications are designed to attract the business-oriented long-term owner
and to filter out possible buyers whose focus is short-term and market-oriented. To date we have been successful in this attempt, and
Berkshire shares have consistently sold in an unusually narrow
range around intrinsic business value. We do not believe that a
NYSE listing will improve or diminish Berkshire's prospects for
consistently selling at an appropriate price; the quality of our
shareholders will produce a good result whatever the marketplace.
But we do believe that the listing will reduce transaction costs
for Berkshire's shareholders-and that is important. Though we
want to attract shareholders who will stay around for a long time,
we also want to minimize the costs incurred by shareholders when
they enter or exit. In the long run, the aggregate pre-tax rewards
to our owners will equal the business gains achieved by the company less the transaction costs imposed by the marketplace-that
is, commissions charged by brokers plus the net realized spreads of

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

121

market-makers. Overall, we believe these transaction costs will be
reduced materially by a NYSE listing.
. . . [T]ransaction costs are very heavy for active stocks, often
mounting to 10% or more of the earnings of a public company. In
effect, these costs act as a hefty tax on owners, albeit one based on
individual decisions to "change chairs" and one that is paid to the
financial community rather than to Washington. Our policies and
your investment attitude have reduced this "tax" on Berkshire
owners to what we believe is the lowest level among large public
companies. A NYSE listing should further reduce this cost for
Berkshire's owners by narrowing the market-maker's spread.
Under NYSE rules we must have at least two independent directors. Among the Board of Directors you elected in May, only
Malcolm Chace, JI. meets their test of independence.
But from this deficiency comes a good result. Charlie and I
are pleased to inform you that Walter Scott, Jr., CEO of the Peter
Kiewit Sons', Inc. has joined the Berkshire board. PKS is one of
the remarkable business stories of our time. The company, which
is employee-owned, has a long-term financial record so good that
I'm not going to recite it for fear of stirring unrest among our
shareholders. Throughout his lifetime, Pete Kiewit ran the company as a strict meritocracy and it was in this tradition that he
picked Walter to succeed him upon his death. Walter instinctively
thinks like an owner and he will feel at home on the Berkshire
board.
One final comment: You should clearly understand that we are
not seeking a NYSE listing for the purpose of achieving a higher
valuation on Berkshire shares. Berkshire should sell, and we hope
will sell, on the NYSE at prices similar to those it would have commanded in the over-the-counter market, given similar economic circumstances. The NYSE listing should not induce you to buy or sell;
it simply should cut your costs somewhat should you decide to do
either.
B. Attracting the Right Sort of Investor29
Berkshire's shares were listed on the [NYSE] on November
29, 1988.... Let me clarify one point not dealt with in the letter
[set forth above]: Though our round lot for trading on the NYSE is
ten shares, any number of shares from one on up can be bought or
sold.
29

[1988.]

122

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

As the [foregoing] letter explains, our primary goal in listing
was to reduce transaction costs, and we believe this goal is being
achieved. Generally, the spread between the bid and asked price
on the NYSE has been well below the spread that prevailed in the
over-the-counter market.
Henderson Brothers, Inc., the specialist in our shares, is the
oldest continuing specialist firm on the Exchange; its progenitor,
William Thomas Henderson, bought his seat for $500 on September 8, 1861. (Recently, seats were selling for about $625,000.)
Among the 54 firms acting as specialists, HBI ranks second in
number of stocks assigned, with 83. We were pleased when Berkshire was allocated to HBI, and have been delighted with the firm's
performance. Jim Maguire, Chairman of HBI, personally manages
the trading in Berkshire, and we could not be in better hands.
In two respects our goals probably differ somewhat from those
of most listed companies. First, we do not want to maximize the
price at which Berkshire shares trade. We wish instead for them to
trade in a narrow range centered at intrinsic business value (which
we hope increases at a reasonable-or, better yet, unreasonablerate). Charlie and I are bothered as much by significant overvaluation as significant undervaluation. Both extremes will inevitably
produce results for many shareholders that will differ sharply from
Berkshire's business results. If our stock price instead consistently
mirrors business value, each of our shareholders will receive an investment result that roughly parallels the business results of Berkshire during his holding period.
Second, we wish for very little trading activity. If we ran a
private business with a few passive partners, we would be disappointed if those partners, and their replacements, frequently
wanted to leave the partnership. Running a public company, we
feel the same way.
Our goal is to attract long-term owners who, at the time of
purchase, have no timetable or price target for sale but plan instead to stay with us indefinitely. We don't understand the CEO
who wants lots of stock activity, for that can be achieved only if
many of his owners are constantly exiting. At what other organization-school, club, church, etc.-do leaders cheer when members
leave? (However if there were a broker whose livelihood depended upon the membership turnover in such organizations, you
could be sure that there would be at least one proponent of activity, as in: "There hasn't been much going on in Christianity for a
while; maybe we should switch to Buddhism next week.")

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

123

Of course, some Berkshire owners will need or want to sell
from time to time, and we wish for good replacements who will pay
them a fair price. Therefore we try, through our policies, performance, and communications, to attract new shareholders who understand our operations, share our time horizons, and measure us as
we measure ourselves. If we can continue to attract this sort of
shareholder-and, just as important, can continue to be uninteresting to those with short-term or unrealistic expectations-Berkshire
shares should consistently sell at prices reasonably related to business value. 30
C.

Dividend Poli cy31

Dividend policy is often reported to shareholders, but seldom
explained. A company will say something like, "Our goal is to pay
out 40% to 50% of earnings and to increase dividends at a rate at
least equal to the rise in the CPI". And that's it-no analysis will
be supplied as to why that particular policy is best for the owners of
the business. Yet, allocation of capital is crucial to business and
investment management. Because it is, we believe managers and
owners should think hard about the circumstances under which
earnings should be retained and under which they should be
distributed.
The first point to understand is that all earnings are not created equal. In many businesses-particularly those that have high
asset/profit ratios-inflation causes some or all of the reported
earnings to become ersatz. The ersatz portion-let's call these
earnings "restricted"-cannot, if the business is to retain its economic position, be distributed as dividends. Were these earnings to
be paid out, the business would lose ground in one or more of the
following areas: its ability to maintain its unit volume of sales, its
long-term competitive position, its financial strength. No matter
how conservative its payout ratio, a company that consistently dis30 [The following is from 1989:]

With more than a year behind him of trading Berkshire's stock on the New York Stock
Exchange, our specialist, Jim Maguire of [RBI] continues his outstanding performance.
Before we listed, dealer spreads often were 3% or more of market price. Jim has maintained the spread at 50 points or less, which at current prices is well under 1%.
hareholders who buy or sell benefit significantly from this reduction in transaction costs.
Because we are delighted by our experience with Jim, RBI and the NYSE, I said as
much in ads that have been run in a series placed by the NYSE. Normally I shun testimonials, but I was pleased in this instance to publicly compliment the Exchange.
31 [1984.]

124

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

tributes restricted earnings is destined for oblivion unless equity
capital is otherwise infused.
Restricted earnings are seldom valueless to owners, but they
often must be discounted heavily. In effect, they are conscripted by
the business, no matter how poor its economic potential. (This retention-no-matter-how-unattractive-the-return situation was communicated unwittingly in a marvelously ironic way by Consolidated
Edison a decade ago. At the time, a punitive regulatory policy was
a major factor causing the company's stock to sell as low as onefourth of book value: i.e., every time a dollar of earnings was retained for reinvestment in the business, that dollar was transformed into only 25¢ of market value. But, despite this gold-intolead process, most earnings were reinvested in the business rather
than paid to owners. Meanwhile, at construction and maintenance
sites throughout New York, signs proudly proclaimed the corporate slogan, "Dig We Must".)
Restricted earnings need not concern us further in this dividend discussion. Let's turn to the much-more-valued unrestricted
variety. These earnings may, with equal feasibility, be retained or
distributed. In our opinion, management should choose whichever
course makes greater sense for the owners of the business.
This principle is not universally accepted. For a number of
reasons managers like to withhold unrestricted, readily distributable earnings from shareholders-to expand the corporate empire
over which the managers rule, to operate from a position of exceptional financial comfort, etc. But we believe there is only one valid
reason for retention. Unrestricted earnings should be retained
only when there is a reasonable prospect-backed preferably by
historical evidence or, when appropriate, by a thoughtful analysis
of the future-that for every dollar retained by the corporation, at
least one dollar of market value will be created for owners. This will
happen only if the capital retained produces incremental earnings
equal to, or above, those generally available to investors.
To illustrate, let's assume that an investor owns a risk-free
10% perpetual bond with one very unusual feature. Each year the
investor can elect either to take his 10% coupon in cash, or to reinvest the coupon in more 10% bonds with identical terms: i.e., a
perpetual life and coupons offering the same cash-or-reinvest options. If, in any given year, the prevailing interest rate on longterm, risk-free bonds is 5%, it would be foolish for the investor to
take his coupon in cash since the 10% bonds he could instead
choose would be worth considerably more than 100¢ on the dollar.
