
“The Big Arms book didn’t do me much good.”

12
Silent Sales
Washington, D.C. • 1945–1947

That August, while the Buffetts were back in Omaha, the United States dropped two atomic bombs on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki; on September 2, Japan formally surrendered. The war was over. Americans
celebrated in near hysteria. But Warren recalls that he quickly started thinking through the next chess moves
after the dropping of the bombs.
“I didn’t know anything about physics. But I knew you could kill a couple of hundred thousand people if
you were the first one to use the bomb in a war. It’s as if I run into some guy in a dark alley, and I’ve got a
cannon, but he’s got a gun. If he’s willing to pull the trigger and I have some moral compunction against
doing it, he wins. Einstein said right away, ‘This has changed everything in the world except how men
think.’ It put a fuse to the end of the world. Now, it may be a long fuse, and there may be ways to interrupt
it, but once that metaphorical bomb has a dozen fuses all burning, the problem becomes a different sort of
thing than if no fuse is lit. I was only fourteen, but it seemed to me just totally clear what was going to
happen, and it has happened to quite a degree.”
A few weeks later, with the family back in Washington, Warren returned to finish tenth grade at Woodrow
Wilson High School, at fifteen still a kid but now also a businessman. He was making so much money
throwing papers that he had accumulated more than $2,000. Howard had let his son invest in Builders Supply
Co., a hardware store that he and Carl Falk were opening next to the feed store back in Omaha.1 Meanwhile,
Warren himself had bought a forty-acre farm for $1,200 about seventy miles away, near Walthill, in Thurston
County, Nebraska.2 A tenant farmer worked the farm and they shared the profits—just the kind of
arrangement Warren liked, with someone else doing the sweaty, boring work. Warren began introducing
himself to people in high school as Warren Buffett from Nebraska, who owned a tenant farm back in the
Midwest.3
He thought like a businessman but did not look like one. He fit uncomfortably into the high school crowd,
showing up with the same tattered sneakers and droopy socks peeking out from under baggy trousers day
after day, skinny neck and narrow shoulders swallowed inside his shirt. If forced into dress shoes, he wore
startling yellow or white socks above the scuffed leather. He seemed to squirm in his seat all the time.
Sometimes he looked shy, almost innocent. At others, he wore a sharp, tough expression.
Doris and Warren ignored each other if their paths crossed in the halls of high school. “Doris, who was very
popular, was particularly ashamed of me, because I dressed terribly. Sometimes your sister would help you
get socialized but I rejected that, basically. It wasn’t her fault; I was painfully aware of being socially
maladjusted. I may just have felt so hopeless.”
Warren’s stone-faced, smart-aleck act covered up the feelings of inadequacy that had made his life so
difficult since leaving Omaha. He desperately wanted to be normal, but still felt very much the outsider.
He was “hesitant,” said classmate Norma Thurston, his friend Don Danly’s girlfriend, “and he chose his
words carefully and never made any commitment, however small, if he thought he might have to take it
back.”4

Many of his classmates plunged enthusiastically into teenage life, joining fraternities and sororities, getting
pinned, and going to parties in their families’ basements where they served soda pop, hot dogs, and ice cream
and then turned the lights down while everybody necked. Instead of necking, Warren rubber-necked. He had
a regular Saturday night reservation with Lou Battistone at Jimmy Lake’s theater, a local burlesque joint,
where they had a fantasy flirtation with one of the dancers, Kitty Lyne. Warren would roar with laughter
when a comedian took a pratfall or the second banana in the balcony started heckling him.5 He spent
twenty-five dollars on a 1920s-style raccoon coat. When he wore it down to Jimmy Lake’s, the bouncer told
him, “No clowning around, you guys. Either take that coat off, or you can’t come in.”6 He took it off.
The side of Warren that had robbed Sears blind was in transition: fading, but not gone. He and Danly still
took the occasional five-finger discount at Sears. When his teachers told him they had most of their
retirement savings in AT&T stock, he shorted it, then showed them the trade tickets to give them heartburn.
“I was a pain in the ass,” he says.7
His exceptional powers of reasoning and smart-aleck tendencies combined into a talent for taking perverse
stands. Somehow, probably because he was the son of a Congressman, he wound up appearing on a radio
program on January 3, 1946. CBS “American School of the Air” brought its program to WTOP, the local
station owned by the Washington Post. On that Saturday morning, Warren went down to the station, where
he and four other kids sat around a microphone and debated as “Congress in Session.”
The show’s hostess assigned him the job of spicing up the debate. He argued convincingly in favor of
absurdities—ideas on the order of eliminating income taxes or annexing Japan. “When they wanted someone
to take a crazy position,” he says, “I did it.” But while he relished argument for its own sake, his clever
retorts, lightning-fast counterarguments, and general contrariness hindered his quest to be liked by his peers.
Until now, Warren’s efforts to get along with people had had mixed results. He charmed adults, except for his
teachers. He felt ill at ease with his peers, but had always managed to make a few close friends. He
desperately wanted people to like him and especially not to attack him personally. He wanted a system. In
fact, he already had one, but he wasn’t using the system to its full effect. Now, lacking any other resources,
he began to work harder at it.
Warren had found this system at his grandfather’s house, where he read everything he could get his hands on
at a blazing pace, just as he did at home. Browsing the bookshelf in the back bedroom, he had consumed
every issue of the Progressive Grocer and every single copy of the Daily Nebraskan that had been edited by
his father, and worked his way like a boll weevil through all fifteen years of the Reader’s Digest that Ernest
had accumulated. This bookcase also held a series of small biographies, many of them on business leaders.
Since a young age Warren had studied the lives of men like Jay Cooke, Daniel Drew, Jim Fisk, Cornelius
Vanderbilt, Jay Gould, John D. Rockefeller, and Andrew Carnegie. Some of these books he read and reread.
One of them was special—not a biography but a paperback written by former salesman Dale Carnegie,8
enticingly titled How to Win Friends and Influence People. He had discovered it at age eight or nine.
Warren knew he needed to win friends, and he wanted to influence people. He opened the book. It hooked
him from the first page. “If you want to gather honey,” it began, “don’t kick over the beehive.”9
Criticism is futile, said Carnegie.
Rule number one: Don’t criticize, condemn, or complain.
This idea riveted Warren. Criticism was something he knew everything about.
Criticism puts people on the defensive, Carnegie said, and makes them strive to justify themselves. It is
dangerous, because it wounds people’s precious pride, hurts their sense of importance, and arouses
resentment. Carnegie advocated avoiding confrontation. “People don’t want criticism. They want honest and
sincere appreciation.” I am not talking about flattery, Carnegie said. Flattery is insincere and selfish.

Appreciation is sincere and comes from the heart. The deepest urge in human nature is “the desire to be
important.”10
Although “don’t criticize” was the most important, there were thirty rules in all.
Everybody wants attention and admiration. Nobody wants to be criticized.
The sweetest sound in the English language is the sound of a person’s own name.
The only way to get the best of an argument is to avoid it.
If you are wrong, admit it quickly and emphatically.
Ask questions instead of giving direct orders.
Give the other person a fine reputation to live up to.
Call attention to people’s mistakes indirectly. Let the other person save face.
I am talking about a new way of life, Carnegie said. I am talking about a new way of life.
Warren’s heart lifted. He thought he had found the truth. This was a system. He felt so disadvantaged socially
that he needed a system to sell himself to people, a system he could learn once and use without having to
respond in a new way to each changing situation.
But it took numbers to prove that it actually worked. He decided to do a statistical analysis of what happened
if he did follow Dale Carnegie’s rules, and what happened if he didn’t. He tried giving attention and
appreciation, and he tried doing nothing or being disagreeable. People around him did not know he was
performing experiments on them in the silence of his own head, but he watched how they responded. He kept
track of his results. Filled with a rising joy, he saw what the numbers proved: The rules worked.
Now he had a system. He had a set of rules.
But it did you no good to read about the rules. You had to live them. I am talking about a new way of life,
said Carnegie.
Warren began to practice. He started at a very elementary level. Some of it came naturally to him, but he
found that this system could not be applied in an automatic and easy manner. “Don’t criticize” sounded
simple, but there were ways to criticize without even realizing it. It was hard not to show off, not to display
annoyance and impatience. And admitting you were wrong was easy sometimes and very difficult at other
times. Giving people attention and sincere appreciation and admiration was one of the hardest. Someone sunk
in misery much of the time, as Warren was, found it hard to focus on others, not himself.
Nevertheless, he gradually worked out for himself that the dark years of junior high were living proof that
ignoring Dale Carnegie’s rules didn’t work. As he started to gain his footing in high school, he continued to
practice the rules in encounters with others.
Unlike most people who read Carnegie’s book and thought, gee, that makes sense, then set the book aside
and forgot about it, Warren worked at this project with unusual concentration; he kept coming back to these
ideas and using them. Even when he failed and forgot and went for long stretches without applying himself to
the system, he returned and resumed practicing in the end. By high school, he had accumulated a few more
friends, joined the Woodrow Wilson golf team, and managed to make himself inoffensive if not popular. Dale
Carnegie had honed his natural wit; above all, it enhanced his persuasiveness, his flair for salesmanship.
He seemed intense, yet with an impish side; even-tempered and congenial, yet somehow solitary. Certainly
his passion for making money—which occupied most of his spare time—made him unique at Woodrow

Wilson.
No one else in high school was a businessman. Just from pitching newspapers a couple of hours a day, he was
earning $175 a month, more money than his teachers. In 1946, a grown man felt well paid if he made $3,000
a year for full-time work.11 Warren kept his money in a chifforobe at home, which no one but he was
allowed to touch. “I was in his house one day,” says Lou Battistone, “and he opened up a drawer and said,
‘This is what I’ve been saving.’ And he had seven hundred dollars in small bills. That’s a big stack, let me tell
you.”12
He had started several new businesses. Buffett’s Golf Balls peddled refurbished golf balls for six bucks a
dozen.13 These he ordered from a fellow in Chicago named Witek, whom Warren couldn’t resist nicknaming
“Half-Witek.” “They were classy balls, really good golf balls too, Titleist and Spalding Dots and Maxflis,
which I bought for three and a half bucks a dozen. They looked brand-new. He probably got them the way
we first tried to get them, out of water traps, only he was better.” Nobody at school knew about Half-Witek.
Even his family didn’t seem to realize that he bought the used golf balls that he and his friend Don Danly
were selling. Fellow members of the Wilson golf team thought he fished them out of water traps.14
Buffett’s Approval Service sold sets of collectible stamps to collectors out of state. Buffett’s Showroom
Shine was a car-buffing business that he and Battistone ran out of Lou’s father’s used-car lot, until they
abandoned this because it involved manual labor and turned out to be too damn much work.15
Then one day when Warren was seventeen and a senior, he raced to tell Don Danly about a new idea. It had
the same exponential quality to it as the weighing machines from One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000
—where one machine could pay for another and another. “I bought this old pinball machine for twenty-five
bucks,” he said, “and we can have a partnership. Your part of the deal is to fix it up.16 And, lookit, we’ll tell
Frank Erico, the barber, ‘We represent Wilson’s Coin-Operated Machine Company, and we have a
proposition from Mr. Wilson. It’s at no risk to you. Let’s put this nickel machine in the back, Mr. Erico, and
your customers can play while they wait. And we’ll split the money.’”17
Danly was game. Although no one had ever put pinball machines in barbershops before, they presented their
proposition to Mr. Erico, who bit. The boys took the legs off the pinball machine, put it in Don’s father’s car,
and hauled it over to Mr. Erico’s barbershop, where they installed it. Sure enough, the very first evening,
when Warren and Don came back to check, “Gee zip!” Warren said—four bucks’ worth of nickels had
found their way into the machine. Mr. Erico was delighted, and the pinball machine stayed.18
After a week, Warren emptied the machine and scooped the nickels into two piles. “Mr. Erico,” he said,
“let’s not bother going one for you, one for me. Just pick the pile you want.”19 It was like the old-fashioned
way of dividing cake: one child cuts, the other child chooses. After Mr. Erico swept one pile over toward his
side of the table, Warren counted out the other and found $25 in his pile. That was enough to buy another
pinball machine. Pretty soon, seven or eight of “Mr. Wilson’s” pinball machines were sitting in barbershops
around town. Warren had discovered the miracle of capital: money that works for its owner, as if it had a job
of its own.
“You had to get along with the barbers. That was crucial. I mean, these guys could all go buy these
machines for twenty-five bucks themselves. So we would always convince them that it took someone with a
four-hundred IQ to repair pinball machines.
“Now, there were some pretty unsavory characters in the pinball business, and they all hung out at a place
called Silent Sales. That was our hunting ground. Silent Sales was in the 900 block of D Street, right near
the Gayety burlesque house on the seedy side of downtown. These characters at Silent Sales were amused
by us, sort of. Danly and I would go down there, and we’d look at these machines and buy whatever we
could for twenty-five bucks. New machines cost about three hundred dollars. I used to subscribe to
Billboard magazine in those days to keep track of what was going on in pinball machines.

“The guys at Silent Sales taught us some things. There were some illegal slot machines around. And they
showed us how to pour beer into them to make a fifty-cent piece get stuck in the mechanism, and you could
just keep pulling the handle until it paid. They showed us how to disable the electric cutoff for the
coin-operated soda machines at the movie theaters so if you stuck a nickel in, then immediately pulled the
plug, you could empty the whole machine.
“These guys would explain all this stuff to us and we’d just eat it up.
“My dad probably suspected the kind of characters we were hanging out with. But he always felt I’d turn
out okay.”
Warren and Don were already making good money with single pinball machines in barbershops, but then they
found a gold mine. “Our home run of all time was down near Griffith Stadium, which is the old baseball
park.” In the middle of Washington’s worst slums, they found “a seven-chair black barbershop. There were
a lot of dudes down there. After we put a pinball machine in, we would come back to collect, and these guys
had drilled holes in the bottom of the machine and rigged the tilt mechanism. It was a real contest of wills.
But that was our mother lode, our best location by far. The guys who played at these barbershops were
constantly imploring us to adjust the tilt mechanism so you could shove the machine harder without making
it tilt.
“Listen, we were not judgmental about our customers.” If anything, they were probably trying to pick up
more ideas like the scams the guys at Silent Sales had taught them, and those they were inventing on their
own. “One time we were down in Danly’s basement playing with my coin collection. To make collecting on
the paper route more interesting, I used to collect different kinds of coins. So I had these Whitman coin
boards with slots for the coins. I said to Don, ‘It looks to me like we could take these coin boards and use
them as molds for casting slugs.’
“Danly was the brains of the operation. And so, sure enough, he learned how to pour these molds for
casting slugs, and I supplied the coin boards. We would try to use the slugs for vending machines for soda
pop and things like that. Our basic formula was to have our income in currency and our outgo in slugs.
“One time, Danly’s father came down in the basement and said, ‘What are you boys doing?’
“We were pouring metal into these things. And it was, ‘We’re doing this experiment for school, Dad.’ We
were always doing experiments for school.”
At school, however, Warren mostly liked to talk about his businesses—not his scams—and by the spring
semester, near the end of high school, his raconteuring had turned him and Don into a minor legend around
Woodrow Wilson.
“Everybody knew we had the pinball-machine business, and everybody kind of knew we were raking it in.
We probably exaggerated too when we told them. And so people wanted in on it. It was like stocks.”
One of them was a boy named Bob Kerlin—an intense kid who played on the golf team with Warren.20 He
and Don weren’t open to letting anyone in on their pinball business, but they did have a plan for using Kerlin
for their newest venture. “We had given up stealing the golf balls from Sears, but we got this idea that we
were going to retrieve lost golf balls from the lakes on golf courses around Washington. And now we saw a
position for Kerlin, because neither one of us wanted to retrieve the golf balls.”
They created an elaborate scenario for how Kerlin would do this. It bordered on an evil prank, but school was
out in a couple of months, so what the hell.
“We went down again to Ninth and D, where the army surplus store was located, right by Silent Sales, and
bought a gas mask. And then we got this garden hose and we hooked them up and tested this thing in a
bathtub by putting our faces in three inches of water.”

Doing what he called his Tom Sawyer routine, Warren said to Kerlin: “‘This is your chance. We’re going to
deal you in.’ We told him that we would go out at four in the morning to some golf course in Virginia, and
that he would wear the gas mask in the lake and retrieve the balls, and we’d split the money three ways.
“Kerlin said, ‘How do I stay down on the bottom?’ I said, ‘Oh, I’ve got that all worked out. What we will do
is, you’ll strip, and you’ll be nude, but you’ll wear my Washington Post newspaper bag, and we’ll put
barbell plates in the newspaper bag so that you’ll stay on the bottom.’
“So we went out to this golf course, and all the way Kerlin was expressing some doubt. And Danly and I
said, ‘Have we ever failed? I mean, you’re looking at a couple of guys…if you want to quit now, okay, but,
you know, you’re not in any future deals.’
“So we got out there at the crack of dawn. Kerlin was stripped, and we were dressed warmly. He was totally
nude with a Washington Post newspaper bag on and all these barbell plates, and he started wading into the
lake. Of course, he didn’t know if he was stepping on snakes or golf balls or whatever. And then he got
down and when he tugged on the rope, we pulled him back up. He said, ‘I can’t see anything.’ We said,
‘Don’t worry about seeing anything, just grope around.’ And he started to go back down.
“But before his head went under, this truck came over the rise, carrying the guy that’s going to fill up sand
traps in the morning. He saw us and drove up, saying, ‘What are you kids doing?’ Danly and I were
thinking fast. ‘We’re conducting an experiment for our high school physics class, sir.’ Kerlin was nodding
the whole time. So we had to get him out of the pond. The whole thing blew up on us.”21
Whatever happened to poor Kerlin, and however nude he actually was, a watered-down version of this story
got around. It would be the last great Tom Sawyering of Warren’s high school career.
By now, however, he had made a small fortune: a glistening $5,000 heap, sticky with the newsprint from
throwing more than five hundred thousand newspapers. Newsprint snowflakes made up more than half his
snowball. Rich as he was, however, Warren meant to keep that snowball rolling.*8

13
The Rules of the Racetrack
Omaha and Washington, D.C. • 1940s

Warren’s Dale Carnegie tests of behavior were handicapping: a mathematical experiment on human nature.
The data he collected gave him the odds that Carnegie was right.
This way of thinking was an extension of his childhood hobby of calculating the odds on the life expectancies
of hymn composers. But his interest in longevity was no mere abstraction. Ernest Buffett, to whom Warren
was extremely attached, had died in September 1946 at age sixty-nine, while the family was in Omaha
campaigning for Howard’s third term. Warren was sixteen. Of his four grandparents, only Stella, age seventythree, remained alive, confined in the Norfolk State Hospital. Long before Ernest’s death, Warren had been
preoccupied with his own lifespan; these latest family events did nothing to ease his mind about either
longevity or insanity. Warren’s passion for handicapping, however, extended to many other subjects, and in
an embryonic form had started much earlier—well before he even knew the meaning of the term—back
when he was a little kid with marbles and license plates and bottle caps and a fingerprint kit for nuns.
The art of handicapping is based on information. The key was having more information than the other
guy—then analyzing it right and using it rationally. Warren had first put this into practical use as a child down
