
The secondary, or intermediate, trend represents correc-
tions in the primary trend and usually lasts three weeks to three
months. These intermediate corrections generally retrace between
one-third and two-thirds of the previous trend movement and
most frequently about half, or 50%, of the previous move.

According to Dow, the minor (or near term) trend usually
lasts less than three weeks. This near term trend represents fluc-
tuations in the intermediate trend. We will discuss trend concepts
in greater detail in Chapter 4, “Basic Concepts of Trends,” where
you will see that we continue to use the same basic concepts and
terminology today.

3. Major Trends Have Three Phases.

Dow focused his attention on primary or major trends, which he
felt usually take place in three distinct phases: an accumulation
phase, a public participation phase, and a distribution phase. The
accumulation phase represents informed buying by the most
astute investors. If the previous trend was down, then at this
point these astute investors recognize that the market has assimi-
lated all the so-called “bad” news. The public participation phase,
where most technical trend-followers begin to participate, occurs
when prices begin to advance rapidly and business news
improves. The distribution phase takes place when newspapers
begin to print increasingly bullish stories; when economic news is
better than ever; and when speculative volume and public partic-
ipation increase. During this last phase the same informed
investors who began to “accumulate” near the bear market bot-
tom (when no one else wanted to buy) begin to “distribute”
before anyone else starts selling.


Dow Theory 27

Students of Elliott Wave Theory will recognize this divi-
sion of a major bull market into three distinct phases. R. N.
Elliott elaborated upon Rhea’s work in Dow Theory, to recognize
that a bull market has three major, upward movements. In
Chapter 13, “Elliott Wave Theory,” we'll show the close similari-
ty between Dow’s three phases of a bull market and the five wave
Elliott sequence.

4. The Averages Must Confirm Each Other.

Dow, in referring to the Industrial and Rail Averages, meant that
no important bull or bear market signal could take place unless
both averages gave the same signal, thus confirming each other.
He felt that both averages must exceed a previous secondary peak
to confirm the inception or continuation of a bull market. He did
not believe that the signals had to occur simultaneously, but rec-
ognized that a shorter length of time between the two signals pro-
vided stronger confirmation. When the two’ averages diverged
from one another, Dow assumed that the prior trend was still
maintained. (Elliott Wave Theory only requires that signals be
generated in a single average.) Chapter 6, “Continuation
Patterns,” will cover the key concepts of confirmation and diver-
gence. (See Figures 2.1 and 2.2.)

5. Volume Must Confirm the Trend.

Dow recognized volume as a secondary but important factor in
confirming price signals. Simply stated, volume should expand or
increase in the direction of the major trend. In a major uptrend, vol-
ume would then increase as prices move higher, and diminish as
prices fall. In a downtrend, volume should increase as prices drop
and diminish as they rally. Dow considered volume a secondary
indicator. He based his actual buy and sell signals entirely on clos-
ing prices. In Chapter 7, “Volume and Open Interest,” we'll cover
the subject of volume and build on Dow’s ideas. Today’s sophisti-
cated volume indicators help determine whether volume is
increasing or falling off. Savvy traders then compare this infor-
mation to price action to see if the two are confirming each other.


28 Chapter 2

01/19/79 (*DWI X) Dow Industrials 02/27/98

Dow Theory at Work
7000

Dow Transports

Dow industrials

1000

‘oo br 2 bs eas see
WE Vaan Praal

Figure 2.1 A long term view of the Dow Theory at work. For a major
bull trend to continue, both the Dow Industrials and the Dow Transports
must advance together.

6. A Trend Is Assumed to Be in Effect Until
It Gives Definite Signals That It Has
Reversed.

This tenet, which we touched upon in Chapter 1, forms much of
the foundation of modern trend-following approaches. It relates a
physical law to market movement, which states that an object in
motion (in this case a trend) tends to continue in motion until
some external force causes it to change direction. A number of
technical tools are available to traders to assist in the difficult task
of spotting reversal signals, including the study of support and
resistance levels, price patterns, trendlines, and moving averages.
Some indicators can provide even earlier warning signals of loss of
momentum. Ali of that not withstanding, the odds usually favor
that the existing trend will continue.


Dow Theory 29

03/17/94 ("DWI X) Dow Industrials 02/27/98

Dow Theory Confirmations ecco

2
Ww -7000
Dow Industrials
1 +6000
‘
Transports 6000
+4000
amen a ade a

Figure 2.2 Examples of two Dow Theory confirmations. At the start of
1997 (point 1), the Dow Transports confirmed the earlier breakout in the
Industrials. The following May (point 2), the Dow Industrials confirmed the
earlier new high in the Transports.

The most difficult task for a Dow theorist, or any trend-fol-
lower for that matter, is being able to distinguish between a normal
secondary correction in an existing trend and the first leg of anew
trend in the opposite direction. Dow theorists often disagree as to
when the market gives an actual reversal signal. Figures 2.3a and
2.3b show how this disagreement manifests itself.

Figures 2.3a and 2.3b illustrate two different market sce-
narios. In Figure 2.3a, notice that the rally at point C is lower
than the previous peak at A. Price then declines below point B.
The presence of these two lower peaks and two lower troughs
gives a clear-cut sell signal at the point where the low at B is bro-
ken (point S). This reversal pattern is sometimes referred to as a
“failure swing.”


30 Chapter 2

Figure 2.3a Failure Swing. Figure 2.3b Nonfailure Swing. Notice
The failure of the peak atC to _ that C exceeds A before falling below B.

overcome A, followed by the Some Dow theorists would see a “sell” sig-
violation of the low at B, con- nal at S1, while others would need to see a
Stitutes a “sell” signal at S. lower high at E before turning bearish at S2.

In Figure 2.3b, the rally top at C is higher than the previous
peak at A. Then price declines below point B. Some Dow theorists
would not consider the clear violation of support, at S1, to be a
bona fide sell signal. They would point out that only lower lows
exist in this case, but not lower highs. They would prefer to see a
rally to point E which is lower than point C. Then they would look
for another new low under point D. To them, $2 would represent
the actual sell signal with two lower highs and two lower lows.

The reversal pattern shown in Figure 2.3b is referred to as a
“nonfailure swing.” A failure swing (shown in Figure 2.3a) is a
much weaker pattern than the nonfailure swing in Figure 2.3b.
Figures 2.4a and 2.4b show the same scenarios at a market bottom.

THE USE OF CLOSING PRICES AND
THE PRESENCE OF LINES

Dow relied exclusively on closing prices. He believed that averages
had to close higher than a previous peak or lower than a previous
trough to have significance. Dow did not consider intraday pene-
trations valid.


Dow Theory 31

Figure 2.4a_ Failure Swing Figure 2.4b Nonfailure Swing
Bottom. The “buy” signal takes place Bottom. “Buy” signals occur at points
when point B is exceeded (at B1). Bi or B2.

When traders speak of lines in the averages, they are refer-
ring to horizontal patterns that sometimes occur on the charts.
These sideways trading ranges usually play the role of corrective
phases and are usually referred to as consolidations. In more mod-
ern terms, we might refer to such lateral patterns as “rectangles.”

SOME CRITICISMS OF
DOW THEORY

Dow Theory has done well over the years in identifying major
bull and bear markets, but has not escaped criticism. On average,
Dow Theory misses 20 to 25% of a move before generating a sig-
nal. Many traders consider this to be too late. A Dow Theory buy
signal usually occurs in the second phase of an uptrend as price
penetrates a previous intermediate peak. This is also, incidentally,
about where most trend-following technical systems begin to
identify and participate in existing trends.

In response to this criticism, traders must remember that
Dow never intended to anticipate trends; rather he sought to rec-
ognize the emergence of major bull and bear markets and to cap-
ture the large middle portion of important market moves.


32 Chapter 2

Available records suggest that Dow’s Theory has performed that
function reasonably well. From 1920 to 1975, Dow Theory signals
captured 68% of the moves in the Industrial and Transportation
Averages and 67% of those in the S&P 500 Composite Index
(Source: Barron’s). Those who criticize Dow Theory for failing to
catch actual market tops and bottoms lack a basic understanding
of the trend-following philosophy.

STOCKS AS ECONOMIC
INDICATORS

Dow apparently never intended to use his theory to forecast the
direction of the stock market. He felt its real value was to use stock
market direction as a barometric reading of general business con-
ditions. We can only marvel at Dow’s vision and genius. In addi-
tion to formulating a great deal of today’s price forecasting
methodology, he was among the first to recognize the usefulness
of stock market averages as a leading economic indicator.

DOW THEORY APPLIED TO
FUTURES TRADING

Dow’s work considered the behavior of stock averages. While
most of that original work has significant application to com-
modity futures, there are some important distinctions between
stock and futures trading. For one thing, Dow assumed that most
investors follow only the major trends and would use intermedi-
ate corrections for timing purposes only. Dow considered the
minor or near term trends to be unimportant. Obviously, this is
not the case in futures trading in which most traders who follow
trends trade the intermediate instead of the major trend. These
traders must pay a great deal of attention to minor swings for
timing purposes. If a futures trader expected an intermediate
uptrend to last for a couple of months, he or she would look for
short term dips to signal purchases. In an intermediate down-
trend, the trader would use minor bounces to signal short sales.
The minor trend, therefore, becomes extremely important in
futures trading.


Dow Theory 33

NEW WAYS TO TRADE THE
DOW AVERAGES

For the first 100 years of its existence, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average could only be used as a market indicator. That all changed
on October 6, 1997 when futures and options began trading on
Dow’s venerable average for the first time. The Chicago Board of
Trade launched a futures contract on the Dow Jones Industrial
Average, while options on the Dow (symbol: DJX) started trading at
the Chicago Board Options Exchange. In addition, options were also
launched on the Dow Jones Transportation Average (symbol: DjTA)
and the Dow Jones Utility Index (symbol: DJUA). In January 1998, the
American Stock Exchange started trading the Diamonds Trust, a unit
investment trust that mimics the 30 Dow industrials. In addition, two
mutual funds were offered based on the 30 Dow benchmark. Mr.
Dow would probably be happy to know that, a century after their
creation, it would now be possible to trade his Dow averages, and
actually put his Dow Theory into practice.

CONCLUSION

This chapter presented a relatively quick review of the more
important aspects of the Dow Theory. It will become clear, as you
continue through this book, that an understanding and apprecia-
tion of Dow Theory provides a solid foundation for any study of
technical analysis. Much of what is discussed in the following
chapters represents some adaptation of Dow’s original theory. The
standard definition of a trend, the classification of a trend into
three categories and phases, the principles of confirmation and
divergence, the interpretation of volume, and the use of percent-
age retracements (to name a few), all derive, in one way or anoth-
er, from Dow Theory.

In addition to the sources already cited in this chapter, an
excellent review of the principles of Dow Theory can be found in
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (Edwards & Magee).


Chart Construction

INTRODUCTION

This chapter is primarily intended for those readers who are unfa-
miliar with bar chart construction. We'll begin by discussing the
different types of charts available and then turn our focus to the
most commonly used chart—the daily bar chart. We'll look at how
the price data is read and plotted on the chart. Volume and open
interest are also included in addition to price. We'll then look at
other variations of the bar chart, including longer range weekly and
monthly charts. Once that has been completed, we'll be ready to
start looking at some of the analytical tools applied to that chart
in the following chapter. Those readers already familiar with the
charts themselves might find this chapter too basic. Feel free to
move on to the next chapter.

35


36 Chapter 3

TYPES OF CHARTS AVAILABLE

The daily bar chart has already been acknowledged as the most
widely used type of chart in technical analysis. There are, how-
ever, other types of charts also used by technicians, such as line
charts, point and figure charts, and more recently, candlesticks.
Figure 3.1 shows a standard daily bar chart. It’s called a bar chart
because each day's range is represented by a vertical bar. The bar
chart shows the open, high, low, and closing prices. The tic to the
right of the vertical bar is the closing price. The opening price is
the tic to the left of the bar.

Figure 3.2 shows what the same market looks like on a line
chart. In the line chart, only the closing price is plotted for each
successive day. Many chartists believe that because the closing
price is the most critical price of the trading day, a line (or close-
only) chart is a more valid measure of price activity.

07/15/97 (INTC) Intel Corp - “02/27/98
|
| Daily Bar Chart “700

It yal
| i ai oe a
I \ Open
Hy Low
in fw " HS
i We

70

‘Oct Nov | Dec 8 Feb
7 WOR 1:10pm Priniad ining TradeStation © Omege Revewch, Inc 1957

Figure 3.1 A daily bar chart of Intel. Each vertical bar represents one
day’s action.


Chart Construction 37

__(INTC) Intel Corp

07/15/97

Daily Line Chart

|70

—_
L Bq __ "Se 06a parc ETE

Figure 3.2 A line chart of Intel. This type of chart produces a solid line
by connecting the successive closing prices.

A third type of chart, the point and figure chart, is shown
in Figure 3.3. Notice here that the point and figure chart shows
the same price action but in a more compressed format. Notice
the alternating column of x’s and o’s. The x columns show rising
prices and the o columns, declining prices. Buy and sell signals are
more precise and easier to spot on the point and figure chart than
on the bar chart. This type of chart also has a lot more flexibility.
Chapter 11 covers point and figure charts.

CANDLESTICKS

Candlestick charts are the Japanese version of bar charting and
have become very popular in recent years among western
chartists. The Japanese candlestick records the same four prices as
the traditional bar chart—the open, the close, the high, and the


38 Chapter 3

07/17/97 (INTC) Intel Corp 02/26/98

Point & Figure Chart

‘mo

1
(1997-72882 ga? e106 100 toe 14031171 Hed 125126. 1998 mg |
. 307 1 in Pred i Yanan © Oo Resch, 1087

Figure 3.3 A point and figure chart of Intel. Notice the alternating columns
of x’s and o’s. The x column shows rising prices. The o column shows falling
prices. Buy and sell signals are more precise on this type of chart.

low. The visual presentation differs however. On the candlestick
chart, a thin line (called the shadow) shows the day’s price range
from the high to the low. A wider portion of the bar (called the
real body) measures the distance between the open and the close.
If the close is higher than the open, the real body is white (posi-
tive). If the close is lower than the open, the real body is black
(negative). (See Figure 3.4.)

The key to candlestick charts is the relationship between
the open and the close. Possibly because of the growing popular-
ity of candlesticks, western chartists now pay a lot more attention
to the opening tic on their bar charts. You can do everything with
a candlestick chart that you can do with a bar chart. In other
words, all the technical tools and indicators we'll be showing you
for the bar chart can also be used on candlesticks. We'll show you
a bit later in the chapter how to construct bar charts for weekly


Chart Construction 39

_ "~~ (INTC) intel Corp 01/29/98

jl
| 100 |
me |

too |

a a) (od Nee

bec 88 ass
~ "Fea rape Prnied using TradeSiation © Omege Resaarch. toc, iser

Figure 3.4 A candlestick chart of Intel. The color of the candlestick is
determined by the relationship between the open and the close. White can-
dlesticks are positive, while black candlesticks are negative.

and monthly periods. You can do the same with candlesticks.
Chapter 12, “Japanese Candlesticks,” provides a more thorough
explanation of candlestick charting.

ARITHMETIC VERSUS
LOGARITHMIC SCALE

Charts can be plotted using arithmetic or logarithmic price scales.
For some types of analysis, particularly for very long range trend
analysis, there may be some advantage to using logarithmic
charts. (See Figures 3.5 and 3.6.) Figure 3.5 shows what the differ-
ent scales would look like. On the arithmetic scale, the vertical
price scale shows an equal distance for each price unit of change.
Notice in this example that each point on the arithmetic scale is
equidistant. On the log scale, however, note that the percentage


40 Chapter 3

increases get smaller as the price
Logarithmi : :
Arithmetic Togeriihmic | scale increases. The distance from

on 10-— points 1 to 2 is the same as the dis-
ot a tance from points 5 to 10 because

7H they both represent the same dou-

s- 6 bling in price. For example, a move

7 i from 5 to 10 on an arithmetic scale

would be the same distance as a
move from 50 to 55, even though

t

3 the former represents a doubling in
do price, while the latter is a price
se ae increase of only 10%. Prices plotted
aL on ratio or log scales show equal dis-

tances for similar percentage moves.
i For example, a move from 10 to 20
ol yu (a 100% increase) would be the

- same distance on a log chart as a
Figure 3.5 A comparison of move from 20 to 40 or 40 to 80.
an arithmetic and logarithmic — 4any stock market chart services
Seale. Notics é ‘he eau ft The log use log charts, whereas futures chart
scale shows percentage changes services use arithmetic. Charting
(right scale). software packages allow both types
of scaling, as shown in Figure 3.6.

CONSTRUCTION OF THE DAILY
BAR CHART

The construction of the daily bar chart is extremely simple. The
bar chart is both a price and a time chart. The vertical axis (the y
axis) shows a scale representing the price of the contract. The hor-
izontal axis (the x axis) records the passage of time. Dates are
marked along the bottom of the the chart. All the user has to do is
plot a vertical bar in the appropriate day from the day’s high to the
day’s low (called the range). Place a horizontal tic to the right of
the vertical bar identifying the daily closing price. (See Figure 3.7.)

The reason for placing the tic to the right of the bar is to
distinguish it from the opening price, which chartists record to


Chart Construction 41

+400
rer"
i

100

pa

Arithmetic Scaling Semi-Log Scaling

li
uf

| |
1 - ily 7

” |

| 374 ( ih {

ig! Le i a 7
!

ee rth

124 H
% 4 0 6 OF ot ow 6 vo 7 °

fl

Figure 3.6 Longer view of Intel using two different price scales. The chart
to the left shows the traditional arithmetic scale. The chart on the right
shows a logarithmic scale. Notice that the three year up trendline worked bet-
ter on the log chart.

the left of the bar. Once that day’s activity has been plotted, the
user moves one day to the right to plot the next day’s action. Most
chart services use five day weeks. Weekends are not shown on the
chart. Whenever an exchange is closed during the trading week,
that day’s space is left blank. The bars along the bottom of the
chart measure volume. (See Figure 3.7.)

VOLUME

Another piece of important information should be included on
the bar chart—volume. Volume represents the total amount of
trading activity in that market for that day. It is the total number
of futures contracts traded during the day or the number of com-
mon stock shares that change hands on a given day in the stock
market. The volume is recorded by a vertical bar at the bottom of
the chart under that day’s price bar. A higher volume bar means


42 Chapter 3

hoe7ie7 INTC) Intel Corp 02/03/98 |
High ‘es
ch
Daily Bar Chart ose | | | ee
[Pw

| | |
| yu ily open il "|
| Met i ia

\
Daily Volume Sars [aco00ed

°° Sho Tapa Pres unng Trade Staton © Omega Resewich int 3997
Figure 3.7 A closer look at the Intel daily bar chart. Each bar measures
the day’s price range. The opening price is marked by the small tic to the left
of each bar. The closing tic is to the right. The bars along the bottom mea-
sure each day’s volume.

8000000

lott

lov

the volume was heavier for that day. A smaller bar represents
lighter volume. A vertical scale along the bottom of the chart is
provided to help plot the data, as shown in Figure 3.7.

FUTURES OPEN INTEREST

Open interest is the total number of outstanding futures contracts
that are held by market participants at the end of the day. Open
interest is the number of outstanding contracts held by the longs or
the shorts, not the total of both. Remember, because we're dealing
with futures contracts, for every long there must also be a short.
Therefore, we only have to know the totals on one side. Open inter-
est is marked on the chart with a solid line along the bottom, usu-
ally just above the volume but below the price. (See Figure 3.8.)


Chart Construction 43

e237 ~~ (7R0698) Treasury Bonds 06/98 02/24/98
Line Chart Leen

\
:

| L126
