that lists the transiting planets automatically to a certain chart point, and which provides
interpretations of aspects by clicking on the planets involved.
Let’s proceed now to the last part of the birth chart, the Part of Fortune.
The Part of Fortune, or POF, can be traced to ancient times. But it was a text written by AlBiruni, an Arab astrologer that made the so-called Arabic parts more known. Al-Biruni lived in
the late Middle Ages, when the most interesting research and uses of astrology occurred in the
Arabic world. There are historically 32 different Arabic parts including parts of death, illness,
marriage, journeys, and so on. They are points constructed on the mathematical calculations of
two or three components, such as planets or house cusps.
However, only the Part of Fortune, which can be calculated on most computer programs, is
now in common use. Since POF is based on the longitude degrees of the Sun, Moon, and
Ascendant, three of the most important places in the horoscope, it becomes as important as
they are, a fact that is sometimes overlooked. Only the Midheaven is as important, but because
the POF is based on three components only, the MC is excluded from the calculation.
The POF symbol is the circle around a cross, shown in the previous figures, and is placed in
the natal chart according to this formula:
Day births (a.m.): Fortune = Ascendant’s longitude degree position plus Moon position
minus the Sun’s degree position. For night births (p.m.), the Moon and Sun’s position are
reversed.
POF is interpreted as being a primary indicator of prosperity, and its position in the natal
chart shows where and how a person may gain honors, make money, or be lucky during his life.
Transits to POF bring opportunities for gain, as the following examples will illustrate. When
transiting Jupiter conjuncts POF in the natal chart, it is often a time when a person may benefit
materially or advance in his or her career. The synodic cycle (one complete orbit relative to the
Sun) for Jupiter is about 12 years, so it will not be of much interest for those who trade
frequently. However, the other aspects mentioned in the checklist in
Table 9.1
have been found to trigger fortunate events as well. So, in reality, there is a beneficial
aspect between transiting Jupiter and POF about every two years. Of course, not all may be as
fortunate as when there is a conjunction between Jupiter and POF, which is the strongest
aspect, but traders may still find it worthwhile to make a note in their calendar when any of
these events occur.
To work out their own horoscope, traders may want to use a freeware astro-program, or go
to
www.astrodienst.com
, which provides a comprehensive chart service that includes a function to plot Arabic parts.
Write down the sign and the degree position of the POF, as well as the degree position of
transiting Jupiter, and use a software program or an ephemeris to determine when the aspects
culminate or become exact.
It is also possible to plot important astrological events with Timing Solution. For instance,
aspects can be plotted with Timing Solution and exported to Excel, or a special calendar format,
and it is then easier to follow the periods when a good influence might manifest. As users
progress, they may wish to include other favorable aspects, such as transiting Venus and Jupiter
in sextile or trine aspects to Pluto, or some of the other aspects mentioned in the checklist in
Table 9.1
.
It should be noted that when a transiting planet approaches an aspect to a natal planet, it is

said to be “applying.” Conversely, after it has reached conjunction and is moving away it is said
to be “separating.” The applying effect is usually stronger than the separating one, but in the
case of transiting Jupiter to POF, the effect is often the opposite, so the beneficial effects of
Jupiter’s contact may only manifest after the exact conjunction, not before. The orb (sphere of
influence of an aspect) should be set fairly tight at no more than 2 degrees.
The native in the chart in
Figure 9.23
received large orders for his business when transiting Jupiter was conjunct his natal POF and
natal Jupiter on November 19, 2007, as is shown in
Figure 9.24
. When the natal POF is conjunct natal Jupiter, the chances of lucky breaks are greatly
enhanced to begin with.
FIGURE 9.23
Natal chart of a person engaged in trading.

FIGURE 9.24
Transiting Jupiter conjunct with the natal Jupiter and natal POF on November 19, 2007.

Figure 9.24
has been drawn up using the Placidus house system, which causes the angles to become
somewhat skewed when the subject is born at higher latitudes, but this house system reflects
the person more accurately. Note that the Moon and Venus are at the cusp of the second
house of money, denoting a strong focus on material possessions. Uranus is in the fifth house
of speculation opposed by Jupiter, which may at times manifest in overestimating oneself and
engaging in risky ventures.
The same natal chart is shown in
Figure 9.25
with the transiting planets in the outer wheel as of December 7, 2010.
FIGURE 9.25
Transiting Jupiter and Uranus are moving to exact conjunction with natal Venus in the second
house of money around the person’s birthday on February 13, 2011. Because the synodic cycle
of Uranus is about 84 years, it is a rare event for transiting Jupiter and Uranus to both conjunct
with natal Venus at the same time. It is likely to result in a large financial boost.

MARKET PROJECTION
Can we predict the market using astrological methods? Forecasting the probability of market
direction has been the primary goal of every trader since early times. When will the market
make a peak? Or when will it make a trough? These are everyday questions in the mind of
every trader. The age-old market prediction method of using advanced mathematical
calculations and historical economic data, sector data, and price data has been the cornerstone
of making market forecasts. And it is still the most acceptable method. But the method works
well only when the market is not subject to so much volatility. The world today is plagued with
uncertainties caused by natural disasters, man-made disasters, military conflicts, political
unrest, and corporate fraud and scams, occurring at unexpected frequent intervals, seemingly
without end. Therefore, the old methods seem inadequate to make a reasonably reliable
prediction of market movements today.
The stock market is too sensitive, too erratic and chaotic for such basic forecasts. The change
of value of the shares is always related to future expectations, not the supposed correct value
at the moment of trade. It is in these challenging circumstances that prediction using financial
astrology adds its value as a complement to the traditional method by revealing another
dimension. Forecasts made using the planetary movements through the zodiac can increase the
odds in favor of the trader significantly. While some traders continue to use traditional
methods and scoff at financial astrology, astro-harmonic analysis is nevertheless gaining more
widespread acceptance. Since the turmoil in the markets that began in 2008, a growing number
of traders, including some at large institutions, have adopted astrological analysis to boost the
results of their trading decisions. They realize that combining fundamental and technical
analyses with financial astrology can improve the performance of their trading. The advantages
of knowing in advance probable major price reversals for a stock through astrological methods
are incalculable.
Moreover, today, using financial astrology for reading markets has become easier for users.
The phenomenal development of software applications, especially in the last decade or so, has
helped spur wider use by traders. It is now possible to undertake complex analysis of economic
cycles and examine the extent to which planetary constellations correlate with movements in
financial markets, including the Forex and commodities markets. Even phenomena such as
sunspot activity, tidal flows, and other factors can be studied to see if they correlate with
terrestrial events. Still, of course, the main purpose is to measure the relationship between
planetary movements and the markets and make use of them in trading.
In this regard, the expanded capability of computer programs adds a new dimension to
technical analysis. They offer a hybrid of common technical analysis techniques (charting tools
and indicators) and modern math methods (neural networks and applied statistics), measuring
astro-cycle correlations and providing the opportunity to model the market. A few examples of
these techniques are shown in
Figures 9.26
through
9.34
. For the examples shown, the advanced version of Timing Solution has been used.
FIGURE 9.26
Projection chart from December 30, 2009, showing the simple projection line for the Dow for

the first quarter of 2010.

FIGURE 9.34
Planet aspects as well as the ingresses of the Sun (dark green), Mercury (dark red), Venus
(dark blue) and Mars (cyan) into new zodiacal signs, as applied to the Hang Seng Index. At the
end of July, three planets enter into new signs, which may correlate with a CIT in the Hang Seng
Index.

Figure 9.26
shows a market projection as of December 30, 2009. Briefly, the composite module
calculates the projection line based on how various astro-cycles relate to the first-trade chart
and the historical data on a daily basis. It includes optimizing the correlation between the
projection line and the relative price oscillator (RPO) to ensure the closest possible match. RPO
is similar to RSI, but has been de-trended in order to smoothen the price swings over a longer
period. The optimized composite result is loaded into the Neural Network module, which takes
all the criteria that were part of the setup and analyzes the historical price data again, using
artificial intelligence and fuzzy logic math to educate itself. The results are used to make future
projections.

Figure 9.27
shows a bar chart of the ensuing market action for comparison with the projection. In this
chart, the market made its low according to the time and value of the forecast, and a changein-trend followed. The market forecast is not an execution of trade entry or exit signals. It
merely projects the direction in which the market is likely to move and where there are areas of
risk to traders. It helps traders better plan their trade and money management. The accuracy of
a hybrid market forecast will, to some extent, depend on the amount of historical data and
other information available. Some traders find that the larger the database, the better the
projection. However, because cycles change, a four-year period seems to yield the most
consistent results. It should also be noted that the scaling of the projection line is rarely 100
percent accurate, but can only serve as an indication of the likely future trend of the market.
Figures 9.28
–
9.33
show examples of projection lines applied to a stock, Gold, and the S&P 500, respectively,
compared with the subsequent market action.
FIGURE 9.27
Daily price chart of the DJIA. The interim low was on February 8, 2010, a few days before the
projected low of February 12. The forecast correctly projects a subsequent trend change to the
upside. Using technical indicators, a trader would be prepared to go long as soon as the buy
signal was triggered; for example, when the price crossed the green line (18-DMA).

FIGURE 9.28
Projection chart as of October 23, 2010, for 255 Lung Kee Holdings Ltd. The subsequent actual
market prices are shown in
Figure 9.29
.

FIGURE 9.29
Daily chart of 255 Lung Kee Holdings Ltd. The forecasted double top did take place, but the
scaling of the second peak in the red projection line is marginally off.

FIGURE 9.30
Projection chart of Gold, showing astro-cycles (blue and green lines).

FIGURE 9.33
Daily price chart of the S&P 500.

In the final chart,
Figure 9.34
, the planetary aspect bars are again shown for the Hang Seng Index. In addition, the chart
shows the ingress, or entrance, of the Sun, Mercury, Venus, and Mars into a new zodiacal sign.
When the Sun left the sign of Gemini on June 21, 2011, it then entered into Cancer at 00
degrees, 00 minutes. As can be seen, when the Sun makes its ingress into a new zodiac sign, it
often correlates with CITs, although occasionally it is one of the other planets that correlates.
Readers who are interested in studying the subject further may find more information at:
www.astro.com/swisseph/swephae.htm
. Scroll down to the “Sun sign ingresses” section and select the year range (
www.astro.com/swisseph/ae/isun2000.pdf
). It lists the exact dates and times for the ingresses that year, calculated in Greenwich Mean
Time.

FIGURE 9.31
Daily price chart of Gold.

FIGURE 9.32
Projection chart of the S&P 500 made on June 22, 2010. Includes Gann squares as well as
ellipse lines. Note the completion of a Gann square coincides with the interim low in price on
August 27, 2010. The red projection line did also match the high on August 6, but the projected
low around the middle of September was off.

CONCLUSION
The charts in this chapter have shown the correlation between the planetary cycles and the
financial markets. Nevertheless, some may still ask, what is the underlying physical mechanism
by which astrology works? In other words, how does a celestial object from as far away as 9
billion miles exert influence?
Australian astrologer Alice McDermott suggests that, instead of looking at it from the
perspective of a tiny little life form on a smallish planet in a solar system on the edge of a
galaxy, we should try to see the question from a solar system perspective.
The Earth is a part of a solar system. From the Earth’s point of view, it is part of the structure
of this solar system, just as our gall bladders are part of our overall physical structure. What we
see as very long distances, millions of miles, are actually quite small from a solar system
perspective. All the planets in this solar system are all part of the same life force and all
influence each other.
As we are all part of the Earth, naturally we are all affected by what goes on in our own solar
system, and by the planets that are part of that structure.
In essence, astrology works through harmonic resonance. Everything resonates with
everything else and a variety of individual energies (certain stars, planets, people, animals,
plants, insects, etc.) can resonate along the same vibrational lines, thereby having a strong
connection.
So, as the cosmos moves, so does life on Earth. The task faced by astrologers since early
times has been to correlate the symbolic language of astrology with events here on Earth. It is a
daunting task. But anyone practicing astrology in earnest realizes after a while that we humans
have in fact been given the tools, ancient tools that have withstood the test of time, to advance
in our understanding of the universe. For the financial astrologer, the job has been made easier
to some extent by powerful software programs. It might be imprudent, however, to rely only
on a mechanical computerized system to try to decipher the influence the planets have on
Earth. With experience, one learns to use various forecasting techniques, which each in their
own way yield pieces of the puzzle, and ultimately to synthesize all the information to come to
a conclusion as to the likely direction of a stock or of a market.
Some say it is impossible to forecast the trend of any commodity or financial instrument. But
tests measuring correlation of various market predictions with complex astro-cycle analysis are
steadily improving. Astro-cycle analysis is expected to improve in the coming years, given the
accelerating pace of efficiency testing and ever more powerful back-testing programs.
Without doubt, as the competition intensifies in the coming decades, investors and traders
will seek more tools to help them outperform the market. It is not beyond the realm of
possibility that financial stock quote companies, including leading ones like Financial Times,
Bloomberg, Reuters, and others, may one day publish lunar cycles and other astrological cycles
for investors who wish to augment their trading strategies with the input of such data.
It is often said, “the stars impel, they do not compel,” meaning that we have free will. In the
same vein, the foregoing is not meant to imply that our lives are wholly governed by the
planets. The purpose is only to show that, when used wisely, astrology can provide valuable
clues in trading. Combined with the technical analysis methods presented earlier, investors and
traders will have at their disposal unequaled tools to achieve consistent profits in trading.

APPENDIX 1

Ruling Planets of the Natural Horoscope
The following is a list of the traditional astrological ruling planets of the natural horoscope,
which starts with Aries on the cusp of the first house. The characteristics of each house for both
personal (see Keywords) and financial astrology are included.
1st House: Aries and Mars. Personnel of the corporation, including stockholders, how the
stockholders see the company, relationship to the public, business objectives.
Keywords: Physical self, personality, motivation, well-being
2nd House: Taurus and Venus. Liquid assets, earnings.
Keywords: Possessions, earning abilities, self-esteem
3rd House: Gemini and Mercury. Relations with competitors, transportation and
communications, some advertising, financial and trade relations with adjacent countries.
Keywords: Siblings, transport, environment, early education
4th House: Cancer and the Moon. Real estate investment and holdings, tangible assets of the
corporation, direct competition.
Keywords: Home and family, foundations of life
5th House: Leo and the Sun. Speculation, income from capital, the place of deposit of capital
such as safes, vaults, and banks.
Keywords: Risk-taking, creativity, fun, romance, children
6th House: Virgo and Mercury. Workers or employees, work and equipment, work schedules,
inventories, corporation contacts with hotels; agriculture and agricultural products.
Keywords: Routine work, health, diet
7th House: Libra and Venus. Partnerships, relationships with other organizations, sales appeal:
trading volume—how much stock is being bought, public accounting, trade agreements,
mergers, lawsuits and legal affairs, competitors and their activities.
Keywords: Primary relationships, partnerships
8th House: Scorpio and Pluto. Investors’ money, credits, international/business finance, losses
or gains due to demise of corporation, financial responsibilities, private conferences.
Keywords: Joint resources, investments, inheritance, sex, death
9th House: Sagittarius and Jupiter. Completion of contracts, legal affairs, audits, activities
abroad, insurance, shipping, philosophy of company, long-distance communications, publicity
and public relations, officials.

Keywords: Higher education, long-distance travel, philosophy, religion, law, ideals
10th House: Capricorn and Saturn. Public image of company, president or chairman of the
board, general business conditions, relations with government and associations, administrative
department.
Keywords: Reputation, career, social responsibilities, ambitions
11th House: Aquarius and Uranus. Corporate allies, long-range goals of the organization,
completion of projects, the good-will and intangible assets; indebtedness in bonds, mortgages,
and so forth.
Keywords: Goals, groups, friends
12th House: Pisces and Neptune. Research and development, trade secrets and formulas,
limitations through secret enemies that might involve inefficiency, secret assistance.
Keywords: Seclusion, institutions, escapism, faith

APPENDIX 2

Effects of Various Aspects
The effects of the various aspects are as follows:
0 degrees (Conjunction). Major aspect. In fact, it is more a position rather than an aspect, but
for simplicity’s sake, it is classified as an aspect. It entails a close gathering of two or more
planets, ideally with the same zodiac degree. Conjunction symbolizes the cooperation of the
planets, which combine their potentials and reinforce each other. Whether this has positive or
negative results depends largely on the nature of the relevant planets.
60 degrees (Sextile). Major aspect. The sextile aspect involves two or more planets at an angle
of 60 degrees from one another. It denotes the ability to turn intellectual understanding into
productivity, to develop one’s talents, and to make use of opportunities for growth and for the
fulfillment of one’s hopes and wishes. Such opportunities often arise under sextile transits.
90 degrees (Square). Major aspect. An aspect between two or more planets positioned at an
angle of 90 degrees is called a square. Modern astrology regards the square as an aspect of
constant inner tension, urging the individual toward action in order to relieve it. Success is
frequently delayed or thwarted, either by circumstances or by inconsistent behavior, and often
demands great efforts over long periods. On the positive side, the square offers numerous
opportunities for learning and personal development, which are usually lacking in more
harmonious aspects.
120 degrees (Trine). Major aspect. The trine is one of the classic Ptolemaic aspects, consisting
of two or more planets at an angle of 120 degrees from each other. The relevant planets are
said to cooperate in the most harmonious way, which is why traditional astrology calls it a
“benefic” aspect. The trine can bestow fortunate circumstances on a person, and positive
results on the matter at hand.
180 degrees (Opposition). Major aspect. The opposition consists of two or more planets or
horoscope points separated by an angle of 180 degrees; that is, on opposite sides of the zodiac.
As the name indicates, the opposition is mostly an aspect of conflict.
30 degrees (Semi-sextile). Minor aspect. The semi-sextile is an aspect of 30 degrees; the
relevant points are one sign apart. The opinions differ as to its effects, with some viewing them
as beneficial and providing good opportunities. Others call the semi-sextile “dissociate” and
connect it with disturbing, albeit minor, incidents.
45 degree (Semi-square). Minor aspect. The semi-square is an aspect of 45 degrees and may be
compared to the effects of a square, only weaker. It tends to promote self-criticism and may
indicate an inner feeling of irritation and/or friction developing.
150 degrees (Quincunx or Inconjunct). Minor aspect. The main characteristics of this aspect are
