
Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

67

FIGURE 1.35

followed by the Japanese yen at 13.6 percent, then the British pound at
11.90 percent, and the Canadian dollar at 9.10 percent.

FOREX TRADERS BENEFIT FROM FUTURES
MARKETS INFO
Forex traders can integrate futures data to help in trading decisions, such
as taking a trading signal based on chart patterns in the futures and translating it into a trading trigger signal in a forex market. Because spot FX and
futures trade in tandem, the price difference is called the basis. Generally,
day-to-day, they are geometrically equal (within a few PIPs). Since, as we
discussed, forex markets are decentralized, there is not a collective database to measure two distinct studies, such as volume and open interest.
These are important tools, so let’s review what the basics are and how a
forex trader can use this futures information.
Volume is the number of trades for the total contract months of a given
future’s contract, both long and short combined. For example, the futures

68

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

foreign currency markets trade on quarterly expirations—the March, June,
September, and December contract months. The volume will represent the
total for all the trades in each contract month. Most technical analysts believe that volume is an indicator of the strength of a market trend. It is also
a relative measure of the dominant behavior of the market. A further explanation is that volume is the measurement of the market’s acceptance or
rejection of price at a specific level and time. There are several theories and
so-called rules when using volume analysis on price charts: First, if a market is increasing in price and the volume is increasing, the market is said to
be in a bullish mode and can indicate further price increases. Second, the
exact opposite is true for a declining market. If price is declining and volume increases, it is said to be in a bearish mode and indicates further price
decreases. However, if a substantial daily market price increase or decrease occurs after a long steady uptrend or downtrend, especially on unusually high daily volume, the move is considered to be a “blow-off-top or
bottom exhaustion” and can signal a market turning point or a trend reversal. Here are some guidelines to use when using volume analysis.
• Increasing volume in a rising price environment signals excessive
buying pressure and could lead to substantial advances.
• Increasing volume while prices are falling may signal a bear move.
• Decreasing volume while prices are climbing may indicate a plateau
and can be used to predict a reversal.
• Decreasing volume with a weaker price environment shows that
fresh sellers are reluctant to enter the market and could be a sign of a
future downtrend.
• Excessive volume while prices are high indicates that traders are selling into strength and often creates a price ceiling.
• Excessively low volume while prices are low indicates that traders are
buying on weakness and often creates a floor.
Open interest reveals the total amount of open positions that are outstanding in existence and not offset or delivered upon. Remember that in
futures trading, this is a zero-sum game so that for every long there is a
short or for every buyer there is a seller. The open interest figure represents
the longs or shorts but not the total of both. So when examining open interest, the theory or general guidelines are that when prices rise and open
interest increases, this reveals that more new longs have entered the market and more new money is flowing into the market. This reflects why the
price increases. Of course, the exact opposite is true on a declining market.
Chartists combine both the price movement and the data from volume and
open interest to evaluate the “condition” of the market. If there is a price
increase on strong volume and open interest increases, then this is a signal

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

69

that there could be a continued trend advance. Of course, the opposite is
true for a bear market when prices decline. Also, if prices increase, volume
stays relatively flat or little changed, and open interest declines, then the
market condition is weakening. This is considered to be a bearish situation
because if open interest is declining and prices are rising, then this shows
that shorts are covering by buying back their positions, rather than new
longs entering the market. That would give a trader a clue that there is a potential trend reversal coming.
Here is a guide as to how to use this information to identify an opportunity when there is a major top or bottom in the spot forex markets: When
observing a continued long-term trend in a spot forex currency, if it trades
as a futures contract (whether it is in an uptrend or a downtrend), when
prices start to fluctuate with wider than normal daily price swings, or
ranges, or are in an extremely volatile condition, if it is combined with unusually strong volume and a decline in open interest, this is referred to as a
climaxing market condition. The market is getting ready to turn or reverse the trend.
In Figure 1.36, the graph is a split chart of the futures euro currency on
top with the volume and open interest study in the middle. The spot forex
euro currency is on the bottom. Notice that after the peak in prices, the vol-

FIGURE 1.36
Used with permission of esignal.com.

70

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

ume was increasing, as was the open interest. This was a warning that a
trend reversal was forming, rather than a small correction. Therefore, spot
forex traders would have a better decision-making process, that selling rallies and looking to take sell signals at resistance would be a more fruitful
and profitable course of action.

INSIDER TRADING INFORMATION
There is one more source of information that stock and spot forex currency traders can borrow from the futures industry. It is the Weekly Commodity Futures Trading Commission’s Commitment of Traders (COT)
report. The CFTC market surveillance staff closely monitors trading activity in the futures markets in order to detect and prevent instances of potential price manipulation. Some consider this “insider trading” information
because every week we get to take a look at which investor group is taking
which side of a trade. (There are many studies and books written on the
subject. In fact, it was covered in my first book on pages 162–165.)
As a futures trader for over 26 years, I have used this information to
capture many significant moves in the markets. Figure 1.37 shows that

FIGURE 1.37

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

71

there are several categories. The first is the “non-commercial”—all large
professional traders or entities, such as a hedge fund, a commodity trading
advisor, commodity pool operators, and locals on and off the exchange
floors. Any trading entity that hits a reportable position limit (for instance,
in the CME currencies, at the end of 2005, the limit was 400 contracts) is reported by the clearing firm to the exchange, which then turns the information over to the CFTC.
The next category is the “commercials”—banks and institutions or
multinational conglomerate corporations looking to hedge a cash position.
The long and short open interest shown as “nonreportable positions” are
derived by subtracting total long and short “reportable positions” from the
total open interest. Accordingly, for nonreportable positions, the number of
traders involved and the commercial/non-commercial classification of each
trader is unknown. This balance of positions is assumed to be the small
speculators. If you look at the first column under non-commercials, you
will see the breakdown of long positions versus short positions. The next
line down shows the changes from the prior week; this is important information because you will be able to see if these guys unloaded some of their
positions or added to them from one week to the next. The line under that
tells you the percent of longs and shorts that are held. The last line shows
how many traders there are that control longs or shorts. The information is
gathered as of the close of business every Tuesday by each of the clearing
brokerage firms and is turned over to exchange officials, who then report
the information to the regulatory body know as the CFTC. This information
is released on Friday afternoons at 3:30 P.M. (ET).
It is critical before acting on a decision based on this information to see
if there was a major price swing from Tuesday’s close to the time the information was released on Friday, because positions may have changed
hands. For example, in Figure 1.37, if the British pound was at 1.7400 at 5
P.M. on Tuesday and the price at Friday’s close was 1.7000, it will indicate
a 400-point move. If the COT showed small speculators net long, I will assume that the speculators were no longer long, as not many small speculators can handle a 400-point loss.
Can traders benefit and make money from this information? The answer is that there is always a chance to make money. The key is to be able
to afford to be not too heavily leveraged if the market moves further than
anticipated. The COT is like an insider information report. It acts like a true
consensus of who literally “owns” the market. A forex trader can use this
data to determine in a long-term trend run if market participants are too
heavily positioned on one side of the market. It is generally the small speculator who is lefty holding the bag. Let’s face it—money moves the market,
and the banks and large professional traders are a bit savvier when it
comes to their business. After all, one would think a bank has a good idea

72

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

of what direction interest rates are going to go once a central bank meeting occurs, right?
Suppose the small speculators are showing a nice short position of, say,
at least two longs for every one short. If the non-commercials are net long
and the commercials are net long, chances are that the small speculators
will be wrong. I am looking for imbalances in markets that have been in a
trending market condition for quite some time, and therefore I can develop
a game plan and start looking for timing clues to enter trades accordingly.
Keep in mind that the commercials sometimes are not right; they are not in
the market to time market turns. They are hedging their risk exposure in a
cash position. Therefore the non-commercials, or professional speculators,
in the short term are considered the smart money.
Here are some general guidelines to follow for using the COT Report:
• If non-commercials are net long, commercials are net long, and the
nonreportable positions category is net short by at least a two-to-one
margin, look at buying opportunities. In other words, go with the pros.
• If non-commercials are net short, commercials are net short, and the
nonreportable positions category is net long by at least a two-to-one
margin, look at buying opportunities.
• If non-commercials are net long, commercials are net short, and the
nonreportable positions category is neutral, meaning not heavily net
long or short, look at buying opportunities and stick with the smart
money speculating non-commercials.

WHAT EVENTS MOVE THE CURRENCY MARKETS?
Traders need to be aware of several key elements and events that can cause
currency values to move. For one, intervention plays a role in the currencies. When the Bank of Japan felt that its export business would suffer at
the hand of an overvalued yen, it would intervene and sell yen to buy U.S.
dollars. Countries like Canada and Australia, which produce raw commodities, saw a rise in their currency valuations as global demand increased for their goods and as their economies improved as well.
Foreign currency markets are mainly influenced by international trade
flows and investment flows, which are the same factors that influence the
equity and bond markets:
• Economic and political conditions.
• Interest rates, inflation, and political instability.
These factors have a long-term impact, which makes forex attractive
to trade due to the long-term trending conditions established by central

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

73

bank decisions based on these factors. Forex also offers investors some diversification necessary to protect against adverse movements in the equity
and bond markets. Japan is closer to changing its zero-interest rule policy;
and when it does, it may attract money back to Japan and boost its currency value

STUDY THE “MACRO” ISSUES
Traders who are new to forex can take comfort in knowing that analyzing
and forecasting exchange rate movement rely solely on macroeconomic
factors—the “big picture” issues and concepts for which information is
readily available and intuitively grasped. Once traders have an understanding of the big picture pertaining to an economic region, they can place
trades in the currency market to profit from their analysis. Currency traders
who are looking to capture big moves in exchange rate movement definitely should focus on three issues when attempting to assess the value of
currencies:
1. Interest Rates—The Carry-Trade Strategy. Each foreign currency has

a central bank that issues an overnight lending rate. This is a prime
gauge of a currency’s value. In recent history, low interest rates have
resulted in the devaluation of a currency. Many analysts assume this is
a function of the carry-trade strategy employed by many hedge funds.
This is a trade where one buys and holds currencies in a high-yielding
interest rate market, such as the United States, and sells or borrows
money from a foreign country where the currency is in a low-yielding
interest rate market, such as Japan. There is a significant risk exposure
to this investment, which requires large capital or a highly leveraged
position from an exchange rate fluctuation.
2. Unemployment Rate. The unemployment rate is a strong indicator of a

country’s economic strength. When unemployment is high, the economy may be weak and, hence, its currency may fall in value. The opposite is true as well. The question that many economists look to answer
is what a specific country’s full-employment capacity level is. That
knowledge will give clues to the peak in productivity and economic
output. That knowledge also helps determine a country’s capital flows
and, therefore, is good information for currency traders to follow for
longer-term trend identification.
3. Geopolitical Events. Like all markets, the currency market is affected

by what is going on in the world. Key political events around the world
can have a big impact on a country’s economy and on the value of its re-

74

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

spective currency. Turmoil, strikes, and terrorist attacks, as we have
witnessed in the new millennium, all play havoc with and cause shortterm price shocks in the currency markets. Terms such as “flight to
safety,” as traders move money from one country to another, cause
shifts in currency values. These events need to be monitored by forex
traders as well.
Forex traders use fundamental analysis as described earlier to identify
trading opportunities by analyzing economic information for a longer-term
perspective. Short-term traders should also understand what and when reports can cause a shift in currency markets. Knowing what time is best to
trade the markets will help you nail down when a potential trade may materialize. As the pie chart in Figure 1.35 showed, the largest percentage
value traded against the U.S. dollar was the euro. Therefore, that would
represent the European session. The central place of foreign currency dealings is London, where the second-most-active trading volume occurs.
Therefore, it is where there are likely to be large range swings in the market, granting day traders an opportunity to profit. The European session
runs from 2 A.M. (ET) until 11 A.M. (ET), so a euro currency to U.S. dollar
(EU/USD) or euro currency to British pound (EU/BP) or a British pound to
U.S. dollar (BP/USD) would be an appropriate pair selection to trade.
The U.S. session opens at 8 A.M. (ET), which overlaps the European session; and these two sessions combined generate the bulk of trading activity.
Most major U.S. economic reports are released at 8:30 A.M. (ET); and, as expected, the currency markets generally react off those reports. This offers
traders the opportunity to trade off what is normally a violent price spike.
Once the U.S. markets close at 5 P.M. (ET), the currency markets are available to trade; but it is not until the Asian session opens at 7 P.M. (ET) that
markets will experience potential price swings. The Australian dollar (AUS)
and Japanese yen (JY) would be what traders would want to focus on, and
the trade opportunities there would be the USD/JY or the USD/AUS or the
cross pair trading the JY/AUS. Notice that the Asian markets overlap the
European session as well, so a Japanese yen versus euro currency cross
(JY/EU) is a popular pair to trade. Here are the time zones a trader wants to
focus on when trading spot forex markets.
• European session—2 A.M. (ET) until 11 A.M. (ET).
• U.S. session—8 A.M. (ET) until 5 P.M. (ET).
• Asian session—7 P.M. (ET) until 4 A.M. (ET).
The prime trading periods for day traders are from 12:30 A.M. (ET) until
5:30 A.M. (ET), from 7 A.M. (ET) until 12 P.M. (ET), and from 1:30 P.M. until 5

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

75

P.M. (ET). These periods are when peak volumes occur, due to the opening
of the European session and economic reporting times in Europe. Then, as
the U.S. market opens, you have the window of opportunity to trade off the
volatility from the time when U.S. reports are released. In the afternoon of
the U.S. session, volume increases as traders rush to balance their positions
before the end of the day. These are the select times to trade forex markets
(more information can be found at www.fxtriggers.com).
For the most part, day and swing traders use technical analysis to identify opportunities from specific chart patterns that demonstrate frequent reoccurring results. They need to trade in active time periods, trading off
trend lines and moving averages, which are a form of trend line analysis
that will help in certain market conditions. We will go over a set of moving
averages that is different from what is normally written about and that will
help identify conditional changes in the market, thereby giving forex
traders a better edge. We will also incorporate and show you how to calculate support and resistance levels from mathematical-based models, such
as pivot point analysis, and other means, such as Fibonacci corrections
and extensions, to identify opportunities and drive trading decisions. These
are the methods I will be covering in this book to help you form a trading
plan based on specific rules and conditions for trading the forex markets.

CHAPTER 2

Determining
Market Condition
Bullish, Bearish, or Neutral

would say the hardest thing for any trader to do is buy high, especially
after seeing a huge run in the market. Buying high is a technique that
very successful professional traders use. It is also a contrarian approach. After all, if you feel that the value cannot go any higher, it probably
won’t, right? This market condition generally tempts traders to sell. That is
absolutely the wrong thinking! In most bull markets, that thinking falls
under the category of “picking tops without cause,” “justification,” and
“trading based off a set of rules or technical reasons”! Do not try to anticipate what the market will do next. Simply go with what the market tells you
it is currently doing. In other words, try to avoid concerning yourself with
why the market is moving; focus on what is occurring. That is my definition
of staying in the now and, most important, staying with the trend.
Forget that last week the market may have taken a nosedive or that yesterday the market rallied significantly. Concern yourself with what the market is doing now. Ask yourself where prices are in relation to the current
trend. It is up to you to identify the type of trader you are (day trader, swing
trader, long-term trader) and the time frame in which you trade (minutes,
days, weeks, . . .).
For example, a day trader in the mini–stock index futures or the foreign
exchange (forex) markets may only be working with a five-minute time
frame. In that case, she could care less what the market did last week or
yesterday. A day trader may also want to focus on a 60-minute trend to decide whether she should hold the position for two or more periods. A swing
trader, who would hold a position for several days, may want to see what

I

77

78

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

the trend is doing from a weekly time perspective or from a time interval
based on the past several days. Longer-term position traders may want to
view the trend over several weeks or months. Cracking the code and understanding how to interpret what the market is telling you is what this
book is about and what it will hopefully teach you.
As a trader, you should recognize the immediate environment or market condition. Is it up, down, or sideways? After a trend is established,
let’s say a bullish trend, it should consist of higher highs and higher lows. It
is usually a more fruitful situation to buy dips in that environment, as you
will you get more out of the trade in price magnitude than you will in selling the rallies. In a bullish environment, buying begets buying. Higher closing highs more importantly bring higher highs as momentum and assigned
values are justified.

WHAT DEFINES MOMENTUM?
The close is the assigned value for any market. The law of physics that
states “a body in motion tends to stay in motion until a force or obstacle
stops or changes that motion” really applies to this concept, because higher
assigned values can and do usually attract more buying and even new buyers. That is what momentum is and why it is the key in trading. Think of
what an auction is like. There is excitement. People are furiously bidding up
the price of an object. It attracts more buyers. Gosh, it even attracts people
to bid on items they don’t even want. Then as value has peaked, the bidding
dries up; and the last person with the highest bid is awarded the item (or
stuck buying the high). Trading is essentially the same if you know when
it’s the right time or price level to enter the market and what signals to look
for to exit a trade.
There are all kinds of traders, and each one uses different forms of
analysis. What I teach short-term stock, forex, and futures traders is that
there is immediate equal access to the four common denominators that
each and every trade has to work with, without prejudice and exclusivity:
(1) the open, (2) the high, (3) the low, and (4) the close. For stock traders,
there is a fifth element: volume. Fugures traders who are longer term or
who like to confirm the strength or the weakness of a trend should also be
concerned with volume. In futures, unlike in stocks, the volume is not given
to the investing public in realtime intraday. Truthfully, that is why the futures and forex markets depend on technical analysis to speed the analytical process to determine a market move on pure price action. After all, it is
how we analyze, interpret, and act on the information that makes us different as traders. As for forex, we do not have a means to measure volume as
