
167

If You Have an Advantage in the Game, the Longer You Play the Greater Your Chances
Are of Winning
If you know you have an advantage in the game, you know that at some point you will be collecting
the chips, that Christmas will come.
This is a vital concept for all speculators, it is a concept to build a belief system on, but the concept
itself cannot be built on a belief. Casinos don't operate on a belief. They operate, run their business, on pure
math; they know that eventually the laws of the wheel or dice will prevail. Thus they keep the wheels
spinning. They don't mind waiting, they don't stop. They also play 24 hours for a reason; the longer you play
their negative expectation game, the more certain they are of getting your money.
I guess that is why I have always been amused by people who think they can go to Las Vegas to tap the
casino's bank. Casinos look at you and me as fodder for their bank accounts, and judging from the size of the
megahotels as well as stock performance, they are on the right side of the ledger.
As traders, we must realize that time is our ally. Legal contracts say time is of the essence; that may
be so when it comes to performance of obligations, but time is not of the essence when it comes to trading
because, given an advantage in a game, the more time that elapses the more certain your eventual winnings.
Casinos don't close for another reason; the players won't quit. Players overtrade, in our vernacular.
We are not casinos but we can sure learn a great deal from them. We need to know for sure that our
approach has a statistical advantage in the game. You need to test, to prove your strategy. You cannot just
assume what you are doing will make money because you are so darn smart or good looking. Once you
have proven through research that your approach works, it is then just a question of backing your
convictions by following the system.

Press Your Winners Not Your Losers
This is the most important underlying rule of speculation. Losers do the opposite: they increase the
size of their bets when losing and decrease their bets when winning! Losers see a guy lose all his money at
a slot machine and rush in to take his place!
Winners look for positive streaks and press their advantage. I vividly recall a string of 18 winning
trades in a row in the S&P 500 on a hot line I used to do. After 3 winning trades in a row, 75 percent of the
subscribers would not take the next trades; after 6 wInners in a row, no one took any more trades!

168
What is going on here is that the human mind cannot stand success and seemingly loves failure.
People fear that winnings will turn into failure. whereas they apparently have more hope that failure will
turn into success. so they willingly invest or speculate following losses.
The truth is success is the result of strings of winning trades, and to succeed you must not stop
because you have been successful. Press the winnings. Failure is the result of strings of losing trades; the
most certain indication that a system is failing is that it is experiencing strings of losses greater than seen in
the past, exactly what the typical speculator is seeking to take advantage of! Admittedly, there is wisdom in
waiting for short-term failure to start investing in a long-term successful system, but there is no wisdom at
all in stopping because something has been "too successful”
Press your winnings, gang, not your losses.

Success Kills-Affluence Is Dangerous
Although we must, and will, press our winnings, we cannot let success go to our heads because
affluence leads to overconfidence, which in turn lead, to not following the rules that led to our success.
I have heard countless stories from traders who started following my approach and did very well, in
some cases making over $100,000, then gave it all back. When pressed on what happened, the bottom line is
always the same, the speculator confused luck and consistent application of valid rules with ego and ego
prevailed.
Their ego told them they had finally arrived, they had enough money to take chances and didn't need
the basics anymore. They were in charge! Thus they got into a "damn the torpedoes-full steam ahead"
mode. No longer were stops so important, and since they were now trading too many positions or too many
markets, when the hits came they were big. Too big-it was wipeout time.
How is this cured? There is a simple concept that I keep telling myself. you dance with the person you
brought to the dance. Don't change because you see some other beautiful system or trading approach. If you
are making money, stay with it, same rules, same logic, don't tinker. It has never been me that has made the
money trading, it has been my following of some well tested and proven systems or methodology. On my
own, on your own, flying by the seat of your pants, you are headed for a crack-up. The more ego you involve
and the further you stray from the operating rules of speculation the sooner the crash, and the more
spectacular.

169

Confidence, Fear, and Aggressiveness
The meek will never make it as speculators so they had better have an inheritance.
The three traits speculators must learn to manage within themselves are confidence, fear, and
aggressiveness: I will discuss them in this order.
Confidence. You need have some confidence but not too much. The confidence comes from your
study of the market and not from your feelings about yourself. Forget that entire warm fuzzy inner-child
good feeling about your self-confidence. What you need is confidence based on experience and research that
allows you to take correct action without choking when it is time to place a trade. Losers choke. Winners
feel nervous about the trade, but they have enough confidence in the approach they are using, not
themselves, that they place the trade.
Without confidence, you will never be able to pull the trigger and take your trades, especially during
tumultuous market times, which is usually when the best trades pop up out of nowhere.
The meek probably do inherit the earth because they sure as heck are not going to make any money on their
own as speculators. The inner assurance I have seen in big-time commodity traders is inspirational. Its
essence is not pluck or conceit, nor a sense of self-possession. What is at the core of their confidence is trust
or faith that things will work out.
Winning traders see or believe in the future, to that extent they are full of faith. I believe in God, and
that good prevails, that all things do work out favorably. If I don't let God down, I will not be let down. My
belief that God prevails gives me the trust in the future to have enough confidence to trade when others fail
to take action. I know my life will work out okay, that I have never doubted for an instant. Fear can be
limiting, to the point a trader does not believe in the future.
We Have More to Fear than Fear Itself. President Roosevelt had it all wrong about fear. That should
come as no surprise, he single-handedly screwed up this great country more than any other leader ever has
with his New Deal socialism and welfare state programs. Worse yet, he persuaded the masses and the
media that his programs got us out of the Great Depression. Sure, like America would not have recovered
or grown without him' ' I will never forget campaigning for the United States Senate in the general election
and knocking on doors in a heavily Democratic district. Behind one of those doors was a wizened lady of at
least 80 whose vote I asked for only to have her tell me she didn't vote. When I asked why, she said, "I

170
voted only once in my life, that was for FDR, and after seeing what he did, I told myself that if I was dumb
enough to vote for that son of a bitch, I should never vote again”.
Fear is a powerful force to help speculators perform at their peak. The best example of the use of fear
that I know was expressed by Royce Gracie. You may not know who Royce Gracie is so let me tell you a
bit about him.
Gracie is a world-class athlete, he is the guy in those Ultimate Fight pay for view TV shows. In case
you haven't seen one, they are for-real fights, no boxing gloves and just about anything is legal from
kicking to gouging. This is for real violence. What is interesting about Gracie is that in over 100 fights he
has never been beaten. That is never as in never, ever. By anyone, boxers, kickers, elbow punchers, Tai
kickers. No one has been able to beat this guy.
Considering that most of these would-be tough guys weigh from 225 to 300 pounds, Gracie's
accomplished victories are even more awesome when you find out he weighs about 180 pounds and looks
better in a Mr. Rogers sweater than fighting attire. You would never know the guy is a giant killer. Since I
am fascinated with fighters and winners (they have a lot in common with speculators), I have followed this
guy's career and listened intently to his words of wisdom.
In one interview, these television thugs were asked if they felt any fear going onto these fights
because, after all, they are real-guys have been maimed, lost their sight, broken bones, suffered numerous
severe concussions, and at least one fighter has died. All the tough guys machine-gunned out their male
macho line about having no fear of anyone or anything.
That is all of them but Gracie. He freely admitted he is scared to death every time he enters the ring.
He went on to say he uses that fear to his advantage as it enables him to respect his opponent and not take
reckless action or deviate from his personal fighting style. "Without fear," he said, "you cannot win as fear
pumps me up for the fight but also assures that I will not lose control. What we do is very dangerous; my
best protection is to be afraid so I protect myself in all the ways of my craft."
Like Gracie, I have an immense fear of trading, I have seen people wiped out, losing all they owned
from poor speculation. Some went bankrupt, some really did go crazy, and several killed themselves. I
suspect all these people had one thing in common: they did not fear the markets.
I think you need to fear the markets and fear yourself.
Although the markets are frightening, the emotions you and I interject into trading are downright
scary. Without fear, there is no respect; if you do not respect the markets and fear yourself, you will
become one more dead body on the long trail of commodity market casualties scattered across the land.

The Right Dosage of Fear and Confidence Create Aggressiveness. There comes a time in every trader's
life, about once a week in fact, when you have to get aggressive, either in protecting yourself or asserting
your market expectations. It is kind of like that eye of the Tiger thing in the old Rocky movie. Unless you
have a killer instinct, you had better fold your tent and go home. This is not a business for passive people
who seemingly don't care whether they win or lose, people who lack that cutting edge to pick up a
challenge and proceed.
I don't mean hostility as most people usually envision aggressiveness. Winning traders have a certain
boldness to their action, and that boldness is the culmination of confidence, fear, and aggressiveness. In this
battle for speculative profits, a well-thought-out plan with boldness will go a long way toward carrying the
day.

Chapter 13

Money Management
The Keys
to the Kingdom

The creation of a speculators' wealth comes from how they manage.
Their money, not some magical, mysterious system or alchemist’s secrets. Successful trading makes
money, successful trading proper money, management can create immense wealth.

Here it is, the most important chapter in this book, the most important chapter in my life, the most
valuable thoughts I can transfer from me to you. I have nothing of more value that I could possibly give
you than what you are about to learn. This is not an overstatement.
What I am going to explain, is the formula I have used to take small amounts of money like $2,000 to
over S40,000, S10,000 to $110.000 and $10,000 to $1,100,000. These were not hypothetical victories; we
are not talking Monday morning quarterbacking-we are talking real time. real money, real profits that you
can spend to buy all the luxuries of life.
Until you use a money management approach, you will be a two-bit speculator, making some money
here, losing some there, but never making a big score. The brass ring of commodity trading -will always be
out of your grasp as you sashay from one trade to another. picking up dollars but not amassing wealth

171

172
The truly shocking thing about money management is how few people want to hear about it or learn the
correct formulas. When I am at a dinner or cocktail party, invariably the conversation turns to the markets.
People want hot tips, or to know how I have been able to make a living without working. They want my
secret. As if there is one!
The public or noneducated speculator thinks there is magic to trading, that somewhere, someplace
someone has a magic decoder ring that correctly signals market action.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Money is made in this business by getting an advantage in the
game, working that advantage on a consistent basis, and coupling this with a consistent approach to how
much of your bankroll you have behind each trade.

Most Traders Use a Hit-and-Miss Approach
Most traders who are confident enough to risk large sums of money, are also confident enough to
think they can figure out the future. That translates into two problem areas.
First, we think we can select the winning trades from the losers in our system or approach. Worst,
though, is knowing we are smart enough to do that we than trade an unequal number of contracts or shares
on our various trades.
just as we must consistently follow our battle plan to succeed, we must also be consistent in the amount
of money we marshal behind each trade. The instant you get the notion you can "for sure" spot the big
winners and back those trades with more contracts than you have been trading, trouble will find you.
Every now and then, you will hit it right and score big, but eventually, you will have a loss on that large
position. The loss is bad enough, but since you have overstepped good money management, you will then
become emotional and probably hold onto the trade too long in hopes of recouping the big hit. Thus things
don't get better, they get worse'
Let me turn to our well-worn LasVegas casino analogy one more time. Casinos all over the world limit
their losses by having a maximum amount the player can bet on any one decision in every game. A good
commodity trader should limit losses in the same way. Can you imagine a pit boss suddenly allowing a high
roller to bet more than the house limit because the boss "feels" the customer is going to lose on the next roll'
Of course not; the pit boss would be fired on the spot for breaking a cardinal rule of money management,
risking too much.
Trading too much, betting too much will cost you far more than bad market calls.

173

Approaches to Money Management One Is Right for You
There are many ways to go about this problem, many formulas to follow. But all the superior
systems to manage your investment dollars have a common tenet; you will increase the number of units,
contracts, or shares as you make money and decrease as you lose money. That is the essence of the sweet
science of the correct marshaling of your funds. This basic truth can be worked several ways.
I am going to show you the major ones in hopes you find the shoe that fits you. No discussion on the
subject could be complete without bringing up the name Ralph Vince. In 1986, I ran across a money
management formula for playing blackjack originally developed in a 1956 paper, "A New Interpretation of
Information Rate," regarding flow of information and now called the Kelly formula by commodity traders.
System Report
System Number: 387
System Rules:
Market:

9/11/98 3:06:15 PM
Description: bonds 7198 no bail
Test Period: 1/1/90 to 7/16/98

Base Unit Calculation Rules
ONE CONTRACT ONLY

Figure 13.1 Bond trading system without money management.

174
What I know about math, you could add up on your thumb and first finger, but I know "math works"
so I began trading commodities using the Kelly formula (see Figure 13. 1). Here it is with F representing
the amount of your account you will back every trade with:
F ((R + l)*P - I)/ R

P Percentage Accuracy of the System Winning
R Ratio of Winning Trade to Losing Trade

System Report
System Number: 387
System Rules:
Market:

9/11/98 3:06:15 PM
Description: bonds 7198 no bail
Test Period: 1/1/90 to 7/16/98

Base Unit Calculation Rules
BASE UNITS = account balance/(draw down*2)
If Account Balance Increases by: units last trade
INCREASE units on the next trade by: 1
If Account Balance Decreases by: units last trade
DECREASE units on the next trade by: 1

Figure 13.2 Varied results based on risk % ofaccount.

175
Let's look at an example using a system that is 65 percent accurate with wins 1.3 times the size of
losses. The math is done as follows using P as .65 and R and 1.3:
1.3 + 1*.65 - 1/1.3
2.3* .65 = 1.495 - 1 = 0.495/1.3 = 38% of account used to trade.
In this example, you would use 38 percent of your money behind every trade; if you had a $100,000
account you would use $38,000 and divide that by margin to arrive at the number of contracts (see Figure
13.2). If margin was $2,000, you would be trading 19 contracts.

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly of Money Management
What this formula did for my trading results was phenomenal. In a very short time, I became a real-life
legend, as very small amounts of money skyrocketed. Using a percentage of the money in the account, based
on Kelly divided by margin, was my approach. It was so good that I was kicked out of one trading contest
because the promoter could not believe the results were accomplished without cheating. To this day, people
on the Internet claim I used two accounts, one for winning trades and one for losers! They seem to forget, or
not know, that in addition to being highly illegal, all trades must have an account number on them before the
trade is entered, so how could the broker, or myself, know which trade should have the winning account
number on it?
But, what would you expect, when no one to my knowledge, had turned in that type of performance
ever before in the history of trading. To make matters "worse," I did it more than once. If it wasn't a fluke
or luck, the losers lament is that it must have been done by pinching some numbers or trades along the way!
What I was doing was revolutionary. And, as with any good revolution, some blood flowed in the
streets. The blood of disbelief was that first the National Futures Association and then the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission commandeered all my account records, looking for fraud!
The CFTC went through the brokerage firm's records with a finetooth comb, then took all my records
and kept them for over a year before giving them back. About a year after getting them back, guess what,
they wanted them back again! Success kills.
All this was due to market performance that was unheard of. One of the accounts I managed went from
$60,000 to close to $500,000 in about 18 months using this new form of money management. Then the
client sued me, her lawyer saying she should have made $54,000,000 instead of half a million.

176
Now my believers were willing to put me on a pedestal, if they could collect some money. The
revolution was more than anyone could handle.
What a story, huh?
But there are two sides to the edge of this money management sword.
My extraordinary performance attracted lots of money for me to manage. Lots of money, and then it
began to happen: the other side of the sword flashed in the sun. Amidst trying now to be a business manager
(i.e., running a money management firm) with precious few skills at doing something I am no good at
anyway, my market system or approach hit the skids, with a cold streak that saw equally spectacular
erosions of equity. Whereas I had been making money hand over fist, I was now losing money, hand over
fist!
Brokers and clients screamed, and most took the off-ramps, they simply could not handle this type of
volatility in their account balances. My own account, which had started the first of the year at $10,000 (yes,
that is $10,000.00) and reached $2,100,000 ... got hit along with everyone else's ... it too was caught in the
whirlpool, spiraling down to $700,000.
About then, everyone jumped ship but me. Hey, I am a commodity trader, I like roller coasters, is there
another form of life? Not that I knew, so I stayed on, trading the account back to $ 1, 100,000 by the end of
1987. What a year!
Watching all this over my shoulder every day was Ralph Vince, when we were working together on
systems and money management. Long before I could see it, he saw it, saw there was a fatal flaw in the
Kelly formula. I was too blind; I kept trading it, while Ralph, math genius that he is, began intense research
into money management, the culmination of which are three great books. His first was The Mathematics of
Money Management, followed by Portfolio Management Formulas, and my favorite, The New Money
Management. These are all published by John Wiley and Sons, New York, and are mustreads for any serious
trader or money manager.
Ralph noticed the error of Kelly, which is that it was originally formulated to assist in implementing the
flow of electronic bits, then used for blackjack. The rub comes from the simple fact that blackjack is not
commodity or stock trading. In blackjack, your potential loss on each wager is limited to the chips you put
up, whereas your potential gain will always be the same in relationship to the chips bet.
We speculators don't have such an easy life. The size of our wins and losses bounces all over the place.
Sometimes we get big winners, sometimes miniscule ones. Our losses reflect the same pattern: they are
random in size. Figure 13.3 shows a trade-by-trade recap on a system I use so you can see the irregularity of
wins and losses.

177
As soon as Ralph realized this, he could explain the wild gyrations in my equity swings; they came
about because we were using the wrong formula! This may seem pretty basic as we are about to enter a new
century, but back then we were in the midst of a revolution in money management and this stuff was not
easy to see. We were tracking and trading where, to the best of my knowledge no one had gone before. What
we saw were some phenomenal trading results, so we did not want to wander too far from whatever it was
we were doing.
Ralph came up with an idea he calls Optimal F; it is similar to Kelly, but unlike Kelly can adapt to
trading markets and gives you a fixed percentage of your account balance to bankroll all your trades. Let's
look at what can happen with this general approach.
