
RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Time invokes an indicator’s power as it compares key values and marks developing trends. Periodbased snapshots sum up this price-volume activity and quantify relative movement. Fresh
calculations then examine each new piece of data so the swing trader can make informed
predictions about future price direction. Indicator time frames destroy the best tool’s effectiveness
when they don’t align properly with current cycles or holding period. Alternatively, resonant time
readings with mediocre tools will generate startling accuracy in prediction.
Study of market volume has two primary functions. First, it attempts to measure actual levels of
accumulation and distribution hidden under the massive flow of the ticker tape. Second, it gathers
up the crowd’s divergent impulses and evokes graphic images of their herd behavior. Volume
indicators comprise a significant subset of all technical analysis. But they offer far less useful
information than most price-based tools.

FIGURE 5.4
Layered indicators through multiple time frames build a 3D landscape of short-term trends, cycles, and
congestion. Both the 5-minute and 60-minute Nextel charts feature 13-bar Bollinger Bands with 5- and 8-bar
simple MAs. A trend-following MACD histogram under the 60-minute chart tracks momentum while the
oscillating Stochastics under the 5-minute chart measures short-term buying and selling cycles. The best trades
arise when features through different time frames come into perfect alignment.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The lack of a simple linear relationship between volume and price change frustrates attempts to
make accurate predictions. Volume leads the crowd as often as it lags, and it always seems to make
perfect sense in hindsight. Timing trades to volume signals alone yields very poor results. Always
combine volume study with price action before making important decisions. Swing traders should
apply a simple histogram and accumulation-distribution overview to most charts. But move on
quickly to more urgent matters unless the emotional crowd demands a more detailed examination.

BUILDING CUSTOM INDICATORS
Most technical indicators tune to preadjusted settings by the author, charting software or website.
Use these canned inputs to track crowd behavior, but set them aside when growing skills demand
original strategies. Trends and opportunities exist throughout all time frames. Proper choice of both
indicators and their related settings requires considerable attention. Common parameters can
misalign with particular tactics and trigger execution decisions that depend on false information.

Vary time frame to track cyclical price behavior and build a 3D trend model. Place one custom set
above and below a central study that correlates with the chosen holding period. This may require
plotting different indicator types for each length chart. For example, to track faster signals on
intraday holds between 1 and 3 hours, try a 6-17-9 MACD histogram on a 60-minute chart, 5-3-3
Stochastics on the 5-minute, and watch the broad daily action with 8-day Bollinger Bands.
Many indicators apply smoothing averages to their raw calculations. These slow down choppy
output and filter individual data to emit fewer false signals. Swing traders apply these moving
averages in different ways to remove inherent bias from the classic formula. Exponential MAs offer
the most common variation. This measure applies greater weight to more recent input and filters the
double count tendency of simple MAs. Experiment with alternative MA calculations when
indicators require a smoother appearance. The varied output may improve a particular tactic or
method. Use this custom technique to speed up, slow down, or filter out certain levels of data.
When a classic analysis method gains popularity with the masses, price adjusts to undermine its
most common outcome. An indicator may stop working entirely when the trading majority bases
decisions on that price examination. This popularity forces constant reevaluation of indicator
effectiveness and choice of parameters. Common knowledge focuses upon specific time periods and
smoothing averages. Swing traders adjust by phasing their parameters ahead of or behind those of
the crowd. This capitalizes on the herd instinct and uses its behavior to build trading profits.
Canned indicators never answer all of the important questions for each promising setup. Because
this limitation adversely affects performance, develop customized views of market activity that
reflect and support unique strategies. Start with pieces of popular tools already in existence. More
importantly, learn to articulate exactly what new information will support evolving tactics. Identify
the question first and then compose an original way to answer it.
Test many variations of a new math application before moving on to the next step. Once in place,
find optimum smoothing averages through trial and error. Then run this new indicator through a
systems testing program such as TradeStation. These heavy number-crunching software programs
take complex data sets and evaluate them through numerous markets to measure how well they
signal primary buy and sell zones.

PATTERN TOOLS
Apply price pattern tools before beginning any other chart analysis. They provide the core
knowledge required to execute original and profitable trading strategies.
TABLE 5.1
Core Elements of Popular Indicators
Indicator
Element
ADX
Bar Range
Chaikin oscillator
Volume
Commodity channel
Price deviation
index
Historical volatility
Price deviation
MACD histogram
Price moving average
McClellan oscillator
Daily breadth
Up closes vs. down
MoneyFlow
closes

Rate of change
RSI
Stochastics

Price
Up closes vs. down
closes
Bar close vs. bar range

TRENDLINES
Trendlines reflect hidden market order as well as self-fulfilling prophecy. Because many market
participants watch straight-line extensions of two prior highs or lows, odds increase that any
extended line will support or resist price when struck. Trendlines grow stronger after each
successful test. Some may persist for years, while others may break in minutes. An individual
trendline will print on the arithmetic or log scale chart, but not both at the same time. Always toggle
between chart types to uncover these important S/R barriers.
Trendlines have many applications beyond their well-known uses. The indicator plots average
momentum for the trend that forms the line. The rate of price change up or down the line always
remains constant. Therefore, these straight lines reflect momentum convergence-divergence when
compared with other price inputs. For example, momentum increases when price expands away
from a trendline and decreases when it rolls toward the line. Also monitor the distance between
trendlines and major moving averages. This oscillation provides significant timing feedback when
used in conjunction with Pattern Cycles.
Trendlines often print in a psychotic manner. This odd phenomenon occurs through many scenarios.
For example, important lines or channels may vanish for no apparent reason and then reappear
unexpectedly months or years after their departure, still exerting major influence. Or an apparently
normal trendline may suddenly act as a price swivel, rather than support or resistance. Price strikes
it once, and the line holds but then breaks on a second test. Price thrusts through, pulls back, and
tests successfully from the other side, but then fails once more and jumps back to the original side.
The line becomes a central pivot axis that drives swing traders crazy.
Legitimate trendline breaks display common price mechanics. Bars expand sharply away from the
violation point on greater-than-average volume. Pullbacks occur, but not until price prints a good
distance away from the break point. Volume then declines on a slow reversal back toward the
former barrier. When price breaks a trendline on low participation and doesn’t expand quickly, an
immediate jump back across S/R often occurs. This behavior triggers an excellent pattern failure
signal in the opposite direction. Watch for price to draw a miniature reversal pattern right across the
trendline. Use these small double tops and bottoms to signal a low-risk fade entry.
The relationship between trendlines and the charting landscape shifts relative to the time frame of
each element. The swing trader must properly tune time to explore different aspects of momentum.
Make certain the time inputs match holding period for the intended execution. For example, the plot
of a 6-month trendline has little meaning for intraday trading unless price touches it that day. But
the return of a 5-minute candlestick to a 3-hour trendline may pinpoint a profitable entry zone.
The first break in a major trendline does not signify a reversal. It flags the end of a move and
beginning of sideways congestion. Take the time to understand the difference between that
phenomenon and an actual trend change. Congestion represents an important feature of the
underlying trend. It often leads to a new price thrust in the same direction as the previous one.
Sometimes congestion evolves into a legitimate reversal, but other conditions must support the
change first.

FIGURE 5.5
Three variations of a 20-day moving average can produce very different results. The linear weighted MA logs the
fastest overall signals on this Verticalnet chart, while the simple MA lags far behind. Notice how the distance
between the simple and linear weighted averages exceeds 10% through some volatile periods in VERT’s price
development. Choose moving averages that correspond with temperament and timing. For example, aggressive
traders can respond quickly with faster MA signals while defensive traders avoid whipsaws with slower ones.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Price action rings a profitable buy signal when it remounts a broken trendline. This occurs after a
pullback that follows the breakdown. Momentum reverses in the direction of the trendline, and
significant participation spikes price back through the line. Support from this new floor should be
strong and eventually push the growing rally into another breakout move. Look for price waves to
print a series of rising trendlines that arc upward above the original remount level.
Charting landscapes may print conflicting trendlines within the same time frame. This adds
considerable noise to any trade analysis. Each intersecting force must resolve price direction
through crowd participation. When two or more trendlines clash, consider a quick position exit until
conditions resolve. Don’t confuse this event with trendlines that print within different time frames.
These represent important profit opportunities. This setup predicts that price within the smaller
wave will come under the influence of the larger trendline and reverse course.

FIGURE 5.6
Siebel Systems builds a series of stepping trendlines while momentum sharply increases. Each trendline generates a
constant rate of price change for that segment of the rally. As it approaches parabolic movement, SEBL collapses back
into a substantial correction. Note how price returns to test the prior trendlines, which now define clear stages of
declining momentum.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

PSYCHOTIC TRENDLINES
Always seek innovative methods to evaluate new setups. Many odd chart shapes have
characteristics that generate original ways to look at the markets. For example, standard trading
wisdom uncovers a trendline whenever three or more relative highs or lows line up. This exercise
sketches a straight line under rising trends and over falling ones. But many participants fail to
realize that a trendline drawn through both highs and lows contains predictive properties as well.
Psychotic trendlines (PTs) encompass all straight-line phenomena not covered by classic charting
landscape rules. They recognize that some market participants will act on the extension of any two
price pivots. PTs don’t have the power of normal trendlines but can exert tremendous influence on
price development. For example, watch their great impact when vanishing trendlines suddenly
reappear after months or years. Evaluate PTs in relation to other chart elements and use them for
simple cross-verification. Also determine whether they define classic S/R or swing axis events.

FIGURE 5.7
Adobe enters a vertical rally after remounting a broken trendline. Whipsaws right at the line after the initial break
suggest a lack of conviction as price rolls over and drops through 55. The violation also occurs within a bull flag
that declines at a mirror angle to the prior rally. Note how price first gaps up out of the flag and then uses the next
bar to climb the trendline.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

A straight line drawn across any two relative highs or lows should produce a random extension with
no predictive power. But in Methods of a Wall Street Master, Vic Sperandeo illustrates how his
two-point method will locate breakouts when combined with specific trading rules. Apply PTs in a
similar manner. But any strategy must also address several variations since these lines represent
price pivots as often as S/R levels.
First locate a PT on a chart of interest. Then see whether price gaps through it repeatedly or whether
bars swivel back and forth across its boundaries. This signals a pivot bias for that line. Next
categorize whether the slope trend is up or down and whether it acts more as support or resistance.
Then trade primarily in the direction of the slope if the PT shows classic S/R. For example, if the
trend descends and displays price resistance, sell that market at the line.
Apply simple trading rules with pivot PTs regardless of trend slope. Expect that price will hold the
first two times that it strikes the line but fail the third time. This tracks the same strategy that swing
traders use for the second test of a horizontal high or low. If the PT also exhibits multiple gaps

through past pivots, odds increase for a gap to ultimately break the line. But don’t take the trade
unless cross-verification also pinpoints a breakout or reversal at this level.

PARALLEL PRICE CHANNELS
Parallel price channels (PPCs) build across the highs and lows of relative price movement. They
print two sets of trendlines at an equal distance to each other and can persist for long periods of
time. PPCs have greater predictive value than simple trendlines and work with many different
strategies. They form on either arithmetic or log scale charts, but not both at the same time. They
owe their existence to Fibonacci proportion within trend development.
FIGURE 5.8
Lucent gaps above a psychotic trendline on the 60-minute chart. The original line shows typical support on the first test
but follows with a critical violation. Price bottoms and draws a simple rising wedge several weeks later that pushes up
into the line and explodes through on high volume. This chart also illustrates typical behavior for a remounted trendline
as the crowd returns for another long-side opportunity.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

PPCs can display all the psychotic tendencies of regular trendlines. They exhibit vanishing
phenomena that can persist for years. They will often criss-cross into complex mosaic patterns that
box price in all directions. Frequently, small channels embed themselves into larger ones. At times,
swing traders may find three or four sublevel PPCs on a single major trend. These multiple-time-

frame PPCs have a great advantage over trendlines. Complex trading systems, such as Elder’s
Triple Screen, can be applied with great ease when they appear.
Channels persist because the crowd sees and acts upon them. This unique formation demonstrates
considerable potency, although modern PPCs print more violations than in the past. While other
common patterns whipsaw participants into oblivion, channels print their classic mechanics more
consistently. It may be that this stable Fibonacci structure cannot be easily altered by the insider
manipulation that weakens other patterns.
How can four chart points connect so easily into parallel lines in our random walk world? They
present a strong argument for technical analysis all by themselves. While logic suggests that these
formations rarely occur, the opposite is true. PPCs print more often than clean trendlines on most
charts. Their frequency probably generates due to self-fulfilling prophecy. Market participants
naturally target a fourth strike after the chart draws the first three points. If a reversal does appear at
that level, the pattern confirms and improves the odds that the next test will also succeed. The
formation then strengthens with each strike and persists until a greater force overcomes it.
PPCs offer more versatility than trendlines in finding low risk entry. The two primary lines display
natural reward targets and focus attention on clear violation levels. Harmonic parallel lines often
form between the two extremes. These intermediate S/R levels target short-term swings, especially
when they intersect with moving averages. Violation of any harmonic line raises the odds that price
will continue to the next parallel support level. When the broader formation prints with embedded
countertrend PPCs, swing traders access a complete pattern mosaic that guides price development.
Channels extend the reach of classic technical analysis. These unique lines reveal vital information
on a trend’s underlying mechanics. Channel traders maintain their edge over the competition since
few books examine them in detail and the crowd remains unaware of their true power.
Unfortunately, clean trendlines don’t print often in modern markets. Insiders know exactly where
these lines set up and repeatedly violate them to trigger volume. But those same players never see
PPCs and enable low-risk positions just below the radar.
PPCs demonstrate Fibonacci behavior that allows visual traders to make accurate predictions
without using a calculator. Many channel strategies closely follow trendline and S/R concepts.
Choose setups based on the channel’s time frame persistence. The longer a pattern endures, the
more likely that it will support the trade. Always search for other S/R to cross-verify PPC extremes.
When moving averages, Bollinger Bands, or Fibonacci retracements cross parallels, risk decreases
and potential reward increases.
Channels may take months to form and last for years. Due to broad movement over long periods of
time, locate monthly and weekly PPCs with log scale charts rather than arithmetic ones. Observe all
the S/R information on these large and complex formations and then drill down to very short time
periods to build detailed insight on embedded price movement.

GAPS
Gaps reveal sudden and important shifts in crowd sentiment through a single price bar. They can
print anywhere within the charting landscape but tend to occur in several distinct patterns. Each
type predicts specific characteristics in regard to persistence, response during retracements, and the
impact on trend. Gaps cut through many time frames and trends, but they represent very different
phenomena in each one. For example, a breakout move in one time frame may print an exhaustion
event in another.

FIGURE 5.9
Parallel price channels build harmonic lines into Motorola’s decline. Note the clear support and resistance of the two
inner channels, which bounce price around like a pinball. Even down gaps within the larger pattern respond to these
harmonic levels as they print. Draw new PPCs in as much detail as possible to identify these inner lines and other
obvious swing pivot zones. Then use them for trade execution in combination with other charting landscape features.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Gap importance relies upon location, extension, and volume. They can print in the major trend
direction or against it. When a major gap opposes the current market momentum, it represents the
only chart phenomenon that signals trend change without a common top or bottom pattern. A short
or long price bar can stand at the far end of a gap move. Long bars tend to predict a quick followthrough in the direction of the gap. Short bars suggest sideways action or a pullback test into the
violated space.
FIGURE 5.10
Sandisk Corp. prints a five-wave rally with a well-organized gap structure on the 60-minute chart. The breakaway gap
pushes through the old downtrend line into an inverse head and shoulders neckline at the (eventual) 38% level. After a
short pullback, a sharp continuation gap prints right through the midpoint of the trend. Then price bases for three bars at
the 62% level before a broad exhaustion gap marks the end of the rally.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The gap’s location reveals both the character and mechanics for subsequent price action. Sharp gaps
through clear S/R signify important breakouts and breakdowns. Pressure can build so strongly at
these levels that the opening tick prints far from the last close. Emotional bursts can trigger
multiple gaps as active trends build momentum. Gaps that print within congestion display far less
persistence and may fill with little warning or volume. And high intensity gaps that occur late in
strong rallies or selloffs often signal the end of a trend.
Participation will limit or fuel gap strength. Certain S/R events only verify when strong volume
accompanies them. For example, breakout gaps without adequate volume invite a strong reversal
even if they print at a perfect location. This relationship between gaps and crowd participation relies
upon complex interactions. For example, a high-volume gap may end price movement in that
direction if it uses up the last available supply for that trend. But another gap with less volume may
leave enough on the table to ensure new surges of momentum.
Old traders’ wisdom advises that gaps get filled. This simple expression describes the mechanics of
retracement found throughout most market trends. However, some gaps never fill. This knowledge
dictates a fresh approach to these specialized patterns. Swing traders must learn the characteristics
of each gap to apply the strategy that aligns best with its behavior. Start by identifying the location
of the event on the trend-range axis.
