
V

olatility is a measure of price variation, either the total movement
between low and high over some fixed period of time or a variation
away from a central measure, like an average. Both concepts of volatility are
valid and useful. The higher the volatility, the higher the risk.
A change in volatility implies a change in the expected price range to come. A
volatile security offers a wide range of possible outcomes. A nonvolatile security delivers a narrower and thus more predictable range of outcomes. The
main reason to keep an eye on volatility is to adjust your profit targets and
your stop-loss to reflect the changing probability of gain or loss.
In this chapter, I describe three ways you can measure volatility, and discuss
their virtues and drawbacks. Then I describe the most popular way traders incorporate consideration of volatility into their trading plans — the
Bollinger band. I also introduce another kind of band — the average true
range band.

Catching a Slippery Concept
Volatility is a concept that can easily slip through your fingers if you aren’t
careful. Just about everybody uses the word volatility incorrectly from a statistician’s viewpoint — and even statisticians squabble over definitions. To
the mathematically inclined trader, volatility usually refers to the standard
deviation of price changes (see the “Considering the standard deviation” section). Standard deviation is not the only measure of volatility, but it suffices
for most technical analysis purposes. In general usage, volatility means variance, and that’s how I use it in this chapter.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

244 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Variance is a statistical concept that measures the distance on each bar
between the high and low from the mean (such as a moving average). You
calculate variance by taking the difference between the high or low from the
average, squaring each result (eliminating the minus signs), adding them
up, and dividing by the number of data points. Squaring magnifies wildly
aberrant prices, so the bigger the variation from the average and the more
instances of such big variations in any one series, the higher the volatility.
Traders do not use variance as a stand-alone measure or indicator, and
it’s not offered in software charting packages. Why? Because variance isn’t
directly useful as a separate measure from the standard deviation, which is
essentially the square root of variance.
Time frame is everything. How you perceive volatility depends entirely on
the time frame you’re looking at. Failure to specify a specific time frame is
why you see so many conflicting generalizations about volatility. The period
over which you measure volatility has a direct effect on how you think about
volatility and, therefore, what kind of a trader you are. Your trading style isn’t
only a function of what indicators you like, but also of how you perceive risk.
Two traders can use the same indicators but get different results because they
manage the trade differently by looking at volatility differently (scaling in and
out, choosing a stop-loss level, and so on).
In Figure 14-1, your eye tells you that the low-variance prices on the left-hand
side of the chart are less volatile and therefore less risky to trade than the
high-variance prices on the right-hand side of the chart, even when the highvariance prices are in a trending mode. And that’s the point about volatility — it
describes the level of risk. In the following sections, I go into more detail about
the nature of volatility, including both high and low levels.

How volatility arises
Think of volatility in terms of crowd sentiment. Volatility rises when traders
get excited about a new move. They anticipate taking the price to new highs
or lows, which arouses greed in bulls putting on new positions and fear in
bears, who scramble to get out of the way in a cascade of stop losses. The
start of a new move is when you get higher highs and lower lows. Volatility
tends to be abnormally low just before a turning point and abnormally high
just as the price is taking off in the first big thrust of a new trend. It is also,
however, a sad fact of trading life that sometimes volatility is high or low for
no price-related reason you can find.
High volatility means trading is riskier but has more profit potential, while low
volatility means less immediate risk.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 14: Estimating Volatility
Volatility isn’t inherently good or bad. Stability of volatility is a good thing
because it allows you to estimate maximum potential gains and losses with
greater accuracy. Every security has its own volatility norm that changes
over time as the fundamentals and trader population changes. Sometimes
you can impute a “personality” to a security that is really a reflection of the
collective risk appetite of its traders.

Low volatility with trending
Go to Figure 14-1. As the price series begins, you instantly see that it’s trending upward. Your ability to see the trend is due in part to the orderliness of
the move. You see the trend, not variations away from it.
A trending security that has low volatility offers the best trade, because it has a
high probability of giving you a profit and low probability of delivering a loss. It
is also easier on the nerves. Here’s why low volatility means the best trade:
✓ You can project the price range of a low-volatility trending security into
the future with more confidence than a high-volatility security.
✓ You generally hold a low-volatility trending security for a longer period
of time, reducing trading costs such as brokerage commissions.

HIGH VARIANCE
WITHOUT TRENDING
HIGH VARIANCE
WITH TRENDING

CONTRACTION OF BAR
HIGH-LOW
LOW VARIANCE
WITHOUT TRENDING
Figure 14-1:
Degrees of
volatility.

LOW VARIANCE WITH TRENDING

www.pdfdummies.com

245

246 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Low volatility without trending
A security that’s range-trading sideways with little variation from one day
to the next is simply untradeable in that time frame. You have no basis on
which to form an expectation of a gain, and without an expectation of gain,
don’t trade it. You can reduce the time frame (from one day to one hour, for
example) to make visible and tradeable the minor peaks and troughs. Note
that options traders don’t care about trendedness and see trading opportunities in both extra-low and extra-high volatility environments.
If a price is trading sideways without directional bias but the high-low range of
the bars contracts or widens, now you’re cooking with gas. Range contraction
and expansion are powerful forecasting tools of an upcoming breakout. You
can start planning the trade. In Figure 14-1, every bar is the same height except
the ones in the circle, which are narrowing. The drop in high-low range and
therefore in volatility often precedes a breakout, although you don’t know in
advance in which direction unless you also have a reliable pattern (Chapter 9),
including candlesticks (see Chapter 8).

High volatility with trending
You may think that the degree of volatility doesn’t matter when your security is trending, but an increase in volatility automatically increases the risk
of loss. You may start fiddling with your indicators to adapt them to current
conditions. Tinkering with the parameters of indicators when you have a live
trade in progress is almost always a mistake. A better response to rising volatility is to recalculate potential gain against potential loss (Chapter 5).

High volatility without trending
When a security isn’t trending but has high volatility in a wide range, it’s
called “trader’s nightmare.” This is the right-hand section of the price series
in Figure 14-1. In this situation, the range is so wide you can’t identify a breakout; you see spiky one- and two-day reversals as bulls and bears slug it out,
making it hard to find entries or to set systematic stops.
The solution to high volatility in a nontrending case is to stop trading the
security, or to narrow the time frame down to an intraday time frame. Often
you can find tradeable swings within 15-minute or 60-minute bars that don’t
exist on the daily chart. (Another choice is spread trading in options.)

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 14: Estimating Volatility

Measuring Volatility
Volatility is the degree of variation of a price series over time. You can
measure volatility in plain or fancy ways. In financial analysis, volatility
usually means one thing — the standard deviation, which I discuss in the
“Considering the standard deviation” section later in the chapter. Before
tackling that, look at other useful measures of volatility.

Tracking the maximum move
One way to measure volatility is to capture the largest price change over x
number of days — the maximum move, also called gross move. You subtract
the lowest low from the highest high over 10 days or 100 days or some other
number of days. You use the resulting maximum move to set a profit target
(maximum favorable excursion) or worst-case stop loss (maximum adverse
excursion). See Chapter 5 for information on setting stops.
In Figure 14-2, the top window shows the highest high in a rolling 30-day
period minus the lowest low in the same 30-day period — the maximum
move. Notice that at the beginning and middle of the chart, you could make
as much as $30 in a 30-day period in this security, but then the volatility of
the price change tapers off to under $10 by the end of the chart. At that point,
you’re taking less risk of a catastrophic drop in the price over any 30-day
period, but your profit potential has just been cut to one-third of its previous
glory, too — the usual trade-off between risk and reward. Keep reading for
more on the maximum and minimum moves in the following sections.
Volatility changes. Projecting the volatility of the last 30 days to the next 30
days is to assume conditions will not change — but conditions always change.

Maximum move and trend
In Figure 14-2, seeing the connection between the 30-day maximum move in
the top window and the prices in the bottom window is hard. The straight
line starting at the middle of the bottom window is the linear regression (see
Chapter 10). The line slopes upward, meaning that the price is in a slight
uptrend — but at the same time, volatility is on a downtrend. This is a good
combination for you — trendedness is delivering new profits at an ever-lower
risk of a big one-period loss. But remember, low volatility precedes a breakout, so it may not be a good deal for long.
The price trend can differ in size and slope from the volatility trend. Sometimes
they’re in sync, rising or falling together, or they can move in opposite directions. Knowing something about the trend in the maximum move doesn’t
necessarily tell you anything about the trend in prices, and vice versa. In other
words, volatility is often independent of price trendedness.

www.pdfdummies.com

247

248 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
30
25
20
15
10
5
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55

Figure 14-2:
Thirty-day
minimum &
maximum of
a stock.

40000
30000
20000
10000
x10
b Mar Apr

May Jun Jul

Aug Sep Oct

Nov Dec 2003 Feb Mar

Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug

Maximum move and holding period
In Figure 14-3, the orderly price series has a net change from the lowest low
to the highest high (A to B) of exactly the same amount as the disorderly
price series below it. But obviously the disorderly series implies a greater
risk of loss if you have to exit before the period ends. The trendedness of each
security is the same, as shown by the identical linear regression slopes.
Figure 14-3 illustrates that measuring the maximum high-low range over a
fixed period of time fails to capture the risk of holding a position during the
period, so don’t write your expected holding period in stone.

Considering the standard deviation
Maximum move (see preceding section) measures the gross low-to-high
move over a period, but the bottom chart in Figure 14-3 exhibits a different
kind of volatility that isn’t captured by the maximum move. The disorderly
price series has the same degree of trendedness and the same low-to-high
outcome over the period, but it’s obviously a riskier trend. What is the right
way to express that riskiness?

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 14: Estimating Volatility

ORDERLY
B

A
DISORDERLY (NOISY)
B
Figure 14-3:
Orderly and
disorderly
price series.

A

The answer is the standard deviation. The standard deviation is a measure
of the dispersion of prices away from the average. The wider the spread, the
higher the standard deviation. The concept is in the same statistical family
as standard error, which I introduce in Chapter 11. The standard deviation is
measured from a moving average and measures the actual variance of each
price away from the centerline.
I bet you were expecting a chart showing standard deviation right about
here. Well, charting software does offer it but it’s not very useful as a standalone measure. Hardly anyone actually looks at the raw standard deviation on a chart, because we have better applications for it. See the section
“Applying Volatility Measures: Bollinger Bands” later in the chapter.

Using the average true range indicator
Another way to view volatility is to look at the average high-low range over
x number of days. The best version of the high-low range is the average
true range (ATR), which incorporates gaps by substituting the close for the
gapped high or low. See Chapter 7 for the calculation method and for illustrations of expanding and contracting ranges. To summarize here:
✓ Range expansion: The highs and lows are getting farther apart; volatility
is rising. Range expansion provides a bigger profit opportunity and an
equivalent increase in risk of gain or loss.
✓ Range contraction: The highs and lows are moving closer together, and
you may think that risk is lower, too. But this is true only up to a point —
the point of a breakout.

www.pdfdummies.com

249

250 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
In Figure 14-4, the ATR indicator in the top window starts falling after the oneday big-bar rise that marks the beginning of the support line. You don’t know
whether you can draw the support line until afterwards, but you can see the
ATR indicator failing to match that spiky high and continue to fall. The price is
rising, but the indicator is falling. And as usual, a divergence between indicator
and price is a warning sign. Sure enough, right after the highest high, you get
a series of lower highs and can draw a resistance line (see Chapter 10). Pretty
soon the price breaks under support.

HIGHER HIGH

Figure 14-4:
Average
true range
indicator
(ATR).

RISING SUPPORT

BREAKOUT

Applying Volatility Measures:
Bollinger Bands
The most popular volatility measure is the Bollinger band, invented by John
Bollinger. He charted a simple 20-day moving average of the closing price
with a band on either side consisting of two standard deviations of the
moving average, effectively capturing about 95 percent of the variation away
from the average. See Figure 14-5.
You use Bollinger bands to display the price in the context of a norm set
at the 20-day moving average, which is the number of days that Bollinger’s
research showed is the most effective in detecting variance in U.S. equities. The bands display relative highs and relative lows in the context of the
moving average — they’re adaptive to the price by the amount of the standard deviation. The bands are, so to speak, moving standard deviations.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 14: Estimating Volatility

WALKING UP
THE BAND

THE SQUEEZE

Figure 14-5:
Bollinger
bands.

The price touching or slightly breaking the top of the band is a continuation
signal. Often the price continues to walk up or walk down the band, as shown
in Figure 14-5. A Bollinger band breakout is just like any other breakout — you
expect the price to continue moving in the same direction as the breakout.
At some point, every price thrust exhausts itself. Bollinger bands display the
end of the up move in two ways:
✓ The price bar stops hugging the top band in an up move, and slides
down to the center moving average (or farther). In Figure 14-5, the
retreat to the moving average occurs at the ellipse. As a general rule, the
failure to make a relative new high signals the end of the move, although
this time, the bulls made a second effort to keep the rally going. In this
case, the price was forming a double top (see Chapter 9).
✓ The bands contract. When the bands contract, the range is narrowing.
Traders are having second thoughts. They aren’t willing to test a new
high, but they aren’t willing to go short and generate new lows, either.
The narrowing of the trading range is named the squeeze and implies an
impending breakout. Figure 14-5 displays a reversal, but a reversal isn’t the
inevitable outcome. Breakouts can occur in the same direction as the original move, too. In this case, the downside breakout of the bottom of the band
occurred unusually quickly after an upside breakout of the top band.

www.pdfdummies.com

251

252 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
A rapid break of the opposite band is sometimes a head fake. In the case of a
downside move like the one in Figure 14-5, traders could have been overly
exuberant in taking profits after such a big run up to the high. See the upward
pullback from the down move in the two circles. Sometimes pullbacks keep
going, and the price resumes the uptrend — although hardly ever after breaking the bottom band like this one. To detect head fakes, use Bollinger bands
with other confirming indicators, especially momentum indicators like the relative strength index and MACD (Chapter 12).

Applying Stops with Average
True Range Bands
Bollinger bands are not generally used to set stops. The bands are equidistant from the moving average, so an upside breakout has the same statistical strength as a downside breakout. When you have a strongly trending
security, you can’t make a reversal move face a tougher breakout test — but
logically, you should. I call it a “prove it” test. Given that false breakouts are
so common, this reason makes it necessary and sufficient for you to consider
another type of band, as observed by system designer Steve Notis.
To use a band for a stop, you want the band to be asymmetrical, so that in an
uptrend, a down move has to be more severe than recent up moves to trigger
your stop. But you can’t filter Bollinger bands. Instead of using the standard
deviation to form the upper and lower bands, you can use a version of the
average true range (ATR). You can adjust the ATR as follows so that a breakout “proves” that it is statistically significant:
✓ Uptrend: Widen the distance of the lower band from the average.
✓ Downtrend: Widen the distance of the upper band from the average.
The greater width of one of the bands from the center moving average separates corrective moves from real reversals. This move can become labor
intensive, not least because before you can widen either band, you must be
sure of the trend direction.
In Figure 14-6, the price makes a bottom on the left-hand side and starts an up
move. The centerline is a moving average of the median price, or the average
of the high, low, and close. The bands are formed by taking a moving average
of the ATR and adding and subtracting it from the moving average.
This process creates an ATR test that a breakout has to pass to qualify as a
true breakout. When the price starts a new uptrend, the price breaking the
upper band confirms that you have identified the trend correctly.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 14: Estimating Volatility

3

1

2
Figure 14-6:
Average
true range
band.

A downside breakout has to pass a bigger test in an uptrend. Accordingly,
you widen the lower band by adding a percentage of the ATR to it. On the
chart in Figure 14-6, the lower band is 50 percent wider than the upper band
(it is 150 percent of the ATR). The last bar on the chart breaks the band, just
after the support line is broken. This is no mere retracement! You have a
double breakout of the trend (support) plus a volatility breakout (ATR band).
As with Bollinger bands, a breakout above the upper band signals continuation, but because breakouts are a sign of abnormally high volatility, you
can usually count on a pullback to the median. A longer-term position trader
would buy at the left-hand low and hold the break of the support line. A
swing trader, on the other hand, would sell at breakout “1” and go short
the security to the touch of the support line at point “2.” Now he becomes a
buyer again to point “3,” where high volatility again triggers a short position
that he holds to the break of the support line or final ATR band breakout.
Few traders would use the ATR breakout alone as the sole deciding factor.
On Figure 14-6, I put only a support line, but in practice, you would be looking
at other indicators. I didn’t do the profit-and-loss arithmetic in this case, but
it’s pretty clear that swing trader using volatility would have made a series
of gains that collectively added up to a higher profit than the trend-following
buy-and-hold trader.

www.pdfdummies.com

253

254 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 15

Ignoring Time:
Point-and-Figure Charting
In This Chapter
▶ Figuring out point-and-figure charting
▶ Looking at patterns
▶ Taking a look at breakouts
▶ Using point-and-figure with other indicators

P

oint-and-figure (“P&F”) charting strips away time and displays only significant prices on the chart. Significant prices are those that exceed the
high or low of a recent trading range by a specified amount. You ignore minor
moves — literally. You don’t even record them on your chart. The result is
filtered price action. You don’t see a price move in the opposite direction of
the current trend until it’s meaningful, according to a rule you set yourself, so
that you can have confidence when a reversal signal is accurate.
You can also easily identify patterns on point-and-figure charts, especially
support and resistance, and therefore, breakouts of support and resistance.
Point-and-figure charts look very different from standard bar charts, but after
you get used to them, you may find their directness and simplicity addictive.
P&F charting emphasizes a shift in the price range as the basis of trading decisions, which is in keeping with the idea of measuring crowd behavior (see
Chapter 3). The purpose of the display method is to filter out irrelevant prices
to isolate the trends.
P&F analysis is suitable for trading that has a medium- to long-term holding
period — weeks and months. The only way to know whether point-and-figure
charting is for you is to try it out on your chosen securities and see what
gains you would’ve made, how many trades it requires of you, and so on. In
general, point-and-figure charting on a daily basis is the easiest technique
of all and the best way for a beginner to start getting a feel for making rulebased trading decisions. So what are you waiting for? This chapter is ready to
guide you through what you need to know about point-and-figure charting.
