
COMMON SIGNALS
Now that you're familiar with the benefits of using candlestick charts versus standard bar or line
charts, it's important to know that there are two major types of candlestick signals: extreme and
neutral. As mentioned, candles reveal the intensity of the imbalance between supply and demand.
Extreme candles with long real bodies reflect intensity on the part of buyers or sellers, while neutral
candles with very small or even non-existent real bodies reflect lack of intensity on the part of both
buyers and sellers. By assessing the intensity factor of buyers or sellers, you can then use that
knowledge in context to assess the odds of a price move continuing to move in the same direction or
possibly reversing to a new direction.

Extreme Candles: Marabozu
The most bullish candlestick opens at the low of the bar and closes at the high of the bar, while the
most bearish candlestick opens at the high of the bar and closes at the low of the bar—in both cases
exhibiting larger range expansion than previous bars.
Figure 4.5 shows an example of these most bullish and most bearish candlesticks, which have full
real bodies and almost no wicks or shadows.
FIGURE 4.5 Marabozu Candles and Standard Bars

Unlike bar charts, certain candlesticks have unique names which traders use to clarify the concepts
of supply and demand. The bullish candle shown in Figure 4.5 where the open is the low of the bar
and the close is the high of the bar is labeled a Marabozu. These particular candles show that one side
of the market dominated the other side, and can be excellent signals for entry when confirmed with
other methods. Marabozus are extreme range expansion bars that have little to no upper or lower
shadows and very wide real bodies.

A candle that opens at the low and then steadily rises to form a wide bar which closes at the high is
called a Bullish Marabozu, which gives a glimpse inside the supply and demand relationship between
participating buyers and sellers. This relationship shows that buyers were dominant over sellers
during that particular time period which could have forecasting ability into future price action if
indeed the relationship has clearly shifted to the buyers. If looking at a daily chart, these would
indicate trend days on the intraday charts. These powerful candles suggest that odds favor higher
prices yet to come because buyers overpowered sellers during the period the candle formed.
The opposite of a Bullish Marabozu is a Bearish Marabozu, which implies that sellers were more
aggressive than buyers and dominated the period in which the candle formed. If a Bearish Marabozu
forms at an upper resistance level or in the context of a larger downtrend, then this single candle
sends a message that odds favor lower prices ahead.
In Figure 4.6, Google (GOOG) gives a great example of a strong, powerful bullish Marabozu and
how that candle as seen on the daily chart is constructed by smaller bars on the intraday charts.
FIGURE 4.6 October 17, 2009 Shows the Internal Construction of a Daily Marabozu Chart for
Google by Showing the Five-minute Intraday Bars

Google's stock begins the trading day rising from the $500.00-per-share level and continues higher
with minimal pauses until buyers push the price to close at the highs of the session at $517.00. This is
a good example of the logic of extreme candles that open at one end and close at the opposite end.
Buyers dominated the sellers for the entire session, and this insight gives us clues that the bullish
dominance may continue into the next trading day. Intraday traders label such days as trend days.
The opposite of a bullish extreme Marabozu candle is a bearish Marabozu candle, which conveys a
bearish signal for prices, indicating that sellers dominated the action for the duration of the bar.
Google (GOOG) forms a Bearish Marabozu candle a few weeks later in October 2009 after Figure
4.6 showed the Bullish Marabozu.
In the creation of a bearish Marabozu, the high of the day occurs at the open as sellers dominate the
action in a trend day down to close at the low of the session. In Figure 4.7, there is a tiny lower
shadow or wick which indicates that price closed slightly off the low of the session. However, the
main idea is that sellers were dominant on the intraday chart, pushing price lower from the opening
session into the close. In both the bullish and bearish Marabozu candles, it is important to understand
the logic of the formation of the candle, which represents a powerful move on a lower timeframe,

such as the intraday chart for a daily candle, the daily chart of a weekly candle, or the weekly chart
for a monthly candle.
FIGURE 4.7 A View inside the Intraday Creation of a Marabozu Candle Google (GOOG) October
30, 2009 (with slight lower shadow)

Extreme candles send the signal that odds favor continuation in the direction the candle closed,
under the principle that trends have greater probabilities of continuing than of reversing. A single
candle contains many bars of lower timeframes that reflect the balance or imbalance between sellers
and buyers, which affects how price moves.
Traders can find bullish extreme candles at the end of a downtrend, which would signal a strong
price reversal to the upside, as was the case on the daily chart of the S&P 500 with the bullish
Marabozu reversal candle on March 10, 2009. Powerful candles signal that buyers have taken control
and would be expected to push prices higher, leading traders to buy on any price move higher than the
close of the Marabozu candle to play for a potential trend reversal.
In addition to being reversal signals into key support levels, or in the context of a downtrend,
extreme candles can also be considered continuation signals if they form away from a key support or
resistance level. The underlying signal of extreme candles is that one side of the market is dominant
over the other, and may continue to be dominant in the next few candles of the chart.
Figure 4.8 shows the daily chart of Google and the two Marabozu candles that formed as a result of
the intraday charts as seen in Figures 4.6 and 4.7.
FIGURE 4.8 The Daily Chart of Google (GOOG) Showing the Bullish and Bearish Marabozu Candle
Examples

The Bullish Marabozu of October 17, 2009 (Figure 4.6) occurred after price was in an upswing that
began in early October, while the Bearish Marabozu that formed October 30, 2009 (Figure 4.7)
occurred after a price resistance formed at $560.00 per share. In this example, both Marabozu
candles formed as continuation patterns near the central part of a price swing instead of serving a
purpose as a reversal candle.
There is a similar candle pattern to a Marabozu that serves exclusively as a reversal signal, and it
is a two-bar candle pattern known as the bullish and bearish engulfing candles.

Reversal Candles: Bullish and Bearish Engulfing
Another extreme candle that has a large range and often opens at one extreme and closes at the other is
called an Engulfing candle. An Engulfing candle visually overtakes (or engulfs) the real body of the
prior candle, and in some cases, even overtakes the high and the low of the prior candle. Engulfing
candles are associated with a market that has experienced a sudden shift in the supply/demand
imbalance, and can mark the exact turning point in price.
Often, an Engulfing candle will expand beyond the range of a prior neutral candle with a small
range. This implies that price boundaries and expected support and resistance levels are changing. As
such, engulfing candles are a two-bar signal, unlike the Marabozu, which is a single candle bar.
Engulfing candles can also reveal an exhaustion phase on one side of the market, where all buyers are
satisfied or all sellers have sold their shares, which creates a vacuum, which is filled with an
Engulfing candle.
There are two specific types of engulfing candles: Bullish Engulfing and Bearish Engulfing.
FIGURE 4.9 Bullish Engulfing Forming in Electronic Arts 15-minute Chart

Bullish Reversal Candle Pattern: Bullish Engulfing
Bullish Engulfing candles often appear at the end of a downtrend, and for a true bullish engulfing
candle to be valid, we would need to see price in a prevailing down move as sellers overtook buyers
as price fell to lower levels. However, if buyers and sellers come into balance as seen on a lower
timeframe chart, then a sudden bullish shift in the relationship can create a trend day that can be the
precursor for a strong retracement back to the upside at a minimum, or a true trend reversal if this
marks an intermediate-term low in prices.
Figure 4.9 shows the intraday timeframe chart of Electronic Arts (ERTS) on the 15-minute frame in
early February 2009 as a bullish engulfing formation developed. Sellers dominated buyers as price
fell to lower levels in a downswing in price. However, on February 3rd, price opened with a sudden
downside thrust as sellers drove prices to new lows under $14.50 per share. However, buyers found
this price to be a good value and began buying shares, shifting the relationship between buyers and
sellers to the upside. Eventually, short sellers were forced to buy back shares as price continued to
rise, which resulted in a positive feedback loop (see Chapter 3). As February began, the range
contracted to form the candle labeled on the left, with open, high, low, and close shown.
As aggressive buyers pushed price higher, February 3 revealed a session where the low of the day
and the high of the day completely engulfed the prior day's high and low. This chart reveals the
construction behind a bullish engulfing candle as it forms on the lower timeframe chart. The candle
represents a dramatic change in the relationship to favor the buyers, and alerts us that we can
potentially expect higher prices yet to come from this development.
This reveals how candles on the daily or weekly frame allow us to ‘step inside’ the price action on
the lower timeframes of the intraday charts. Let's step back to the daily chart, shown in Figure 4.10, to
see this same pattern on the higher timeframe.
FIGURE 4.10 Bullish Engulfing Marks a Turning Point on the Daily Chart of Electronic Arts

We can observe that the $15.00 level reflected a prior support zone in December 2008. As price
came back to this level, traders could have been anticipating a potential reversal back to the upside if
this level held as support again. A bullish engulfing candle pattern formed at the $15.00 support level,
and traders could have found other sources of confluence to establish a trade at this level, expecting a
reversal in price. Notice the power of the positive feedback loop, and bullish impulse that took price
from the low of the trading range at $15.00 per share to the upper resistance line at $19.00 per share
in four days. The bullish engulfing candle was the first clue that odds shifted to favor buyers, and that
traders might benefit from buying shares of Electronic Arts to play for an upside return to the $19.00
level.

Bearish Reversal Candle Pattern: Bearish Engulfing
The logic in the formation and signal of the Bearish Engulfing candle is similar to that of the bullish
engulfing, only that a Bearish Engulfing candle must form after an upward move in price and the
candle signal is enhanced if it forms at an overhead expected resistance level in price. We turn to
Yahoo Inc (YHOO) in Figure 4.11 for an example of a bearish engulfing candle.
FIGURE 4.11 Bearish Engulfing Marks a Turning Point on the Daily Chart of Yahoo

From late September to October 2009, Yahoo stock formed key resistance at the $18.00-per-share
level, as shown from four prior attempts to overcome this level when the bearish engulfing candle
develops. In late October, price rallied again to challenge the $18.00 overhead resistance level, and a
bearish engulfing candle formed, signaling that odds favored a move back down to test the prior
support zone at $16.50 for a minimum downside price target. Having observed the bearish engulfing
candle in late October 2009, we can now view Figure 4.12 to step inside this candle signal to reveal
the intraday balance between buyers and sellers, which created this reversal candle.
FIGURE 4.12 Bearish Engulfing Forming in Yahoo 15-min Chart

Unlike the chart of Electronic Arts above, Figure 4.12 does not reveal the broader context in which
the Bearish Engulfing candle develops. Reference the daily chart of Yahoo in Figure 4.11 to uncover
the context leading up to the bearish engulfing candle on October 23, 2009. It is very important to
understand the logic of why certain candles have the association with price reversals that they do,
which allows you to make more informed trading decisions with higher probabilities of success. The
key is understanding lower timeframe supply and demand relationships, which candles can reveal
clearly.
Remember from viewing the daily chart that the $18.00-per-share level was a month-long
resistance level. Price rallies just shy of $17.80 on October 22, and then falls sharply in the morning

session on October 23. Sellers became dominant over buyers and the supply/demand relationship
began to shift, as evidenced by the wide-range Marabozu bars. Price rallied mid-day and then closed
toward the low of the session. More importantly, price had engulfed the range of the prior day's
activity, giving the candle chartist a signal that odds favored lower prices yet to come.
A trader could have seen this development and entered a short-sale position when the sellers
pushed price under the low of the bearish engulfing candle at $17.10 and then placed a stop above the
high of the candle at $17.80, or above the known resistance level at $18.00 per share. Chapter 8
further details trade-execution tactics using candles, but the main idea is to understand how these
candles reveal insights into the supply/demand relationship on lower timeframes and give trading
signals when confirmed with other forms of analysis that reveal expected support or resistance levels.

Neutral Candles: Doji
While candles reveal insights into underlying buying strength or selling pressure by visually
emphasizing the range along with the open and close, there is another type of candle that signals
equilibrium or indecision between buyers and sellers. These particular candles form when the open
of the bar is equal or almost equal to the close of the period, which suggests that neither buyers nor
sellers were dominant. The general name for candlesticks where the open is roughly equal to the
close of the bar is called a doji. Figure 4.13 shows the comparison between a bar chart doji and a
candle doji. Figure 4.14 then steps inside a price chart of the ETF-traded SPY intraday chart to
highlight how a doji on the daily chart forms in the intraday timeframe. Notice that the figures are
identical. A bar chart and a candle chart reflect an identical image when the open and close are equal.
FIGURE 4.13 Bar Chart and Candle Chart Neutral Bar Doji

FIGURE 4.14 The Formation of a Daily Chart Doji as Seen on the Exchange-traded SPY Five-minute
Chart on December 10, 2009

Candle charts clearly reveal the difference between the open and close of a bar, but not all candles
or bars have a difference in the open and close of the period. Interestingly, a candle chart and bar
chart will reveal the same image when a doji forms. Fortunately, we also receive an insight into the
supply and demand relationship when the open and close of a bar are identical or nearly identical in
price. Rather than being inherently bullish or bearish, the bar highlights balance between buyers and
sellers. Traders often identify doji candles with key turning points in price because supply and
demand balanced during that time period, and any movement to tip this balance could result in the
beginning of a short-term reversal in price.
Many traders use doji candles to trigger an entry if these candles form at key support or resistance
levels. Doji candles are most closely associated with the concept of indecision, and doji candles can
be said to reflect a period of indecisiveness between buyers and sellers—neither buyers nor sellers
won the supply/demand battle. Doji that form at a potential resistance level after a price rally can
offer a low-risk, high-probability trade entry or trade exit because these candles are associated with
exact turning points in price.

Neutral Candle: Spinning Tops
Similar to a doji, a spinning top contains a slightly larger real body than a doji, though both candles
reflect indecision or equilibrium between buyers and sellers, and as such are associated with
temporary turning points in price.
While the open and close of a doji are almost equal, the open and close of a spinning top candle
show a small distance, as seen in Figure 4.15. which reveals the 15-minute chart of the S&P 500
Index during early February 2009. Remember the previous chart of the S&P 500 shown in Figure 4.3?
Figure 4.15 steps inside the creation of the spinning top labeled on the daily chart of the S&P 500
Index in early 2009.
FIGURE 4.15 Formation of a Spinning Top Candle in the S&P 500 Index 15-minute Chart

The spinning top candle formed at the peak of a counter-upswing in price that ended near the 870.00
price level as the downtrend continued. As seen in the 15-minute chart, price rallied until February 9
when buyers and sellers found balance and the intraday trend paused, stabilized, and then reversed to
the downside.
An intraday trader could have sold short the S&P 500 (using the exchange traded fund SPY) as soon
as price broke beneath the intraday low of 861.00, which formed the low of the candle and of the
short-term intraday range in price. A trader using the daily chart similarly could have put on a shortsale position when price broke beneath the low of the spinning top candle also at 861.00, in
anticipation of the downtrend continuing, thus playing for a much larger target in a swing trade than
the intraday trader would achieve. Both traders would have considered placing stops above the high
of the spinning top candle, or intraday range, above the 875.00 level.

Momentum Shift: TriStar Doji Pattern
As if one doji were not enough, there is a special name given to a cluster of three doji candles that
form on a price chart, and the triple-doji signal gives a stronger indication for a potential short-term
turn in price. We refer to three doji candles that form together in a row as the Tri-Star Doji pattern.
Tri-Star patterns are rare, but traders often spot them more easily; in fact, sometimes traders report
that these patterns leap off the charts at them. No pattern guarantees a successful trade outcome, but
these patterns can give useful signals when they form on a daily or weekly chart.
As discussed in Chapter 3, price alternates between periods of range expansion and range
contraction on all timeframes. The Tri-Star doji candle pattern reflects tight range contraction on a
lower timeframe that is expected to break into a price range expansion phase yet to come. As seen in
Figure 4.16, the S&P 500 daily chart formed two range consolidation periods that created the two
Tri-Star doji patterns, both of which preceded a range expansion move in price and short-term price
reversals.

FIGURE 4.16 Two Tri-Star Doji Patterns Form in July and August 2009 on the Daily Chart of the
S&P 500 Index

Tri-Star doji pattern signals increase confidence for traders anticipating either a range expansion
move or a price reversal, especially if this pattern forms at an expected support or resistance area
along with a corresponding positive or negative momentum divergence. The signal is bullish in July
when forming after a down-move and bearish when forming after an up-move in August; thus, the tristar pattern is neither bullish nor bearish in isolation, but the price chart context reveals the inherent
bullishness or bearishness of the candle pattern.
A trader would buy after the high of the highest doji that created the Tri-Star pattern is exceeded
and place a stop beneath the low of the lowest doji. Likewise, if a tri-star doji pattern formed into key
resistance after an upswing in price, a trader may sell short as price broke beneath the low of the
lowest doji and then place a stop above the high of the highest doji.
As seen in the tri-star doji that formed in August 2009, it can be helpful to place stops slightly
above candle highs instead of one or two pennies above a high. It is best to place stops beyond prior
price resistance levels instead of directly at those levels. A very tight stop would have resulted in a
loss as price made one final push two points to a new marginal high of 1,039 before falling to a low
of 990 in September, emphasizing the point that traders often benefit from placing stops beyond
known support or resistance levels, rather than locating them exactly at a key price level. We discuss
execution tactics and stop-loss placement logic in Chapter 8.

Higher Price Rejection Candle: Gravestone Doji
While a standard doji candle shows the high and low of the candle to be roughly equal, there are two
special types of doji that reflect clear price rejection of a certain level. The first special doji is a
gravestone doji, which has a much longer upper range than a standard doji. These doji candles show a
long upper wick, which reflects that price rose to a higher level and then declined to close at the same

price as the opening period, revealing a rejection of the higher prices earlier in the session. In other
words, buyers pushed price higher early in the period, but by the close, sellers pushed price lower
back to where the period opened for no net price gain or loss. Gravestone doji are visually distinctive
because the open and close are near the low of the session, while the high is often a wide range above
this area.
Gravestone doji that occur after an extended price rally, or at a critical overhead resistance level,
imply that odds favor a possible reversal to the downside, as sellers overtook buyers during the
session and pushed prices to lower levels. Specifically, the sellers rejected higher prices and the
supply and demand relationship returned to balance at the close of the session just as it existed at the
open of the session.
It is easy to associate the potential signal given from a gravestone doji, because of the negative
connotations associated with a gravestone. The candle is named because it resembles a tombstone,
with the open and close of the candle appearing at or near the low of the session though the high was
noticeably higher than the low of the session.
As eBay Inc (EBAY) prepared to enter 2009, a rally formed from mid-November to midDecember, and a gravestone doji formed with price rejecting the $15.50 high. After buyers pushed
price higher, sellers stepped in to drive prices lower, creating a long upper wick which sends a
bearish signal for the future. Figure 4.17 reveals the gravestone doji on the daily chart of eBay, and
then Figure 4.18 drops to the 10-minute intraday chart to show exactly how buyers and sellers
interacted to create this candle on the daily chart.
FIGURE 4.17 Gravestone Doji on the Daily Chart of eBay in December 2008
