
Missing Out
Traders may end up with a losing streak simply because they miss out on
some trades. This is a particularly difficult problem for those traders who
have a low win rate. It is obviously possible to be a successful and profitable trader—in fact to be a professional trader—with a trading system
that has a very low win rate. The problem is that if winning trades do not
occur that often, it is imperative that all trades are taken to make sure the
winners are captured.
If you trade a system that has a low win rate, and you miss out on
some of the trades, and these trades end up being large winners, it can be
disheartening. Obviously, if you trade a system with a very low win rate,
you need large winning trades to maintain profits. Missing out on these
winners can be psychologically demoralizing; it can be difficult to maintain
your confidence in a trading system with a low win rate. There is an easy
solution, however.
If you want to make sure that you do not miss out on trades, or miss
out on trading information so that you can manage trades, technology may
be your answer. Today, there are many technical solutions for the naked
trader. Technology today allows traders to be almost anywhere and still
manage the trades.
The key is to be prepared. It is possible for the naked trader to simply
trade from a phone. With well-equipped phones, naked traders are able to
not only to place trades and manage trades, keeping tabs on live market
charts, they can also set alerts. If the market goes to a predetermined price
level, traders will receive e-mails or alerts on their phones.
On the Internet, there are services that allow you to set price alerts,
so that once the market crosses a price level you receive an e-mail. If you
receive e-mails on your phone, you should know nearly immediately if the
market reaches a predetermined price. For more information about setting
alerts about your charts on your phone, see the video on creating automated alerts at www.fxjake.com/book.

CONFIDENCE IN YOU
Your confidence may ebb and flow; this is part of trading. There are some
easy tricks you can do to keep a steady stream of confidence in your trading

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:21

Gaining Conﬁdence

Printer: Courier Westford

243

life. You can do three things, and if you practice these consistently they will
help to maintain your confidence.

Step One: The Reasons for Your Success
In order to be confident as a trader, you must consistently execute your
trading system as it was outlined in your system rules. More importantly,
you must know, without a doubt, the reason why you have chosen to execute your trading system. In other words, your beliefs must align with your
trading goals.
This is a foreign concept to most traders. Many traders assume that
they want to make money, and if they are not making money, the reason is
that they have not found the trading system that will allow them to make
money consistently. Notice how the emphasis for most traders is on the
system. The system yields the reward. The system is responsible for profits.
Unfortunately this emphasis on the system is incorrect.
The only traders who do not have to concern themselves with the
psychology of trading are those traders who use automated trading systems. You are influencing your trading results regardless of whether you acknowledge this fact. Unless you are trading a purely mechanical system—a
pure automated trading system, you are influencing each and every one of
your trades. (Here is a test to see if your system is a purely automated system. If you can be away from the Internet for a month and your system will
still trade and make money for you, then it is a purely automated system.)
Your thoughts, your beliefs, and whether you believe you are deserving of
profit all influence how you trade your trading system.
Think about and write down your answers to the following:

r How many wealthy people do you spend time with?
r Do you think that you will one day have a lot of money?
r When something goes wrong with money, do you think that this is “just
your luck?”

r When you see a wealthy person, what do you think?
r Do you think that wealthy people are good people?
r If you become extremely wealthy, are you worried that your personality may change?
To learn more about your answers to these questions and your attitudes toward making money, go to www.fxjake.com/book.
Aligning your trading goals with your financial personality is important
and something that will occur regardless of whether you are consciously
aware of this.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

244

23:21

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

Step Two: The Rewards of Routine
The trading system you employ depends on you. You must identify and
execute trades. You must apply the risk management rules to each of your
trades. You must remain vigilant and ensure that you take all the trades that
your system identifies as high probability trades. In order to achieve all this,
you must have an established routine. This routine must be written down,
and it must include all the important variables for your trading system.
The rules for your trading system must include your trading routine.
Define what you will do, and what you will not do regularly. This will be
your trading routine. Adherence to your trading routine is the closest thing
you have to insurance against sloppy trading. Sloppy trading involves missing trades, trading the wrong lot size, placing the stop loss at the wrong
price, or poor execution when entering a trade.
At a minimum, this is what you should have written down for your
trading routine rules:

r When will you look for trades?
r How will you calculate your trade size? (There is a risk-free calculation spreadsheet, a great tool for calculating your trade size, at
www.fxjake.com/book.)
r How often will you check the charts?
r How will you be alerted to trading opportunities?
r How will you be alerted when you need to manage your trades?
Defining your trading routine is important because, over time, as you
begin to consistently capture profits, you will gain confidence in what you
do. The simple act of entering your trade into the risk calculation spreadsheet will often bring an anticipation of profits to come. There is great
power in routine.

Step Three: The Machine
If you have aligned your personal beliefs with your trading goals, and if you
have designed a well-planned trading routine that you can adhere to, you
are now ready to put into place fail-safe rules and tools so you may quickly
regain your confidence when it wavers.
The fastest way to regain your confidence is to back-test in a forex
tester. A losing streak can be put into proper perspective after you have
traded the GBP/USD over three years and found consistent profits in a
forex tester using the very same system that has you in a drawdown.
Back-testing in general is a one-size-fits-all remedy. Not only does backtesting help your confidence during a losing streak, but it also helps you to

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:21

Gaining Conﬁdence

Printer: Courier Westford

245

concentrate on what is important in your trading system. The simple act
of taking 50 trades in a forex tester (or your chosen back-testing software)
adds another 50 trades under your belt. You will have honed your skills to
identify valid trade set-ups and execute valid trades within the confines of
your system.
Spreadsheets can also help you. If you can, make some spreadsheets with the data from your back-testing sessions. These data will help
put drawdowns into perspective. There is a great template for you at
www.fxjake.com/book. Download the spreadsheet there and enter your
back-testing data into the spreadsheet. The spreadsheet will calculate for
you the statistics of your trading system. Having the statistics in front of
you is evidence that your trading system works, and you may need to trot
these data out when you are experiencing a losing streak, to remind yourself that what you are doing is successful trading.
In the next chapter you will see how confidence and risk are related.
For now, it is important to note that if you are not following your trading
system, that is, if your risk management does not fit with the rules of your
trading system, you may find it extremely difficult to execute your system
properly.

REASONS FOR LOSING STREAKS
There are many reasons that a trade may not make money. These reasons
include the following:

r Poor system execution (mistakes, sloppy trade entry, human error,
etc.).

r Changing market (trading system no longer works).
r Bad technology (slow computer, poor Internet connection, etc.).
r Dishonest broker (market manipulation, bad data feed, frozen trading
platform, etc.).

r Trading system not flexible enough (unusual market activity, news report, etc.).
All these reasons have one thing in common: They are incorrect. These
are not reasons for a losing trade; they are excuses. Confident naked
traders understand that these excuses will not aid in the collection of profits from the markets. These reasons for failed trading are excuses; each
offers a reason for failure. If you find yourself using these reasons for losing trades, please reconsider your thinking. Changing your thinking about

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

246

23:21

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

what is possible and what is under your control will help improve your
confidence.
Losing trades are really due to one thing—bad luck. Luck will come and
go, as you know, so the drawdown you are experiencing will be temporary,
and as long as you do not change your rules, you will get it back on track
soon. Bad luck is the reason why a trade ends up a loser. Bad luck is the
reason you never know if a trade will make money or if it will lose money.
The possibility of bad luck is the reason why responsible traders place the
same amount of risk on every trade.
If you follow your trading system and all your trading rules, you will
have the confidence of knowing that only one thing can lead to a losing
trade—bad luck. Luck can neither be accounted for nor can you anticipate your luck. Armed with back-testing data and your trading record (from
your live account), you may have a very good idea of the chances that your
next trade will be an unlucky one.
The probability that any given trade is a losing trade is calculated as
follows:
1 − Win Rate
If your trading system has a 59 percent win rate, then you have a 41 percent chance that your very next trade will be an unlucky (losing) trade.
1 − 0.59 = 0.41
Thinking about your next trade in terms of probabilities may help you
to re-focus on what is important: following your trading system. Worrying
about any one trade or emphasizing reasons why your trade lost money
is not important. The big picture is important, the overall probability of a
winning trade is important. A specific trade is not that important.

THE BAD MARKET THEORY
Some traders are concerned that very good trading systems will change the
market. The theory goes something like this: If a large proportion of traders
start using the kangaroo tail on the daily forex charts, eventually the daily
forex charts will stop printing reliable kangaroo tails because too many
traders are using kangaroo tails to find high-probability trades. Although
the story sounds good, it is incorrect.
Even if all the retail forex traders (traders like you and me) traded the
daily kangaroo tails, we would not affect the market. There are two reasons
why this is true. First, every trader views the market differently, so what is

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

Gaining Conﬁdence

January 11, 2012

23:21

Printer: Courier Westford

247

a worthwhile kangaroo tail to me may not be a worthwhile kangaroo tail
to you. Second, retail forex traders make up such a small proportion of
the forex market that even a truly coordinated trade executed by all retail
forex traders would not have an effect on the market. The majority of the
volume in forex is from the banks and private funds, not the retail traders.
The retail traders make up about 1 percent of all the forex trading volume
each day.
The great thing for the naked trader is that naked trading systems are
based on market psychology. The naked trading systems you have learned
in this book are based on the psychology of the market participants. They
are likely to hold for as long as humans participate in the markets. Any
downturn in performance is likely due to bad luck if you have been following your system rules. This means that the profits will likely return to
normal again, after the bad-luck streak is over.
Finally, the possibility remains that your trading system completely
falls apart and stops working. The way to test this is to take a recent sample
of all the trades for that system and compare the win rate to the historical
win rate. If you are concerned about a recent losing streak for your trading system, compare your historical win rate to the win rate of the past 50
trades. If the historical win rate differs greatly from the current win rate,
the trading system may be losing its potency.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c15

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

248

23:21

Printer: Courier Westford

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

CHAPTER 16

Managing Risk

Yes, risk taking is inherently failure-prone. Otherwise, it would be called sure-thing-taking.
—Jim McMahon

s you progress as a trader you will become involved in thinking and
probably reading about trading psychology. Trading psychology is a
broad term that encompasses the study of traders and their emotional issues about trading. Trading-psychology literature takes its cues
from scientific study of psychology, common sense, and the experience
of traders and trading gurus. If you are interested in trading psychology, it
probably means that you are further along in your trading education.
If you are one of the traders with an interest in trading psychology,
you have moved beyond looking for the perfect trading system. You now
understand the important role emotions play in trading results. One thing
that many traders fail to recognize is the intricate relationship between
what you risk and the emotions you experience during trading. In fact, risk
and trading psychology are two sides of the same coin.

A

YOUR RISK PROFILE
Every battle is won before it is ever fought.
—Sun-Tzu
Some would say your lot in life has been decided. The ending balance
of your account is already known. If this were the case, would you like to
249

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:27

250

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

know who knows this number? Why not ask this person now to find out
if you should spend so much of your time trading? Who knows what your
final balance will be? Who is this person who can tell you what the future
holds? Who knows how much money you will make (or lose) due to your
trading?
You! This person is you!
You are the one who knows whether you will make money or not,
even though you may not have conscious access to this information. Most
traders do not acknowledge this fact: Your beliefs drive your behaviors.
This includes your trading behaviors. If you believe you are worthy of trading profits, you will be able to make money. If you do not believe your trading will lead to profits, you will not be able to consistently make money. It
doesn’t matter if you decide to work in business or in trading. Your beliefs,
whether they are accessible to you consciously, will drive your behaviors.
This is exactly why people who win the lottery end up broke a few
years later. This is a very common story. Perhaps you heard about these
people. Once they win the lottery, things should change for these lucky
winners, but, in fact, it just delays the inevitable result. The end result is, of
course, no money. (See the featured story “The Man Who Auctions off His
Lottery Winnings.”)

The Man Who Auctioned oﬀ His Lottery Winnings
William Bud Post, III had a diﬃcult life. His mother died when William was
eight, and his father abandoned him and later sent him to an orphanage. As
an adult, he drifted between meaningless jobs, working as a spray painter,
laborer, cook, and truck driver for the circus. He was unable to aﬀord a
home and even spent 28 days in jail for writing bad checks. Even his love
life was cursed. He was married and divorced six times.
Then, his luck took a turn for the worse. He won the lottery.
One day, in 1988, he had no job and was receiving a paltry monthly
disability check. He had only $2.46 in the bank, so he sold a ring to a
pawnshop for $40 and asked his landlady (who was also his on-again-oﬀagain girlfriend, Ann Karpik), to buy 40 lottery tickets with the cash. One
of the tickets she bought was the winning ticket. He won $16.2 million.
The lottery payments were to be made over 26 years, and totaled
$497,953.47 each year. He spent over $300,000 after receiving the ﬁrst
payment. Bud bought a liquor license, a twin-engine plane (he did not have
a pilot’s license), a restaurant for his brother and sister, and he bought a
used-car lot for his other brother. He was $500,000 in debt three months
after his ﬁrst lottery payment.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

Managing Risk

January 11, 2012

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

251

In quick succession, things got worse for Mr. Post. He used his second
annual payment to purchase a mansion for $395,000 in Oil City, Pennsylvania, with the hopes of refurbishing it. But his former landlady, Ann Karpik,
sued him, claiming that they agreed to split any winnings, a claim that Bud
denied. The court ruled that Bud owed Ann one-third of his winnings. Bud
was unable to pay, so the court ordered him to give Ann his 1992 annual
payment. He refused, so the judge froze his future payments. Understandably, visitors to his Pennsylvania mansion noticed that the estate was in
disarray, showers were missing, the security malfunctioned (and chirped
every 60 seconds), the pool was ﬁlled with garbage, there was an old car
on blocks in the weedy yard, and the windows were covered with plywood.
Mr. Post was quickly falling into debt, so he hatched a plan. He decided
to sell the ailing mansion for $65,000 and auction oﬀ his 17 remaining
lottery payments in the hopes of scratching out of debt. He hoped that this
plan would allow him to hold onto some cash.
His plan failed. Within the year, he had bought a couple of large screen
televisions, two homes, three cars, a truck, two motorcycles, some computers, a camper, and a $260,000 sailboat he left in Biloxi, Mississippi. (He
had hoped to start a charter ﬁshing business with the boat.)
He was tracked down and arrested on that boat for refusing to serve a
prison sentence. He was convicted of assault. Apparently, Mr. Post ﬁred a
shotgun at a man who tried to collect a car-repair debt back in Pennsylvania.
Post was quoted as saying “Once I’m no longer a lottery winner, people
will leave me alone. That’s all I want. Just peace of mind.” He said, “I was
much happier when I was broke.” Post got his wish: After serving his sentence for assault, he was back to living on his $450-per-month disability
check.

Why You Win (or Lose)
You win (or lose) because of your beliefs. Specifically, of course I am talking about your winning or losing in the financial game. It does not matter
if you are an entrepreneur, looking at establishing a new business, or if
you are a salesman, looking to cultivate a stream of customers, or, perhaps
more likely, if you are a burgeoning trader, looking to establish reliable
trading method to pull profits from the market. The same principles apply
to all people looking to make money. Your beliefs about money, and how
worthy you believe you are of money will determine whether or not you
make money trading.
Perhaps you don’t agree. Perhaps you believe that you only need a good
trading system in order to find a trading success. If that is the case, then

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

252

January 11, 2012

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

why is it that one profitable trading system may be offered to 10 people,
and those 10 people will have varying degrees of success? There are some
excellent trading systems in this book. However, not everyone reading this
book will take these trading systems and go forward and make money. Why
is this the case?
If you believe you are worthy of trading profits you will find they come
much more easily. If, however, you believe you do not deserve trading profits, you may never find a trading system that works for you. The most critical aspect of your trading system is you.

Your Money Attitudes
Before you do anything else, do this. Get a piece of paper and a pen. Answer
these questions quickly and as truthfully as possible. The important thing
here is that you do this now. Be honest and be quick; use your gut reaction
to answer in every case.

r True or False? Rich people are good people.
r True or False? Money is the root of all evil.
r True or False? Money comes to those who help others.
r Money is a
.
r Most rich people are more
than most poor people.
r Those with money also have
.
r Poor people are better
than rich people.
r If I had more money, I might become more
.
Your beliefs about money can determine how much money comes your
way. If you believe money is good and you are worthy of wealth, money is
more likely to come your way. However, perhaps you believe something
different; perhaps you believe that rich people are selfish. Maybe you think
that most wealthy people found wealth through immoral behaviors. If you
think wealthy people are unethical, you are unlikely to desire to become
wealthy.
Some traders believe wealthy people are nefarious, and thus these
traders are unlikely to ever achieve real wealth. Why should they become
wealthy if wealthy people are despicable. Other traders think that rich people simply make loads of money because rich people are very motivated
to . . . make money. These traders are much more likely to join the wealthy
crowd.
Seeing yourself making money is the first step to trading success. If you
believe wealthy people are moral and good, you are more likely to become
one of these people. Likewise, if you know that you will be making money,

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16
