
The greatest care should be used to be sure that the volume of the
activities being credited with reducing the profit margin is not merely
the volume of these activities needed for a good rate of growth, but
actually represents even more research, sales promotion, etc., than this.
When this happens, the research company with an apparently poor
profit margin may be an unusually attractive investment. However, with
the exception of companies of this type in which the low profit margin
is being deliberately engineered in order to further accelerate the
growth rate, investors desiring maximum gains over the years had best
stay away from low-profit-margin or marginal companies.

POINT 6. What is the company doing to maintain or
improve profit margins?

The success of a stock purchase docs not depend on what is generally
known about a company at the time the purchase is made. Rather it
depends upon what gets to be known about it after the stock has been


64 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

bought. Therefore it is not the profit margins of the past but those of
the future that are basically important to the investor.

In the age in which we live, there seems to be a constant threat to
profit margins. Wages and salary costs go up year by year. Many compa-
nies now have long-range labor’ contracts calling for still further increases
for several years ahead. Rising labor costs result in corresponding increases
in raw materials and supplies. The trend of tax rates, particularly real estate
and local tax rates, also seems to be steadily increasing. Against this back-
ground, different companies are going to have different results in the trend
of their profit margins. Some companies are in the seemingly fortunate
position that they can maintain profit margins simply by raising prices.
This is usually because they are in industries in which the demand for
their products is abnormally strong or because the selling prices of com-
petitive products have gone up even more than their own. In our econo-
my, however, maintaining or improving profit margins in this way usual-
ly proves a relatively temporary matter. This is because additional
competitive production capacity is created, This new capacity sufficiently
outbalances the increased gain so that, in time, cost increases can no longer
be passed on as price increases. Profit margins then start to shrink.

A striking example of this is the abrupt change that occurred in the
fall of 1956, when the aluminum market went in a few weeks from a
condition of short supply to one of aggressive competitive selling. Prior
to that time aluminum prices rose about with costs. Unless demand for
the product should grow even faster than production facilities, future
price increases will occur less rapidly. Similarly the persistent disinclina-
tion of some of the largest steel producers to raise prices of certain classes
of scarce steel products to “all the market would bear” may in part
reflect long-range thinking about the temporary nature of broad profit
margins that arise from no other cause than an ability to pass on
increased costs by higher selling prices.

The long-range danger of this is perhaps best illustrated by what
happened to the leading copper producers during this same second half
of 1956.These companies used considerable self-restraint, even going so
far as to sell under world prices in an attempt to keep prices from going
too high. Nevertheless, copper rose sufficiently to curtail demand and
attract new supply. Aggravated by curtailed Western European con-
sumption resulting from the closing of the Suez Canal, the situation
became quite unbalanced. It is probable that 1957 profit margins were
noticeably poorer than would have been the case if those of 1956 had



What to Buy 65

not been so good. When profit margins of a whole industry rise because
of repeated price increases, the indication is not a good one for the
long-range investor.

In contrast, certain other companies, including some within these
same industries, manage to improve profit margins by far more ingenious
means than just raising prices. Some companies achieve great success by
maintaining capital-improvement or product-engineering departments.
The sole function of such departments is to design new equipment that
will reduce costs and thus offset or partially offset the rising trend of
wages. Many companies are constantly reviewing procedures and meth-
ods to see where economies can be brought about. The accounting func-
tion and the handling of records has been a particularly fertile field for
this sort of activity. So has the transportation field. Shipping costs have
risen more than most expenses because of the larger percentage of labor
costs in most forms of transportation as compared to most types of man-
ufacturing. Using new types of containers, heretofore unused methods of
transportation, or even putting in branch plants to avoid cross-hauling
have all cut costs for alert companies.

None of these things can be brought about in a day. They all require
close study and considerable planning ahead. The prospective investor
should give attention to the amount of ingenuity of the work being
done on new ideas for cutting costs and improving profit margins. Here
the “scuttlebutt” method may prove of some value, but much less so
than direct inquiry from company personnel. Fortunately, this is a field
about which most top exccutives will talk in some detail. The compa-
nies which are doing the most successful work along this line are very
likely to be the ones which have built up the organization with the
know-how to continue to do constructive things in the future. They are
extremely likely to be in the group offering the greatest long-range
rewards to their shareholders.

POINT 7. Does the company have outstanding labor and
personnel relations?

Most investors may not fully appreciate the profits from good labor rela-
tions. Few of them fail to recognize the impact of bad labor relations.
The effect on production of frequent and prolonged strikes is obvious
to anyone making cven the most cursory review of corporate financial
statements.


66 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

However, the difference in the degree of profitability between a
company with good personnel relations and one with mediocre per-
sonnel relations is far greater than the direct cost of strikes. If workers
feel that they are fairly treated by their employer, a background has been
laid wherein efficient leadership can accomplish much in increasing
productivity per worker. Furthermore, there is always considerable cost
in training each new worker. Those companies with an abnormal labor
turnover have therefore an element of unnecessary expense avoided by
better-managed enterprises.

But how does the investor properly judge the quality of a company’s
labor and personnel relations? There is no simple answer. There is no
set yardstick that will apply in all cases. About the best that can be done
is to look at a number of factors and then judge from the composite
picture.

In this day of widespread unionization, those companies that still
have no union or a company union probably also have well above aver-
age labor and personnel relations. if they did not, the unions would have
organized them long ago. The investor can feel rather sure, for example,
that Motorola, located in highly unionized Chicago, and Texas Instru-
ments, Inc., in increasingly unionized Dallas, have convinced at least an
important part of their work force of the company’s genuine desire and
ability to treat its employees well. Lack of affiliation with an interna-
tional union can only be explained by successful personnel policies in
instances of this sort.

On the other hand, unionization is by no means a sign of poor labor
relations. Some of the companies with the very best labor relations are
completely unionized, but have learned to get along with their unions
with a reasonable degree of mutual respect and trust. Similarly, while a
record of constant and prolonged strikes is a good indication of bad
labor relations, the complete absence of strikes is not necessarily a sign
of fundamentally good relations. Sometimes the company with no
strikes is too much like the henpecked husband. Absence of conflict may
not mean a basically happy relationship so much as fear of the conse-
quences of conflict.

Why do workers feel unusually loyal to one employer and resentful
of another? The reasons are often so complex and difficult to trace that
for the most part the investor may do better to concern himself with
comparative data showing how workers feel, rather than with an
attempt to appraise each part of the background causing them to feel



What to Buy 67

that way. One series of figures that indicates the underlying quality of
labor and personnel policies is the relative labor turnover in one compa-
ny as against another in the same area. Equally significant is the relative
size of the waiting list of job applicants wanting to work for one com-
pany as against others in the same locality. In an area where there is no
labor surplus, companies having an abnormally long list of personnel
seeking to enter their employ are usually companies that are desirable for
investment from the standpoint of good labor and personnel relations.
Nevertheless, beyond these general figures there are a few specific
details the investor might notice. Companies with good labor relations
usually are ones making every effort to settle grievances quickly. The
small individual grievances that take long to settle and are not consid -
ered important by management are ones that smoulder and finally flare
up seriously. In addition to appraising the methods set up for settling
grievances, the investor might also pay close attention to wage scales.
The company that makes above-average profits while paying above-
average wages for the area in which it is located is likely to have good
labor relations. The investor who buys into a situation in which a sig-
nificant part of earnings comes from paying below-standard wages for
the area involved may in time have serious trouble on his hands.
Finally the investor should be sensitive to the attitude of top
management toward the rank-and-file employees. Underneath all the
fine-sounding generalities, some managements have little feeling of
responsibility for, or interest in, their ordinary workers. Their chief con-
cern is that no greater share of their sales dollar go to lower echelon per-
sonnel than the pressure of militant unionism makes mandatory. Workers
are readily hired or dismissed in large masses, dependent on slight
changes in the company’s sales outlook or profit picture. No feeling of
responsibility exists for the hardships this can cause to the families affect-
ed. Nothing is done to make ordinary employees feel they are wanted,
needed, and part of the business picture. Nothing is done to build up the
dignity of the individual worker. Managements with this attitude do not
usually provide the background for the most desirable type of investment.

POINT 8. Does the company have outstanding
executive relations?

If having good relations with lower echelon personnel is important, cre-
ating the right atmosphere among executive personnel is vital. These are


68 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

the men whose judgment, ingenuity, and teamwork will in time make
or break any venture. Because the stakes for which they play are high,
the tension on the job is frequently great. So is the chance that friction
or resentment might create conditions whereby top executive talent
either does not stay with a company or does not produce to its maxi-
mum ability if it does stay.

The company offering greatest investment opportunitics will be
one in which there is a good executive climate. Executives will have
confidence in their president and/or board chairman. This means,
among other things, that from the lowest levels on up there is a feeling
that promotions are based on ability, not factionalism. A ruling family is
not promoted over the heads of more able men. Salary adjustments are
reviewed regularly so that executives feel that merited increases will
come without having to be demanded. Salaries are at least in line with
the standard of the industry and the locality. Management will bring
outsiders into anything other than starting jobs only if there is no pos-
sibility of finding anyone within the organization who can be promot-
ed to fill the position. Top management will recognize that wherever
human beings work together, some degree of factionalism and human
friction will occur, but will not tolerate those who do not cooperate in
team play so that such friction and factionalism is kept to an irreducible
minimum. Much of this the investor can usually learn without too
much direct questioning by chatting about the company with a few
executives scattered at different levels of responsibility. The further a cor-
poration departs from these standards, the less likely it is to be a really
outstanding investment.

POINT 9. Does the company have depth to its
management?

A small corporation can do extremely well and, if other factors are right,
provide a magnificent investment for a number of years under really able
one-man management. However, all humans are finite, so even for
smaller companies the investor should have some idea of what can be
done to prevent corporate disaster if the key man should no longer be
available. Nowadays this investment risk with an otherwise outstanding
small company is not as great as it seems, in view of the recent tenden-
cy of big companics with plenty of management talent to buy up out-
standing smaller units.



What to Buy 69

However, companies worthy of investment interest are those that
will continue to grow. Sooner or later a company will reach a size where
it just will not be able to take advantage of further opportunities unless
it starts developing executive talent in some depth. This point will vary
between companies, depending on’ the industry in which they are
engaged and the skill of the one-man management. It usually occurs
when annual sales totals reach a point somewhere between fifteen and
forty million dollars. Having the right executive climate, as discussed in
Point 8, becomes of major investment significance at this time.

Those matters discussed in Point 8 are, of course, needed for devel-
opment of proper management in depth. But such management will not
develop unless certain additional policies are in effect as well. Most
important of these is the delegation of authority. If from the very top on
down, each level of executives is not given real authority to carry out
assigned duties in as ingenious and efficient a manner as each individ-
ual’s ability will permit, good executive material becomes much like
healthy young animals so caged in that they cannot exercise. They do
not develop their faculties because they just do not have enough oppor-
tunity to use them.

Those organizations where the top brass personally interfere with
and try to handle routine day-to-day operating matters seldom turn
out to be the most attractive type of investments. Cutting across the
lines of authority which they themselves have set up frequently results
in well-meaning executives significantly detracting from the invest-
ment caliber of the companies they run. No matter how able one or
two bosses may be in handling all this detail, once a corporation reach-
€s a certain size executives of this type will get in trouble on two fronts.
‘loo much detail will have arisen for them to handle, Capable people
just are not being developed to handle the still further growth that
should lie ahead.

Another matter is worthy of the investor’s attention in judging
whether a company has suitable depth in management. Does top man-
agement welcome and evaluate suggestions from personnel even if, at
times, those suggestions carry with them adverse criticism of current
management practices? So competitive is today’s business world and so
great the need for improvement and change that if pride or indifference
prevent top management from exploring what has frequently been
found to be a veritable gold mine of worthwhile ideas, the investment
climate that results probably will not be the most suitable one for the


70 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

investor. Neither is it likely to be one in which increasing numbers of
vitally needed younger executives are going to develop.

POINT 10. How good are the company’s cost analysis
and accounting controls?

No company is going to continue to have outstanding success for a
long period of time if it cannot break down its over-all costs with suf-
ficient accuracy and detail to show the cost of each small step in its
operation. Only in this way will a management know what most needs
its attention. Only in this way can management judge whether it is
properly solving each problem that does need its attention. Further-
more, most successful companies make not one but a vast series of
products. If the management does not have a precise knowledge of the
true cost of each product in relation to the others, it is under an
extreme handicap. It becomes almost impossible to establish pricing
policies that will insure the maximum obtainable over-all profit consis-
tent with discouraging undue competition. There is no way of know-
ing which products are worthy of special sales effort and promotion.
Worst of all, some apparently successful activities may actually be oper-
ating at a loss and, unknown to management, may be decreasing rather
than swelling the total of over-all profits. Intelligent planning becomes
almost impossible.

In spite of the investment importance of accounting controls, it is
usually only in instances of extreme inefficiency that the careful
investor will get a clear picture of the status of cost accounting and
related activities in a company in which he is contemplating invest-
ment. In this sphere, the “scuttlebutt’” method will sometimes reveal
companies that are really deficient. It will seldom tell much more than
this. Direct inquiry of company personnel will usually elicit a com-
pletely sincere reply that the cost data are entirely adequate. Detailed
cost sheets will often be shown in support of the statement. However,
it is not so much the existence of detailed figures as their relative accu-
racy which is important. The best that the careful investor usually can
do in this field is to recognize both the importance of the subject and
his own limitations in making a worthwhile appraisal of it. Within these
limits he usually can only fall back on the general conclusion that a
company well above average in most other aspects of business skill will
probably be above average in this field, too, as long as top management



What to Buy 71

understands the basic importance of expert accounting controls and
cost analysis.

POINT 11. Are there other aspects of the business,
somewhat peculiar to the industry involved, which will
give the investor important clues as to how outstanding

the company may be in relation to its competition?

By definition, this is somewhat of a catch-all point of inquiry. This is
because matters of this sort are bound to differ considerably from each
other—those which are of great importance in some lines of business
can, at times, be of little or no importance in others. For example, in
most important operations involving retailing, the degree of skill a com-
pany has in handling real estate matters—the quality of its leases, for
instance is of great significance. In many other lines of business, a high
degree of skill in this field is less important. Similarly, the relative skill
with which a company handles its credits is of great significance to some
companies, of minor or no importance to others. For both these matters,
our old friend the “scuttlebutt” method will usually furnish the investor
with a pretty clear picture. Frequently his conclusions can be checked
against mathematical ratios such as comparative leasing costs per dollar
of sales, or ratio of credit loss, if the point is of sufficient importance to
warrant careful study,

In a number of lines of business, total insurance costs mount to an
important per cent of the sales dollar. At times this can matter enough so
that a company with, say, a 35 per cent lower overall insurance cost than
a competitor of the same size will have a broader margin of profit. In
those industrics where insurance is a big enough factor to affect earnings,
a study of these ratios and a discussion of them with informed insurance
people can be unusually rewarding to the investor. It gives a supplemen-
tal but indicative check as to how outstanding a particular management
may be. This is because these lower insurance costs do not come solely
from a greater skill in handling insurance in the same way, for example, as
skill in handling real estate results in lower than average leasing costs.
Rather they are largely the reflection of over-all skill in handling people,
inventory, and fixed property so as to reduce the over-all amount of acci-
dent, damage, and waste and thereby make these lower costs possible. An
index of insurance costs in relation to the coverage obtained points out
clearly which companies in a given field are well run.


72 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

Patents are another matter having varying significance from com-
pany to company. For large companics, a strong patent position 1s usu-
ally a point of additional rather than basic strength. It usually blocks
off certain subdivisions of the company’s activities from the intense
competition that might otherwise prevail. This normally enables these
segments of the company’s product lines to enjoy wider profit margins
than would otherwise occur. This in turn tends to broaden the aver-
age of the entire line. Similarly, strong patent positions may at times
give a company exclusive rights to the easiest or cheapest way of mak-
ing a particular product. Competitors must go a longer way round to
get to the same place, thereby giving the patent owner a tangible com-
petitive advantage although frequently a small one.

In our era of widespread technical know-how it is seldom that
large companies can enjoy more than a small part of their activities
in areas sheltered by patent protection. Patents arc usually able to
block off only a few rather than all the ways of accomplishing the
same result. For this reason many large companies make no attempt
to shut out competition through patent structure, but for relatively
modest fees license competition to use their patents and in return
expect the same treatment from these licensees. Influences such as
manufacturing know-how, sales and service organization, customer
good will, and knowledge of customer problems are depended on far
more than patents to maintain a competitive position. In fact, when
large companies depend chiefly on patent protection for the main-
tenance of their profit margin, it is usually more a sign of investment
weakness than strength. Patents do not run on indefinitely. When
the patent protection is no longer there, the company’s profit may
suffer badly.
