
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Becoming a Trader

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

385

probably fewer than one in a thousand, and maybe many fewer than that, really succeeds. If you are going to be in this elite group, you must prepare yourself, work hard,
and have the emotional resilience to deal with setbacks along the way. It is very hard to
find common personality traits that make people suited to be traders; most people can
succeed in some capacity if they find a market and trading style that fits their personality, if they have realistic expectations and all of the prerequisites for success, and if they
commit to enduring the learning curve.
One last thought on this subject: When we look at people who are very successful in
any field, we find a very mixed group. They come from different backgrounds, have very
different personalities and attitudes, and reached their success through interesting paths,
some of which are far from straight. In most fields, it is impossible to find consistent
predictors of success, but people who succeed have one thing in common—they did
not quit. This is so simple that it seems trivial, but is the common thread tying all of
these people together. As Mark Cuban said, “It doesn’t matter how many times you fail.
It doesn’t matter how many times you almost get it right. No one is going to know or
care about your failures, and neither should you. All you have to do is learn from them
and those around you because . . . all that matters . . . is that you get it right once. Then
everyone can tell you how lucky you are.” Commit to the process. Never give up.

RECORD KEEPING
Good record keeping is an important part of skill development in many disciplines. Selfdirected traders usually focus on two specific kinds of records: trading journals and
trade-specific records. Trading journals may include narrative about the patterns in the
markets and pattern research, or they may focus on psychological issues the trader is
struggling with. Trade-specific records are P&L records with some deeper information
on each trade: at least the type of trade and initial risk assumed on the position. If these
records are done well, it is then possible to do deep performance analysis on them to understand how the trader’s ability is growing and to target specific areas for further work.
There are many ways to create and format these sets of records once you understand
the goals. With all of these records, the most important thing is to create a routine that
you can commit to following on a regular schedule. There is a trade-off between complexity and ease of use; it does no good to create an elaborate system that takes so much
time to maintain that you do not do it on a regular basis. On the other hand, an overly
simplistic record will probably not contain enough information to be useful. Invest time
at the beginning planning and creating a system that will work for you, be open to some
revision as you use it, and once you have settled on a final plan, commit to keeping these
records consistently. It is not unusual for traders to spend more time maintaining and
reviewing these records than they do in actual trading.
Another issue to consider is whether the records will be kept on paper, in an electronic format, or in some combination of the two. Electronic records have many advantages, probably the most important of which is that they are easily searchable. If you want

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

386

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

to find every instance of the word slippage in your trading journal, this can be done in
seconds. They are also easier to read and to store, and if they are backed up in the cloud,
can be accessed from any computer in the world. Even with all of these advantages, there
may be some argument for keeping at least a portion of the records on paper. Many people find that the act of setting pencil to paper engages a type of thought—perhaps a part
of the brain—that is different from the experience of typing.

Journal
A good journal is one of the trader’s most important tools. For the developing selfdirected trader, it is a concrete record of successes and failures; careful reflection on
and analysis of this record can point out weaknesses and growing edges that can have
an immediate impact on the bottom line. Having a good written record is essential, because memory is somewhat mutable after the fact. Highly emotional events, gains and
losses, and large market movements will invariably color our recollection. Keeping this
record is a difficult task that most traders have trouble sustaining over many years, but it
is virtually impossible to progress from novice to expert without keeping a solid trading
journal. For the proficient trader, the journal becomes a type of control document. Every
trader’s performance is subject to some variation as a function of the natural randomness
in markets, but there are also performance slips that are due to some outside stress or
psychological issue. If performance deteriorates, the trading journal becomes a valuable
resource to answer the question “What has changed?”
Journaling about Yourself As a self-directed, discretionary trader, you are a major
component of your trading success and failure. Your attitude, emotional state, and energy
level will all have an impact on the bottom line, and these things should be recorded in
a daily journal. At the beginning, err on the side of too much detail. Though it might
seem absurd, you should record such trivial points as what you had for breakfast, how
much you slept, and anything unusual that happened in the morning. If you do not record
those events in your journal, it is going to be difficult to tease out a pattern and to find
influences that help or hurt your performance. Write down everything at the beginning,
and modify the procedure only after you see how you will be using this document to
improve your performance.
Journaling about the Market In writing about the market, there are two aspects
to consider. One, there is the objective reality of price movements and relationships between markets; over time, this journal will become a source and a reference for your own
research into market patterns and trading ideas. Perhaps you observed four down days
in the major indexes, followed by a large up day with strong buying. Maybe you think
you see an interesting correlation between currency rates and the spread between two
equity sector indexes. Traders who are truly committed to understanding how markets
work maintain large backlogs of trading ideas and often work on many ideas at the same
time. You will be surprised at the times you will think of something several years down

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Becoming a Trader

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

387

the road, dig back into an old journal, and find a relevant observation that can be a revelation for a research project you are doing at the time. This record of observations and
ideas about market action is an important tool for your learning and development.
In addition, you should also be journaling about your reactions to the market’s movements, adapting this record to your stage of development and your function as a trader.
Do you find that a period of small-range consolidation days near lows makes you nervous? Do you find yourself becoming extremely bullish during large-range multiday declines? Some of these reactions will be mistakes, and you will find some inclinations and
biases that can be corrected before they become too costly in actual trading. However,
other reactions will, over time, reveal facets of your trading personality that you might
never have seen without this record. For instance, perhaps you will discover that you
trade declining markets much better than advancing markets, or that you excel at positioning in consolidations before breakouts. Record keeping is an essential part of the
learning process; without it, you may still progress, but that progress will be much slower
and much more uncertain.
Daily Game Plan It is important to have a written daily game plan for each market
session. Even long-term investors will benefit from writing down important cues and
planned reactions to price movements over the course of days to weeks; intraday traders
will need a very detailed and specific plan for each individual day. This document can
serve as a control to help the trader build discipline, and can provide a connection between dispassionate analyses done outside of market hours and the actual trading process. Developing traders will often find that their view of the market is clouded by their
emotional reactions to price movements, and that it is often much easier to see clearly
when the market is closed. Sometimes the best solutions are the simplest: in this case,
simply writing down a plan while the market is closed can do wonders. Over time, this
particular record becomes something of a hybrid between a diary and trade record.
How you create this game plan is up to you, but it should probably include at least
three sections: observations on the overall market, points to watch on existing positions,
and potential new entries. Ideally, this document should not be in narrative style; this is
not a journal, it is an attack plan—bullet points are much more efficient. In the beginning
stages of your development you will probably want to include more detail: not only what
markets you are looking at but notes on specific setups, price levels, action in related
markets, and comments across multiple time frames. Later, when you have mastered
your setups and your style is more fully developed, the daily game plan can become
much shorter and more succinct. Retaining these plans and periodically reviewing them
will give you insights into your growth as a trader, and can highlight issues of style drift
that you might not otherwise be aware of.

Profit and Loss (P&L) Records
The most important set of records are probably the actual P&L records. Though developing traders should not expect to make money, their P&L is still an objective measure of

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

388

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

growth and performance. For the working trader, P&L is the bottom line. It is important
to maintain clean, well-categorized, and accurate P&L records, and to have your own
set of records to double-check your broker or clearing firm’s accounting. Errors happen.
Positions may be missing, may be sized incorrectly, or may end up in the wrong account.
Corporate actions, buy-ins, dividends, rolls in futures, interest rates in forex accounts,
currency conversions for assets held on foreign exchanges, and options assignments can
all cause issues, so develop an obsessive habit of checking statements and records after
any of these events. In many cases the customer has some liability in this type of error;
treat your trading as a business and manage every aspect of it with discipline.
Though many brokers produce records that are adequate for most accounting and
tax purposes, more resolution is usually needed. One of the most important tasks in
record keeping is categorizing all trades and executions according to the setup or pattern
that generated the trade. For instance, it is useful to be able to separate all pullback
trades or all failure test trades, and then to do statistical analysis on that particular set
of trades. Again, think carefully when you develop this system, because it is important to
strike a balance between ease of use and sufficient detail. If you do not include enough
detail, your analysis will not tell you anything useful about your performance. If you
include too much detail, you may create an onerous task and eventually stop updating
these records every day. In general, most traders might find it useful to have three to
five main categories of trades corresponding to specific setups and patterns they trade.
Each category could optionally have more information regarding the specific entry or
exit technique used to allow for cross-referencing and deeper analysis. Excel is adequate
for keeping these records, but many traders will find a database program better suited to
the task.
It is very important that you create a process that is meaningful for your style and
frequency of trading, and it is also important to get it right from the beginning. If, for instance, you change the way you categorize your trades, you may have to go back through
several hundred or thousands of trades and recategorize them all. Not only is this a waste
of time, but it compromises the integrity of the records; you may be inclined to push certain trades into certain categories in a subtle effort to skew the performance metrics on
some classes of trades. In many cases it is possible to designate a trade several ways:
Was that a pullback trade? Did you buy at support? Did you buy a failure test against
support? Was it a selling climax trade on a lower time frame? What matters is what you
thought it was at the time you made the trade, not some decisions you may make weeks
or months afterward, so beware of making revisions to these designations after the fact.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF TRADING RESULTS
There are so many subjective elements in discretionary trading, but your P&L is not one
of them—you are either making or losing money. Correct analysis of your P&L can reveal
hidden strengths and weaknesses. You may find you trade certain market environments

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

389

Becoming a Trader

or asset classes better than others, or that you are trading a specific pattern well but giving back all of the P&L in other, less successful trades. In addition, tracking performance
over a period of time can give early warning of problems, can highlight style drifts, and
can tie performance to certain market environments. For traders at all stages of development, the main questions to ask of this analysis are:

r Are you making money? Does your P&L show that you have an edge? Are your results
better than what someone could have achieved flipping a coin or throwing a dart?

r Is your performance dependent on one class of setup more than others? Could you
improve performance by eliminating certain setups from your trading plan?

r Is there a market, group of markets, or asset class that you trade better than others?
r How is your performance changing compared to other time periods?
These questions can be answered through some fairly simple procedures. Many brokers will supply statements that will answer some of these questions, but others will need
to be addressed through your own work and records. Once these basic questions have
been answered, the analysis and review can be extended with other questions, such as:

r Are you repeating certain mistakes often enough that eliminating them could have a
very positive effect on your overall P&L?

r Are you achieving superior risk-adjusted performance?
r Are there other things that you are doing that are hurting your numbers?
This next section will walk through a theoretical analysis to show the basic concepts and math used. (The set of trades is available from the author’s web site at www
.adamhgrimes.com/ and in Appendix C.) If this type of work is new to you, you should
repeat the analysis yourself and compare your results to those in this section.

Quantifying Your Edge
Table 12.1 shows summary statistics for an active swing trader trading four separate
systems over three months in a $100,000 account. Number of trades (N=) and cumulative
net P&L (Sum) are given, as well as means for all trades and both winning and losing
TABLE 12.1 Summary Statistics for Net P&L
System

N=

Sum

Mean

StDev

AvgWin

AvgLoss

Win%

p=

A
B
C
D
All

29
17
16
6
68

(2,531)
5,109
1,109
(529)
3,158

(87)
301
69
(88)
46

616
515
653
479
600

456
557
361
468
456

(528)
(314)
(1,194)
(366)
(538)

44.8%
70.6%
81.3%
33.3%
58.8%

0.226
0.014
0.339
0.336
0.263

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

390

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

trades separately. The percentage of winning trades is given as Win% in the table. In this
example, losing trades are 1 − Win% for all categories, but in other cases there may be
breakeven trades to consider. Standard deviation is calculated as an intermediate step
to deriving the p value, which is a significance test (one-tailed t-test) for the mean P&L
being >0.
First, consider the bottom line of the table, which gives summary statistics for all
trades combined. Over this period, this trader made $3,158 on starting capital of $100,000.
The first question to ask is: Is this good performance? Even a simple question like
this may not have a simple answer. On one hand, $3,158 is not a lot of money, but if this
is performance over one quarter, a 3.16 percent gain is perhaps not bad. Assuming this
trader can repeat this performance regularly, 3.16 percent quarterly compounds to a respectable 13.2 percent annually: (1 + 0.0316)4 − 1.
However, it is not so simple: The standard deviation of the trades is a staggering
$600 compared to a mean trade of $46. This is not good, and suggests that the positive
performance could have been nothing more than luck. The p value of 0.263 basically
says that, given this set of trades, there is a 26.3 percent chance of seeing results at
least this extreme due to random chance even if the trader did not actually have an
edge. Figure 12.1, a running total of the individual trades, provides another check on
consistency and edge. (Note that this figure does not mirror the daily account P&L that is
marked to market; this graph simply sums each trade’s closed P&L. Graphs like this can
be ordered either by trade entry or by exit date.) Consider this P&L line and ask yourself
how hard it is to believe that it ended above zero just due to chance. In this case, there
seems to be little consistency and the line wanders about as far above as below the zero

FIGURE 12.1 Cumulative P&L by Trade

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Becoming a Trader

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

391

FIGURE 12.2 Trade-by-Trade Net P&L

line. This is not what we would expect to see if a trader had a strong edge. Though this is
not an actual statistical test, visual inspection of a time series chart is a good companion
to deeper analyses.
Yet another check comes from plotting the P&L of each individual trade (not cumulative) as in Figure 12.2. One of the most important aspects of this graph is the long runs
of both winning and losing trades. There seem to be roughly three separate sections to
this trader’s performance: The first half of the graph shows winning and losing trades approximately equally matched, and then there is a potentially nasty series of losing trades
as two large losses, followed by two small wins, lead to eight losing trades in a row.
However, this period is followed by a nearly unbroken series of wins on the last third
of the graph. There are questions that must be asked here that cannot be answered by
this simple analysis: Why did this happen? Does the trader’s style favor certain market
environments over others, or is there an element of performance psychology here? Is
the trader himself responsible for these streaks of losses or wins? Essentially all of the
positive P&L comes from the long run of wins at the end, so is there some repeatable
element in that set of trades? The answers to all of these questions may well be no. It
is possible that these runs are just the normal expectation for the system, and that any
tweaking would be counterproductive, but these are the kinds of questions to ask.
Though the trader’s performance is not promising, all is not lost. The breakdown of
trades by system (A, B, C, and D) in Table 12.1 shows that the B-class trades might have

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

392

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

a stronger edge. These trades, taken alone, made $5,109 on 17 trades, showing a mean
trade of $301 with a standard deviation of $515, achieving statistical significance as well.
This trader should possibly consider these trades further, and ask if some of the other
trades could be eliminated from the playbook.
This is also a vivid illustration of the fact that neither reward/risk ratio nor winning
percentage is particularly important when taken alone. Consider the C trades, which
have a very impressive win ratio of 81.3 percent, but an average loss more than three
times the size of the average win essentially wipes out any edge. Note also that it is not
necessary to calculate expected value in this analysis, as the trade means are equivalent
to the expected values for each class of trade.

Standardizing for Risk
One complicating factor is that this trader was not consistent in his risk. Though not visible in Table 12.1, risk per trade on the $100,000 account ranged from a low of $199 to
a high of $1,790. The nominal trade risk will vary under a fixed percentage plan (see
Chapter 9), but this trader was not executing a fixed percentage plan as trade risks
ranged from 0.2 percent to 1.8 percent of equity at the time of entry. Standardizing each
trade’s P&L as a percentage of the amount risked can provide deeper insight into the
trader’s performance:
%R = Actual dollar P&L ÷ Initial risk
Table 12.2 shows the result of this analysis.
This time, the results paint a very different picture. On average, the trader made
0.3 times the initial risk on every trade, with a standard deviation of 0.8; this is a much
better ratio of return to standard deviation than in the first table. The t-test shows that
this P&L is statistically significant at the 0.001 level, as there would be less than a 0.1
percent chance of seeing a result this extreme due to random chance. There is a very
important point here: The trader’s net P&L was a combination of both his position sizing
choices and whatever actual edge he may have had. Standardizing for risk removes the
position sizing effect and reveals that this trader actually was trading with a clear statistical edge, even though it was completely obscured by his position sizing decisions. This
second analysis also suggests that there probably is an edge to the C-class trades, which
TABLE 12.2 Summary Statistics for %R P&L
System
