
By the 1840s, these indexes had widened to include a maximum of seven financial stocks and 27 railroad stocks—still an absurdly unrepresentative sample of the
rambunctious young American stock market.
2
See Jason Zweig, “New Cause for Caution on Stocks,” Time, May 6, 2002,
p. 71. As Graham hints on p. 65, even the stock indexes between 1871 and
the 1920s suffer from survivorship bias, thanks to the hundreds of automobile,
aviation, and radio companies that went bust without a trace. These returns,
too, are probably overstated by one to two percentage points.
1

Commentary on Chapter 3

83

THE HIGHER THEY GO,
T H E H A R D E R T H E Y FA L L
As the enduring antidote to this kind of bull-market baloney, Graham
urges the intelligent investor to ask some simple, skeptical questions.
Why should the future returns of stocks always be the same as their
past returns? When every investor comes to believe that stocks are
guaranteed to make money in the long run, won’t the market end up
being wildly overpriced? And once that happens, how can future
returns possibly be high?
Graham’s answers, as always, are rooted in logic and common
sense. The value of any investment is, and always must be, a function
of the price you pay for it. By the late 1990s, inflation was withering
away, corporate profits appeared to be booming, and most of the
world was at peace. But that did not mean—nor could it ever mean—
that stocks were worth buying at any price. Since the profits that companies can earn are finite, the price that investors should be willing to
pay for stocks must also be finite.
Think of it this way: Michael Jordan may well have been the greatest basketball player of all time, and he pulled fans into Chicago Stadium like a giant electromagnet. The Chicago Bulls got a bargain by
paying Jordan up to $34 million a year to bounce a big leather ball
around a wooden floor. But that does not mean the Bulls would have
been justified paying him $340 million, or $3.4 billion, or $34 billion,
per season.
THE LIMITS OF OPTIMISM
Focusing on the market’s recent returns when they have been rosy,
warns Graham, will lead to “a quite illogical and dangerous conclusion
that equally marvelous results could be expected for common stocks
in the future.” From 1995 through 1999, as the market rose by at least
20% each year—a surge unprecedented in American history—stock
buyers became ever more optimistic:
•

In mid-1998, investors surveyed by the Gallup Organization for
the PaineWebber brokerage firm expected their portfolios to earn
an average of roughly 13% over the year to come. By early 2000,
their average expected return had jumped to more than 18%.

84

•

Commentary on Chapter 3

“Sophisticated professionals” were just as bullish, jacking up their
own assumptions of future returns. In 2001, for instance, SBC
Communications raised the projected return on its pension plan
from 8.5% to 9.5%. By 2002, the average assumed rate of return
on the pension plans of companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500stock index had swollen to a record-high 9.2%.
A quick follow-up shows the awful aftermath of excess enthusiasm:

•

•

Gallup found in 2001 and 2002 that the average expectation of
one-year returns on stocks had slumped to 7%—even though
investors could now buy at prices nearly 50% lower than in
2000.2
Those gung-ho assumptions about the returns on their pension
plans will cost the companies in the S & P 500 a bare minimum of
$32 billion between 2002 and 2004, according to recent Wall
Street estimates.

Even though investors all know they’re supposed to buy low and
sell high, in practice they often end up getting it backwards. Graham’s
warning in this chapter is simple: “By the rule of opposites,” the more
enthusiastic investors become about the stock market in the long run,
the more certain they are to be proved wrong in the short run. On
March 24, 2000, the total value of the U.S. stock market peaked at
$14.75 trillion. By October 9, 2002, just 30 months later, the total
U.S. stock market was worth $7.34 trillion, or 50.2% less—a loss of
$7.41 trillion. Meanwhile, many market pundits turned sourly bearish, predicting flat or even negative market returns for years—even
decades—to come.
At this point, Graham would ask one simple question: Considering
how calamitously wrong the “experts” were the last time they agreed
on something, why on earth should the intelligent investor believe
them now?

2

Those cheaper stock prices do not mean, of course, that investors’ expectation of a 7% stock return will be realized.

Commentary on Chapter 3

85

W H AT ’ S N E X T ?
Instead, let’s tune out the noise and think about future returns as Graham might. The stock market’s performance depends on three factors:
•
•
•

real growth (the rise of companies’ earnings and dividends)
inflationary growth (the general rise of prices throughout the
economy)
speculative growth—or decline (any increase or decrease in the
investing public’s appetite for stocks)

In the long run, the yearly growth in corporate earnings per share
has averaged 1.5% to 2% (not counting inflation).3 As of early 2003,
inflation was running around 2.4% annually; the dividend yield on
stocks was 1.9%. So,
1.5% to 2%
+ 2.4%
+ 1.9%
= 5.8% to 6.3%
In the long run, that means you can reasonably expect stocks to
average roughly a 6% return (or 4% after inflation). If the investing
public gets greedy again and sends stocks back into orbit, then that
speculative fever will temporarily drive returns higher. If, instead,
investors are full of fear, as they were in the 1930s and 1970s, the
returns on stocks will go temporarily lower. (That’s where we are in
2003.)
Robert Shiller, a finance professor at Yale University, says Graham
inspired his valuation approach: Shiller compares the current price of
the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index against average corporate
profits over the past 10 years (after inflation). By scanning the historical record, Shiller has shown that when his ratio goes well above 20,
the market usually delivers poor returns afterward; when it drops well

3

See Jeremy Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run (McGraw-Hill, 2002), p. 94,
and Robert Arnott and William Bernstein, “The Two Percent Dilution,” working paper, July, 2002.

86

Commentary on Chapter 3

below 10, stocks typically produce handsome gains down the road. In
early 2003, by Shiller’s math, stocks were priced at about 22.8 times
the average inflation-adjusted earnings of the past decade—still in the
danger zone, but way down from their demented level of 44.2 times
earnings in December 1999.
How has the market done in the past when it was priced around
today’s levels? Figure 3-1 shows the previous periods when stocks
were at similar highs, and how they fared over the 10-year stretches
that followed:

FIGURE 3-1
Price/earnings ratio

Total return over
next 10 years

21.4
20.7
21.7
19.6
22.0
21.1
18.9
18.6
22.0
18.6
21.0
22.8
23.7
19.7
21.8
22.3
18.6
20.4
20.8

 9.2
 7.1
 5.9
 5.0
0.1
 4.4
11.1
 7.8
 7.1
 9.9
 6.0
 1.2
 3.3
 6.6
 3.6
 3.2
 6.7
 9.3
 6.0

Year
1898
1900
1901
1905
1929
1936
1955
1959
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1972
1992
Averages

Sources: http://aida.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data/ie_data.htm;
Jack Wilson and Charles Jones, “An Analysis of the S & P 500 Index and Cowles’
Extensions: Price Index and Stock Returns, 1870–1999,” The Journal of Business, vol.
75, no. 3, July, 2002, pp. 527–529; Ibbotson Associates.
Notes: Price/earnings ratio is Shiller calculation (10-year average real earnings of
S & P 500-stock index divided by December 31 index value). Total return is nominal
annual average.

Commentary on Chapter 3

87

So, from valuation levels similar to those of early 2003, the stock
market has sometimes done very well in the ensuing 10 years, sometimes poorly, and muddled along the rest of the time. I think Graham,
ever the conservative, would split the difference between the lowest
and highest past returns and project that over the next decade stocks
will earn roughly 6% annually, or 4% after inflation. (Interestingly, that
projection matches the estimate we got earlier when we added
together real growth, inflationary growth, and speculative growth.)
Compared to the 1990s, 6% is chicken feed. But it’s a whisker better
than the gains that bonds are likely to produce—and reason enough for
most investors to hang on to stocks as part of a diversified portfolio.
But there is a second lesson in Graham’s approach. The only thing
you can be confident of while forecasting future stock returns is that
you will probably turn out to be wrong. The only indisputable truth that
the past teaches us is that the future will always surprise us—always!
And the corollary to that law of financial history is that the markets will
most brutally surprise the very people who are most certain that their
views about the future are right. Staying humble about your forecasting powers, as Graham did, will keep you from risking too much on a
view of the future that may well turn out to be wrong.
So, by all means, you should lower your expectations—but take care
not to depress your spirit. For the intelligent investor, hope always
springs eternal, because it should. In the financial markets, the worse
the future looks, the better it usually turns out to be. A cynic once told
G. K. Chesterton, the British novelist and essayist, “Blessed is he who
expecteth nothing, for he shall not be disappointed.” Chesterton’s
rejoinder? “Blessed is he who expecteth nothing, for he shall enjoy
everything.”

CHAPTER 4

General Portfolio Policy:
The Defensive Investor

The basic characteristics of an investment portfolio are usually

determined by the position and characteristics of the owner or
owners. At one extreme we have had savings banks, life-insurance
companies, and so-called legal trust funds. A generation ago their
investments were limited by law in many states to high-grade
bonds and, in some cases, high-grade preferred stocks. At the other
extreme we have the well-to-do and experienced businessman,
who will include any kind of bond or stock in his security list provided he considers it an attractive purchase.
It has been an old and sound principle that those who cannot
afford to take risks should be content with a relatively low return
on their invested funds. From this there has developed the general
notion that the rate of return which the investor should aim for is
more or less proportionate to the degree of risk he is ready to run.
Our view is different. The rate of return sought should be dependent, rather, on the amount of intelligent effort the investor is willing and able to bring to bear on his task. The minimum return goes
to our passive investor, who wants both safety and freedom from
concern. The maximum return would be realized by the alert and
enterprising investor who exercises maximum intelligence and
skill. In 1965 we added: “In many cases there may be less real risk
associated with buying a ‘bargain issue’ offering the chance of a
large profit than with a conventional bond purchase yielding about
41⁄2%.” This statement had more truth in it than we ourselves suspected, since in subsequent years even the best long-term bonds
lost a substantial part of their market value because of the rise in
interest rates.
88

General Portfolio Policy

89

The Basic Problem of Bond-Stock Allocation
We have already outlined in briefest form the portfolio policy of
the defensive investor.* He should divide his funds between highgrade bonds and high-grade common stocks.
We have suggested as a fundamental guiding rule that the
investor should never have less than 25% or more than 75% of his
funds in common stocks, with a consequent inverse range of
between 75% and 25% in bonds. There is an implication here that
the standard division should be an equal one, or 50–50, between
the two major investment mediums. According to tradition the
sound reason for increasing the percentage in common stocks
would be the appearance of the “bargain price” levels created in a
protracted bear market. Conversely, sound procedure would call
for reducing the common-stock component below 50% when in
the judgment of the investor the market level has become dangerously high.
These copybook maxims have always been easy to enunciate
and always difficult to follow—because they go against that very
human nature which produces that excesses of bull and bear markets. It is almost a contradiction in terms to suggest as a feasible
policy for the average stockowner that he lighten his holdings when
the market advances beyond a certain point and add to them after
a corresponding decline. It is because the average man operates,
and apparently must operate, in opposite fashion that we have had
the great advances and collapses of the past; and—this writer
believes—we are likely to have them in the future.
If the division between investment and speculative operations
were as clear now as once it was, we might be able to envisage
investors as a shrewd, experienced group who sell out to the heedless, hapless speculators at high prices and buy back from them at
depressed levels. This picture may have had some verisimilitude in
bygone days, but it is hard to identify it with financial developments since 1949. There is no indication that such professional
operations as those of the mutual funds have been conducted in
this fashion. The percentage of the portfolio held in equities by the

* See Graham’s “Conclusion” to Chapter 2, p. 56–57.

90

The Intelligent Investor

two major types of funds—“balanced” and “common-stock”—has
changed very little from year to year. Their selling activities have
been largely related to endeavors to switch from less to more
promising holdings.
If, as we have long believed, the stock market has lost contact
with its old bounds, and if new ones have not yet been established,
then we can give the investor no reliable rules by which to reduce
his common-stock holdings toward the 25% minimum and rebuild
them later to the 75% maximum. We can urge that in general the
investor should not have more than one-half in equities unless he
has strong confidence in the soundness of his stock position and is
sure that he could view a market decline of the 1969–70 type with
equanimity. It is hard for us to see how such strong confidence can
be justified at the levels existing in early 1972. Thus we would
counsel against a greater than 50% apportionment to common
stocks at this time. But, for complementary reasons, it is almost
equally difficult to advise a reduction of the figure well below 50%,
unless the investor is disquieted in his own mind about the current
market level, and will be satisfied also to limit his participation in
any further rise to, say, 25% of his total funds.
We are thus led to put forward for most of our readers what may
appear to be an oversimplified 50–50 formula. Under this plan the
guiding rule is to maintain as nearly as practicable an equal division between bond and stock holdings. When changes in the market level have raised the common-stock component to, say, 55%,
the balance would be restored by a sale of one-eleventh of the stock
portfolio and the transfer of the proceeds to bonds. Conversely, a
fall in the common-stock proportion to 45% would call for the use
of one-eleventh of the bond fund to buy additional equities.
Yale University followed a somewhat similar plan for a number
of years after 1937, but it was geared around a 35% “normal holding” in common stocks. In the early 1950s, however, Yale seems to
have given up its once famous formula, and in 1969 held 61% of its
portfolio in equities (including some convertibles). (At that time
the endowment funds of 71 such institutions, totaling $7.6 billion,
held 60.3% in common stocks.) The Yale example illustrates the
almost lethal effect of the great market advance upon the once popular formula approach to investment. Nonetheless we are convinced
that our 50–50 version of this approach makes good sense for the

General Portfolio Policy

91

defensive investor. It is extremely simple; it aims unquestionably in
the right direction; it gives the follower the feeling that he is at least
making some moves in response to market developments; most
important of all, it will restrain him from being drawn more and
more heavily into common stocks as the market rises to more and
more dangerous heights.
Furthermore, a truly conservative investor will be satisfied with
the gains shown on half his portfolio in a rising market, while in a
severe decline he may derive much solace from reflecting how
much better off he is than many of his more venturesome friends.
While our proposed 50–50 division is undoubtedly the simplest
“all-purpose program” devisable, it may not turn out to be the best
in terms of results achieved. (Of course, no approach, mechanical
or otherwise, can be advanced with any assurance that it will work
out better than another.) The much larger income return now
offered by good bonds than by representative stocks is a potent
argument for favoring the bond component. The investor’s choice
between 50% or a lower figure in stocks may well rest mainly on
his own temperament and attitude. If he can act as a cold-blooded
weigher of the odds, he would be likely to favor the low 25% stock
component at this time, with the idea of waiting until the DJIA dividend yield was, say, two-thirds of the bond yield before he would
establish his median 50–50 division between bonds and stocks.
Starting from 900 for the DJIA and dividends of $36 on the unit,
this would require either a fall in taxable bond yields from 71⁄2% to
about 5.5% without any change in the present return on leading
stocks, or a fall in the DJIA to as low as 660 if there is no reduction
in bond yields and no increase in dividends. A combination of
intermediate changes could produce the same “buying point.” A
program of that kind is not especially complicated; the hard part is
to adopt it and to stick to it not to mention the possibility that it
may turn out to have been much too conservative.

The Bond Component
The choice of issues in the bond component of the investor’s
portfolio will turn about two main questions: Should he buy taxable or tax-free bonds, and should he buy shorter- or longer-term
maturities? The tax decision should be mainly a matter of arith-

92

The Intelligent Investor

metic, turning on the difference in yields as compared with the
investor’s tax bracket. In January 1972 the choice in 20-year maturities was between obtaining, say, 71⁄2% on “grade Aa” corporate
bonds and 5.3% on prime tax-free issues. (The term “municipals” is
generally applied to all species of tax-exempt bonds, including
state obligations.) There was thus for this maturity a loss in income
of some 30% in passing from the corporate to the municipal field.
Hence if the investor was in a maximum tax bracket higher than
30% he would have a net saving after taxes by choosing the municipal bonds; the opposite, if his maximum tax was less than 30%. A
single person starts paying a 30% rate when his income after
deductions passes $10,000; for a married couple the rate applies
when combined taxable income passes $20,000. It is evident that a
large proportion of individual investors would obtain a higher
return after taxes from good municipals than from good corporate
bonds.
The choice of longer versus shorter maturities involves quite a
different question, viz.: Does the investor want to assure himself
against a decline in the price of his bonds, but at the cost of (1) a
lower annual yield and (2) loss of the possibility of an appreciable
gain in principal value? We think it best to discuss this question in
Chapter 8, The Investor and Market Fluctuations.
For a period of many years in the past the only sensible bond
purchases for individuals were the U.S. savings issues. Their safety
was—and is—unquestioned; they gave a higher return than other
bond investments of first quality; they had a money-back option
and other privileges which added greatly to their attractiveness. In
our earlier editions we had an entire chapter entitled “U.S. Savings
Bonds: A Boon to Investors.”
As we shall point out, U.S. savings bonds still possess certain
unique merits that make them a suitable purchase by any individual investor. For the man of modest capital—with, say, not more
than $10,000 to put into bonds—we think they are still the easiest
and the best choice. But those with larger funds may find other
mediums more desirable.
Let us list a few major types of bonds that deserve investor consideration, and discuss them briefly with respect to general
description, safety, yield, market price, risk, income-tax status, and
other features.

General Portfolio Policy

93

1. u.s. savings bonds, series e and series h. We shall first summarize their important provisions, and then discuss briefly the
numerous advantages of these unique, attractive, and exceedingly
convenient investments. The Series H bonds pay interest semiannually, as do other bonds. The rate is 4.29% for the first year, and
then a flat 5.10% for the next nine years to maturity. Interest on the
Series E bonds is not paid out, but accrues to the holder through
increase in redemption value. The bonds are sold at 75% of their
face value, and mature at 100% in 5 years 10 months after purchase.
If held to maturity the yield works out at 5%, compounded semiannually. If redeemed earlier, the yield moves up from a minimum
of 4.01% in the first year to an average of 5.20% in the next 45⁄6 years.
Interest on the bonds is subject to Federal income tax, but is
exempt from state income tax. However, Federal income tax on the
Series E bonds may be paid at the holder’s option either annually
as the interest accrues (through higher redemption value), or not
until the bond is actually disposed of.
Owners of Series E bonds may cash them in at any time (shortly
after purchase) at their current redemption value. Holders of Series
H bonds have similar rights to cash them in at par value (cost).
Series E bonds are exchangeable for Series H bonds, with certain
tax advantages. Bonds lost, destroyed, or stolen may be replaced
without cost. There are limitations on annual purchases, but liberal
provisions for co-ownership by family members make it possible
for most investors to buy as many as they can afford. Comment:
There is no other investment that combines (1) absolute assurance
of principal and interest payments, (2) the right to demand full
“money back” at any time, and (3) guarantee of at least a 5% interest rate for at least ten years. Holders of the earlier issues of Series
E bonds have had the right to extend their bonds at maturity, and
thus to continue to accumulate annual values at successively
higher rates. The deferral of income-tax payments over these long
periods has been of great dollar advantage; we calculate it has
increased the effective net-after-tax rate received by as much as a
third in typical cases. Conversely, the right to cash in the bonds at
cost price or better has given the purchasers in former years of low
interest rates complete protection against the shrinkage in principal value that befell many bond investors; otherwise stated, it gave
them the possibility of benefiting from the rise in interest rates by
