
88

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

that you would want your daughter to marry. It is a privilege to be
associated with them-and also a lot of fun, as any of you who
know them will understand.
Our purchase of stock helped Cap Cities finance the $3.5 billion acquisition of American Broadcasting Companies. For Cap
Cities, ABC is a major undertaking whose economics are likely to
be unexciting over the next few years. This bothers us not an iota;
we can be very patient. (No matter how great the talent or effort,
some things just take time: you can't produce a baby in one month
by getting nine women pregnant.)
As evidence of our confidence, we have executed an unusual
agreement: for an extended period Tom, as CEO (or Dan, should
he be CEO) votes our stock. This arrangement was initiated by
Charlie and me, not by Tom. We also have restricted ourselves in
various ways regarding sale of our shares. The object of these restrictions is to make sure that our block does not get sold to anyone
who is a large holder (or intends to become a large holder) without
the approval of management, an arrangement similar to ones we
initiated some years ago at GEICO and Washington Post.
Since large blocks frequently command premium prices, some
might think we have injured Berkshire financially by creating such
restrictions. Our view is just the opposite. We feel the long-term
economic prospects for these businesses-and, thus, for ourselves
as owners-are enhanced by the arrangements. With them in
place, the first-class managers with whom we have aligned ourselves can focus their efforts entirely upon running the businesses
and maximizing long-term values for owners. Certainly this is
much better than having those managers distracted by "revolvingdoor capitalists" hoping to put the company "in play." (Of course,
some managers place their own interests above those of the company and its owners and deserve to be shaken up-but, in making
investments, we try to steer clear of this type.)
Today, corporate instability is an inevitable consequence of
widely-diffused ownership of voting stock. At any time a major
holder can surface, usually mouthing reassuring rhetoric but frequently harboring uncivil intentions. By circumscribing our blocks
of stock as we often do, we intend to promote stability where it
otherwise might be lacking. That kind of certainty, combined with
a good manager and a good business, provides excellent soil for a
rich financial harvest. That's the economic case for our
arrangements.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

89

The human side is just as important. We don't want managers
we like and admire-and who have welcomed a major financial
commitment by us-to ever lose any sleep wondering whether surprises might occur because of our large ownership. I have told
them there will be no surprises, and these agreements put Berkshire's signature where my mouth is. That signature also means the
managers have a corporate commitment and therefore need not
worry if my personal participation in Berkshire's affairs ends prematurely (a term I define as any age short of three digits).
Our Cap Cities purchase was made at a full price, reflecting
the very considerable enthusiasm for both media stocks and media
properties that has developed in recent years (and that, in the case
of some property purchases, has approached a mania). It's no field
for bargains. However, our Cap Cities investment allies us with an
exceptional combination of properties and people-and we like the
opportunity to participate in size.
Of course, some of you probably wonder why we are now buying Cap Cities at $172.50 per share given that your Chairman, in a
characteristic burst of brilliance, sold Berkshire's holdings in the
same company at $43 per share in 1978-80. Anticipating your
question, I spent much of 1985 working on a snappy answer that
would reconcile these acts.
A little more time, please.
E.

Intelligent Investing21

Inactivity strikes us as intelligent behavior. Neither we nor
most business managers would dream of feverishly trading highlyprofitable subsidiaries because a small move in the Federal Reserve's discount rate was predicted or because some Wall Street
pundit had reversed his views on the market. Why, then, should
we behave differently with our minority positions in wonderful
businesses? The art of investing in public companies successfully is
little different from the art of successfully acquiring subsidiaries. In
each case you simply want to acquire, at a sensible price, a business
with excellent economics and able, honest management. Thereafter, you need only monitor whether these qualities are being
preserved.
When carried out capably, an investment strategy of that type
will often result in its practitioner owning a few securities that will
come to represent a very large portion of his portfolio. This inves21

[1996.]

90

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

tor would get a similar result if he followed a policy of purchasing
an interest in, say, 20% of the future earnings of a number of outstanding college basketball stars. A handful of these would go on
to achieve NBA stardom, and the investor's take from them would
soon dominate his royalty stream. To suggest that this investor
should sell off portions of his most successful investments simply
because they have come to dominate his portfolio is akin to suggesting that the Bulls trade Michael Jordan because he has become
so important to the team.
In studying the investments we have made in both subsidiary
companies and common stocks, you will see that we favor businesses and industries unlikely to experience major change. The
reason for that is simple: Making either type of purchase, we are
searching for operations that we believe are virtually certain to
possess enormous competitive strength ten or twenty years from
now. A fast-changing industry environment may offer the chance
for huge wins, but it precludes the certainty we seek.
I should emphasize that, as citizens, Charlie and I welcome
change: Fresh ideas, new products, innovative processes and the
like cause our country's standard of living to rise, and that's clearly
good. As investors, however, our reaction to a fermenting industry
is much like our attitude toward space exploration: We applaud the
endeavor but prefer to skip the ride.
Obviously all businesses change to some extent. Today, See's
is different in many ways from what it was in 1972 when we bought
it: It offers a different assortment of candy, employs different machinery and sells through different distribution channels. But the
reasons why people today buy boxed chocolates, and why they buy
them from us rather than from someone else, are virtually unchanged from what they were in the 1920's when the See family
was building the business. Moreover, these motivations are not
likely to change over the next 20 years, or even 50.
We look for similar predictability in marketable securities.
Take Coca-Cola: The zeal and imagination with which Coke products are sold has burgeoned under Roberto Goizueta, who has
done an absolutely incredible job in creating value for his shareholders. Aided by Don Keough and Doug Ivester, Roberto has
rethought and improved every aspect of the company. But the fundamentals of the business-the qualities that underlie Coke's competitive dominance and stunning economics-have remained
constant through the years.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

91

I was recently studying the 1896 report of Coke (and you think
that you are behind in your reading!). At that time Coke, though it
was already the leading soft drink, had been around for only a decade. But its blueprint for the next 100 years was already drawn.
Reporting sales of $148,000 that year, Asa Candler, the company's
president, said: "We have not lagged in our efforts to go into all the
world teaching that Coca-Cola is the article, par excellence, for the
health and good feeling of all people.'; Though "health" may have
been a reach, I love the fact that Coke still relies on Candler's basic
theme today-a century later. Candler went on to say, just as Roberto could now, "No article of like character has ever so firmly
entrenched itself in public favor." Sales of syrup that year, incidentally, were 116,492 gallons versus about 3.2 billion in 1996.
I can't resist one more Candler quote: "Beginning this year
about March 1st ... we employed ten traveling salesmen by means
of which, with systematic correspondence from the office, we covered almost the territory of the Union." That's my kind of sales
force.
Companies such as Coca-Cola and Gillette might well be labeled "The Inevitables." Forecasters may differ a bit in their predictions of exactly how much soft drink or shaving-equipment
business these companies will be doing in ten or twenty years. Nor
is our talk of inevitability meant to play down the vital work that
these companies must continue to carry out, in such areas as manufacturing, distribution, packaging and product innovation. In the
end, however, no sensible observer-not even these companies'
most vigorous competitors, assuming they are assessing the matter
honestly-questions that Coke and Gillette will dominate their
fields worldwide for an investment lifetime. Indeed, their dominance will probably strengthen. Both companies have significantly
expanded their already huge shares of market during the past ten
years, and all signs point to their repeating that performance in the
next decade.
'
Obviously many companies in high-tech businesses or embryonic industries will grow much faster in percentage terms than will
The Inevitables. But I would rather be certain of a good result
than hopeful of a great one.
Of course, Charlie and I can identify only a few Inevitables,
even after a lifetime of looking for them. Leadership alone provides no certainties: Witness the shocks some years back at General Motors, IBM and Sears, all of which had enjoyed long periods
of seeming invincibility. Though some industries or lines of busi-

92

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

ness exhibit characteristics that endow leaders with virtually insurmountable advantages, and that tend to establish Survival of the
Fattest as almost a natural law, most do not. Thus, for every Inevitable, there are dozens of Impostors, companies now riding high
but vulnerable to competitive attacks. Considering what it takes to
be an Inevitable, Charlie and I recognize that we will never be able
to come up with a Nifty Fifty or even a 1\vinkling 1\venty. To the
Inevitables in our portfolio, therefore, we add a few "Highly
Probables."
You can, of course, pay too much for even the best of businesses. The overpayment risk surfaces periodically and, in our
opinion, may now be quite high for the purchasers of virtually all
stocks, The Inevitables included. Investors making purchases in an
overheated market need to recognize that it may often take an extended period for the value of even an outstanding company to
catch up with the price they paid.
A far more serious problem occurs when the management of a
great company gets sidetracked and neglects its wonderful base
business while purchasing other businesses that are so-so or worse.
When that happens, the suffering of investors is often prolonged.
Unfortunately, that is precisely what transpired years ago at both
Coke and Gillette. (Would you believe that a few decades back
they were growing shrimp at Coke and exploring for oil at Gillette?) Loss of focus is what most worries Charlie and me when we
contemplate investing in businesses that in general look outstanding. All too often, we've seen value stagnate in the presence of
hubris or of boredom that caused the attention of managers to
wander. That's not going to happen again at Coke and Gillette,
however-not given their current and prospective managements.

* * * * *
Let me add a few thoughts about your own investments. Most
investors, both institutional and individual, will find that the best
way to own common stocks is through an index fund that charges
minimal fees. Those following this path are sure to beat the net
results (after fees and expenses) delivered by the great majority of
investment professionals.
Should you choose, however, to construct your own portfolio,
there are a few thoughts worth remembering. Intelligent investing
is not complex, though that is far from saying that it is easy. What
an investor needs is the ability to correctly evaluate selected businesses. Note that word "selected": You don't have to be an expert

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

1997]

93

on every company, or even many. You only have to be able to
evaluate companies within your circle of competence. The size of
that circle is not very important; knowing its boundaries, however,
is vital.
To invest successfully, you need not understand beta, efficient
markets, modern portfolio theory, option pricing, or emerging markets. You may, in fact, be better off knowing nothing of these.
That, of course, is not the prevailing view at most business schools,
whose finance curriculum tends to be dominated by such subjects.
In our view, though, investment students need only two well-taught
courses-How to Value a Business, and How to Think About
Market Prices.
Your goal as an investor should simply be to purchase, at a
rational price, a part interest in an easily-understandable business
whose earnings are virtually certain to be materially higher five,
ten and twenty years from now. Over time, you will find only a few
companies that meet these standards-so when you see one that
qualifies, you should buy a meaningful amount of stock. You must
also resist the temptation to stray from your guidelines: If you
aren't willing to own a stock for ten years, don't even think about
owning it for ten minutes. Put together a portfolio of companies
whose aggregate earnings march upward over the years, and so
also will the portfolio's market value.
Though it's seldom recognized, this is the exact approach that
has produced gains for Berkshire shareholders: Our look-through
earnings have grown at a good clip over the years, and our stock
price has risen correspondingly. Had those gains in earnings not
materialized, there would have been little increase in Berkshire's
value.
F.

Cigar Butts and the Institutional Imperative 22

To quote Robert Benchley, "Having a dog teaches a boy fidelity, perseverance, and to turn around three times before lying
down." Such are the shortcomings of experience. Nevertheless,
it's a good idea to review past mistakes before committing new
ones. So let's take a quick look at the last 25 years.
• My first mistake, of course, was in buying control of Berkshire. Though I knew its business-textile manufacturing-to be
unpromising, I was enticed to buy because the price looked cheap.
Stock purchases of that kind had proved reasonably rewarding in
22

[1989.]

94

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[VoL 19:1

my early years, though by the time Berkshire came along in 1965 I
was becoming aware that the strategy was not ideaL
If you buy a stock at a sufficiently low price, there will usually
be some hiccup in the fortunes of the business that gives you a
chance to unload at a decent profit, even though the long-term performance of the business may be terrible. I call this the "cigar
butt" approach to investing. A cigar butt found on the street that
has only one puff left in it may not offer much of a smoke, but the
"bargain purchase" will make that puff all profit.
Unless you are a liquidator, that kind of approach to buying
businesses is foolish. First, the original "bargain" price probably
will not turn out to be such a steal after all. In a difficult business,
no sooner is one problem solved than another surfaces-never is
there just one cockroach in the kitchen. Second, any initial advantage you secure will be quickly eroded by the low return that the
business earns. For example, if you buy a business for $8 million
that can be sold or liquidated for $10 million and promptly take
either course, you can realize a high return. But the investment
will disappoint if the business is sold for $10 million in ten years
and in the interim has annually earned and distributed only a few
percent on cost. Time is the friend of the wonderful business, the
enemy of the mediocre.
You might think this principle is obvious, but I had to learn it
the hard way-in fact, I had to learn it several times over. Shortly
after purchasing Berkshire, I acquired a Baltimore department
store, Hochschild, Kohn, buying through a company called Diversified Retailing that later merged with Berkshire. I bought at a substantial discount from book value, the people were first-class, and
the deal included some extras-unrecorded real estate values and a
significant LIFO inventory cushion. How could I miss? So-o-othree years later I was lucky to sell the business for about what I
had paid. After ending our corporate marriage to Hochschild,
Kohn, I had memories like those of the husband in the country
song, "My Wife Ran Away With My Best Friend and I Still Miss
Him a Lot."
I could give you other personal examples of "bargainpurchase" folly but I'm sure you get the picture: It's far better to
buy a wonderful company at a fair price than a fair company at a
wonderful price. Charlie understood this early; I was a slow
learner. But now, when buying companies or common stocks, we
look for first-class businesses accompanied by first-class
managements.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

95

• That leads right into a related lesson: Good jockeys will do
well on good horses, but not on broken-down nags. Both Berkshire's textile business and Hochschild, Kohn had able and honest
people running them. The same managers employed in a business
with good economic characteristics would have achieved fine
records. But they were never going to make any progress while
running in quicksand.²³
I've said many times that when a management with a reputation for brilliance tackles a business with a reputation for bad economics, it is the reputation of the business that remains intact. I
just wish I hadn't been so energetic in creating examples. My behavior has matched that admitted by Mae West: "I was Snow
White, but I drifted."
• A further related lesson: Easy does it. After 25 years of buying and supervising a great variety of businesses, Charlie and I
have not learned how to solve difficult business problems. What
we have learned is to avoid them. To the extent we have been
successful, it is because we concentrated on identifying one-foot
hurdles that we could step over rather than because we acquired
any ability to clear seven-footers.
The finding may seem unfair, but in both business and investments it is usually far more profitable to simply stick with the easy
and obvious than it is to resolve the difficult. On occasion, tough
problems must be tackled as was the case when we started our Sunday paper in Buffalo. In other instances, a great investment opportunity occurs when a marvelous business encounters a one-time
huge, but solvable, problem as was the case many years back at
both American Express and GEIeO. Overall, however, we've
done better by avoiding dragons than by slaying them.
• My most surprising discovery: the overwhelming importance
in business of an unseen force that we might call "the institutional
imperative." In business school, I was given no hint of the imperative's existence and I did not intuitively understand it when I entered the business world. I thought then that decent, intelligent,
and experienced managers would automatically make rational
business decisions. But I learned over time that isn't so. Instead,
rationality frequently wilts when the institutional imperative comes
into play.
For example: (1) As if governed by Newton's First Law of Motion, an institution will resist any change in its current direction; (2)
23

[See the essay The Anxieties of Plant Closings in Part I.e.]

96

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Just as work expands to fill available time, corporate projects or
acquisitions will materialize to soak up available funds; (3) Any
business craving of the leader, however foolish, will be quickly supported by detailed rate-of-return and strategic studies prepared by
his troops; and (4) The behavior of peer companies, whether they
are expanding, acquiring, setting executive compensation or
whatever, will be mindlessly imitated.
Institutional dynamics, not venality or stupidity, set businesses
on these courses, which are too often misguided. After making
some expensive mistakes because I ignored the power of the imperative, I have tried to organize and manage Berkshire in ways
that minimize its influence. Furthermore, Charlie and I have attempted to concentrate our investments in companies that appear
alert to the problem.
• After some other mistakes, I learned to go into business only
with people whom I like, trust, and admire. As I noted before, this
policy of itself will not ensure success: A second-class textile or department-store company won't prosper simply because its managers are men that you would be pleased to see your daughter marry.
However, an owner-or investor-can accomplish wonders if he
manages to associate himself with such people in businesses that
possess decent economic characteristics. Conversely, we do not
wish to join with managers who lack admirable qualities, no matter
how attractive the prospects of their business. We've never succeeded in making a good deal with a bad person.
• Some of my worst mistakes were not publicly visible. These
were stock and business purchases whose virtues I understood and
yet didn't make. It's no sin to miss a great opportunity outside
one's area of competence. But I have passed on a couple of really
big purchases that were served up to me on a platter and that I was
fully capable of understanding. For Berkshire's shareholders, myself included, the cost of this thumb-sucking has been huge.
• Our consistently-conservative financial policies may appear
to have been a mistake, but in my view were not. In retrospect, it
is clear that significantly higher, though still conventional, leverage
ratios at Berkshire would have produced considerably better returns on equity than the 23.8% we have actually averaged. Even in
1965, perhaps we could have judged there to be a 99% probability
that higher leverage would lead to nothing but good. Correspondingly, we might have seen only a 1 % chance that some shock factor, external or internal, would cause a conventional debt ratio to

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT
