
face of what he had understood about the nature of their marriage. His impression that she had ended her
other relationship stood corrected. Despite the parallel between his own complicated personal life and
Susie’s, he was upset.
A discussion of Susie’s will ensued. They had sharply differing opinions about who among her friends should
receive bequests. In the end, his decision ruled. Afterward, the Buffett bathtub memory went to work.
Anything negative that had transpired between them simply vanished, and Susie was restored as his ideal,
because he needed her to be.
Warren had stood firm on the question of Susie’s bequests to her friends. But she had gentled him enough on
issues of money when it came to their children that he was not only comfortable giving them a million dollars
every few years while he was alive, he was going to leave them a reasonable amount of money after his
death.5 It would not fund a zoo full of bears like William Randolph Hearst’s, but they would be more than
comfortable.
Howie had used his first million-dollar birthday gift to buy a nine-hundred-acre farm in Decatur, Illinois,
where he still lived. Now he had two farms, one of which he owned outright. After the ADM lawsuits settled
down, Don Keough suggested that he become a professional director by going on the board of another
high-profile business, Coca-Cola Enterprises (CCE). Even though he had gained some business experience,
Howie really preferred to sit on his combine working the fields. And while CCE was far more respectable
than ADM, the CCE directorship nevertheless was a bit of a hop from the fire into the frying pan.
A giant cola bottler, CCE had been smashed together out of smaller bottlers that were Coca-Cola’s
customers. They bought the syrup concentrate that Coke made, mixed it with fizzy water, and sold it, acting
as middlemen, so their relationship with Coke was critical. Neither could live without the other.
Don Keough, Buffett’s old Omaha friend, was now president of Coca-Cola. His boss, the CEO of Coca-Cola,
the aristocratic Cuban-born Roberto Goizueta, was revered in the business world for creating the world’s
best-known brand through slogans like “Coke Is It” and “I’d like to buy the world a Coke.” Buffett felt that
Coca-Cola had by now become a self-sustaining enterprise—and he admired Goizueta for having gotten it to
this stage.
In 1997, Gates joined Buffett and Goizueta on a panel discussion at Sun Valley that was moderated by
Keough.
“I used to talk to Bill all the time, and I’d always use this expression that a ham sandwich could run
Coca-Cola. And Bill wasn’t quite housebroken then. So we were sitting on this panel, up in front of the
audience, and Bill said something to the effect that it’s pretty easy to run Coke.”
“I was trying to make a point about how Coke is such a wonderful business,” says Gates, “and I said
something about how I’m going to step down from Microsoft before I’m sixty because it’s a tough business
and a young person may need to be in there to handle turns in the road. But it came across that I thought of
Microsoft as exciting and I must have said something like, ‘Unlike Coca-Cola…’
“Goizueta thought I was an uppity, arrogant kid who was painting some kind of picture that I was engaged in
some masterful act on a daily basis whereas anybody could leave at noon and go golfing if they ran
Coca-Cola.”6
“And Roberto hated Bill from that point forward.”
Buffett avoided technology stocks partly because these fast-moving businesses could never be run by a ham
sandwich. He thought it no shame to have a business that could be run by a ham sandwich; he wanted to get
Berkshire Hathaway to the point that it could be run by a ham sandwich too—though not until after he was
gone.
But by 1997, Coca-Cola had started to set goals for itself that were so ambitious that it took—not a ham

sandwich, not even Goizueta—but a lot of financial engineering to achieve them.
Coke owned forty percent of CCE and tended to act as though it owned a hundred percent. The creation of
CCE by rolling up a group of bottlers had been part of a larger strategy of buying and selling bottlers in order
to time the profits and boost Coca-Cola’s earnings. This was neither illegal nor technically deceitful, but it
was nonetheless an illusion, and Warren, who was on the board of Coke, was always aware of the potential
for misrepresentation.
“Roberto did a lot of things operationally that were terrific, and I loved the guy. But Roberto got tangled
up in promising numbers that eventually couldn’t be delivered. He talked about high-teens growth, eighteen
percent. Big companies are not going to increase their earnings in the high teens over long periods of time.
For a while you can do it, but it just isn’t in the cards to keep it up forever.
“I remember when he came in and talked to us about how he was going to add a third leg to earnings, which
was profits made on buying and selling bottlers. He tried to sell the finance committee that this was the way
of the future.
“The prices they paid for bottling companies were just nuts. I asked the chief financial officer all these
questions. But Roberto started the board meetings at ten o’clock and finished at noon; the atmosphere was
such that it didn’t lend itself to questioning. You just had a feeling when it got to be noon that it would not
be at all polite to keep raising subjects or talking about things that would cause the meeting to last until one
o’clock. He was just not a guy you questioned. Some people have that bearing about them, and when the
bearing is backed up by a very good record, the combination of the two is pretty overpowering.” Buffett
was more than simply nonconfrontational; he was of an age and from an era that viewed serving on boards as
a quasisocial activity in which deference and politeness held sway. In 1998, that was the boardroom culture
throughout America. This culture reflected the reality that the structure of corporate boards gave directors
very little leeway with management.
“As a director, you can’t remotely tell management what to do. All this stuff you read in the press about the
board setting strategy is baloney. As a board member, you can do practically nothing. If a CEO thinks a
director is smart and on his side, he’ll listen to some degree, but ninety-eight percent of the time, he’ll do
what he wants to anyway. Listen, that’s the way I run Berkshire. I think Roberto liked me, but he was not
looking for a lot of ideas from me.”
Buffett never knew of anything seriously enough awry at Coca-Cola to make him consider the drastic step of
resigning from the board. Howie had a different problem: standing up to pressure from Coca-Cola.
“I was more independent than just about anybody else on that board, because I was on the Berkshire board,
and no one at Coca-Cola could intimidate me,” says Howie. “So I had no problem challenging Coca-Cola on
behalf of CCE.” But Howie eventually got off the CCE board. There was just too much potential for conflict
between the two boards. In the sense that people learn more from heavy seas than smooth sailing, if Keough
had meant to send Howie to another crash course in business school, the CCE role was a success. Howie’s
radar for danger signs in business had sharpened considerably. Even though he continued to serve on boards,
the experience taught him that he wanted to fulfill his thirst for excitement outside the corporate world.
By the mid-1990s, Goizueta and his finance chief, Doug Ivester, were dosing Coke with even larger amounts
of bottler profits to maintain the illusion of the company’s rapid earnings flow. Then in 1997, Goizueta died
unexpectedly, only a few months after announcing he had lung cancer. The board and the company and
investors were shocked. He had been a statesmanlike CEO, credited with making Coca-Cola an international
giant, his persona so titanic that it was hard to imagine who could fill his shoes. The board had deferred to
Goizueta so absolutely that nobody ever seemed to have thought of any alternative to his handpicked
successor, the burly, table-pounding Ivester.7 The finance chief had a big reputation: He had engineered
much of the company’s recent success, carving up the financial interests of Coca-Cola and its bottlers to
squeeze out every last advantage in Coca-Cola’s favor. Goizueta was the aristocratic leader, Ivester the
hands-on “doer.” He loved technology, and hummed along with the Silicon Valley gestalt of the times.

Buffett liked Ivester and wanted him to succeed. A textile-factory mechanic’s son who had risen through
sheer determination, Ivester was an analytical numbers guy.8 And, of course, under Goizueta he had enriched
Buffett enormously. He had that underdog grit that Buffett liked. Moreover, Buffett laid responsibility for the
accounting gimmickry at Goizueta’s door, not Ivester’s.
Juicing the earnings had certainly worked. Coca-Cola was trading at $70 per share. BRK itself was rocking
with the market. Priced at $48,000 in June 1997, it flew to $67,000 over the next nine months. The higher the
market went, the tougher it got for Buffett to invest, and yet the higher BRK rose. It made no sense, except
that the stocks that Berkshire owned were rising with the market. As 1998 progressed, the Dow crossed 9,000
and was on its way to the magic 10,000. BRK blasted through $70,000 a share. At the shareholder meeting,
Buffett told investors, “Our idea of tough times is periods like now.”9
With too much cash, too few wonderful ideas, and without calling the Air-a-holic hotline, Buffett now bought
a company for Berkshire called NetJets for $725 million.10 He sold the Indefensible and became one of
NetJets’ customers. This company sold time-shares in jets of various makes and sizes; its planes all had tail
numbers that started with QS, or Quebec Sierra. Susie had gotten Warren to buy her a quarter share in a
“fractional” jet from NetJets in 1995, worth two hundred hours a year of flight time, which she referred to as
The Richly Deserved.11 She joked that QS stood for Queen Susie. Buffett took to NetJets so much that he
had appeared in an ad and endorsed it even before he bought it. Still, on the surface, it was an atypical
decision for a man who would, one year later, tell the moguls at Sun Valley that somebody should “have shot
Orville down.”
The reasoning behind the purchase seemed sound, though. NetJets was dominant in its market; it was too late
for any serious competitor to catch up. Buffett figured that it was not unlike the newspaper business, where
there were no red ribbons. Eventually, the competitors would fall away.12 And, indeed, NetJets was
outgrowing the competition. Buffett was intrigued with its CEO, Richard Santulli, an entrepreneurial
mathematician who had formerly spent his days at Goldman Sachs figuring out trading patterns using chaostheory mathematics. Now he used those same skills to schedule plane flights on six hours’ notice for a
database full of celebrity clients whom he entertained at private events. Buffett met a whole new set of
famous people, including Arnold Schwarzenegger and Tiger Woods.
Investors cheered Buffett’s purchase of NetJets but were shocked when he almost simultaneously announced
that Berkshire was buying General Re, a huge insurance wholesaler, or “reinsurer,” which bought excess risk
from other insurers. At $22 billion, this deal was almost thirty times larger than NetJets. It dwarfed by
multiples his largest deal ever, GEICO.13
When he met with the Gen Re management team, Buffett told them, “I’m strictly hands-off. You guys run
your own business. I won’t interfere.” Then he suddenly started spouting numbers from GEICO. “Well, you
know, their hit ratio has dropped a bit.*32 Last week their numbers were…” Holy cow! thought Tad
Montross, General Re’s chief underwriter. This is hands-off? He knows more about GEICO than we know
about General Re.14
Buffett did not know much about the inner workings of General Re. He had made the decision to buy based
on studying the company’s results, and he liked its reputation. General Re was sort of the Grace Kelly of the
sometimes-shady insurance business. General Re wore white gloves and historically had acted more ladylike
and respectable than the average company. Still…given the pattern of Buffett’s purchases of insurers—in
almost every case they plunged straight into the ditch shortly after he bought them—and given the size of this
deal, the distant rumble of the tow truck’s engine warming up could be heard, barely audible, over the next
hill.
But it was the high price paid for General Re that attracted most of the attention, and the fact that Buffett
had paid in stock, not cash—in effect, swapping twenty percent of Berkshire Hathaway for General Re in a
deal announced on the day that Berkshire hit its then-all-time high of $80,900 per share. People wondered if
Buffett’s willingness to give away his stock when it was trading at such an unheard-of price meant that he,

too, thought BRK was overvalued.15 Buffett had spent his career tightening his stranglehold on Berkshire.
Giving stock to General Re’s shareholders diluted his own personal voting interest in Berkshire from
forty-three percent to less than thirty-eight percent. The last time he had paid stock for a major purchase, it
was GEICO, and investors had believed then that Berkshire was overpriced. So they speculated about the
message Buffett’s new deal might be sending.
The price of BRK swung up and down based partly on the prices of the stocks that Berkshire owned. It was
especially high at that moment because Berkshire owned 200 million shares of Coca-Cola, which now traded
at an astronomical price. So, if Buffett was subtly signaling through his purchase of General Re that BRK was
overvalued, did that mean that its underlying stocks—like Coca-Cola—were overpriced? If so, this could
have implications for the entire market. It might mean the whole market was overpriced.
The king of the soft-drink world, Coca-Cola ruled with an aggressive swagger, a fizzy-dizzy arrogance.
Buffett’s stake in KO had multiplied fourteenfold over a decade, to $13 billion, and he had gone so far as to
declare the company an “inevitable” to his shareholders, as if it were a stock he would never sell.16 He
reasoned that Coca-Cola would send more swallows down more throats in each passing decade “for an
investing lifetime,” which made it about as close to immortal, for a brand, as you could get. Berkshire now
owned more than eight percent of the company. Coca-Cola stock was trading as high as forty times its
estimated 2000 earnings—a multiple that said investors believed the stock would keep rising by at least
twenty percent a year. But to do that, it would have to increase earnings twenty-five percent a year for five
years—impossible. It would have to almost triple sales, to a number nearly as large as the entire soft-drink
market in 1999—again impossible.17 No amount of bottler sales or accounting finagles could produce results
like that. Buffett knew it. Nevertheless, he did not sell his Coca-Cola stock.
The reason was partly inertia. Buffett liked to say he made most of his money by “sitting on his ass.” Like the
investors who kept their GEICO stock when it fell to $2 a share, inertia had protected him from many
mistakes—both of commission and of omission. He also owned too much Coke to sell without creating a
major headache. The symbolism of Warren Buffett—the “world’s greatest investor” and a board member
—dumping Coca-Cola stock would be unmistakable. The price of Coca-Cola could plunge as a result.
Besides, with its effervescent mix of profit, product, nostalgia, show business, and likable people, Coca-Cola
was Buffett’s favorite stock. “The Real Thing” wasn’t a slogan to him, it was an incredible cash machine that
could grind out money forever, like the mill in the old fairy tale that endlessly ground out rivers of porridge,
mountains of gold, or an ocean’s-worth of salt.
Buffett carefully sidestepped these questions about the market and Coca-Cola when he used Berkshire stock
to buy General Re, saying, “It is not a market call whatsoever.”18 BRK, he said, was “fairly valued” before
the merger, and the combined companies would create “synergy.” When Charlie Munger was asked, he
stated that Buffett had consulted him about this deal very late in the game. In effect, he disowned the deal.19
Not unexpectedly, investors began to reprice BRK as if either Berkshire and its holdings in stocks like
Coca-Cola were overpriced or the deal’s synergies would prove illusory.20 Or both.
Buffett’s explanation later that summer at Sun Valley was that “we wanted to buy Gen Re, but coming with
Gen Re was $22 billion dollars of investments.” Many were stocks; Buffett promptly sold them. Adding $22
billion of bonds “changed the bond/stock ratio at Berkshire, which I was not unhappy with. It did have the
effect of a portfolio allocation change.”
So Buffett—who sat on the Coca-Cola board with Herbert Allen—was “not unhappy with” swamping BRK’s
stocks, including Coca-Cola, in an ocean of General Re’s bonds. This statement in context made all kinds of
sense. In his previous shareholder letter, Buffett had written that stocks were “not overvalued”—if interest
rates stayed below average, and if businesses kept delivering “extraordinary” returns on capital—in other
words, if the unlikely continued to occur. This statement was oblique enough to avoid looking like a forecast.
Buffett thought those who were always out prophesying some turn in the market’s direction usually wound
up being wrong ten times out of two. So he rarely made statements about the market, and often played coy
when he did. Still, it was unusually clever of him to work the words “not overvalued” into a sentence that
said that the market was overvalued. People could read this message any way they wanted, but if they were

smart, they got it.21
Likewise, Buffett was “not unhappy with” diluting his stock portfolio in the same Sun Valley speech, where
he faced an audience filled with Internet CEOs at a time when Internet stocks were parthenogizing faster
than naked mole rats. He accompanied his “not unhappy with” remark with the same warnings as in his
letter: that interest rates must stay well below average and the economy stay unusually hot for the market to
meet investors’ expectations. This was also the same Sun Valley speech where Buffett had used his place at
the pulpit to explain that investing is laying out money today to get money back tomorrow, like Aesop’s bird
in the hand versus the birds in the bush; that interest rates are the price of waiting for the birds in the bush;
that for periods sometimes as long as seventeen years the market had gone exactly nowhere; and that at other
times—such as the present—the value of stocks grows much faster than the economy. And, of course, he had
closed this speech by comparing investors to a bunch of oil prospectors who were going to hell.
Thus, if Buffett was reshuffling his portfolio and focusing on bonds, perhaps it meant that he thought that it
was now easier to make a living in bonds than stocks, and it was going to get easier still.22
The following October, he made another move that was just the opposite of what most people were doing—
strikingly conservative by the standards of the market. He bought MidAmerican Energy Holding Company,
an Iowa-based utility company with some international operations and a presence in alternative energy. He
put in enough capital to buy just over seventy-five percent of MidAmerican for about $2 billion plus $7
billion of assumed debt, with the other twenty-five percent owned by his friend Walter Scott; MidAmerican’s
CEO, Scott’s protégé David Sokol; and Sokol’s number two, Greg Abel.
Investors were mystified. Why would Buffett want to buy a regulated electric company? Admittedly, the
business was growing moderately, was well-managed, and had attractive embedded returns that were
relatively certain and would be so for as long as could reasonably be imagined.
Buffett saw this as a second cornerstone for Berkshire alongside the insurance business. He felt that he was
working with excellent managers who could potentially put a lot of money to work in utilities and energy at
predictable rates of return, which compensated for the limited growth. However, Buffett was already being
ridiculed for his refusal to buy technology stocks. Now he had bought the light company. How dull!
But this was not how he thought. When it came to investing, the kind of electricity he sought was not the
thrill of trading, but rather, kilowatts.
Buying MidAmerican and General Re significantly diluted the impact of Coca-Cola on Berkshire’s
shareholders, but Berkshire still owned 200 million shares of Coke. Buffett never stopped thinking about
Coca-Cola, where matters continued to go awry. By late 1999, the value of his KO stock was down to $9.5
billion, dragging down the price of BRK with it. A short-term wobble didn’t worry him—it never did—but
thanks in large part to Coca-Cola, one share of BRK stock could no longer buy a top-of-the-line luxury sports
car. Buffett kept turning over and over in his mind an incident back in June. Reports had trickled in that Coke
products were poisoning children in Belgium and France. It was not hard to figure out what to do. The late
Goizueta would have let “Mr. Coca-Cola,” Don Keough, handle it: Fly over right away, visit the kids, shower
the parents with free soft drinks, make compassionately clever remarks to the press. Instead, Ivester—who
was actually in France at the time—returned to the U.S. without comment, leaving the local bottlers to deal
with the mess.
Herbert Allen, never one to sit patiently on the sidelines, called Ivester and asked, Why on earth don’t you
get over there and show your face? And Ivester said, I’ve sent a team over, plus, those kids aren’t really sick.
Allen exploded in frustration. Look, he said, these aren’t kids who marched around and said, “I’m going to
‘get Coca-Cola’ by saying I’m sick.” They think they’re sick. Whether they’re sick or not, what harm would
it do to go over and sit down with their parents and give them a lifetime supply of Coke?23
But it seemed to him that Ivester didn’t understand any of that. As he saw it, Coca-Cola was not at fault. And
that was that.
