
Trend-following systems
Trend following is favored by many technicians for one simple reason:
Trends offer excellent opportunities for profit. Unfortunately, the popularity
of the trend-following approach is one of its weaknesses. Too many of these
systems generate many similar buy and sell signals, which, in turn, makes
outperforming the average trader difficult for any individual trend-following
trader.
Even the best trend-following systems have a relatively large percentage of
failed trades, primarily because they depend on several extremely profitable
trades to make up for the large percentage of losing trades. If your trendfollowing system also is a discretionary system, your discretion (or lack of
it) can cause you to miss a few of these profitable trades, and your overall
results will suffer.
Trend-following systems typically are based on either moving averages or
breakout patterns (see Chapters 9 and 11). Moving average–based trading systems are the most popular and can be quite profitable; however, they work
only when a stock is trending. These trading systems depend on long-lasting
trends to generate enough profit to outweigh a relatively large number of
losing trades. In fact, the number of losing trades can easily outnumber winning trades with this trading system. When a stock is range bound (stuck in a
specific price range), a moving-average system generates a large number of
losing trades. Because of the large overall number of trades, this system often
is accompanied by relatively high transaction and slippage costs (see the section “Accounting for slippage”). Money management is critical when using a
trend-following trading system.
You can make some adjustments to a trend-following system that may
improve its performance. For example, you can insist that its trading signals
be confirmed by another condition before actually entering any positions. If
your system triggers a buy signal, for example, you may want to see whether
the signal remains in effect for at least a day or two before entering a position. We show some examples of moving-average and breakout systems,
along with some ideas to improve the performance of these systems, in the
section “Developing and Testing Trading Systems.”

Chapter 15: Developing Your Own Powerful Trading System

Countertrend systems
For many traders, the quest to find a profitable countertrend trading system is
all-consuming. Countertrend systems appear desirable because their goal is to
buy low and sell high. These systems try to identify inflection points, or the
moments when stocks change direction, so traders can take positions close to
when they occur. This approach may work in a few narrowly defined situations, such as in a trading range (Chapter 9) or a trend channel (Chapter 10),
but it is likely to fail in a spectacular and expensive way if attempted on a
broader scale.
The vast majority of trading systems follow market trends. Trend-following
systems tend to outperform countertrend systems, especially for position
traders. Swing traders and some day traders sometimes use a countertrend
approach, but even then, they usually do so in conjunction with a trendfollowing component.
Countertrend systems usually depend on oscillating indicators, reversal patterns, and channeling strategies to find turning points. Some countertrend
systems also are based on cycle theory, and others are based on volatility,
expansion, and contraction. We briefly review some of these techniques in
Chapter 16.
We discourage you from spending too much time evaluating countertrend systems, at least until you’re confident in your ability to use trend-following systems to successfully make your trades. Countertrend systems generate a large
volume of trades, and the more you trade, the more you spend on transaction
and slippage costs. These costs alone often swamp potentially profitable systems. Although a countertrend strategy can sometimes work profitably in a
trading range or trend channel (Chapters 9 and 10), it is still risky, especially
for a new trader.

Selecting System-Development Tools
Conceptually, you can use the back of an envelope to develop your tradingsystem ideas. However, most traders want some way of confirming that their
newly designed systems can perform profitably before they commit real trading capital. That means you need a way to test your system, which further
means using computer software to precisely define the system and evaluate
its performance. Typically, this requires simulating trades by using historical
data.

243

244 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Regardless of whether you decide on a mechanical or a discretionary
approach to trading, your system will benefit from testing. Although thoroughly testing a discretionary system is difficult, you can still test the component indicators to learn when they do and don’t provide effective trading
signals. To begin, you need a computer, development and testing software,
and historical data.

Choosing system-development hardware
Doing the math that’s required when testing your system can really slow
down your computer, and it can generate a lot of data. Almost any computer
will do the job when you’re getting started, but if you end up testing many
system ideas, you definitely need a large amount of disk storage and a fast
computer. The computer equipment required to run a proprietary trading
platform, including products such as TradeStation or MetaStock, is usually
enough for system development and testing. (See Chapter 4 for more information about the hardware requirements for a typical proprietary trading
platform.)

Selecting system-development software
Many trading system–development and testing products are on the market.
Some proprietary trading platforms, such as TradeStation or MetaStock,
include system-testing capabilities. Spreadsheet software, like Microsoft’s
Excel, also is useful for analyzing simple trading systems and for analyzing
the results generated by specialized-development and testing software.

Trading system–development and testing software
You need to consider several of the following criteria when evaluating your
system-development and testing software:
✓ All trading system–development and testing programs use some type
of computer language to describe and test your system. Some are terse
and difficult to use, others are more intuitive. Traders with strong computer or programming skills have little problem mastering any of these
languages, but others may struggle. Pay careful attention to this development language before selecting a system. Be certain that you’re actually able to use the system you choose.
✓ You need to integrate your trading system with your stock charts. Some
system-development software requires you to actually write computer
code that enables you to display your trading system and stock charts
simultaneously. Avoid these systems if you’re uncomfortable writing
computer code.

Chapter 15: Developing Your Own Powerful Trading System
✓ The manner and effectiveness by which your system-development and
testing software reports on how your trading system is performing is
critical. Some systems provide extremely detailed statistics about the
performance of your trading systems. Others, however, list little more
than the buy or sell signals. In general, more information is better.
✓ Make sure your system-development and testing programs are capable
of exporting the data they generate, historical price data included, into a
spreadsheet program for further analysis.
TradeStation is the gold-plated system-development platform. It has many
built-in tools that make your development and testing job relatively easy.
For those of you on tight budgets, one of the less expensive alternatives
you may want to consider is a charting and system-development program
like AmiBroker (www.amibroker.com). Although flexible and powerful,
AmiBroker isn’t as feature-rich or polished as TradeStation, and it requires
significantly more effort on your part. For example, AmiBroker includes
well-known technical-analysis indicators like moving averages and MACD
(see Chapter 11), but the number of indicators included is a tiny subset compared with what TradeStation offers. Similarly, you have to use AmiBroker’s
formula language to create and enter any other indicators that you may be
using.

Spreadsheet software
A spreadsheet program is another invaluable testing and analysis tool.
Although a spreadsheet program can’t do everything that a specialized system-development and testing program can do, it can add quite a bit of analysis
horsepower to your system-development tool kit. You can actually code and
test simple trading systems directly into the spreadsheet. You can also evaluate the results of your trading-system tests more thoroughly using the spreadsheet’s built-in statistical and analysis functions.
You can, for example, copy the price data for a stock into your spreadsheet,
calculate moving averages and other indicators, and then configure buy, sell,
or sell-short signals. You can also export trading signals from your systemdevelopment program and import the results into your spreadsheet for further analysis.
One of our favorite spreadsheet projects is calculating the maximum favorable and unfavorable moves after our system has triggered a buy or sell
signal. Simple to do, it helps you understand the strengths and weaknesses of
your trading system in great detail. You can see whether problems with your
trading system might be solved by using different exit procedures or tighter
(or looser) stop-loss points.

245

246 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
For example, although your entry signals may show promise, your exit signals
may be causing you to leave a lot of money on the table. These situations are
hard to see when you’re working only with charts; however, they sometimes
jump out when you’re working with raw data during your spreadsheet analysis. You can find an example using this testing technique in the “Working
with breakout trading systems” section, later in this chapter.
Some system-development programs provide a great deal of statistical analysis, so choosing between spreadsheet tools and system-development tools is
a trade-off between thoroughness and expediency. After you’ve been through
the testing exercises a few times, you get a feel for the strength of each
approach. So it’s likely that you’ll decide to use both a system-development
program and a spreadsheet program when creating and testing your new
trading systems.

Finding historical data for system testing
When you need to test your system, you can, of course, test it in real time,
with real money, and in the real markets. But getting some idea of how your
system will perform before risking your hard-earned capital is usually better.
Typically, that means testing your system by evaluating how it performs
when simulating trading using historical price data. Ten to twenty years of
historical end-of-day data for the indexes and stocks in which you plan to
trade is usually more than enough to properly simulate trades for testing
your system.
Many sources can provide the data. You can download historical data from
the Internet, and some online data is available free of charge. Some proprietary
trading platforms likewise include access to historical data. You may want to
get data from more than once source to confirm its accuracy.
Yahoo Finance provides free historical data and permits you to download the
data into a spreadsheet. To access the Yahoo data feed, get a quote for the
stock and select “Historical Data” under the Quotes menu item. Then click
“Download to Spreadsheet.”
Many online services offer data in a more convenient format, but for a price.
Some sell historical data recorded on CDs. Sources for intraday price data
also are available. Here are the URLs for a few of the many sites offering
various forms of historical data:
✓ Historical data:
• Yahoo Finance: finance.yahoo.com
• QP3 Quotes Plus: www.quotes-plus.com

Chapter 15: Developing Your Own Powerful Trading System
✓ Intraday data:
• eSignal: www.esignal.com
• IQ Feed: www.iqfeed.net
• Price Data: www.price-data.com
• Quote Tracker: www.quotetracker.com
✓ Historical data on CD:
• Prophet: www.prophet.net/satellites/marketData/home/
index.jsp
• CSI: www.csidata.com

Developing and Testing Trading Systems
The ideas that you may want to include in your system development and
testing are virtually limitless. Many new traders begin system testing by
combining a few off-the-shelf indicators in an effort to obtain better trading
results. Doing so is as good a place as any to begin.
However, we want to caution you to keep your systems simple enough that
you can understand not only the system but also the result. Simplicity usually
is better when trading, especially when you’re first becoming familiar with the
processes of system development and testing. We describe the process by
looking at a couple of examples in the sections that follow.

Working with trend-following systems
Many trend-following systems use a moving average for their starting points.
In this trend-following example, the system is designed for position trading,
which means we use a relatively long moving average. Short-selling won’t be
permitted with this simple system.
The first step is defining buy and sell rules for your initial testing. The actual
code for defining these rules depends on your specific system-development
package. Therefore, trading rules are described as generally as possible. The
rules for an initial test may look like this:
✓ Buy at tomorrow’s opening price when today’s price crosses and closes
above the 50-day exponential moving average (EMA).
✓ Sell at tomorrow’s opening price when today’s price crosses and closes
below the 50-day EMA.

247

248 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
To test whether using a moving average as a starting point is a good idea
in a trend-following system, apply these two rules to ten years of historical
data for the stock or stocks of your choice. After testing this idea, you find
that this simple system works fairly well when stock prices are trending, but
it’s likely to trigger many losing trades when the prices of stocks are range
bound. You can try to avoid these losing trades, and possibly improve your
overall trading results, by filtering out trading-range situations. One way to
accomplish that goal is by changing the buy rule to read: Buy at tomorrow’s
open when the following conditions are true:
✓ Today’s closing price is above the 50-day EMA.
✓ The stock crossed above the 50-day EMA sometime during the last
5 days.
✓ Today’s 50-day EMA is greater than the 50-day EMA from 5 days ago.
These added conditions serve as signal confirmation. When you test these
rules, you find they reduce the number of whipsaw trades for most stocks,
but they’re also likely to delay buy and sell signals on profitable trades, and
thus usually result in smaller profits on those trades. Yet this adjustment
makes the overall system more profitable, because the number of losses is
reduced.
You can find out whether other changes that you can make in your simple
system actually can improve profitability. You may, for example, test different types of moving averages. Try, for example, a simple moving average
instead of an exponential moving average (see Chapter 11 for the types of
moving averages). Or, you may want to try using different time frames for
your moving average, such as 9-day, 25-day, or 100-day moving averages.

Identifying system optimization pitfalls
Most system-development and testing software comes equipped with a provision for system optimization, which allows you to fine-tune the technical
analysis tools used in your trading system. You can, for example, tell the
system to find the time frame of the moving average that produces the highest profit for one stock, and then ask it to do the same thing for a different
stock. Some systems enable you to test this factor simultaneously for many
stocks.
Although something is alluring about using this approach, doing so is likely to
cause you trouble. If you find, for example, that a 22-day moving average
works best for one stock, a 37-day moving average works best for the next
stock, and another stock performs best using a 74-day moving average, you’re
going to run into problems. The set of circumstances leading to these optimized results won’t likely repeat in precisely the same way again. We can
almost guarantee that whatever optimized parameters you may find for these
moving averages won’t be the optimal choices when trading real capital.

Chapter 15: Developing Your Own Powerful Trading System
This is a simple example of a problem that is well-known to scientists and
economists who build mathematic models to forecast future events. It is
called curve fitting, because you are molding your model to fit the historical
data. You can expend quite a bit of effort fine-tuning a system to identify all
the major trends and turning points in historical data for a particular stock,
but that effort is not likely to result in future trading profits. In that case, your
optimized system is more likely to cause a long string of losses rather than
profits.
Testing a long moving average and comparing the results to a short moving
average is fine, and so is testing a few points in between a long moving average and a short moving average. As long as you use this exercise to understand why short moving averages work best for short-term trades and why
longer moving averages work better for traders with longer trading horizons,
you’ll be fine. Otherwise, you’re probably moving into the realm of curve fitting and becoming frustrated with your actual trading results.

Testing with blind simulation
Blind simulation is a method for setting aside enough historical data so that
you can test your system optimization results and avoid the problem of curve
fitting. For example, you may test data from 1990 through 1999, and thus
exclude data from 2000 through the present. After you’ve developed a system
that looks good enough for you to base your trades on, you can then test your
system against the data that was excluded. If the system performs as well with
the excluded data as it did with the original test data, you may have a system
worth trading. If it fails, you obviously need to rethink your system.
Another approach is choosing your historical data with extreme care. You
can expect trend-following systems like a moving-average system to perform
well during long, powerful trends. If your stock had a strong run-up during
the long-lasting 1990s bull market, that kind of price data can skew your
results, magically making any trend-following system appear profitable.
Whether that success actually can be duplicated during a subsequent bull
market, however, must first be thoroughly tested.
If the majority of your profits come from a single trade, or only a small number
of trades, the system probably won’t perform well when you begin trading real
money. You may want to address this problem by excluding periods from
your test data when your stock was doing exceptionally well or when the
results of any trades were significantly more profitable than the average trade.
This technique is a valid approach to eliminating the extraordinary results
arising from extraordinary situations in your historical data. Using it should
give you a better idea of your system’s potential for generating real profits in
the future.

249

250 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Working with breakout trading systems
Similar to moving average–based systems, a breakout system can take many
forms. You may already be familiar with the trading-range breakout system
we describe in Chapter 10. To test a different approach, you can define a
breakout system as follows:
✓ Buying at tomorrow’s opening price when today’s closing price is above
the highest high price that occurred during the last 20 days.
✓ Selling at tomorrow’s opening price when today’s closing price is below
the lowest low that occurred over the last 20 days.
These trading rules are loosely based on the rules for Donchian Channels
(sometimes called Price Channels), which comprise a breakout system developed by Richard Donchian in the 1950s. Donchian was one of the early developers of trend-following trading systems.
A spreadsheet may be helpful for evaluating this system. You can, in fact,
configure this system into a spreadsheet, include buy and sell signals, and
perform analyses to determine how well the system performs. You also can
use the spreadsheet to dig into the system’s results to find out what works
and what doesn’t. Figure 15-1 shows an example.
Re-creating the spreadsheet in Figure 15-1 is straightforward. After downloading the historical price data into a spreadsheet format, all you have to do is
encode the formulas into the correct columns. The formulas are described in
the nearby sidebar “Creating the Donchian Channel spreadsheet.”
If you’re like most traders, the first thing you’ll do is calculate some statistics
about the system. For example, you can use spreadsheet functions to calculate the following:
✓ Total gain or loss for the system
✓ Average gain (the numerical average)
✓ Median gain (the middle result)
✓ Maximum gain for any single trade
✓ Maximum loss for any single trade
✓ Standard deviation
Then you can look at aggregate results to find out whether the system
actually made money. In the case of the Donchian Channel breakout system,
initial results don’t look promising. The system lost money during the entire
test period.

Chapter 15: Developing Your Own Powerful Trading System
A

Figure 15-1:
Spreadsheet
analysis for
Donchian
Channels.

Date
9/4/07
9/5/07
9/6/07
9/7/07
9/10/07
9/11/07
9/12/07
9/13/07
9/14/07
9/17/07
9/18/07
9/19/07
9/20/07
9/21/07
9/24/07
9/25/07
9/26/07
9/27/07
9/28/07
10/1/07
10/2/07
10/3/07
10/4/07
10/5/07
10/8/07
10/9/07
10/10/07
10/11/07
10/12/07
10/15/07
10/16/07
10/17/07
10/18/07
10/19/07
10/22/07
10/23/07
10/24/07
10/25/07
10/26/07
10/29/07
10/30/07
10/31/07
11/1/07
11/2/07
11/5/07
11/6/07
11/7/07
11/8/07
11/9/07

B
Open
48.93
49.56
49.23
48.53
48.62
48.51
48.84
49.29
48.80
49.00
49.09
50.29
50.06
50.28
50.49
50.42
51.36
51.62
51.54
51.45
52.04
51.84
51.75
52.17
52.80
53.27
53.39
53.79
52.90
53.61
52.79
53.62
53.33
53.77
52.16
53.61
53.74
53.89
54.08
54.19
53.94
54.47
54.68
54.42
53.86
54.33
54.22
53.14
50.73

C
High
50.00
49.65
49.36
48.60
48.75
48.99
49.37
49.35
49.31
49.10
50.08
50.59
50.26
50.52
50.96
51.07
51.51
51.65
51.68
52.16
52.06
52.07
51.83
