
CHAPTER 11
THINKING LIKE A TRADER
If you asked me to distill trading down to its simplest form, I would say that it is a pattern recognition
numbers game. We use market analysis to identify the patterns, define the risk, and determine when to
take profits. The trade either works or it doesn't. In any case, we go on to die next trade. It's that simple,
but it's certainly not easy. In fact, trading is probably the hardest thing you'll ever attempt to be
successful at. That's not because it requires intellect; quite the contrary! But because the more you think
you know, the less successful you'll be.
Trading is hard because you have to operate in a state of not having to know, even though your analysis
may turn out at times to be "perfectly" correct. To operate in a state of not having to know, you have to
properly manage your expectations. To properly manage your expectations, you must realign your
mental environment so that you believe without a shadow of a doubt in the five fundamental truths. In
this chapter, I am going to give you a trading exercise that will integrate these truths about the market
at a functional level in your mental environment. In the process, I'll take you through the three stages of
development of a trader.
The first stage is the mechanical stage. In this stage, you:
1. Build the self-trust necessary to operate in an unlimited environment.
2. Learn to flawlessly execute a trading system.
3. Train your mind to think in probabilities (the five fundamental truths).
4. Create a strong, unshakeable belief in your consistency as a trader.
Once you have completed this first stage, you can then advance to the subjective stage of trading. In
this stage, you use anything you have ever learned about the nature of market movement to do
whatever it is you want to do. There's a lot of freedom in this stage, so you will have to learn how to
monitor your susceptibility to make the kind of trading errors that are the result of any unresolved selfvaluation issues I referred to in the last chapter. The third stage is the intuitive stage. Trading intuitively
is the most advanced stage of development. It is the trading equivalent of earning a black belt in the
martial arts.
The difference is that you can't try to be intuitive, because intuition is spontaneous. It doesn't come
from what we know at a rational level. The rational part of our mind seems to be inherently mistrustful
of information received from a source that it doesn't understand. Sensing that something is about to
happen is a form of knowing that is very different from anything we know rationally. I've worked with
many traders who frequently had a very strong intuitive sense of what was going to happen next, only

to be confronted with the rational part of themselves that consistently, argued for another course of
action. Of course, if they had followed their intuition, they would have experienced a very satisfying
outcome. Instead, what they ended up with was usually very unsatisfactory, especially when compared
with what they otherwise perceived as possible. The only way I know of that you can try to be intuitive
is to work at setting up a state of mind most conducive to receiving and acting on your intuitive
impulses.
THE MECHANICAL STAGE
The mechanical stage of trading is specifically designed to build the kind of trading skills (trust,
confidence, and thinking in probabilities) that will virtually compel you to create consistent results. I
define consistent results as a steadily rising equity curve with only minor draw downs that are the
natural consequence of edges that didn't work. Other than finding a pattern that puts the odds of a
winning trade in your favor, achieving a steadily rising equity curve is a function of systematically
eliminating any susceptibility you may have to making the kind of fear, euphoric or self-valuation
based trading errors I have described throughout this book. Eliminating the errors and expanding your
sense of self-valuation will require the acquisition of skills that are all psychological in nature.
The skills are psychological because each one, in its purest form, is simply a belief. Remember that the
beliefs we operate out of will determine our state of mind and shape our experiences in ways that
constantly reinforce what we already believe to be true. How truthful a belief is (relative to the
environmental conditions) can be determined by how well it serves us; that is, the degree to which it
helps us satisfy our objectives.
If producing consistent results is your primary objective as a trader, then creating a belief (a conscious,
energized concept that resists change and demands expression) that "I am a consistently successful
trader" will act as a primaiy source of energy that will manage your perceptions, interpretations,
expectations, and actions in ways that satisfy the belief and, consequently, the objective. Creating a
dominant belief that "I am a consistently successful trader" requires adherence to several principles of
consistent success. Some of these principles will undoubtedly be in direct conflict with some of the
beliefs you've already acquired about trading. If this is the case, then what you have is a classic
example of beliefs that are in direct conflict with desire.
The energy dynamic here is no different from what it was for the boy who wanted to be like the other
children who were not afraid to play with dogs. He desired to express himself in a way that he found, at
least initially, virtually impossible. To satisfy his desire, he had to step into an active process of
transformation. His technique was simple: He tried as hard as he could to stay focused on what he was
trying to accomplish and, little by little, he de-activated the conflicting belief and strengthened the
belief that was consistent with his desire.
At some point, if that is your desire, then you will have to step into the process of transforming yourself

into a consistent winner. When it comes to personal transformation, the most important ingredients are
your willingness to change, the clarity of your intent, and the strength of your desire. Ultimately, for
this process to work, you must choose consistency over eveiy other reason or justification you have for
trading. If all of these ingredients are sufficiently present, then regardless of the internal obstacles you
find yourself up against, what you desire will eventually prevail.
Observe Yourself
The first step in the process of creating consistency is to start noticing what you're thinking, saying, and
doing. Why? Because everything we think, say, or do as a trader contributes to and, therefore,
reinforces some belief in our mental system. Because the process of becoming consistent is
psychological in nature, it shouldn't come as a surprise that you'll have to start paying attention to your
various psychological processes. The idea is eventually to learn to become an objective observer of
your own thoughts, words, and deeds. Your first line of defense against committing a trading error is to
catch yourself thinking about it. Of course, the last line of defense is to catch yourself in the act. If you
don't commit yourself to becoming an observer to these processes, your realizations will always come
after the experience, usually when you are in a state of deep regret and frustration.
Observing yourself objectively implies doing it without judging about yourself. This might not be so
easy for some of you to do considering the harsh, judgmental treatment you may have received from
other people throughout your life. As a result, one quickly learns to associate any mistake with
emotional pain. No one likes to be in a state of emotional pain, so we typically avoid acknowledging
what we have learned to define as a mistake for as long as possible.
Not confronting mistakes in our everyday lives usually doesn't have the same disastrous consequences
it can have if we avoid confronting our mistakes as traders. For example, when I am working with floor
traders, the analogy I use to illustrate how precarious a situation they are in is to ask them to imagine
themselves walking across a bridge over the Grand Canyon. The width of the bridge is directly related
to the number of contracts they trade. So, for example, for a one-contract trader the bridge is very wide,
say 20 feet. A bridge 20 feet wide allows you a great deal of tolerance for error, so you don't have to be
inordinately careful or focused on each step you take. Still, if you do happen to stumble and trip over
the edge, the drop to the canyon floor is one mile.
I don't know how many people would walk across a narrow bridge with no guardrails, where the
ground is a mile down, but my guess is relatively few. Similarly, few people will take the kinds of risks
associated with trading on the floor of the futures exchanges. Certainly a one-contract floor trader can
do a great deal of damage to himself, not unlike falling off a mile-high bridge. But a one-contract trader
also can give himself a wide tolerance for errors, miscalculations, or unusually violent market moves
where he could find himself on the wrong side. On the other hand, one of the biggest floor traders I
ever worked with trades for his own account with an average position of 500 Treasury bond futures at a

time. He often puts on a position of well over a thousand contracts.
A position of 1,000 T-bond contracts amounts to $31,500 per tic (the smallest incremental price change
that a bond contract can make). Of course, T-bond futures can be very volatile and can trade several
tics in either direction in a matter of seconds. As the size of a traders position increases, the width of
our bridge over the Grand Canyon narrows. In the case of the large bond trader, the bridge has
narrowed to the size of a thin wire. Obviously, he has to be extremely well-balanced and very focused
on each step that he takes. The slightest misstep or gust of wind could cause him to fall off the wire.
Next stop, one mile down. Now, when he's in the trading pit, that tiny misstep or slight gust of wind is
the equivalent to one distracting thought. That's all, just a thought or anything else where he allows
himself to lose his focus for even a second or two. In that moment of distraction, he could miss his last
favorable opportunity to liquidate his position.
The next price level with enough volume to take him out of his trade could be several tics away, either
creating a huge loss or forcing him to give a substantial winning trade back to the market. If producing
consistent results is a function of eliminating errors, then it is an understatement to say that you will
encounter great difficulty in achieving your objective if you can't acknowledge a mistake. Obviously,
this is something very few people can do, and it accounts for why there are so few consistent winners.
In fact, the tendency not to acknowledge a mistake is so pervasive throughout mankind, it could lead
one to assume that it's an inherent characteristic of human nature. I do not believe this is the case, nor
do I believe we are born with the capacity to ridicule or think less of ourselves for making a mistake,
miscalculation, or error. Making mistakes is a natural function of living and will continue to be until we
reach a point at which:
1. all our beliefs are in absolute harmony with our desires, and
2. all our beliefs are structured in such a way that they are completely consistent with what works from
the environment's perspective.
Obviously, if our beliefs are not consistent with what works from the environments perspective, the
potential for making a mistake is high, if not inevitable. We won't be able to perceive the appropriate
set of steps to our objective. Worse, we won't be able to perceive that what we want may not be
available, or available in the quantity we desire or at the time when we want it.
On the other hand, mistakes that are the result of beliefs that are in conflict with our objectives aren't
always apparent or obvious. We know they will act as opposing forces, expressing their versions of the
truth on our consciousness, and they can do that in many ways.
The most difficult to detect is a distracting thought that causes a momentary lapse in focus or
concentration. On the surface this may not sound significant. But, as in the analogy of the bridge over
the canyon, when there's a lot at stake, even a slightly diminished capacity to stay focused can result in
an error of disastrous proportions. This principle applies whether it's trading, sporting events, or
computer programming. When our intent is clear and undiminished by any opposing energy, then our

capacity to stay focused is greater, and the more likely it is that we will accomplish our objective.
Earlier I defined a winning attitude as a positive expectation of our efforts, with an acceptance that
whatever results we do get are a perfect reflection of our level of development and what we need to
learn to do better. What separates the "consistently great" athletes and performers from everyone else is
their distinct lack of fear of making a mistake. The reason they aren't afraid is that they don't have a
reason to think less of themselves when they do make a mistake, meaning they don't have a reservoir of
negatively charged energy waiting to well up and pounce on their conscious thought process like a lion
waiting for the right moment to pounce on its intended prey. What accounts for this uncommon
capacity to quickly move beyond their errors without criticizing themselves?
One explanation may be that they grew up with extremely unusual parents, teachers, and coaches, who
by their words and examples taught them to correct their miscalculations and errors with genuine love,
affection, and acceptance. I say "extremely unusual" because many of us grew up with just the opposite
experience. We were taught to correct our mistakes or miscalculations with anger, impatience, and a
distinct lack of acceptance. Is it possible that, for the great athletes, their past positive experiences with
respect to mistakes caused them to acquire a belief that mistakes simply point the way to where they
need to focus their efforts to grow and improve themselves? With a belief like that, there's no source of
negatively charged energy and consequently no source for self-denigrating thoughts.
However, the rest of us, who did grow up experiencing a plethora of negative reactions to our actions,
would naturally acquire beliefs about mistakes: "Mistakes must be avoided at all costs," "There must be
something wrong with me if I make a mistake," "I must be a screw-up," or "I must be a bad person if I
make a mistake." Remember that every thought, word, and deed reinforces some belief we have about
ourselves. If, by repeated negative self-criticism, we acquire a belief that we're "screw-ups," that belief
will find a way to express itself in our thoughts, causing us to become distracted and to screw up; on
our words, causing us to say things about ourselves or about others (if we notice the same
characteristics in them) that reflect our belief; and on our actions, causing us to behave in ways that are
overtly self-sabotaging. If you're going to become a consistent winner, mistakes can't exist in the kind
of negatively charged context in which they are held by most people.
You have to be able to monitor yourself to some degree, and that will be difficult to do if you have the
potential to experience emotional pain if and when you find yourself in the process of making an error.
If this potential exists, you have two choices:
1. You can work on acquiring a new set of positively charged beliefs about what it means to make a
mistake, along with de-activating any negatively charged beliefs that would argue otherwise or cause
you to think less of yourself for making a mistake.
2. If you find this first choice undesirable, you can compensate for the potential to make errors by the
way you set up your trading regime.

This means that if you're going to trade and not monitor yourself, but at the same time you desire
consistent results, then trading exclusively from the mechanical stage will resolve the dilemma.
Otherwise, learning how to monitor yourself is a relatively simple process once you have rid yourself
of negatively charged energy associated with mistakes. In fact, it's easy. All you have to do is decide
why you want to monitor yourself, which means you first need to have a clear purpose in mind. When
you're clear about your purpose, simply start directing your attention to what you think, say, or do.
If and when you notice that you're not focused on your objective or on the incremental steps to
accomplish your objective, choose to redirect your thoughts, words, or actions in a way that is
consistent with what you are trying to accomplish. Keep redirecting as often as necessary. The more
willfully you engage in this process, especially if you can do it with some degree of conviction, the
faster you will create a mental framework free to function in a way that is consistent with your
objectives, without any resistance from conflicting beliefs.
THE ROLE OF SELF-DISCIPLINE
I call the process I just described self-discipline. I define self-discipline as a mental technique to
redirect (as best we can) our focus of attention to the object of our goal or desire, when that goal or
desire conflicts with some other component (belief) of our mental environment. The first thing you
should notice about this definition is that self-discipline is a technique to create a new mental
framework. It is not a personality trait; people aren't born with self-discipline. In fact, when you
consider how I define it, being born with discipline isn't even possible. However, as a technique to be
used in the process of personal transformation, anybody can choose to use self-discipline. Here is an
example from my life that illustrates the underlying dynamics of how this technique works. In 1978 I
decided that I wanted to become a runner.
I don't exactly remember what my underlying motivation was, except that I had spent the previous
eight years in a very inactive life style. I wasn't involved with any sports or hobbies, unless you call
watching television a hobby. Previously in both high school and at least part of college I was very
active in sports, especially ice hockey. However, coming out of college, my life was unfolding in the
way that was very different from what I had expected. It was not to my liking, but at the time I felt
powerless to do anything about it. This led to a period of inactivity, which is a nice way of saying that I
was severely depressed. Again, I'm not sure what prompted me to suddenly want to become a runner
(maybe I saw some TV program that sparked my interest).
I do, however, remember that the motivation was verv strong. So, I went out and bought myself some
running shoes, put them on, and went out to run. The first thing I discovered was that I couldn't do it. I
didn't have the physical stamina to run more than fifty or sixty yards. This was very surprising. I didn't
realize, nor would I have ever believed, that I was so out of shape that I couldn't run even a hundred
yards. This realization was so disheartening that I didn't attempt to run again for two or three weeks.

The next time out, I still couldn't run more than fifty or sixty yards. I tried again the next day with, of
course, the same result.
I became so discouraged about my deteriorated physical condition that I didn't run again for another
four months. Now, it's the spring of 1979. I'm once again determined to become a runner, but, at the
same time, very frustrated with my lack of progress. As I was contemplating my dilemma, it occurred
to me that one of my problems was that I didn't have a goal to work towards. Saying that I wanted to be
a runner was great, but what did that mean? I really didn't know; it was too vague and abstract. I had to
have something more tangible to work towards.
So I decided that I wanted to be able to run five miles by the end of the summer. Five miles seemed
insurmountable at the time, but thinking that I might be able to do it generated a lot of enthusiasm. This
increased level of enthusiasm gave me enough impetus to run four times that week. At the end of this
first week, I was really surprised to discover even a little bit of exercise improved my stamina and
ability to run a little farther each time. This created even more enthusiasm, so I went out and bought a
stop watch and blank book to be used as a running diary. I set up a two-mile course, and marked off
each quarter mile. In the diary I entered the date, my distance, my time, and how I felt physically each
time I ran. Now I thought I was well on my way to the five miles, until I literally ran into my next set of
problems.
The biggest were the conflicting and distracting thoughts that flooded my consciousness every time I
decided I wanted to go out and run. I was amazed at the number (and intensity) of the reasons I found
for not doing it: "It's hot [or] cold outside," "It looks like it's going to rain," "I'm still a little tired from
the last time I ran (even though it was three days ago)," "Nobody else I know is doing this," or the most
prevalent, "I'll go as soon as this TV program is over" (of course I never went). I didn't know any other
way to deal with this conflicting mental energy except to redirect my conscious attention on what I was
trying to accomplish. I really wanted to get to five miles by the end of the summer. I found that
sometimes my desire was stronger than the conflict. As a result, I managed to get my running shoes on,
actually step outside, and start running. However, more times than not, my conflicting and distracting
thoughts caused me to stay put. In fact, in the beginning stages, I estimate that two-thirds of the time I
was unable to get past the conflicting energy.
The next problem I encountered was that when I started approaching the point where I was able to run
one mile, I was so thrilled with myself that it occurred to me I was going to need an additional
mechanism to get me to the five miles. I reasoned that once I got to the point where I could run two or
maybe three miles, I would be so overwhelmingly pleased with myself that I wouldn't feel any need to
fulfill my five-mile objective. So I made a rule for myself. You could call it the five-mile rule. "If I
managed to get my running shoes on and get outside in spite of all the conflicting thoughts trying to
talk me out of it, I committed myself to running at least one step farther than the last time I ran." It was
certainly all right if I ran more than one step further, but it couldn't be less than one step, no matter
what. As it turns out, I never broke this rule, and by the end of the summer, I made it to five miles.
