Trend Trading
for a Living

This page intentionally left blank

Trend Trading
for a Living
Learn the Skills and Gain the
Confidence to Trade for a Living

Dr. Thomas K. Carr

New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London
Madrid Mexico City Milan New Delhi
San Juan Seoul Singapore
Sydney Toronto

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United
States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976,
no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means,
or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the
publisher.
0-07-154420-8
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-154419-4.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark
symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial
fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of
infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have
been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and
sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please
contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212)
904-4069.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and
its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these
terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and
retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer,
reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate,
sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior
consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other
use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if
you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS
MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY,
ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM
USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE
ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not
warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor
its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission,
regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill
has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect,
incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of
or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of
such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever
whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071544194

This book is dedicated to:
. . . my father, who is a much better pastor than investor,
but is supportive of my work nonetheless;
. . . my late mother, who always encouraged her sons to
follow their dreams;
. . . my lovely wife, Ina, for looking after our toddler without
complaint while I wrote (and for directing me back to the
computer when I wasn’t writing!);
. . . and my two lovely daughters, Natasha and Nadia,
who are my best investments; the risks may be great,
but the return on equity is priceless!

This page intentionally left blank

For more information about this title, click here

contents

F O R E W O R D B Y A L A N FA R L E Y

xi

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

xv

INTRODUCTION

From Passion to Profession

1

PART ONE

Preliminaries
CHAPTER 1

What You Need to Get Started

29

CHAPTER 2

Becoming a Chart Reader

39

CHAPTER 3

Developing a Trader’s Mind

71

CHAPTER 4

The 10 Habits of Highly Successful
Traders

83

PART TWO

Trend-Trading Basics
CHAPTER 5

What Is Trend Trading?

93

vii

viii

CONTENTS

CHAPTER 6

Setting Up Your Watch Lists

103

CHAPTER 7

Determining General Market Direction

113

CHAPTER 8

Put Your Market-Reading Skills
to the Test

133

PART THREE

Get Started in Trend Trading
CHAPTER 9

Selecting Bullish Stocks to Trend-Trade

155

CHAPTER 10

Selecting Bearish Stocks to Trend-Trade

191

CHAPTER 11

Entries and Exits

227

PART FOUR

Trend Trading with Options
CHAPTER 12

Options Basics

243

CHAPTER 13

Options Strategies: Bullish Trends

271

CHAPTER 14

Options Strategies: Bearish Trends

277

CHAPTER 15

Options Strategies: Neutral

283

CONTENTS

ix

PART FIVE

Trading for a Living
CHAPTER 16

The Bigger Vision: Where Trend Trading
Can Take You

311

FINAL THOUGHTS

329

INDEX

333

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

341

This page intentionally left blank

foreword

L

ET’S talk about your interest in the ﬁnancial markets.

We’ll start with the hardest truth of all: it’s difﬁcult to turn
proﬁts and earn a living through the trading game. After
all, no one but the mint is printing money, nor does it grow
on trees.
So here’s the bottom line for anyone wanting to trade
stocks, currencies, or futures. You’ll either earn your success through hard work or lose your stake and move on.
Trading has a mathematical advantage over investing,
and good traders will make more money over less time than
good investors. But the devil is in the details. It’s the
trader’s job to capture volatile price swings that ﬂatten out
over the holding period of a buy-and-hold investor. As a
result, they need to master the challenging skill of time
management.
Take this pursuit seriously, and ﬁnd a strategy that
capitalizes on market movement. Indeed, your success or
failure depends on the path you choose. The most dangerous road chases proﬁts without an understanding of downside risk. The safest course builds skills one step at a time
and acts defensively when things go wrong.
xi

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

xii

FOREWORD

Fortunately, you’ve found your way to Thomas Carr’s
excellent book on trend trading. This informative text
opens the market vault to new and experienced traders,
welcoming them into our discipline with open arms.
Indeed, you’ll ﬁnd everything you need to get started on
the road to trading proﬁts in these enlightening pages.
But don’t stop your education there. Developing superior trading skills is a lifetime pursuit, in which we’re constantly on the hunt for new ideas, methods, and strategies.
This active learning process keeps our game fresh in a
predatory market world that takes no prisoners.
Make sure your trading matches your lifestyle. You
can lose a lot of money when your reach exceeds your
grasp. Don’t trade every tick if you can’t follow the market
in real time. Don’t day-trade your investments or buy and
hold your trades. Never use the market as your therapy for
personal problems. It makes a terrible cellmate.
Watch the clock, and become a survivor. Develop a
sense of how stocks react to different cycles. Learn the
unique traits of the market day, week, and month. These
repetitive tendencies affect how prices move and how
traders trade. And they reveal telling quirks that produce
high-probability trades.
Catalog strange market behavior, and apply simple
techniques to trade it. Master a few setups, and let these
pay your way while you learn to play the game. Realize that
chasing hot stocks is a bad way to make money. Give up the
excitement and follow the precision of classic market
mechanics. They’ll produce consistent proﬁts, with far less
stress.

FOREWORD

xiii

Manage risk before worrying about proﬁts. The most
important rule of risk management requires little interpretation: Don’t enter a trade without knowing the exit.
Understand the risk of your positions, and get out when the
price action says you’re wrong. Trading small is the best
way for new players to control risk until they learn how to
make money. Remember that the markets will be there
tomorrow, next week, and next year.
Focus on precise entry and exit. Pick your price, and
stay on the sidelines when the market doesn’t give it to you.
Reduce position size when your buying or selling signals
don’t line up. Use discretion, execute wisely, and remember: good entries on bad stocks produce greater returns
over time than bad entries on good stocks.
The best trades come when the information ﬂow sends
the same message in different ways. A moving average, news
report, and cross-market surge can all suddenly line up and
tell you to buy or sell. But avoid seeking out data and opinions just to support your bias. The markets won’t care who’s
on your buddy list when they’re ready to move.
Finally, commit many hours of study and observation
to the market. Develop a predatory instinct, avoid greed,
and view this hobby as a lifelong obsession. Work hard to
complete your analysis, and don’t cut corners. Develop your
own trading style and don’t run with the herd.
Be patient, and the doors will eventually open to consistent trading proﬁts.
Alan S. Farley
Author of The Master Swing Trader

This page intentionally left blank

acknowledgments

A

COMPREHENSIVE book like Trend Trading for a Liv-

ing rests on the work of many others, past and present. As
a perpetual student of the markets and of trading systems,
I am privileged to have had many ﬁne teachers and mentors whose contributions to this volume are evident on
every page. Let me take a moment here to acknowledge the
most important of those.
I owe a huge debt to the writings of the late Nicholas
Darvis, my ﬁrst and greatest market inspiration, whose
story I tell in the Introduction. It was his box system that
ﬁrst got me started in systems development, and it was his
breathless story of wealth creation in the stock market
while pursuing a full-time career that ﬁrst inspired me to
believe that I could do it, too.
Even more, I am indebted to Alexander Elder, master
teacher and market psychologist, also mentioned in detail
in these pages. Dr. Elder ﬁrst revealed to me the elegance
and logic of technical analysis as applied to price charts.
Many of the key concepts embedded in the systems
explained in this text come from his seminal work, Trading
for a Living, now considered a classic in trading literature.
xv

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

xvi

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I also wish to recognize a family friend, the late Gene
Browning. Gene was a successful options trader as well as
a man of deep faith; he is truly an exemplar of the life well
lived. Through several phone conversations, Gene taught
me that a career watching numbers and charts need not
necessarily exclude a life of devotion to higher principles.
Gene was ﬁrst and foremost a disciple of Jesus Christ. He
always saw his trading skills as subservient to that calling.
This book would not exist were it not for Alan Farley, whose commitment to teaching the art of trading to
others is second to none. Many years ago Alan embarked
on a career as a trader educator through his Web site,
Hardrightedge.com, and it was his example and encouragement (at a time when trading was mostly a professional’s game with rules unknown to the masses) that
inspired me to launch Befriendthetrend.com, now one of
the leading online sources of trading education. I am
deeply indebted to Alan for volunteering to write the foreword to this book, and I consider it a great honor.
Other important members in the cast of this drama
include Jamie Caputo, vice president at RBC/Carlin Equities, whose passion and enthusiasm for supporting traders
is as rare as it is contagious; Ken Adams, trading systems
developer, superb encourager, and long-term Silicon
Investor friend; and Dianne Wheeler, editor extraordinaire,
and all her colleagues at McGraw-Hill, for their tireless
conﬁdence in this publication and their dedication to publishing professionalism.
A special thanks is owed to all our friends and partners at Befriendthetrend.com: God bless you all!

Trend Trading
for a Living

This page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION

from passion to
profession

B

RAINSTORM with me for a minute: what does the stock

market represent to you? What images come to mind?
What feelings do you associate with trading, with Wall
Street, with the global markets? When I reﬂect on what the
markets mean to me, this is what I come up with:
• A free-ﬂowing stream of numbers, numbers,

numbers
• Greens and reds, ups and downs, peaks and
troughs, ebbs and ﬂows
• A melting pot of products, services, technologies,
commodities, and information
• Manhattan high culture, soot-stained buildings,
suspenders and pinstripes
• A barometer of the economic and psychological
state of the nation, and of the world
• Power, greed, discipline, corruption, intelligence,
ecstasy, and agony
• The playground of very energetic people who
love making money

1

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

2

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• Icon of free-market capitalism, of democracy, of

America
• An efﬁcient, highly accessible vehicle for creating
wealth, freedom, opportunity
Obviously, my impression of the stock market is an
amalgam of a variety of things. The market represents to
me the most challenging and most stimulating arena in all
of human culture. I love art, literature, architecture, science, ﬁlm, and fashion. I am a religiously committed person and am conversant with many of the world’s major
philosophies. But of all products of human making, no
other so totally engages my intellect, my will, my passion as
does the stock market.
My introduction to the stock market came through a
recurring image in the pages of my favorite serial comic
book character: Richie Rich. There stood the “poor little
rich boy” in front of a glass-enclosed machine, slender tape
in hand, scrutinizing the ever-growing Rich fortune he was
destined to inherit. The neural network this image hardwired into my six-year-old brain must have been permanent, for I have been striving ever since to understand what
Master Rich must have understood as he stared at that long
stream of paper. If I wanted to live like he lived (and what
young boy wouldn’t?), I knew I would one day have to
unlock the secrets of that mysterious ticker tape.
On my eighth birthday I asked for, and received, the
original, 1968 deluxe version of the Whitman Stock Market
Game. This classic game is played just like Monopoly, only
instead of buying famous streets, you accumulate shares in
some of the world’s biggest and fastest-growing companies.

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

3

At the time, those companies included Maytag, Woolworth,
American Motors, International Shoe, and General Mills
(how times have changed!). Players barter and bid for shares
and are forced to pay dividends when they land on a stock in
someone else’s portfolio. Unfortunately, I could not get any
of my playmates excited enough about the stock market to
play with me. So for the most part I played alone, often for
hours at a stretch, bidding against myself as I amassed a small
fortune. Funny thing, I always won! As an aside, the 1968
Whitman Deluxe Stock Market Game is no longer manufactured, but you can occasionally ﬁnd one for sale on eBay
for about $20.
My next childhood association with the stock market
came when I turned 12 and was old enough to walk on my
own to the downtown public library after school. The ﬁrst
book I remember checking out with my new library card
was a biography of Howard Hughes. I devoured every
page, seeing in Hughes a real-life, grown-up version of
Richie Rich. While I remember not liking the man very
much, I recall wanting to do with my life what he was able
to do with his. I remember making the connection in my
mind between the ideas of risk, speculation, and passionate investment on the one hand, and on the other, the kind
of freedom and power both Rich and Hughes enjoyed.
On my next visit to the library I walked up to the
librarian and asked, “Do you have any books on the stock
market?” Managing to hide a smile, the woman escorted
me quite courteously to a shelf located upstairs in a far,
dark corner. After looking over the neatly stacked books,
she pulled one down and handed it to me. “Here,” she said,
“you might like this one.” The book’s title couldn’t have

4

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

been more perfect: How I Made $2,000,000 in the Stock
Market. It described how a young professional dancer
named Nicolas Darvas amassed a fortune by trading stocks
on only three bits of information: the high of the day, the
low of the day, and the close. Darvas invested in fundamentally sound, growing companies breaking out of consolidation bases on strong volume. Once he made a
purchase, Darvas would simply record the boxes the stock
price made as it moved above the base. A box was what
Darvas called the trading range the stock tended to trade
within, based on its daily highs and lows. If it broke above
the upper edge of the box, he would move the box up to a
higher level, but if it broke the lower edge of the box, he
would sell the stock and cut his losses.
Although I didn’t know it at the time, Darvas’s book
was my ﬁrst introduction to systems trading—and I was
hooked. But I also knew that the kind of fundamental
analysis Darvas applied to the companies he traded was
beyond the competencies of my 12-year-old brain. So a
couple years passed before I picked up another stock market book.When I did, I found a real winner, one that taught
me how a proﬁtable system can turn the stock market into
a virtual money machine. It was Robert Lichello’s 1977
best-seller, How to Make $1,000,000 in the Stock Market
Automatically! Written in response to the 1970s bear market, Lichello developed a system that exploited the type of
volatility that typically appears at market tops and bottoms.
Like Darvas’s box method, Lichello’s system was simple
and mechanical: after buying an initial position in a stock,
you buy more shares if the price goes down and you sell
shares if the price goes up. A mathematical formula was

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

5

applied to the closing price at the end of each week to
determine what to do with your position: buy a little, sell a
little, or hold. In this way, Lichello claimed, a stock could
move up and down within a range—netting the buy-andholder very little—and still yield a handsome proﬁt to the
one using his automatic investment management (AIM)
system.
After I ﬁnished Lichello’s book I decided to experiment with his system to see whether it worked. I asked my
father to explain that odd section of the paper with tiny
print that listed all the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
companies and how they fared in that day’s trading. He
showed me how to read the numbers and suggested I focus
on a company I was familiar with. I chose McDonald’s. We
ate their hamburgers at least once a week, and though I
didn’t know that it was the fastest-growing franchise in the
United States, I was well aware from the big sign out front
that the number of hamburgers served at our local restaurant kept going higher. So I put the AIM method to work
with an imaginary 500 shares of McDonald’s.
Lichello’s AIM method requires only a weekly glance
at the closing price of a stock in order to work the system.
I decided that was too infrequent, so I checked the price
every day. I still remember feeling absolutely elated that
ﬁrst day after my imaginary purchase upon learning that
MCD had closed ⫹1/4 point, netting me a paper proﬁt of
$100. By the end of that ﬁrst week, as I recall, MCD was
up a whole dollar. A $500 return in one week!
The problem with Lichello’s method is that it only
works with stocks making large up and down swings. However impressive a $1 move might be, it did nothing to trig-

6

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

ger AIM’s signal to sell shares. That would have required
at least a $3 move. So I watched again the next week. Each
day I checked the paper to see how my shares did on the
big board battleﬁeld, and each day my hopes would rise and
fall with each quarter-point advance or decline. This went
on for about two more weeks before I ﬁnally gave up out
of sheer boredom.
I decided to give Darvas’s box method another read. I
dog-eared the library’s copy of How I Made $2,000,000 in
the Stock Market, carefully taking notes on how to apply
every aspect of the system. Again, I took an imaginary
investment in my favorite company, McDonald’s. It certainly ﬁt the Darvas proﬁle: strong earnings growth, hot
prospects, and trading in a long-range base. So early in the
summer of 1974 I “bought” 500 shares of MCD in my
make-believe trading account and excitedly set about putting Darvas’s system to the test. I drew up a kind of primitive spreadsheet for keeping track of the daily highs and
lows in order to determine the boxes necessary to manage
the open position. At that time, MCD was trading in the
low 40s. It had recently broken out of a months-long trading range with a lower edge in the upper 20s and an upper
edge in the mid-30s. I already knew MCD was a fundamentally sound company, and this base breakout qualiﬁed
as a Darvas entry point. So I went long the stock around
$42 per share and set my stop-loss just under the lower
edge of the new trading range, around $37. About three
weeks later, the stock rallied to near $48 before closing the
month at $44, so I dutifully moved the Darvas box up two
points. My stop-loss now stood at $39, and I was comfortably ahead nearly $1,000. Life was good!

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

7

For a while things looked promising. The position
came close to getting stopped out following a stern earnings warning, but my box was not touched and I remained
in the trade. Then disaster struck. MCD declared earnings
that fell below even their lowered prediction, and this was
followed promptly by several high-level downgrades. In a
swift New York minute I was taken out of the trade for an
imaginary, but no less painful, loss of $1,500. Suddenly, and
decidedly, my career as a teenage Wall Street tycoon had
come to an end.
I grew up a bit after that. I got interested in sports,
girls, parties—the usual adolescent distractions. At 18 I
went off to university to study medicine, until I discovered
I hated being in hospitals and felt nauseated at the sight of
blood. So I switched to religious studies and philosophy,
and 10 years of graduate study later found myself with a
doctorate in the subject, teaching the rudiments of Plato
and Aquinas to undergraduates.
Having weathered a very frugal decade as a starving
graduate student, and with a mountain of student loans and
credit card debt to pay off, not even a full-time professor’s
salary could tempt me back into the trading game. But
when I took up an offer to teach summer school, the $5,000
bonus brought with it, rather unexpectedly, a return of the
old trading bug.
The year was 1996 and a new trading tool was all the
rage: 24-hour ﬁnancial television. First came the CNNFinancial Network, and then CNBC and Bloomberg Television. When this input coupled with Internet trading chat
rooms, online discount brokers, and cheap charting Web
sites, Wall Street quickly became Main Street. The market
