
This pair has equal interest rates at 1.00 percent and Frankfurt trades its last
two-and-a-half hours into the ﬁrst hours of trade in Toronto that opens at
9:30 a.m. New York time. If the DAX and the TMX in Toronto are both up,
euro/Canadian dollar is a clear long, and a sell when both markets are down.
If U.S. markets are up, it’s a further indication for this pair to go long. Yet if
the U.S. market is up, Frankfurt is closed, and the Canadian market is up, it’s
still a clear long, and a sell when both are down.
Euro/Canadian dollar should never be reconﬁgured under present interest rate-conditions and under the present perfect two-market arrangements.
Both sides of this pair seek yields in their respective markets and both sides
will ﬁnd them easily when both markets are up. If economic circumstances
change for the better among both pairs and interest rates remain the same,
euro/Canadian dollar will ﬂy up. Only a change of interest rates that favors
one side or another can change the present balance.

Stock and Bond Markets

257

In terms of U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar, euro/Canadian dollar goes long
and rises as U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar goes short. Combine the pairs, and
the equation becomes Canadian dollar/Canadian dollar and euro/U.S. dollar.
Canadian dollar becomes either short with euro/Canadian dollar or long with
U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar or vice versa.
Euro/Swiss Franc

This is a tricky pair for many reasons. Both the Swiss National Bank (SNB)
and european Central Bank (ECB) have huge interests in this pair, but both
have interests in opposing conﬁgurations. The Swiss want Swiss franc/euro to
rise while the ECB want euro/Swiss franc to rise. Both markets pull against
each other and that continues in U.S. markets.
One reason is the DAX rises on yields while the SMI stock index that
trades on the SIX Swiss Exchange is tied to Confederate bonds and both are
tied to economic performance. This equation seems quite simple but it will
not work in every instance with this pair.
It’s not the euro side that’s complicated but rather the Swiss franc side.
So it’s important to view Confederate and Bund futures on the SIX Swiss
Exchange web site. bund and Confederate futures are the key indicator, more
so than the SMI. The web site actually provides all the necessary information to trade this pair in real time and all is provided as market indicators.
Interesting about this pair is it can be a big mover because the payout is big
in U.S. dollar terms. Yet if the matrix is understood between the two markets,
it’s an easy pair to trade.
So to trade this arrangement as the DAX rises, bund prices fall, and yields
rise along with the euro. The SMI needs to rise along with the SBI in order
for the Swiss franc to rise. If the DAX falls and the SMI falls, spreads compress so this might be the long trade opportunity. If Confederate and bund
futures rise, euro/Swiss franc is a short.
The Swiss SMI is not an essential element in this equation because the
SMI can rise while the SBI Index is down. SBI and Confederate futures is
the essential element for the Swiss franc side. Both or either must rise in order
for Swiss franc to rise. This can be tricky on some days, so caution is advised.
If problems arise while in a trade and it doesn’t work as expected, bail out and
wait for a better day. Those problems lie in the push and pull of both central
banks’ interests and the exchange rate element in the SMI calculation.
In U.S. markets, euro will follow Treasury yields up and down and
Swiss franc will follow Treasury bond prices up and down. Rising U.S.

258

Inside the Currency Market

stock markets sends Treasury yields up and Treasury bond prices down. U.S.
markets will dictate direction in all three markets once New York trading
formally opens.
The methodology for U.S. trade is view euro/Swiss franc the same as
euro/U.S. dollar. Because U.S. dollar/Swiss franc is an opposite pair to euro/
Swiss franc, they will move in opposite directions. Swiss franc/U.S. dollar is
another conﬁguration that moves in opposite directions as euro/Swiss franc.
In Swiss franc/euro terms, U.S. dollar/Swiss franc and Swiss franc/U.S. dollar
would both run counter to Swiss franc/euro. The overall strategy should be
watch euro/Swiss franc because it’s a forward indicator to euro/U.S. dollar
due to interest for both central banks to employ it for cross-border trade
rather than a speculative investment.
SIX Swiss Exchange

The SMI is the widely reported and popularly known index that marks direction for all stocks traded on the SIX Swiss Exchange. The SMI comprises 20
of Switzerland’s biggest companies. Yet the SMIM is a broader index that
includes 30 of Switzerland’s largest mid-cap companies. A total of 256 shares
trade on the SIX Swiss Exchange, represented by the All Share Index.
All stock indices operate based on a Laspeyres index, a free ﬂoat that is
calculated every second by dedicated market professionals at the SIX Swiss
Exchange. The formula is:
M

∑p ×x × f ×r
i ,s

Is = i =1
where

i ,t

i ,t

s

Dt

t  current day,
s  current time on day t,
Is  current index level at time s,
Dt  divisor on day t,
M  number of shares in index,
pi,s  last paid price security I,
xi,t  number of shares of security I on day t,
fi,t  free ﬂoat for security I on day t, and
rs  current Swiss franc exchange rate at time s.

The Domestic Government Bond Index is not only the most important index to monitor and evaluate trades, but it’s by far the most widely

259

Stock and Bond Markets

traded. The index is termed the SBI Domestic. Only Swiss Government ﬁxed
interest-rate bonds with maturities 12 months or longer with Swiss franc
$100 million comprise the index. The SBI is calculated based on a Laspeyres
capital-weighted index.
The SBI 52-week high and low ranged from 110.82 to 119.96 with a
daily high and low that ranged from a low of 117.96 and high of 118.11
(SIX Swiss). Daily movements in this range do not speak volumes about
stock market ranges.
To monitor the SMI, a volatility index was introduced in 2005 called the
VSMI. Volatility is based on SMI 30-day options traded on Eurex. The index
is calculated based on a Sharpe Ratio as trades enter the Eurex system. The
calculation is:

SMI index level, X 

(30 : 365)  VSMI in percent per year

High volatility says the SMI price is high and low volatility implies the index
is low.
Bond trading begins at 8:30 a.m. Zurich time, 2:30 a.m. New York time
and closes at 5:30 p.m. Zurich, 11:30 a.m. New York. The 8:30 a.m. opening
includes a two-minute randomized opening. If bond prices with maturities
less than 15 years deviate 1 percent in price at the opening, trade is stopped
for 15 minutes. If bond prices with more than 15-year maturities deviate
3 percent in price, trade is halted for 15 minutes. The SIX Swiss Exchange
opens at 9:00 a.m. and closes at 5:30 p.m., which is 3:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m.
New York time.
At the Swiss opening, Australia, New Zealand, and Tokyo are closed.
The SIX Swiss Exchange closes 30 minutes before the close at the Frankfurt
Exchange. The London close occurs simultaneously with the SIX Swiss
Exchange. The last two hours of Swiss trading coincide with the ﬁrst two hours
of the New York Stock Exchange trading as well as the Toronto Stock Exchange.
SIX Swiss Exchange Trading Services

On the SIX Swiss web site are a number of useful trading services that deserve
mention. The bond calculator offers an option to determine yields based on
price and price based on yields to include accrued interest. A bond can be
factored based on maturity, coupons, settlement, price, and day counts.
Charts allow charting of the Swiss markets in terms of equities, bonds,
and indices. A charting comparison between markets is offered as well.

260

Inside the Currency Market

A sophisticated colored heat map allows individual stocks, sectors, industries, and stock indices to be viewed in terms of different periods, volume,
and turnover not just for present trading periods but historical markets as
well. It’s valuable as a measure of the Swiss markets.
An updated exchange rate table along with the ability to measure U.S.
dollar and cross pairs in terms of an interactive conversion table is offered.
This may appear simplistic on the surface, but exchange rates must be
measured in terms of the larger picture of worldwide traders and market
professionals.
Resident U.S. traders may ﬁnd no value in an Australian dollar/New
Zealand dollar trade because the number of Australian dollar/New Zealand
dollar converted into U.S. dollars is quite small. Yet the exchange rate may
be sufﬁcient in Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar terms and for
Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar resident traders who may ﬁnd
proﬁt. Japanese traders may ﬁnd proﬁt in, say, British pound pairs. All currency pairs have a different payout depending on exchange rates and the
conversion factors in whatever currency, according to the particular world
market.

Switzerland Confederate Bonds
Confederate Bonds are tied to economic performance of the Swiss economy
and serve as the benchmark for trade of Swiss franc.
Trade Strategy

U.S. dollar/Swiss franc and Swiss franc/U.S. dollar can be tricky trades. The
SBI Domestic Bond Index provides the most important indicator in terms of
direction for both pairs. Typically, when the SBI and SMI are up Swiss franc/
U.S. dollar is up and U.S. dollar/Swiss franc is down, a long and a short. The
SMI is an ancillary indicator in this equation, and doesn’t necessarily correlate
directly with the SBI. Yet both are by far the most widely traded instruments
on any given Swiss trading day. The tricky aspect occurs when the SMI is
up, say, 10 points and the SBI can actually trade in negative territory. This
can send U.S. dollar/Swiss franc and Swiss franc/U.S. dollar in quite different directions. For this reason, the SBI is the key guide. Confederate Bond
futures play a role of almost equal importance.
Typically, the SBI and Confederate Futures follow each other, sometimes
not. Confederate Bond futures sometimes follow German bund futures,

Stock and Bond Markets

261

sometimes not. To navigate, employ SBI as the overall guide because SMI
again fails as an overall correlational tool. When the SBI is up, Swiss franc/
U.S. dollar is up and U.S. dollar/Swiss franc falls. Better to trade the Swiss
franc/U.S. dollar conﬁguration in Swiss markets. Euro/Swiss franc will typically follow the direction of U.S. dollar/Swiss franc, while Swiss franc/euro
will not. Caution is advised in Swiss markets because sometimes trades are
easy and other days they are not. The SMI web site allows a full view of the
SMI, SBI, Confederate, and bund Futures to be viewed on one screen.
In U.S. markets, Swiss franc in U.S. dollar/Swiss franc will follow
Treasury bond prices up and down while U.S. dollar will follow yields. As
the U.S. stock market rises, yields will rise and the bond price will fall. When
both markets trade together, U.S. markets provides direction to U.S. dollar/
Swiss franc and Swiss franc/U.S. dollar and also provide direction to Swiss
markets in terms of the SBI.
Go long U.S. dollar/Swiss franc when U.S. markets are down and short
when markets rise. Go long Swiss franc/U.S. dollar when U.S. markets rise
and short when U.S. markets fall.
Euro in euro/Swiss franc follows Treasury bond yields while Swiss franc
follows Treasury bond prices, so some continuity exists from market to market to some degree for this pair. It’s another reason euro/Swiss franc can be
employed as the premier risk indicator. The question for euro is risk to follow
yields or safety of bond prices by Swiss franc. It’s a gauge of a market that
seeks risk or safety, caution against risk.
British pound/Swiss franc in U.S. markets trades as British pound is the
Treasury yield seeker while Swiss franc follows the bond price. Negative U.S.
stock markets will see British pound fall as Swiss franc rises and vice versa.
The best opportunity for British pound/Swiss franc is go long in rising U.S.
markets, short when markets drop because of the British pound dominance
in interest rates and movements over Swiss franc.
Australian dollar/Swiss franc and New Zealand dollar/Swiss franc have
possibilities in U.S. markets only as a long trade and only if U.S. stock markets rise because of the wide disparity in interest rates between these two
pairs. Both pairs are long trends due to the disparity of interest rates.
In terms of DAX comparisons, one must triangulate the pairs. Euro/
U.S. dollar and U.S. dollar/Swiss franc is actually euro/Swiss franc if U.S.
dollar is cancelled. U.S. dollar works as a cancellation because Swiss franc
becomes the U.S. dollar measure in terms of market risk for both pairs.
A long euro/U.S. dollar is a short U.S. dollar/Swiss franc and vice versa. Euro
seeks yields in terms of bunds and yields in terms of U.S. Treasuries. It’s a
pure risk indicator as opposed to Swiss franc as a pure measure of safety as

262

Inside the Currency Market

it follows Confederate bonds, U.S. bonds, and German bonds. What if euro/
Swiss franc was measured as euro/U.S. dollar and Swiss franc/U.S. dollar?
This is actually a proper arrangement of the pairs because equal positions are
held in terms of the bond-yield conﬁguration. The ﬁnal analysis is still euro/
Swiss franc as a measure, because the SMI sometimes fails as an indicator.

Toronto Stock Exchange

The TMX Group operates the Toronto Stock Exchange to trade stocks,
the Montreal Exchange to trade Canadian derivatives, the Boston Options
Exchange to trade equity options electronically, and the Natural Gas Exchange
to trade and clear natural gas contracts.
The S&P/TSX 60 is the primary equity index that covers 73 percent of
total equity capitalization. The S&P/TSX Composite is a broader market
measure that includes common stock and income trust units. Income trust
units are deﬁned as an equity type investment structured to distribute cash
ﬂows in a tax efﬁcient manner. Currently 155 are traded, that includes 92
business trusts, 13 energy trusts, 38 real estate investments trusts, and 12
power and pipeline trusts. Income unit trusts are employed as a corporate
formation in Canada to allow the development of Canada’s natural resourcerich commodities such as gold, minerals, oil sands, mining, oil, and gas and
natural gas. Dividend yields have been known to be quite high over the years,
especially as underlying trusts became full-ﬂedged companies.
The S&P/TSX Composite is a comprehensive measure of equities in
terms of the S&P/TSX 60, S&P/TSX equity, and S&P/TSX Completion
Indices.
In October 2010, the S&P/TSX VIX index was launched to measure
30-day volatility of the S&P/TSX 60 equity index. The index is derived
from near- and next-term options on S&P/TSX 60. The Canadians employ
CORRA and CDOR one-, two-, and three-month rates to interpolate riskfree rates for each maturity.
The Montreal Exchange is a sophisticated and well-managed trading
forum for options, futures, interest rate, equity indices, yield curve spreads,
and swap hedges. The guides and strategies section is a fabulous tool as a
learning guide into Canadian ﬁnancial traded instruments.
Can Deal reports Canadian Treasury and bond prices in terms of a bid
and ask price, a bid and ask yield, and price changes throughout any trading
day directly on the Toronto Stock Exchange web site. This is most important
to trade the Canadian dollar. The Canadian bond market opens at 8:00 a.m.

Stock and Bond Markets

263

New York time or EST, while stock trading begins at 9:30 a.m. and closes at
4:00 p.m. Canadian economic announcements are released about 8:30, the
same as the United States.
Standard and Poor’s, a company formed in 1941 by the merger of
Standard Statistics Corporation and Poor’s Publishing, calculates all Canadian
stock indices. The TSX is factored by dividing the total ﬂoat-adjusted market
capitalization of index stocks by a divisor. Float adjusted are publicly traded
shares. An investable weight factor (IWF) is employed. For each stock IWF is
equal to available ﬂoat shares divided by total shares outstanding.
The ﬂoat-adjusted index  j(Pj Sj IWFj )/divisor
where

Pj  price of stock j,
Sj  total shares outstanding of stock j,
IWFj  investable weight factor, and
divisor  index divisor.

The divisor is not released for public consumption.
Trade Strategy

The Canadian market trades as the TSX rises, and bond prices fall while
bond yields rise. This combination sends Canadian dollar up toward weakness, a long position. So Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar would work in rising
Canadian markets while U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar is a short because Canadian
dollar’s conﬁguration was changed to reﬂect the bond price rather than
the yield.
The Canadian arrangement will always be tricky because both the U.S.
and Canadian markets reﬂect yields as both stock markets rise and bond
prices fall. One side must reﬂect a bond price while another must reﬂect
the yield. The question on any trading day is which combination works. The
determination can be tricky.
U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar won’t work as a long if Canadian markets rise
and U.S. markets fall. A short is a questionable arrangement. If both markets
fall, short U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar. If both market rise, long Canadian
dollar/U.S. dollar, so trade the Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar arrangement.
This is the proper order, not necessarily perfect, but U.S. dollar attaches to a
bond price while Canadian dollar attaches to its yield. The Canadian market

264

Inside the Currency Market

must be thought about ﬁrst before a trade strategy is implemented, yet U.S.
markets may provide overall direction.
In interest-rate terms, Canadian dollar rates are 1.00 percent while U.S.
dollar is 0.25 percent. The longer term says Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar is the
preferred combination as a longer-term long trade. Yet interest-rate disparities should always arrange as the dominant rate in the ﬁrst position of any
currency-pair arrangement.
Due to the unique Canadian dollar yield arrangement and present interest-rate disparities against other pairs, normal Canadian dollar
conﬁgurations will be strange. For example, see the euro/Canadian dollar.
Canadian dollar rates are 1.00 percent as opposed to euro 1.00 percent.
But both are yield seekers. When the DAX and TSX both rise, how
should pair arrangement work? To some degree, it’s long without looking
back unless either side changes its rates and provided economic conditions hold steady or improve. Australian dollar/Canadian dollar and New
Zealand dollar/Canadian dollar have the same arrangement in U.S. and
Canadian trading. Both pairs seek yields, so it’s again long under present
conﬁgurations.
Canadian dollar/Swiss franc in present form works ﬁne. Go long Canadian
dollar/Swiss franc in rising Canadian markets, especially because Canadian rates
are 1.00 percent and Swiss rates are 0.25 percent.
The Canadian dollar is a yield seeking currency, which classiﬁes it as
a risk asset. Risk assets can only be traded against measures of risk such as
the new Volatility Index. High volatility is normally a sign of high risk or
overbought conditions, while low volatility represents oversold conditions
with low risk. The Canadian dollar should be traded based on rises and falls
of the TSX with volatility as the overall guide to determine direction. Based
on its yield nature, the Canadian dollar will always be a funny-moving pair
even loony at times. Add the vast amounts of corporate oil interest in this
pair who wish to lock in a particular price, and prices can at times become
really loony.
New York Stock Exchange

The New York Stock Exchange and Euronext combined in 2007 to form
New York Stock Exchange, Euronext which claims 8000 varying ﬁnancial
instruments traded, including derivatives, futures, options, stocks, and stock
indices. Two most important instruments to trade currency pairs are the Dow
Jones and S&P indices. Both are important, yet very different in calculation,
methodology, size, and age.

Stock and Bond Markets

265

Charles Dow calculated the Dow 12 stocks in 1896 while Standard Statistics
Corporation ﬁrst introduced the S&P 90 in 1926, S&P 500 in the 1950s (DJ
Indexes, S&P). Dow indices are price weighted while S&P are market-capitalization weighted (DJ Indexes, S&P). Dow indices represent only blue chips while
S&P are the largest capitalization companies, at least $3.5 billion by Standard
& Poor terms. Dow 30 captures about 25 to 30 percent of the market while
the S&P 500 covers about 75 percent (DJ Indexes, S&P). Dow Jones offers the
Dow 30 and Composite 65 while the S&P offers S&P 100, Mid Cap 400, Small
Cap 600, and S&P 1500 that comprises S&P 500, 400, and 600 (DJ Indexes,
S&P). All indices are represented by U.S. companies and calculated in U.S. dollars. Dow Jones indices update every two minutes on the NYSE web site, S&P
are time delayed by 20 minutes. Both indices are calculated within seconds.
Both companies offer Treasury bond indexes to track Treasury bond
prices. Dow Jones offers the CBOT Treasury Index that comprise a 30-year
bond, a 10-year note, and a 5-year note futures contract that measures the
default-free U.S. dollar capital market returns (DJ Indexes). It’s calculated
every 15 seconds and prices are reported in real time.
The S&P/BG Cantor U.S. Treasury Series includes subindices such as
the U.S. Treasury Bill Index, one- to three-year index, three- to ﬁve- year, ﬁveto seven-year, 7- to 10-year, 10- to 20-year, and 20-plus-year indices (S&P).
The S&P 500 comprises info technology—18.8 percent, ﬁnancials—15.7
percent, healthcare—11.6 percent, consumer staples—11.3 percent, industrials—
10.8 percent, energy—10.9 percent, consumer discretionary—10.4 percent, utilities—3.6 percent, materials—.5 percent, and telecommunication
services—.2 percent. The Dow 30 comprises industrials—22.07 percent,
technology—17.37 percent, consumer services—13.54 percent, consumer
goods—10.70 percent, oil and gas—0.15 percent, ﬁnancials—9.92 percent,
healthcare—7.99 percent, telecommunications—4.15 percent, and basic
materials—4.11 percent (S&P).
The S&P 500 index value is a “quotient of total ﬂoat-adjusted market
cap of constituents and its divisor and is calculated as each stock weight is
proportional to ﬂoat adjusted market value”. To calculate:
 P  Qi
Index level  i i
Divisor
The numerator is calculated as “the price of each stock  the number of shares
in index calculation.” The divisor is by S&P’s example. “If the numerator is
equal to $11.8 trillion and the divisor is equal to $9.4 billion, the index is equal
to 1250” (S&P). The S&P Index is a modiﬁcation of a Laspeyres Index.
 P  Q i,o
Laspeyres Index  i i,1
 I pi,o  Q i,o
