
Burniske 03.indd 233

9/9/17 2:41 PM

234 CRYPTOASSETS

Market/Share

NAV/Share

175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
Jan-14

Jul-14

Jan-15

Jul-15

Jan-16

Jul-16

Jan-17

Figure 15.1 n GBTC’s NAV compared to its price
Source: https://grayscale.co/bitcoin-investment-trust/#market-performance

without having to deal with all the nitty-gritty explained in the prior chapter.
Figure 15.1 shows how GBTC has differed from its net asset value (NAV) over
time. (NAV is the true value of the bitcoin underlying the shares. Anytime the
gray line is above the black line means that GBTC is trading at a premium to
the underlying value of the shares.)
It’s clear that GBTC has traded well above its net asset value for much of its
short life. Different explanations exist for this, such as that GBTC now allows
everyday investors to put bitcoin exposure directly into their traditional portfolios or retirement accounts, and institutional investors can also easily buy
GBTC. Whatever the reason, it is a sign that investors are interested in gaining bitcoin exposure in their portfolios. As of March 2017, the most common
method to do this through a capital market vehicle is with GBTC, and therefore the premium is the price one must pay for such access. Additionally, some
argue the premium is worth the ability to enjoy the benefits of bitcoin’s price
appreciation while providing tax reporting flexibility. However, at its core,
GBTC has a supply-demand problem. New units of freely traded GBTC can
only be created when accredited investors choose to exit their initial investment in the BIT, and there is no requirement to ever do so. Thus, as demand
builds, the supply to match the demand isn’t always there.
Some may initially see GBTC as an ETF, and therefore wonder why so
much drama has unfolded around a “bitcoin ETF.” However, the BIT and
GBTC are a far cry from an ETF, both in the regulatory approval they have
been granted and in the operational complexity. ETFs are constructed so that

Burniske 03.indd 234

9/9/17 2:41 PM

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

235

the value of the shares stay close to the net asset value. Keeping shares close
to NAV avoids the sizeable premiums like those which GBTC investors must
endure. Furthermore, an ETF requires sign-off from the SEC. While the BIT is
a step in the right direction, many steps remain before an SEC-approved ETF
will be available to investors.

THE WINKLEVOSS TWINS AND THE BITCOIN ETF RACE
Upon inception of the BIT, Grayscale was the only provider of a bitcoin-based
capital market investment vehicle in the United States, but others were interested in getting a piece of the action. Little did Grayscale know it would have
competition from former Olympic rowers and near-founders of Facebook.
Perhaps best known for their involvement with the latter, Cameron and Tyler
Winklevoss are two well-to-do investors. They claimed to be the originators
of the idea for Facebook, which led to a $60-million settlement with Mark
Zuckerberg. Since much of that settlement was in shares, its present-day
equivalent is in the hundreds of millions.
However, the twins were not about to disappear into oblivion with their
millions; they had tasted greatness and were not the kind of figures who easily faded from the limelight. Eager for new ventures, Bitcoin provided just the
opportunity. They were introduced to the idea of Bitcoin in 2012 by David
Azar while vacationing in Ibiza,10 putting them well ahead of the informational curve. The twins were smitten with the concept and started buying the
currency hand over fist, including investing in bitcoin-based startups.
At one point in 2013, they reported owning about 1 percent of all bitcoin in
existence (at the time, well over 100,000 bitcoin).11 Cameron has been credited
with buying the bitcoin that first pushed the currency’s total network value
over $1 billion.12 Seeing the opportunity, he placed a bid for bitcoin at $91.26
or above on Mt. Gox, the precise price that would make bitcoin’s total network
value greater than $1 billion.
The twins weren’t satisfied with being passive investors; they wanted to
bring products to market. To that end, in July 2013, they filed an SEC Form
S-1 for the Winklevoss Bitcoin Trust, which they intended to list as an ETF
under the ticker COIN.13 Typical S-1s are often 100 pages or more and cover
every imaginable detail of a product. By writing an S-1 for a bitcoin product,
the Winkelvoss twins signaled their seriousness.
An ETF is arguably the best investment vehicle to house bitcoin. It has a
transparent and low fee schedule and has an internal structure that keeps the

Burniske 03.indd 235

9/9/17 2:41 PM

236 CRYPTOASSETS

ETF close to the net asset value, while providing an investor with an easy way
to trade it during the market day. Furthermore, the twins saw the SEC approval
as the holy grail for winning investor confidence, and thereby taking bitcoin to
the mainstream. While an admirable idea, they would soon find this path was
longer than they likely expected.
By the start of 2017, the Winkelvoss twins were still waiting to get an ETF
approved. In the interim, they had made amendment after amendment to
their S-1, consulted with too many lawyers to count, and even started their
own cryptoasset exchange, known as Gemini.
GEMINI EXCHANGE
Creating an ETF was not the only bitcoin product the Winklevoss brothers
were working on. In 2015, they launched their own cryptoasset exchange
called Gemini. The twins followed the proper regulatory path and worked
to secure licensing from the New York Department of Financial Services.
Although a lengthy process, as of March 2017 their exchange was one of two
companies in the space that was a limited liability trust company, making it
regulated similarly to a bank. The twins were inspired to create this exchange
in response to concerns from the SEC over the lack of regulated exchanges.

Approaching March 10, 2017, all eyes were on the Winkelvoss ETF, as the
SEC was required to make a decision on a 19b-4 filing the twins had submitted, which was a necessary step to listing an ETF. The prospect of a bitcoin
ETF being approved gripped the cryptoasset community. An approval would
not only be one of the greatest regulatory wins for the budding asset class, but
would also require a large amount of bitcoin to be sourced to meet the demand
of capital market investors buying the ETF.14 In a research report published
early in January 2017, analyst Spencer Bogart, at the time with Needham &
Company, wrote, “We think the listing of a bitcoin ETF would have a profound
effect on the price of bitcoin. Conservatively, we estimate that a bitcoin ETF
could attract $300 million in assets in its first week and the resulting effort
to source the underlying bitcoin for the Trust would likely drive the price of
bitcoin up significantly.”15
Prior to the decision, the price of bitcoin rose in anticipation of this surge
in demand. Although those with the greatest understanding of cryptoassets

Burniske 03.indd 236

9/9/17 2:41 PM

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

237

and the capital markets doubted the product would get approved,16 the price
of bitcoin hit a new high before the decision. On March 10, at an SEC event
totally unrelated to Bitcoin known as the Evidence Summit, an SEC employee
made a public comment: “I will say that, for people that are emailing in, we
have nothing to say about bitcoin, so please stop asking.”17 Clearly, the entire
community was hungry for news on this decision.
Later that day, the SEC denied approval to the Winklevoss ETF.18 Following
is the key part of that ruling:
The Commission is disapproving this proposed rule change
because it does not find the proposal to be consistent with Section
6(b)(5) of the Exchange Act, which requires, among other things,
that the rules of a national securities exchange be designed to prevent fraudulent and manipulative acts and practices and to protect investors and the public interest. The Commission believes
that, in order to meet this standard, an exchange that lists and
trades shares of commodity-trust exchange-traded products
(“ETPs”) must, in addition to other applicable requirements, satisfy two requirements that are dispositive in this matter. First, the
exchange must have surveillance-sharing agreements with significant markets for trading the underlying commodity or derivatives
on that commodity. And second, those markets must be regulated.
Based on the record before it, the Commission believes that
the significant markets for bitcoin are unregulated. Therefore,
as the Exchange has not entered into, and would currently be
unable to enter into, the type of surveillance-sharing agreement
that has been in place with respect to all previously approved
commodity-trust ETPs—agreements that help address concerns
about the potential for fraudulent or manipulative acts and practices in this market—the Commission does not find the proposed
rule change to be consistent with the Exchange Act.

The two big takeaways were that the SEC decided the markets for bitcoin
were “unregulated” and that there were not sufficient “surveillance-sharing
agreements” between Bats Exchange—the exchange where the bitcoin ETF
would list—and the cryptoasset exchanges where bitcoin for the ETF would
be sourced.

Burniske 03.indd 237

9/9/17 2:41 PM

238 CRYPTOASSETS

Regardless of what people expected going into the SEC decision, most
everyone was taken aback by the rigidity of the SEC’s rejection. Notably,
the SEC didn’t spend much time on the specifics of the Winkelvoss ETF but
focused more on the overarching nature of the bitcoin markets. Saying that
these markets were unregulated was an extra slap to the Winkelvosses, who
had spent significant time and money on setting up the stringently regulated
Gemini exchange. In focusing on the bitcoin markets at large, the rejection
implied that an ETF will not happen in the United States for some time.
Immediately following the SEC decision not to approve the ETF, which was
released just after 4 p.m. EST on a Friday, bitcoin dropped from $1,250 to
below $1,000, an over 20 percent drop in a matter of minutes. It quickly rallied back toward $1,100. The incident allowed the naysayers to write their “I
told you so” and “Bitcoin is dead” commentaries once again. The Wall Street
Journal decided to enlighten its readers over the weekend with an article on
the SEC decision titled, “Let’s Be Real: Bitcoin Is a Useless Investment.”19
When these bloggers and commentators returned to their desks on Monday,
they found that investors on the 24/7 cryptoasset exchanges had been working
over the weekend. On Monday, naysarers were faced with the reality that bitcoin
was once again back over $1,200, and the network value for all crypto­assets had
increased $4 billion since the SEC decision. Yes, $4 billion in three days.
The Winkelvoss ETF was not the first bitcoin ETF the SEC rejected. In July
2016, SolidX Partners filed with the SEC for the SolidX Bitcoin Trust ETF,
with the intention of listing it on the NYSE under the ticker XBTC.20 A major
difference between SolidX and the Winkelvoss product was that SolidX aimed
to insure its trust for up to $125 million against any theft or hack of bitcoin. In
March 2017, the SEC rejected the SolidX ETF.
ARK INVEST AND BITCOIN EXPOSURE IN ETFS
As of March 2017 there were two ETFs that offered bitcoin exposure, ARK
Invest’s Next Generation Internet ETF (ARKW) as well as its overall Innovation
ETF (ARKK). Both combine bitcoin exposure with a portfolio of growth stocks,
and have been some of the highest performing ETFs in the market. Using
Grayscale’s BIT, ARK Invest became the first public fund manager to invest
in bitcoin in September of 2015, and as of this writing still has the only ETFs
on the market with bitcoin exposure. Given ARK’s focus on fast-moving technologies like machine learning, autonomous vehicles, and genomics, investing in bitcoin was a natural fit for the firm.

Burniske 03.indd 238

9/9/17 2:41 PM

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

239

THE ETN OPTION
Outside of the United States, more options for capital market-based bitcoin
products exist, such as two exchange traded notes (ETN) offered by XBT
Provider on Nasdaq Nordic in Stockholm, Sweden. Nasdaq Nordic is a regulated exchange system that is a subsidiary of the well-known Nasdaq in the
United States. To list on Nasdaq Nordic, these products had to surmount a
significant number of regulatory hurdles. Notably, these ETNs had been
approved by Sweden’s Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA), a government
agency overseeing financial regulation in Sweden.
While ETNs are exchange traded, just as ETFs are, one is a note and the
other is a fund. The easiest way to sum up the difference is that an ETN gives
the investor a digital note that promises the investor will get paid depending
on the asset’s performance, while an ETF actually holds the assets and thereby
tracks its value on the market.
In technical terms, ETNs are senior unsecured debt instruments that track
a market index or benchmark. An ETN provides investors with exposure to an
asset without the issuers of the ETN having to own the assets. Since an ETN is
a debt instrument, investors are then subject to the credit quality of the issuer.
If the issuer goes bankrupt, then investors in the ETN may get only a fraction of what they invested in the ETN, whereas with an ETF the fund holds
the underlying assets. Therefore, investors in an ETN must have faith in the
issuer’s ability to continue to operate, as well as the issuer’s ability to track an
index without necessarily owning the basket of assets that make up the index.
Issuers of ETNs are usually a bank or financial firm that backs the instrument
with its credibility and serves to quell concerns regarding the financial strength
of the issuer. Morgan Stanley was the initial issuer of this type of security, and
Barclays is also a frequent issuer, both well-diversified international banks with
solid ratings. However, as we learned from the crisis of 2008, recognizing and
evaluating the underwriting firm is critical, and not always so easy to do.21 As a
debt instrument, the health and well-being of the underlying issuer is the added
risk that the innovative investor possesses when owning an ETN.
As with ETFs, ETNs allow investors to integrate exposure of an asset into
their portfolio without having to deal with the messy details of acquiring and
securing that asset. For instance, if an investor believes in commodity futures
like live cattle, but doesn’t want to get involved with trading the actual futures
contracts, he or she can invest in an ETN that tracks that futures index. The
issuer of that ETN is responsible for delivering the value of that index (minus

Burniske 03.indd 239

9/9/17 2:41 PM

240 CRYPTOASSETS

fees) to the investor upon maturity or early repurchase. Because the ETN trades
on an exchange, it’s susceptible to market forces and can trade at a premium
or discount to its underlying value.22 Trading on an exchange also allows for
liquidity, so an investor can easily buy or sell. ETNs can also be held in standard brokerage or custodial accounts.
In October 2015, XBT Provider issued Bitcoin Tracker One (COINXBT) to
track the USD price of bitcoin.23 Bitcoin Tracker One takes the average USD
exchange rate of bitcoin from the Bitfinex, Bitstamp, and GDAX exchanges to
determine the underlying value of bitcoin for the investment.24 The following
year, XBT Provider issued the Bitcoin Tracker Euro. Both investments were
made available through the Interactive Brokers platform, a discount broker
service available to investors.25
For these products, XBT Provider charges a 2.5 percent management fee,
25 percent higher than the fee Grayscale charges. Perhaps most important for
the innovative investor, unlike many ETNs, XBT Provider is at all times fully
hedged, meaning it holds the underlying bitcoin equal to the value of the ETN.
This can significantly reduce reliance on XBT Provider’s credit quality because
even if the company goes bankrupt there should still be the underlying bitcoin
in place to reimburse investors. As stated on the website, “XBT Provider do[es]
not have any market risk. The company always holds bitcoins equivalent to the
value of ETNs issued.”26
In mid-2016, XBT Provider was purchased by Global Advisors (Jersey)
Limited (GABI) after XBT Provider’s main stockholder, KnCMiner, declared
bankruptcy. KnCMiner had long been a bitcoin mining company and producer of bitcoin mining rigs. With an ETN the credibility of the underlying
issuer is paramount, and GABI recognized that as well. Following KnC’s bankruptcy, trading of XBT Provider’s two ETNs temporarily paused as a new guarantor was pursued, with GABI ultimately coming to the rescue.27
The GABI team is led by Jean-Marie Mognetti and Daniel Masters, who cut
their teeth as commodities traders at Lehman Brothers and JPMorgan respectively. They bring considerable capital markets experience to the bitcoin space.
Prior to purchasing XBT Provider, GABI had created a bitcoin fund intended
for institutional investors called the GABI.28 The fund is domiciled in Jersey,
United Kingdom, an area known for its innovative approach to regulation,
similar to the Cayman Islands. By purchasing XBT Provider, GABI strengthened the reliability of the counterparty to the bitcoin ETNs and added a nice
asset to its growing bitcoin investing platform for institutions. The rationale was

Burniske 03.indd 240

9/9/17 2:41 PM

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

241

summed up by Masters: “Global Advisors Bitcoin Investment Fund (GABI) is
the only fully regulated Bitcoin investment fund targeting institutions and in
adding XBT we are addressing the online retail and professional markets.”29

THE ETI OPTION
Another bitcoin investment vehicle for investors is the exchange traded instrument (ETI). ETIs are similar to ETFs in that they are asset-backed securities,
whereas an ETN doesn’t have to be backed by the underlying asset. However,
ETIs are much less common and are primarily intended to house alternative
investments such as futures or options.30
In July 2016, a bitcoin ETI was listed on the Gibraltar Stock Exchange
under the symbol BTCETI.31 It charges a 1.75 percent management fee,
placing it below both Grayscale and XBT Provider, and custodies its assets
with Coinbase. While the sponsor and arranger of the ETI—Revoltura and
Argentarius ETI Management Limited—are not well known, what is notable is
the involvement of the government of Gibraltar and Gibraltar’s regulator, the
Financial Services Commission.
It is clear that Gibraltar sees an opportunity and is making a play for itself as
a virtual currency hub. Albert Isola, Gibraltar’s Minister for Financial Services
and Gaming, said, “We continue to work with the private sector and our regulator on an appropriate regulatory environment for operators in the digital
currency space, and the launch of this ETI on our stock exchange demonstrates our ability to be innovative and deliver speed to market.”32
In the same month as Gibraltar’s bitcoin ETI announcement, a Swiss issuer
called Vontobel announced a tracker certificate for bitcoin that appears to
operate like an ETN, though the details are sparse. July 2016 was a busy month
for capital markets-focused bitcoin products, but represents only the beginning of what we expect to see as the years roll on.

CAN AN INVESTOR FEEL COMFORTABLE
WITH THE PRICING OF CRYPTOASSETS?
As the innovative investor may have noticed, many of the exchange-traded
products listed above rely on price indices. While a price index sounds simple,
it can be a complex mathematical process to assess the exact price the market
is offering, especially for cryptoassets that trade globally and can be purchased

Burniske 03.indd 241

9/9/17 2:41 PM

242 CRYPTOASSETS

through a wide array of fiat currencies and cryptoassets. However, pricing is
important for the future growth of capital market vehicles holding crypto­
assets, so it is an area of development that the innovative investor should watch.
The pricing problem is particularly acute for bitcoin that trades in different
geographies and with different fiat currency pairs. Currently, the operations of
different cryptoasset exchanges can be thought of as isolated liquidity pools, so if
one exchange is experiencing significantly stronger demand than other exchanges,
the bitcoin on that exchange may trade at a premium to other exchanges. In the
equities markets, such differences in price would quickly be solved by arbitrage,
but due to time delays in moving bitcoin between different exchanges, not to
mention fiat currency capital controls, these pricing discrepancies persist.
The combination of growing interest in bitcoin and recognition of the need
for robust and regulated bitcoin indices has led two major investment markets,
the NYSE and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), to implement their
own bitcoin indices. The NYSE launched its bitcoin pricing index, NYXBT,
in May 2015.33 At the time, the president of the NYSE, Thomas Farley, said,
“Bitcoin values are quickly becoming a data point that our customers want
to follow as they consider transacting, trading, or investing with this emerging asset class. As a global index leader and administrator of ICE LIBOR,
ICE Futures U.S. Dollar Index, and many other notable benchmarks, we are
pleased to bring transparency to this market.”34
The NYBXT methodology utilizes data-based rules that produce what they
feel is an “objective and fair value for one bitcoin.” The index initially began by
taking data from Coinbase, in which the NYSE had a minority investment,35
though it has since branched out to include other exchanges.
In the latter part of 2016, the CME Group also launched its own bitcoin
price indices with the CME CF Bitcoin Reference Rate and the CME CF
Bitcoin Real Time Index.36 It also created an independent advisory committee, including bitcoin evangelist Andreas Antonopoulos to oversee its pricing
model, which utilized prices from various exchanges throughout the world.37
Many have speculated that this index could be the precursor to bitcoin futures
and other derivatives products, which is CME Group’s specialty.
We commonly use the Tradeblock index, XBX, which is a leading bitcoin
index for institutional traders of bitcoin to get the most accurate price of the
asset throughout a trading day.38 Intended for institutional investor use, the
index derives a price for bitcoin using algorithms that account for market
liquidity, manipulation attempts, and other anomalies that occur throughout
the global exchanges.39
