
Finding S/R Is Key to Identifying and Executing Low-Risk High-Yield
Trades
Identifying s/r is arguably the most important goal of TA. Here's why. If you can find situations that
allow you to enter at strong support zones and plan exits near strong resistance that is a much greater
distance away from your entry point than your stop loss, then you will have a low-risk, high-yield
setup that even a beginner can turn into a profitable trade.
Some would argue that identifying trends, momentum, or cycles of price movements (all discussed
later) are equally or more important. However, trends are sequences of s/r levels, and trend lines are
mostly used as a type of s/r. Momentum is the speed at which trend lines change, and cycle analysis
like the Elliott Wave Theory is the timing of when these change. Granted, momentum and timing
indicators can have important predictive value beyond their relationship to s/r.
In other words, by using TA to find likely s/r at which to enter and exit, we can hunt for trades that
offer both the lowest probability of loss and highest probability of gain:
1. The lowest probability of loss: For example, we open long positions near what our TA tools
tell us is the likely support or low price for a given period we set an entry limit order to open a
long position near support. We also enter a stop loss order to close the position a short distance
(in pips) below this estimated low price because if the price breaks below this level, that's our
signal that we were wrong about support and that in fact the pair could fall much lower. With the
stop loss order, our trading platform automatically closes the position for us with only a small
loss. Similarly, we want to open short positions by entering a sell limit order near what our TA

tools indicate is support. With short positions, support is the high price for a given period. As
part of good risk management, we enter a stop loss order a short distance (in pips) above this
level, so that if we were wrong and the price breaks higher, that stop loss automatically executes
and closes our position with an affordable small loss.
How we choose where to place our stop losses will depend on a number of factors that we'll
discuss in more detail later. For now, know that we'd consider these factors:
Money management criteria: What size loss can we take and not lose more than 1 to 3
percent of our trading capital.
Risk management criteria: Aim for a 1:3 risk-to-reward ratio. In other words, the distance in
pips from our entry point to stop loss should be no more than about a third of the distance
from our entry point to our profit-taking point (near the high in the case of long positions,
near the low in the case of short positions). That way our winning trades produce gains that
make up for multiple losses.
Normal or average price fluctuation or candle length is for the given time frame so we don't
get “stopped out” of our position by random market noise.
Market conditions: For example, if we have a lot of confidence in the prevailing trend, we
might compromise on certain RAMM criteria because we believe the chance of a loss from
the trend stalling or reversing is exceptionally low.
2. The highest probabability of gain: Using our TA tools to identify s/r, we hunt for and trade
situations where the distance from our entry point to the likely resistance or high price is triple
(or more) the distance (in pips) from our entry point to our stop loss point.

Good Risk Management Requires Good TA
Do you see why technical analysis is so, well, fundamental to good risk management? You need good
TA to determine likely s/r to identify situations that offer low-risk, high-yield entry and exit points. In
short, TA tells you when you're buying low and have a good chance of selling at a much higher price
(or the opposite in the case of short positions).

Think of S/R as Zones or Areas
As we mentioned earlier, support and resistance are not precise prices but rather price ranges. For
example, in Figure 3.10, our labels assume a long position on the EURJPY. If we were short the pair,
the labels would be reversed. For example, SUPPORT 1 would be labeled RESISTANCE 1.
FIGURE 3.10 EURUSD Daily Chart, January 16 to July 3, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Support and resistance are not precise points but rather areas. Depending on circumstances, some
may determine s/r points based only on opening or closing prices, while others will consider the
wicks as well.
There are many reasons for why s/r should be viewed as zones rather than precise points, including:
Differences in perception of s/r: The application and use of many s/r indicators depends on
human judgment and is to varying degrees subjective. For example, different traders will draw
the same trend line a bit differently. These differences will cause some variance in where traders
chose to buy or sell.
Trader temperament: Buy and sell orders tend to cluster around popular s/r levels, so the effects
of these are felt above and below them. For example, as a currency pair rises toward resistance,
more conservative traders will have exit orders to take profits set somewhat before resistance
(or what they think it is) is hit in order to beat the crowd and exit before price might start to
reverse. More aggressive traders will place profit-taking sell limit orders closer to or above
resistance in hope of getting a few extra pips of profit.
Large institutions and brokers are aware of key s/r levels and will often use their ability to place
huge orders to move prices so less savvy individual traders get fooled into making premature buy
or sell decisions from which these players reap profits. The mechanics of this are beyond the
scope of this book, but the point here is that there are those who can and will try to influence very
short-term perceptions of s/r, thus further blurring where an objective s/r point lies. These
attempts at short-term price manipulation are part of the reason why so many seemingly random,
unpredictable intraday price movements are seen on the short time frames (1 to 60 minutes, oneto four-hour charts, etc.). More on how to deal with these attempts to fool you later when we
discuss topics for further study.

So Stick to Trading Longer Time Frames—They're Safer
This is another reason we urge less experienced or profitable traders to avoid day trading forex until

they're consistently profitable on a monthly basis with multiday/week/month positions. They avoid
becoming victims of random price movements or attempts at short-term price manipulation. That
happens in any kind of short-term trading and not just forex. As noted earlier, stock markets are ruled
by market makers for a given stock, who, ahem, have been known to succumb to similar temptations,
all for the sake of maintaining an “orderly market, of course” Your Honor.
Few beyond the central banks of sovereign nations have the ability to exercise longer-term
influence on prices, so longer-term trends are far less subject to manipulation by even the most
powerful players.

Reasons to Consider Using Multiple Entry and Exit Points
When you enter a position, support might not appear exactly where you think it should be, and you
could find your trade moving against you. Similarly, resistance might appear earlier or later, causing
you to miss a profit-taking opportunity or to exit too soon (if you're not using a trailing stop).
So, consider entering positions and taking profits in stages. For example, consider closing half of
your position when your profit equals the size of your stop loss (plus a few pips extra to cover
transaction costs). Then move up your stop loss order to this first exit or break-even point so even if
the trade reverses, you break even. If it continues to move in your favor, switch to a trailing stop loss
to ride the move for whatever gains you can get.
More on this in Chapter 5, when we discuss the value entering and exiting positions in stages rather
than all at once. Staged entries and exits are another aspect of trade planning, risk management, and
trader psychology because if you've taken some profits or will at least break even, this relieves some
of the stress of trading.

Once Broken, Resistance Becomes Support and Vice Versa
Markets are comprised of human traders who study past support and resistance levels. Look again at
Figure 3.10 for reference.
Note how often former resistance becomes support and vice versa. For example, compare:
Resistance area 1 and support area 3 both center around 113.55.
Resistance area 2 and s/r area A both center around 115.05.

Why Resistance Becomes Support and Vice Versa
The short answer is that traders remember recent highs and lows and are watching charts like the one
in Figure 3.10. They tend to perceive breaks above resistance as a sign the asset has hit a new
plateau, and they treat former resistance as support until proven otherwise. At least part of the reason
for this is that those who sold near resistance and regret having sold too soon see a return to that price
as a chance to reverse their mistake.
The same holds true when support is broken. If prices rise back toward that former support area,
traders who are still holding the asset, who had expected price to move higher and are sitting with
losing positions, see this level as a chance to get out and break even.

Don't “OD” on TA
It's easy to get carried away with TA in your early years of trading and to clutter your charts
indicators in the hope that more is better.
It isn't, so don't. Here are two reasons:
1. While I'm oversimplifying a bit, most indicators measure s/r, trend, trend strength (aka
momentum), or the cyclical movements of prices, so the marginal benefit of additional indicators
drops after you have one or two of each kind because they're tracking the same thing in different
ways. So, stick to around five (plus or minus 2) of them as a rough guide. By all means
experiment with various tools for various asset classes or pairs, but limit the number you're using
at any one time.
2. You risk the common beginner's malady of paralysis from analysis, as you struggle to reconcile
conflicting or ambiguous signals. For example, though a group of trend or momentum indicators
may be attempting to track the same thing, the difference in how they do it could be enough to
send conflicting signals.
It's far better to focus on mastering a limited number of technical tools (four to seven as a rough
maximum), mixing trend, momentum, and timing indicators, as discussed in Chapter 9. Together these
give you enough information about likely s/r points and where to enter and exit for best results.
Therefore, know that you'll put the odds more in your favor by first focusing on building expertise
with the tools we'll be covering and applying them to a limited number of currency pairs and time
frames. For example, some traders will gravitate toward how a given currency pair responds to
moving averages or other kinds of trend lines. Others will focus more on Double Bollinger bands or
Fibonacci retracement and extension levels. In Chapter 9 we'll show you how to test the forecasting
power of different combinations of indicators through a process called back testing. Over time you
can then expand your repertoire of tools used as well as pairs and time frames traded.

Why Specialize in a Few Currency Pairs and Time Frames?
When starting out with forex, you'll progress faster by becoming familiar with the price behavior and
fundamentals of a few pairs in a few time frames, preferably longer ones for reasons cited above. As
each economy and currency has its unique characteristics, so too do individual currency pairs. For
example, different kinds of events impact some more than others. Correlations can be different. The
EUR and USD tend to move in opposite directions because the EURUSD comprises 25 to 33 percent
of all forex trade, so every time three to four EUR are bought, a USD is sold, and vice versa. That
means the pair can be subject to wild swings depending on which currency is in favor at a given
moment. However, the USDCAD tends to be less volatile because the Canadian economy is more
closely linked to the fortunes of the USD, a destination for about 75 percent of Canadian exports.
We'll go deeper into intermarket correlations and how to use them in Chapter 9.
By specializing, you'll develop expertise faster, and you won't be sacrificing much in terms of
trading opportunities because, as we'll see, there are only two kinds of currency pairs: risk currencies
and safe haven or safety currencies. Members of each group behave similarly relative to the overall
market movements, so you can ride bullish or bearish market trends with only a few currency pairs.

What Determines Whether a Currency Is a Risk or a Safe Haven?
In Chapter 2 we said that there are 2 kinds of currencies, risk and safe haven, which respond in
opposite ways to market sentiment.
The higher the risk ranking (think AUD, NZD, CAD, EUR and GBP in that order), the more the
currency tends to appreciate versus those lower on the risk spectrum in times of optimism, when
markets seek risk assets like stocks or industrial commodities. In times of fear, the opposite
happens.
The higher the safety ranking (think JPY, USD and CHF in that order) the better the currency
performs versus those lower on the safety spectrum (or higher on the risk spectrum) in times of
fear, when risk assets sell off and safety assets, like quality bonds, rally.
Once again, here's the general ranking.

What causes a given currency's risk ranking?
The main reason is interest rates. The higher the currency's benchmark short term yields, the more
closely it moves with other risk assets, and so the higher it tends to rank as a risk currency. That's
because in times of optimism, high-yielding currencies are in greater demand due to carry trading. In
other words, carry traders buy higher-yielding currencies and sell lower-yielding ones to fund these
purchases, with a view to profiting on the interest rate differences. In times of fear, carry traders
close these positions, causing a sell-off in risk currencies and a rally in their safe haven counterparts.
If you're confused, don't worry; all this is explained in Chapter 6.
For now, just know that a currency's short term benchmark interest rate, set by its central bank, is
the most important reason behind a given currency's ranking.
There are other factors that can affect risk ranking, but their influence can vary with multiple
factors. Interest rates provide most of the explanation for whether a currency behaves like a risk or
safety asset, that is, like a growth stock or like a quality bond.

Understanding the Risk/Safety Asset Distinction Is Lucrative
Whether the base currency (the one on the left) of a forex pair has a higher risk or safety ranking than
its counter currency determines whether the pair is a risk or safety currency pair, and thus determines
how it correlates with other kinds of assets. When we see a divergence in that correlation (that is, the
pair isn't behaving like other risk or safety assets), that's usually a warning of a possible change in
market direction or in the currency pair.
For example, forex and bond markets tend to pick up changing conditions before stock markets, so
those who watch forex or bond markets can often see advanced warnings of what may happen with
stocks or other markets. That advanced knowledge can be very profitable.
The opportunities to spot these divergences from the normal correlations between currency pairs
and other asset types is one of the best reasons why everyone needs some awareness of forex markets.
With experience, you'll become increasingly sensitive to any divergences from normal correlations

between asset types. The study of these relationships is called intermarket analysis, and we'll explore
this critical topic in Chapter 9.
Note however, that because currencies trade in pairs, the significance of currency's risk ranking is
in how it affects the behavior of one of its pairings. The farther apart a given pair's component
currencies are on the above risk spectrum, the more sensitive the pair will be to market movements.
We'll explain that in much greater depth later on.

Note
1. Steve Nison, Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (New York: New York Institute of
Finance, 2001).

CHAPTER 4
Technical Analysis
Types of Support and Resistance (S/R)
Now you understand some basics about charts, support and resistance (s/r), and risk and money
management (RAMM). You're ready to get to the meat of TA and learn the tools to identify the likely
support area at which to enter or open a position and the likely resistance zone at which to exit or
close it.
This chapter will cover:
Price levels
Trends and trend lines
Fibonacci retracements
Bollinger Bands (BBs) in range-bound markets
Introduction to Japanese candle chart patterns
Introduction to Western chart patterns
The importance of having multiple s/r indicators
I have selected the following tools and indicators of s/r based on importance and ease of use. The
idea is to give you a powerful toolkit you can learn quickly and easily.
Though opinions about the value of TA vary, most would agree it's necessary to know if you're
buying low or selling high. And though many disparage TA, I've yet to meet a serious trader or
investor who doesn't use it. The main reasons include:
Much of it makes intuitive sense. Some of it doesn't, but works anyway. For example, the
Fibonacci retracements we will discuss further on are based on a common ratio found in nature,
music, and other fields of study. Why it applies to price behavior is unclear, but it does, so look
at it like electricity. You use it even though you don't understand how it works.
Used properly, it improves your performance.
It is so widely used that you need to watch the popular indicators to know what the rest of the
market is thinking. That self-fulfilling prophecy factor alone makes it worthwhile.
Let's focus on that last point. Successful trading or investing depends on anticipating what the
crowd will do, and doing it first, or even better, early, just as they've already started to bid up the
price but before most of the gains are realized. In other words, the key to success isn't knowing
what's necessarily true, but rather correctly anticipating what the rest of the market will soon
believe is true.
Savvy traders ignore their personal opinions and focus on what they think the crowd will do. These
traders buy when price is low before the herd rushes in and bids it up, and they sell before the masses
sell and drive price lower, regardless of whether they think the move is justified. Ironically, many

with great academic credentials and analytical skills often struggle because they can't anticipate what
they see as an irrational behavior of markets, while others of more average credentials who have a
better feel for the emotions of market participants prosper.
While fundamental analysis (see Chapter 6) is valuable, it tells us little about the likely best entry
and exit prices in a given time frame and, except for news trades, it tells us nothing about short-term
price action. Fundamental analysis is also notoriously bad for timing entries and exits. In contrast,
technical indicators can tell you when the crowd has begun buying or selling.
Regardless of whether you believe in TA, you need to understand and use it because the crowd uses
it. That makes TA invaluable in anticipating what they see as s/r, and thus when they are likely to be
buying or selling. The more popular the indicator, the more it creates a self-fulfilling prophecy of how
markets may react.
Though some theorize that TA works solely because of this self-fulfilling prophecy phenomena, that
line of reasoning fails to explain why markets originally accepted TA. It had to produce some results
before it could gain acceptance. Moreover, as we'll see next, most of the commonly used s/r
indicators have a clear logic to them.

PRICE LEVELS
Simple price levels, like those in Figure 4.1, are the most basic building blocks of most s/r indicators.
As noted earlier, think of them more as areas or zones rather than precise price points.
FIGURE 4.1 EURUSD Daily Chart, January 16 to July 3, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

They don't appear out of nowhere. As experienced food shoppers remember a low price (support)
or a high price (resistance) for apples, price levels are the product of collective trader memory over
a given period and time frame. That perception of what is a low or high price can change with news
about the fundamentals (see Chapter 6) that affect supply and demand, be it for apples or a currency.

For example, reports that apples cure impotence would raise demand and price for apples. Similarly,
rising interest or growth rates increase demand for a given currency.

For Lowest Risk, Enter Near Strong Support
If you enter near strong support, and that support doesn't hold, then you will immediately know you
were wrong about how low price should go and you can exit the trade with only a small loss. For
example, if you open a long position, the farther that entry is above solid support, the bigger your loss
before price tests that support level, and the greater your risk of loss if support is breached.
Similarly, when you enter a short position, the further that entry is below the next major support
level, the larger your risk of loss before discovering that support isn't holding and it's time to exit with
a small loss before it becomes too large. Remember, with short positions, support is the likely high
price.
Therefore, correctly identifying strong support is essential to choosing low-risk entry points.

What Makes Some S/R Points Stronger Than Others?
We'll discuss these criteria for strong s/r as they apply to price zones, but these characteristics apply
to any kind of s/r points and not just price levels.
Four factors that make s/r points stronger are:
1. Round numbers: They're easier to remember and use. The bigger the round number, the more
psychologically important it tends to be. For example, in stock markets, it's significant when the
Standard & Poor's 500 Index (S&P 500) breaks above or below some multiple of 50 or 100, or
when the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) breaks through a multiple of 100 or 1,000. The
same holds true for currency pairs. For example, using the long-term monthly charts, the
EURUSD's most significant levels have been 1.2000, 1.3000, 1.4000, and 1.5000, with lesser but
still significant s/r roughly every 200 pips (1.4800, 1.4600, etc.) and more minor s/r every 100
pips, and so on. Traders are human and humans are wired to attach significance to round
numbers. Note the charts shown in Figures 4.1 and 4.2.
2. Age: The longer a given price level has held, the stronger the support or resistance and the
