
Sell Stop is an entry order to sell at a price below the current price, typically used by momentumtype short sellers, those who believe that once the pair breaks below a price that has served as a floor
or support in the past, the pair will make a sustained move lower.

The OCO Order: To Open a Long or Short Position Depending on How
Price Moves
The one cancels the other (OCO) order allows you to place two future orders depending on which of
two possible but mutually exclusive outcomes occurs. This way you're ready to profit from multiple
possible scenarios.
For example, on July 10, 2011, the USDCAD was in between near-term support and resistance on
its daily chart (see Figure 2.6). For now, just know that support is the recent low price and resistance
is the recent high price (we'll go much more in depth on these concepts later).
FIGURE 2.6 USDCAD Daily Chart, June 30 to July 10, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Let's say you want to play the next multiday trend, which, for simplicity's sake, we'll assume would
be indicated solely by the break higher above key resistance or the break lower beneath strong
support. These are marked by the upper and lower horizontal red lines. You'd use an OCO order that
would include the following two entry orders:

1. An entry buy stop that executes when price breaks above the resistance level (upper horizontal
line), the theory being price is beginning a move higher.
2. An entry sell stop that triggers when price breaks below the support level (lower horizontal
line), the belief being that the EURUSD is about to make a move lower.
When one order executes, the other is cancelled. Figure 2.7 shows what happened.
FIGURE 2.7 USDCAD Daily Chart, June 30 to July 20, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Depending on where you set your entry points, your entry sell stop would have been executed
between July 13 and 15 (In reality, you'd consider other technical and fundamental data besides these
support and resistance (s/r) lines, but we'll stick to these for now for the sake of illustration.)
The break below support did signal a move lower over the coming days.

Beware Temporary Reversals before Breakouts
For a variety of reasons, it's common for breakouts to begin, retrace somewhat, then resume. Note
how the downtrend reversed during July 17–18 before it resumed. This is another reason we
discourage very short-term trading because you can easily get shaken out of a correctly identified
trend by mere random price movements. Much more on that later when we discuss RAMM, trade
planning, and recommended trading styles and timeframes. For now, know that even if your analysis
is good, expect some kind of countermove against you. A big part of risk management and trade
planning will involve selecting situations in which fake reversals are easier to identify and will
involve deciding how much of a to accept before you cut your losses.
At some point during the above trade, you'll decide it's time to take profits, or if the trend reversed,
to cut losses when they're small. To do that, you'll need to use one of the following exit position
orders.

Exit Orders: Ways to Close a Position
The main difference between them is whether you're closing a losing trade to cut your losses or a
winning trade to take profits.

Stop Loss Orders: Fixed and Trailing Stops
As the name implies, stop loss orders are pending orders that automatically close your position to

stop a loss from getting any worse than your predetermined maximum amount you were willing to
risk. That maximum may be determined by either:
Risk management considerations: broken price support of some kind (many exist as we'll soon
see) or other indications that you were wrong about the price direction.
Money management considerations: you don't want to lose more than 1 to 3 percent of your
account on any given trade.
There are two basic kinds of stop loss orders:
1. Fixed or Simple Stop Loss: As the name implies, this order automatically executes when a
fixed predetermined loss is reached or if the market gaps past it, and the loss is exceeded. Any
good trading platform will allow you to set that loss in terms of pips, cash loss, or percentage
loss from your entry price.
2. Trailing Stop Loss: As the name suggests, this kind of stop loss order trails or follows the
price as it moves further in your favor, and it automatically closes your position after the currency
pair price moves against you by a fixed number of pips, cash amount, or percentage change in
price against you. Thus the trailing stop loss not only to limits losses, but also locks in gains from
winning trades that have started to reverse against you by more than what you believe to be
normal random price movements or “market noise.”
Stop loss orders are a key part of risk management. We can enter them in advance and have our
trading system automatically cut our losses. They help keep emotion out of our trading

Exit Limit Orders: Taking Fixed Maximum Profit
Just as a stop loss limits your losses, exit limit orders lock in, but limit, your gains. They are triggered
after a predetermined gain instead of a predetermined loss, be it in registered in pips, cash, or a
percentage move in your favor from the entry price. If, for some reason, a trailing stop is
inappropriate, an exit limit order locks in profits in case a price reverses against you. Typically, it is
set near what you believe will be strong resistance to further gains.
The exact names of the assorted order types may vary on some trading platforms, so be sure to
clarify before you trade real money.

Market Order: Executing in Real Time at Current Price
As the name implies, market orders are buy or sell orders at the current market price, used by those
who are usually present at their trading station or who have been waiting for a particular price, chart
setup, or news event and want to enter or exit immediately. Though placing a market order in advance
is possible during times when markets are closed to buy or sell at the opening market price, this is
rarely advisable for a number of reasons, chief among which is that you don't know what you'll be
paying.
Though market orders have their uses (they're good for getting out of a trade quickly if you've a
good reason to change your plan for that trade), they can be dangerous for all but the most disciplined,
cold-blooded unemotional traders who can think quickly and objectively when their money is at risk.
Even if traders have a solid predetermined trading plan, fear, greed, and ego can cause them to
abandon it in the heat of the moment via a market order.

Thus, beginners and those not yet consistently profitable on a monthly basis should stick with
predetermined entry and exit points as based on a solid trading plan. By the way, I specifically refer
to profitability over a period of time as a means of evaluating success rather than percentage of
winning trades. You can be profitable with a low percentage of winners (the question is whether you
emotionally can handle that, and also be unprofitable with a high percentage).

THE THREE FACETS OF RISK AND RISK CONTROL
Now that you know about pips, lot sizes, leverage, margin, and order types (particularly stop losses),
we can summarize what risk is and how we control it.
If risk is the planned maximum percent loss of your capital on a trade, then here's how each of the
above elements influence your risk:
Leverage: Determines the percentage loss or gain for every 1 percent price movement per lot. It
determines the margin deposit needed to control a given lot.
Lot size: Determines the nominal cash loss for a given amount of leverage and percent price
move because it determines how much each pip is worth (see Appendix B for details).
Account size: Determines how large a loss we can absorb without exceeding 1 to 3 percent of our
capital, so we can survive a string of losses and still have a good chance of recouping our losses
(see Appendix E for details). Thus, account size determines how far away our stop loss orders
can be set from our entry points, and so also determines how much flexibility we have to take
trades that demand wider stop loss settings that risk more cash

Example
We'll see more of how these elements influence our RAMM later. Here's an illustration of how the
above elements influence the amount we risk per position, and how they influence each other. For
example, the larger the account, the larger the loss one can afford per position, and the larger the
leverage and position size one can afford.
Pair Traded: USDCAD
Account size: $20,000, denominated in US dollars, the base currency, which implies we can
afford a $200–600 loss to keep risk per trade to 1 to 3 percent.
Lot size: 10,000 units of base currency (the one on the left of the currency pair symbol). As
shown in Appendix B (Rule of Tens), each pip is worth $1, so we can afford to set our stop loss
no more than 200–600 pips from our entry point.
Leverage: Assume we use 100:1 leverage. For every $10,000 of base currency, we will need to
have $100 on deposit, and every 1 percent loss means our position loses $100, and we'll need
enough cash in the account so the broker can set aside another $100 for each 1 percent move
against us.
If using 100:1 leverage, trading the USDCAD, and entering at 1.0500, a 1 percent loss equals 105
pips, or $100 USD. So, we can afford a loss of between 210 pips ($200) and 630 pips ($600).
We would be careful to set our stop loss orders no farther than 210 to 630 pips from our entry
point. For each 210 pips move against us, our broker would need to set aside another $100

deposit to keep this position open. If that cash was unavailable, we'd have to have a margin call
and the position would be automatically closed.

THE CORE FOUR: THE MOST IMPORTANT SKILLS
FOR SUCCESS
There's a common misconception that success in trading or investing is all about the right analytical
techniques, finding the right trade setups, algorithms, secret chart pattern, and so forth, and that
everything else is secondary. By all means do your best with these since they help, particularly if you
can afford to hire the best mathematical and programming talent, and provide them with the best
equipment and time needed to develop winning systems. Generally, that's a game that only wealthy
funds and institutions can play.
However, if you want to bet on your chances of ever figuring out even a part of the markets,
consider the following:
Most actively managed funds fail to beat the returns of passively managed index funds that simply
mirror the relevant benchmark index.1 Remember, these people are supposed to be the best,
smartest, best trained, and funded, with unparalleled access to all the resources they need. They
survived a rigorous selection process to be hired and promoted to the rank of fund manager and
have convinced people smart enough to accumulate wealth to invest with them.
Recent history has witnessed numerous spectacular hedge fund failures. Some were based on
complex strategies and algorithms, some on value investing. The most famous of all was that of
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM). Its principal managers included two Nobel prizewinning economists and team of highly regarded market veterans whose reputation alone
managed to attract over $1 billion before the fund even started operating.2
Automated trading systems sound great in theory, and are promising for those who understand
technical analysis and programming or can hire those who do. However, for the rest of us, unless
you're comfortable with investing in something you don't understand (generally a bad idea unless
you're getting good advice), leave consideration of these until a later time when you have the
skills and experience to evaluate them properly. Trading systems often lack transparency.
Developers understand how they work, and most of the time, you won't. Even if the system has a
verified track record, they're typically designed to work in a specific kind of market environment,
be it a trending market, a range bound market, a risk-seeking market that favors carry trades, and
so on. Once the market changes, the system's performance breaks down. Systems that function in
multiple kinds of markets over long periods are considered as rare and treasured as the legendary
Holy Grail. Do you really believe that anyone who actually created such a system would be
hawking it on the open market at prices retail traders can afford? We'll look into autotrading
systems more in Chapter 0.
The point here is that even good analysis by bona fide geniuses and market legends is so often
wrong that analytical skills, though still essential, rank at the bottom of the top four keys to trading
success. Here they are, in order of importance:
1. Trader psychology, which includes your mindset, discipline, unemotional decision-making
ability, attitudes, expectations, awareness of what trading styles they're suited for, and so forth.

2. Risk management.
3. Money management.
4. Technical and fundamental analyses, which includes knowing how to use the two together.

Trader Psychology
This includes having right attitudes toward winning and losing trades, realistic expectations, knowing
your risk tolerance level, discipline, the mistakes you're prone to make and how to monitor and
compensate for them, keeping fear and greed out of trading decisions, having the discipline and
humility to cut losses, let winning trades continue, etc. Many books cover this topic alone, but keep in
mind the following attitudes and expectations.

Mind Your Business
It's no secret that much of the 75 percent or more of retail forex “traders” who fail aren't really even
attempting serious trading. They want some fun and excitement by betting on an outcome. Forex
brokers love to aim marketing campaigns at this herd of sheep, which so willingly runs to the
slaughter. For them, it's a game and not a business.
For you, dear reader, that's good news. The mere fact that you're reading this book suggests you're
not one of the madcap cowboys or at least don't want to be one of them. The high failure rate doesn't
apply to you. Continue doing your homework, and expect do all the things you'd do if you were
starting a business that faces lots of competition from bigger, more skilled players. Expect to invest
plenty of time in study, and practice, be it over a shorter period as a full-time trader or over a longer
one as a part-time trader. Expect frustration and failure, a need to develop means of monitoring your
business, how to identify and correct problems, and more. In Chapters 0 through 12, we'll show you
easier ways to profit, but even these require education and effort.

Trade Defensively
Just as new or accident-prone drivers drive defensively, proceeding slowly and taking extra
precautions, so should those who are not yet consistently profitable trade defensively.
Until you have found the trading or investing styles that are keeping you consistently profitable,
trade defensively.
Assume most of your early trades will be losers. That's fine; it's quite possible to be profitable with
a less than 50 percent winning trade percentage. It's a normal part of the learning process. With this
expectation in mind, don't trade real money until you're profitable on practice accounts for about six
months.

Learn from Every Losing Trade
Accept losses as the tuition expenses. To get the most for your money, you should keep a trading log
in which you record, among other things, your trading plan, the trade rationale, and a post-mortem of
why it did or didn't work. We'll show you examples of these in Chapters 5 and 7. Again, expect
failure, and embrace it as an unavoidable and necessary learning experience. By all means, make
every effort to learn from every failed trade. If you don't know, find someone or some resource to

help you. Many are available. Some forex brokers will offer a degree of free mentoring. Many online
forex content sites have writers responding to questions. There are online trading forums, along with
many offering courses and mentoring for a fee. As with anything else, do your due diligence.

Risk and Money Management (RAMM)

In light of the above, if you've got a professional's mindset, you'll be serious about RAMM.
Theoretically, they're separate, but in practice, you apply them together and both are essential for your
survival while you are learning and finding yourself as a trader or investor.
Risk management: Because even successful traders commonly experience a high percentage of
losing trades, you're goal is to keep losses from losing trades low relative to the gains from
winning trades, so you can be profitable with fewer than 50 percent of your trades being
profitable. That is what risk management involves.
Money management: While risk management is about keeping losses small relative to your gains,
money management is about ensuring that loss per trade is small relative to your total account
size. As we will discuss in Chapter 5 and Appendix E, small losses of about one to three percent
of your total account are survivable and relatively easy to recoup, large ones are not, and
repeated large losses will destroy your account and confidence.

Technical and Fundamental Analysis

As the examples at the start of this section suggest, those decisions will often be wrong even for the
best traders and investors, so the other three allow you to prosper despite the unfortunate reality that
markets are too complex and dynamic for the vast majority of traders to outsmart by analysis alone.
Despite their being at the bottom of the “core four,” technical and fundamental analyses are
essential because they're the basis for your trading decisions, including those involving your risk and
money management because you need both:
Solid technical analytical skills to identify low-risk entry and exit points.
A firm grasp of fundamental analysis for grasping the big picture needed to anticipate long-term
price moves and events that could influence short-term price movements.
So, analytical skills are not only important in their own right, they are also essential to good
RAMM.

Notes
1. Michael Buek, “Why Index Funds Beat Active Strategies” (October 2009),
www.bankrate.com/finance/financial-literacy/why-index-funds-beat-active-strategies-1.aspx.
2. James E. McWhinney, Investopedia, “Massive Hedge Fund Failures” (July 2011),
http://finance.yahoo.com/news/Massive-Hedge-Fund-investopedia-712989148.html?x=0&.v=1.

CHAPTER 3
Technical Analysis (TA) Basics
If you understood most of Chapter 2, you now have enough background so that we can begin to cover
the analytical skills that will help you succeed in forex or any other kind of trading or investing. This
chapter will cover:
What is technical analysis (TA).
Understanding the basics of candle charts and the simple goals and theory behind all those
complex looking lines, charts, patterns, and more.
How to understand and use some of the most important of these, including various ways we
identify support and resistance (s/r) and trends.
Examples to illustrate and apply what we've covered.
Those with some experience in TA from other kinds of trading will be glad to know that nearly
everything they know applies to TA of forex markets. The charts, their common patterns, and their
indicators work the same way. The main difference is the unique fundamentals driving these charts.
These readers can feel free to just skim the following for anything they may have missed or want to
review.
TA is typically defined as the study of price behavior, which is a reflection of mass trader
behavior. Repeating chart patterns or persistent support or resistance levels don't form from thin air,
but rather from the repetitious nature of how traders respond to past experience, each other, new
information, and how each tries to anticipate how the other will react to that information. Trader
behavior is based on unchanging human psychology. It's logical, then, that the repetitive nature of
chart patterns and other technical indicators simply reflects that repetitive nature of human and crowd
behavior in similar circumstances.
However, even the best TA is often wrong for various reasons, and the signals it provides often
conflict.
That's why we obsess over risk management. We can't control the outcome of a trade. However, we
can control what we risk and can make sure that we keep our losses affordable, and only enter trades
that have both a high probability of being profitable, and a high risk-to-reward ratio (explained later).
Unlike fundamental analysis, TA ignores speculation about what may be influencing supply and
demand. Instead it focuses purely on how (not why) prices move and what that movement suggests
about future price behavior.
Of all the four core skills mentioned in Chapter 2, we'll cover TA first because it's the basis for
much of our risk control decisions, such as:
Defining what trades offer the lowest risk, highest potential yield entry and exit points, so that we
can buy low and sell high (or vice versa in the case of short positions).
Identifying price levels for cutting losses or taking partial profits if the trade threatens to turn

against us.
Deciding position size and partial position entry or exit.
TA occurs mostly on charts, which are pictures of trader behavior over a given period, regardless
of what fundamentalists may speculate is the reason behind that behavior.
So, the first step in learning TA is to read and understand the price charts.

CANDLE CHART BASICS
To understand a book, you need to be able to read the words. To understand sheet music, you need to
be able to read the notes. To understand price behavior, you need to be able to read and interpret the
charts.

Candle Anatomy and Meaning
Charts come in different styles, but we will focus on Japanese candlestick or candle charts, which
have become by far the most popular because they provide the quickest visual grasp of price action
and the market sentiment behind it. Much has been written about the advantages of candle charts and
why they've become the dominant charting style since they were first introduced to the West by
analyst Steve Nison in 1989, and popularized in his seminal book, Japanese Candlestick Charting
Techniques, nearly a decade later.1 However, we'll stick to an overview of what you need to know to
make money. So, let's get to one of the cornerstones of TA, which is understanding candle charts.
First, study the parts of each candlestick, shown in Figure 3.1.
FIGURE 3.1 Anatomy of Chart Candles
