 2.  Have thoughtful disagreements in which people are willing to shift their opinions as they learn, and 
 3.  Have agreed-upon ways of deciding (e.g., voting, having clear authorities) if disagreements remain so that we can move beyond them without resentments. 
 I believe that for any organization or for any relationship to be great, these things are required. I also believe that for a group decision-making system to be effective, the people using it have to believe that it’s fair. 
 Having our work principles written out and getting in sync about them in the same way we had with our investment principles were essential for our understanding each other, especially since our unique way of operating—this radical truth and radical transparency—that led to our unique results is counterintuitive and emotionally challenging for some. 
 Trying to understand how we could get our meaningful work and meaningful relationships through this straightforwardness led me to speak with neuroscientists, psychologists, and educators over the decades that followed. I learned a lot, which I can summarize as follows. There are two parts of each person’s brain: the upper-level logical part and the lower-level emotional part. I call these the “two yous.” They fight for control of each person. How that conflict is managed is the most important driver of our behaviors. That fighting was the biggest reason for the problems Bob, Giselle, and Dan raised. While the logical part of people’s brains could easily understand that knowing one’s weaknesses is a good thing (because it’s the first step toward getting around them), the emotional part typically hates it. 

 3  By “return streams,” I mean the returns that come from executing a particular decision rule—think of them as lines on a chart that track the value of an investment through time, and the decision to either let it continue to grow in value or sell. 
 4  This approach is what I call the “5-Step Process.” I’ll dive into it in more detail later on. 
 5  I’ll explore more on the topic of working with computer-aided decision-making systems in Chapter Five of Life Principles , Learn How to Make Decisions Effectively. 
 6  With advances in digital technology, we continue to innovate our methods for recording and distributing this content. 
 7  You can find the references to books by Robert Kegan, Edward Hess, and Adam Grant in the bibliography. 
 8  Treasury secretary Hank Paulson’s moves, especially putting government money into systemically important banks, were also crucial.

Principles 

 CHAPTER 5 
 THE ULTIMATE BOON: 
 1995–2010 
 B y 1995, Bridgewater had grown to forty-two employees and $4.1 billion under management, which was more than I’d ever hoped for, especially considering that Bridgewater had been down to just me only a dozen years before. While things were much better and more stable, we were still doing basically the same things I’d been doing from the start—wrestling with the markets, thinking independently and creatively about how to make our bets, making mistakes, bringing those mistakes to the surface, diagnosing them to get at their root causes, designing new and better ways of doing things, systematically implementing the changes, making new mistakes, and so on. 4 This iterative, evolutionary approach allowed us to continually refine the investment systems that I’d begun building in 1982. Back then, we showed that a few bright guys with computers could beat the big, well-equipped establishment players. Now we were becoming the well-equipped establishment ourselves. 
 As the number of decision rules and the amount of data in our systems grew more complex, we hired young programmers who were better than us in converting our instructions into code and smart new grads right out of college to help with our investment research. One of these new whiz kids, Greg Jensen, joined Bridgewater as a college intern in 1996. Because he shined, I grabbed him as my research assistant. Over the decades that followed, he contributed a lot, grew into the co-chief investment officer role with Bob Prince and me, and became a co-CEO. He also became like a godson to me. 
 We also invested in more and more powerful computers. 5 Having our systems running through these machines freed us to get above the daily movements of the markets and consider things from a higher level, where we could make novel, creative connections that produced innovations for our clients. 
 DISCOVERING INFLATION-INDEXED BONDS 
 Around this time, I had dinner with David White, the man in charge of the Rockefeller Foundation’s money. David asked me how I would engineer the foundation’s portfolio to produce a return that was 5 percent above the U.S. inflation rate. I answered that a portfolio of leveraged foreign inflation-indexed bonds with the currency hedged back to U.S. dollars should deliver exactly that. (The bonds needed to be foreign because there were no U.S. inflation-indexed bonds at the time, and they needed to be hedged to the dollar so there would be no currency risk.) 
 Thinking about this later, I realized that we could create an entirely new and radically different asset class, so Dan Bernstein and I researched such a portfolio more closely. According to our analysis, this new asset class would perform even better than we’d thought. In fact, it would be uniquely effective because we could engineer it to have the same expected return as equities but with less risk and with a negative correlation with bonds and equities over long time frames. We showed this research to our clients and they loved it. Before long, we became the first global inflation-indexed bond manager in the world. In 1996, U.S. Treasury deputy secretary Larry Summers began looking into whether the U.S. should issue its own inflation-indexed bonds, and because we were the only manager with a portfolio of such bonds, he called us in as experts. 
 Dan and I traveled down to Washington to meet with Summers, his Treasury colleagues, and a number of representatives from well-known Wall Street firms. We were late (punctuality isn’t one of my strengths) and the doors to the big meeting room at Treasury were locked. I wasn’t going to let that stop me, so I knocked until someone opened it. It was a large room with a table in the middle and a press gallery off to the side. There was only one seat open at the table and it had Dan’s nameplate in front of it—we’d agreed that he’d be our one allowed representative since he’d done a lot of the prep work. I had forgotten that, so I walked over to the press gallery, grabbed a chair, and carried it next to Dan’s so I had a seat at the table too. Dan describes that meeting as an analogy for what it was like for us in the 1990s in general: We had to barge our way into things. Larry Summers has since said that the advice he got from us was the most important in shaping this market. When the Treasury did create the bonds, they followed the structure we recommended. 
 DISCOVERING RISK PARITY 
 By the mid-1990s, I had enough money to set up a trust for my family, so I began to think about what the best asset allocation mix for preserving wealth over generations would look like. In my years as an investor, I had seen all sorts of economic and market environments and all kinds of ways that wealth could be created and destroyed. I knew what drove asset returns, but I also knew that no matter what asset class one held, there would come a time when it would lose most of its value. This included cash, which is the worst investment over time because it loses value after adjusting for inflation and taxes. I also knew how difficult it was to anticipate the swings that cause those losses. I’ve devoted my life to it and I’ve made my share of bad calls; anticipating these swings wasn’t something I’d bet on others doing well when I wasn’t around. Finding investors who have done well in all economic environments—when inflation rises and when it falls, when there are booms and when there are busts—is like finding needles in a haystack, and they don’t live forever so that’s not a viable path. I didn’t want the wealth I had created to protect my family to be wiped out after I was gone. That meant I had to create a mix of assets that could be good in all economic environments. 
 I knew which shifts in the economic environment caused asset classes to move around, and I knew that those relationships had remained essentially the same for hundreds of years. There were only two big forces to worry about: growth and inflation. Each could either be rising or falling, so I saw that by finding four different investment strategies—each one of which would do well in a particular environment (rising growth with rising inflation, rising growth with falling inflation, and so on)—I could construct an asset-allocation mix that was balanced to do well over time while being protected against unacceptable losses. Since that strategy would never change, practically anyone could implement it. And so, with help from Bob and Dan, I created a portfolio mix that I could comfortably put my trust money in for the next hundred or more years. I called it the “All Weather Portfolio” because it could perform well in all environments. 
 Between 1996 and 2003 I was the only “client” investing in it because we didn’t sell it as a product. But in 2003, the head of Verizon’s pension fund, a longtime client, told us he was looking for an approach to investing that would do well across all environments. After Verizon made its investment, others quickly followed, and a dozen years later we were managing nearly $80 billion. It was another industry-shaping concept. Seeing its success, other investment managers followed with their own versions. It is now generically called “risk parity” investing. 
 TO REMAIN A BEAUTIFUL BOUTIQUE OR BECOME A GREAT INSTITUTION? 
 With our people and culture producing these industry-shaping investment products, Bridgewater really took off. By 2000, we were managing more than $32 billion, almost eight times what we had been managing just five years before. Our head count had doubled, so we moved out of our strip mall office into a larger space situated in a nature preserve on the banks of the Saugatuck River. But while we continued to grow, it was never clear sailing. Building the business while managing investments required me to do two challenging jobs simultaneously and develop two distinct skill sets, while being a good father, husband, and friend. The demands of these roles changed over time, so the skills and abilities I needed changed as well. 
 Most people assume that the challenges that go along with growing a large business are greater than those of growing a smaller one. That is not true. Going from a five-person organization to a sixty-person organization was just as challenging as going from a sixty-person organization to a seven-hundred-person organization—and from a seven-hundred-person organization to a 1,500-person one. Looking back, I can’t say that the challenges were easier or harder at any of the various phases we went through. They were just different. For example, when I had no one to manage, I had the challenge of having to do almost everything myself. When I learned and earned enough to pay others, I had the challenge of managing them. Similarly, the challenges of wrestling with market and economic swings were constantly changing. I didn’t think about it then, but it’s obvious to me now that while one gets better at things over time, it doesn’t become any easier if one is also progressing to higher levels—the Olympic athlete finds his sport to be every bit as challenging as the novice does. 
 Very soon we faced another critical choice: What kind of company did we want to have? Should we continue to grow or stay about the same size? 
 By 2003, I had come to believe that we needed to grow Bridgewater into a real institution instead of remaining a typical boutique-sized investment manager. Doing this would make us better in many ways—better technology, better security controls, a deeper talent pool—all of which would make us more stable and permanent. This meant hiring more people in technology, infrastructure, and other areas, as well as additional HR and IT staff to train and support them. 
 Giselle argued strongly that we should not grow. She believed that introducing a lot of new people would threaten our culture, and that the time and attention that hiring, training, and managing them required would dilute our focus. While I agreed with her points, I didn’t like the alternative of not allowing ourselves to become all we could be. I felt about this fork-in-the-road choice the way I felt about most others—that whether or not we could have our cake and eat it too was merely a test of our creativity and character. For example, I could envision ways in which technology would help us get the most out of people. After a fair amount of wrestling with these questions, we decided to go ahead. 
 FLESHING OUT PRINCIPLES 
 Ever since Bob, Giselle, and Dan had presented me with the “Ray Feedback Memo” in the 1990s, I had been much more explicit in writing down and sharing my work principles in the same way I had written down my investment principles. At first, this took the form of shared philosophy statements and emails to the entire company. Then, whenever something new came along that required me to make a decision, I would reflect on my criteria for making that decision and write it down as a principle so people could make the connections between the situation, my principle for handling these situations, and my actions. More and more, we saw everything as “another one of those”—another of a certain type of situation like hiring, firing, determining compensation, dealing with dishonesty—that had principles for handling them. By having them explicitly written out, I could foster the idea meritocracy by having us together reflect on and refine those principles—and then adhere to them. 
 The number of principles started small and grew over time. By the mid-2000s, Bridgewater was beginning to grow rapidly, and we had a number of new managers trying to learn and adapt to our unique culture—and who were increasingly asking me for advice. I was also beginning to have people from outside Bridgewater ask me how they could create idea meritocracies of their own. So in 2006, I prepared a rough list of about sixty Work Principles and distributed them to Bridgewater’s managers so they could begin to evaluate them, debate them, and make sense of them for themselves. “It’s a rough draft,” I wrote in the covering memo, “but it is being put out now for comments.” 
 This began an ongoing evolutionary process of encountering many situations, forming principles about how to deal with them, and getting in sync with other Bridgewater leaders and managers about them. Over time, I encountered most everything there is to encounter in running a company, so I had a few hundred principles that covered most everything. That collection of principles, like our collection of investment principles, became a kind of decision-making library. Those principles are the basis of what you’ll find in Work Principles . 
 But it wasn’t enough to codify and teach our philosophy; we had to live it. As the company grew bigger, how that happened evolved. In Bridgewater’s early days, everyone knew each other, so being radically transparent was easy—people could attend the meetings they wanted to and communicate with each other informally. But as we grew, that became logistically impossible, which was a real problem. How could people engage productively with the idea meritocracy if they didn’t know everything that was going on? Without transparency, people would spin whatever happened to suit their own interests, sometimes behind closed doors. Problems would be hidden instead of brought to the surface where they could be resolved. To have a real idea meritocracy, there must be transparency so that people can see things for themselves. 
 To make sure this happened, I required that virtually all our meetings be recorded and made available to everyone, with extremely rare exceptions such as when we were discussing very private matters like personal health or proprietary information about a trade or decision rule. At first I sent these tapes of management meetings unedited to the entire company, but that was a huge burden on people’s time. So I built a small team to edit the tapes, focusing on the most important moments, and over time we added questions to create “virtual reality” case studies that could be used for training. 6 Over time, these tapes became part of a “boot camp” for new employees as well as a window into an ongoing stream of situations connected to the principles for handling them. 
 All this openness led to some very frank discussions about who did what and why, and as a result we were able to deepen our understanding of our different ways of thinking. This was enlightening to all of us in showing how differently people’s brains worked. If nothing else, I could better appreciate people I’d once wanted to strangle! Moreover, I recognized that managers who do not understand people’s different thinking styles cannot understand how the people working for them will handle different situations, which is like a foreman not understanding how his equipment will behave. That insight led us to explore psychometric testing as a way of learning how people think differently. 
 DISCOVERING PSYCHOMETRIC TESTING 
 Early in my kids’ lives, I’d had them tested by a brilliant psychologist named Sue Quinlan. Her assessments proved spot-on and provided a great road map for how they would develop over the years. Because that testing process had been so successful, I worked with her and others to try to identify the best tests for determining what the people I worked with were like. In 2006, I took the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) assessment for the first time and found its description of my preferences to be remarkably accurate. 
 Many of the differences it described, such as those between “intuiting people,” who tend to focus on big-picture concepts, and “sensing people,” who pay more attention to specific facts and details, were highly relevant to the conflicts and disagreements we were having at Bridgewater. I began to look for other tests that could help us deepen our understanding of each other. This was slow going at first, largely because most of the psychologists I met were surprisingly squeamish about exploring differences. But eventually I found a few great people, especially a psychologist named Bob Eichinger, who pointed me to a number of other very useful tests. 
 In early 2008, I had most of Bridgewater’s managers take the Myers-Briggs assessment. The results astounded me. I couldn’t believe that some of them actually thought in the ways the test described, yet when I asked them to rate how well it described them on a scale of one to five, more than 80 percent of them gave it a four or five. 
 CREATING BASEBALL CARDS 
 Even after we were armed with the Myers-Briggs data and other tests we’d taken, I found that we were still having a hard time connecting the dots between the outcomes that we were seeing and what we knew about the people producing them. Over and over again, the same people would walk into the same meetings, do things the same ways, and get the same results without seeking to understand why. (Recently I came across a study that revealed a cognitive bias in which people consistently overlook the evidence of one person being better than another at something and assume that both are equally good at a task. This was exactly what we were seeing.) For example, people who were known not to be creative were being assigned tasks that required creativity; people who didn’t pay attention to details were being assigned to detail-oriented jobs, and so on. We needed a way to make the data that showed what people were like even clearer and more explicit, so I began making “Baseball Cards” for employees that listed their “stats.” The idea was that they could be passed around and referred to when assigning responsibilities. Just as you wouldn’t have a great fielder with a .160 batting average bat third, you wouldn’t assign a big-picture person a task requiring attention to details. 
 At first, this idea met a lot of resistance. People were concerned that the Baseball Cards wouldn’t be accurate, that producing them would be too time-consuming, and that they would only succeed in pigeonholing people unfairly. But over time, everyone’s attitudes toward this approach of openly exploring what people are like shifted 180 degrees. Most people found that having this information out in the open for everyone to see was more liberating than constraining because when it became the norm, people gained the sort of comfort that comes with just being themselves at work that family members have with each other at home. 
 Because this way of operating was so unusual, a number of behavioral psychologists came to Bridgewater to evaluate it. I urge you to read their assessments, which were overwhelmingly favorable. 7 The Harvard psychologist Bob Kegan called Bridgewater “a form of proof that the quest for business excellence and the search for personal realization need not be mutually exclusive—and can, in fact, be essential to each other.” 
 I should also explain that my personal circumstances at the time also drew me to psychology and neurology. While for the most part I am keeping my family members’ lives out of this book to protect their privacy, I will tell you this one story about my son Paul as it is relevant and he is open about it. 
 After graduating from NYU’s Tisch film school, Paul headed out to Los Angeles to take a job. One day he went to the front desk of the hotel where he was staying while he looked for an apartment and smashed their computer. He was arrested and thrown in jail, where he was beaten up by guards. Ultimately, he was diagnosed with bipolar disorder, released into my custody, and admitted to the psychiatric ward of a hospital. 
 That was the beginning of a three-year roller-coaster ride that took Paul, Barbara, and me to the peaks of his manias and the depths of his depressions, through the twists and turns of the health care system, and into discussions with some of the most brilliant and caring psychologists, psychiatrists, and neuroscientists at work today. There is nothing to prompt learning like pain and necessity, and this gave me plenty of both. At times I felt as though I was holding Paul by the hand as he was dangling over a cliff—from one day to the next, I never knew whether I could hold on or if he would slip from my grip. I worked intensely with his caregivers to understand what was going on and what to do about it. Thanks both to the help he received and his own great character, Paul worked through this and is now better off than if he hadn’t fallen into his abyss, because he developed strengths he didn’t have but needed. Paul was once wild—staying out till all hours, disorganized, smoking marijuana and drinking—but he now faithfully takes his meds, meditates, goes to bed early, and avoids drugs and alcohol. He had loads of creativity but lacked discipline. Now he has plenty of both. As a result, he is more creative now than he was before and is happily married, the father of two boys, an accomplished filmmaker, and a crusader helping those who struggle with bipolar disorder. 
 His radical transparency about being bipolar and his commitment to helping others with it inspires me. His first feature film, Touched with Fire , which received lots of acclaim, gave many people who might have lost their lives to bipolar disorder both the hope and the path forward they needed. I remember watching him shoot one scene based on a real conversation between us in which he was manic and I was struggling to reason with him. I could simultaneously see the actor playing Paul at his worst while the real Paul was at his best, directing the scene. As I watched, my mind flashed over his whole journey—from the depths of his abyss, through his metamorphosis into the strong hero standing in front of me, someone on a mission to help others going through what he had gone through. 
 That journey through hell gave me a much deeper understanding of how and why we see things differently. I learned that much of how we think is physiological and can be changed. For example, Paul’s wild swings were due to the inconsistent secretions of dopamine and other chemicals in his brain, so he could change by controlling those chemicals and the activities and stimuli affecting them. I learned that creative genius and insanity can be quite close to each other, that the same chemistry that creates insights can cause distortions, and that being stuck in one’s own head is terribly dangerous. When Paul was “crazy,” he always believed his own illogical arguments, no matter how strange they sounded to others. While more extreme in the case of someone with bipolar disorder, this is something I’ve seen most everyone do. I also learned how people can control how their brains work to produce dramatically better effects. These insights helped me to deal with people more effectively, as I will explain in detail in Chapter Four, Understand That People Are Wired Very Differently. 
 MAKING BRIDGEWATER ROCK-SOLID AND CUTTING-EDGE 
