
230 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

willing to sit down with us so that, under the very shrewd questioning
of our professor, we could learn something of what the strengths and
weaknesses of the business really were. | recognized that this was a learn-
ing opportunity of just the type that I was seeking. I was able to jockey
myself into a position to take particular advantage of it. In that day, over
a half century ago, when the ratio of automobiles to people was tremen-
dously lower than it is today, Professor Emmett did not have a car. I did.
I offered to drive him to these various plants. I did not learn much from
him on the way over. However, each week on the way back to Stanford,
I would hear comments of what he really thought of that particular com-
pany. This provided me with one of the most valuable learning experi-
ences I have ever been privileged to enjoy.

Also on one of these trips I formed a specific conviction that was
to prove of tremendous dollar value to me a few years in the future.
It was actually to lay the foundation for my business. One week we
visited not one but two manufacturing plants that were located next
door to each other in San Jose. One was the John Bean Spray Pump
Company, the world leaders in the manufacture of the type of pumps
that were used to spray insecticides on orchards to combat natural
pests. The other was the Anderson-Barngrover Manufacturing Com-
pany, also world leaders, but in the field of equipment used by fruit
canneries. In the 1920's the concept of a “growth company” had not
yet been verbalized by the financial community. However, as I some-
what awkwardly worded it to Professor Emmett, “I thought that
those two companies had probabilities of growing very much beyond
their present size to a degree that I had seen in no other company we
had visited.” He agreed with me.

Also, through spending part of the time on these automobile trips
by asking Professor Emmett about his previous business experiences, 1
learned something else that was to stand me in good stead in the years
ahead. This was the extreme importance of selling in order to have a
healthy business. A company might be an extremely efficient manufac-
turer or an inventor might have a product with breathtaking possibilities,
but this was never enough for a healthy business. Unless that business
contained people capable of convincing others as to the worth of their
product, such a business would never really control its own destiny. It
was later that I was to build on this base to conclude that even a strong
sales arm is not enough. For a company to be a truly worthwhile invest-
ment, it must not only be able to sell its products, but also be able to


Origins of a Philosophy 231

appraise changing needs and desires of its customers; in other words, to
master all that is implied in a true concept of marketing.

FIRST LESSONS IN THE SCHOOL’ OF EXPERIENCE

As the summer of 1928 approached and my first year in the business
school came to an end, an opportunity arose which seemed to me too
good to pass up. In contrast to the hundreds of students that are enrolled
each year in this school today, my class, being only the third in the grad-
uate school’s history, contained nineteen students. The graduating class
onc ycar ahead of me contained only nine. Just two of these nine were
trained in finance. In that day of great stock market ferment, both were
snapped up by New York-based investment trusts. At the last minute, an
independent San Francisco bank, which years later was acquired by the
Crocker National Bank of that city, sent down to the school a request
for a graduate trained in investments. The school was anxious not to pass
up this opportunity because if their representative merited the approval
of the bank, it could be the forerunner of many opportunities for plac-
ing future graduates in the years to come. However, they had no grad-
uate to send. It was not easy to do, but when I heard of this opportunity,
I finally persuaded the school to send me with the thought that if T were
to make good, I would stay there. If I could not fill the job, I would
come back and take second-year courses, with the bank realizing that
the school had made no pretense of sending them a completely trained
student.

Security analysts in those pre-crash days were called statisticians. It
was three successive years of sensationally falling stock prices that were
to occur just a short time ahead that caused the work of Wall Street’s
Statisticians to fall into such disrepute that the name was changed to
security analysts.

I found that I was to be the statistician for the investment banking
end of the bank. In those days, there was no legal barrier to banks being
in the brokerage or investment banking business. The work I was
assigned to do was extremely simple. In my opinion, it was also intel-
lectually dishonest. The investment arm of the bank was chiefly engaged
in selling high interest rate, new issues of bonds on which they made
quite sizable commissions as part of underwriting syndicates. No
attempt was made to evaluate the quality of these bonds or any stocks


232 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

they sold, but rather in that day of a seller’s market they gratefully
accepted any part of a syndicate offered them by their New York asso-
ciates or by the large investment banking houses. Then the security
salesmen for the bank would portray to their customers that they had a
statistical department capable of surveying those customers’ holdings
and issuing to them a report on each security handled. What was actu-
ally done in those “‘security analyses” was to look up the data on a par-
ticular company in one of the established manuals of the day, such as
Moody’s or Standard Statistics. Then someone like myself, with no further
knowledge than what was reported in that manual, would simply para-
phrase the wording of the manual to write his own report. Any company
that was doing a large volume of sales was invariably reported as “well
managed,” just because it was big. I was under no direct orders to rec-
ommend that customers switch some of the securities I “analyzed” into
whatever security the bank was attempting to sell at the moment, but
the whole atmosphere was one of encouraging this type of analysis.

BUILDING THE BASICS

It was not very long before the superficiality of the whole procedure
caused me to feel that there must be a better way to do this. I was
extremely fortunate in having an immediate boss who completely
understood why I was concerned and granted me the time to make an
experiment which I proposed to him. At that time, in the fall of 1928,
there was a great deal of speculative interest in radio stocks. I introduced
myself as a representative of the investment arm of the bank to the
buyers of the radio department of several retail establishments in San
Francisco. I asked them their opinions of the three major competitors
in this industry. | was given surprisingly similar opinions from cach of
them. In particular, I learned a great deal from one man who was him-
self an engineer and who had worked for one of these companies. One
company, Philco, which from my standpoint unfortunately was private-
ly owned so that it represented no stock market opportunity, had devel-
oped models which had especial market appeal. As a result, they were
getting market share at a beautiful profit to themselves because they
were highly efficient manufacturers. RCA was just about holding its
own market share, whereas another company, which was a stock market
favorite of the day, was slipping drastically and showing signs of getting


Origins of a Philosophy 233

into trouble. None of this was the direct business of the bank, for it was
not handling radio stocks. Nevertheless, an evaluative report seemed
likely to help me considerably within the bank because many key bank
officers wha would see it were personally involved in speculation in
these issues. Nowhere in material from Wall Street firms who were talk-
ing about these “hot” radio issues could I find a single word about the
troubles that were obviously developing for this speculative favorite.

In the ensuing twelve months, as the stock market continued on its
reckless but merry way with most stocks climbing to new highs, I
noticed with increasing interest how the stock I had singled out for
trouble was sagging further and further in that rising market. It was my
first Icsson in what later was to become part of my basic investment
philosophy: reading the printed financial records about a company is
never enough to justify an investment. One of the major steps in pru-
dent investment must be to find out about a company’s affairs from
those who have some direct familiarity with them.

At this early point, however, I had not achieved the next logical step
in this type of reasoning: it is also necessary to learn as much as possible
about the people who are running a company under investment con-
siderations, either by getting to know those people yourself or by find-
ing someone in whom you have confidence who knows them well.

As 1929 started to unfold, | became more and more convinced of
the unsoundness of the wild boom that seemed to be continuing. Stocks
continued climbing to ever higher prices on the amazing theory that we
were in a “new era.” Therefore, in the future, year after year of advanc-
ing per-share earnings could be taken as a matter of course. Yet as I tried
to appraise the outlook for America’s basic industries, I saw a number of
them with supply-demand problems that seemed to me to indicate their
outlook was getting rather wobbly.

In August of 1929 I issued another special report to the officers of
the bank. I predicted that the next six months would see the beginning
of the greatest bear market in a quarter of a century. It would be very
satisfying to my ego, if at this point, I could alter drastically the tale of
just what happened and leave the impression that, having been exactly
right in my forecasting, I then profited greatly from all this wisdom. The
facts were quite to the contrary.

Even though | felt strongly that the whole stock market was too
high in those dangerous days of 1929, I was nevertheless entrapped by
the lure of the market. This caused me to look around to find a few


234 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

stocks that “were still cheap” and were worthwhile investments because
“they had not gone up yet.” As a result of the small profits from the tiny
amount of stock transactions a few years back and the saving of a good
part of my salary, plus some moncy I had earned in college, 1 managed
to scrape together several thousand dollars as 1929 went along. | divid-
ed this almost equally among three stocks which, in my ignorance, |
thought were still undervalued in that overpriced market. One was a
leading locomotive company with a still quite low price-earnings ratio.
With railroad equipment being one of the most cyclical of all industries,
it takes very little imagination to see what was to happen to that com-
pany’s sales and profits in the business depression that was about to
engulf us. The other two were a local billboard company and a local
taxicab company, also selling at very low price-earnings ratios. In spite
of my success in ferreting out what was going to happen to the radio
stocks, I just did not have the sense to start making similar inquiries
from people who knew about these two local enterprises, even though
obtaining such information or even getting to meet the people who ran
these businesses would have been relatively simple, since they were close
at hand. As the depression increased, I learned rather vividly why these
companies had been selling at such low price-earnings ratios. By 1932,
only a tiny percentage of my original investment was represented by the
market value of the shares in these companies.

THE GREAT BEAR MARKET

Fortunately for my future well-being, I have an intense dislike for los-
ing money. I have always believed that the chief difference between a
fool and a wise man is that the wise man learns from his mistakes, while
the fool never does. The corollary of this is that it behooved me to go
over my mistakes pretty carefully and not to repeat them again.

My approach to investing expanded as I learned from my 1929 mis-
takes. I learned that, while a stock could be attractive when it had a low
price-earnings ratio, a low price-earnings ratio by itself guaranteed
nothing and was apt to be a warning indicator of a degree of weakness
in the company. I began realizing that, all the then current Wall Street
opinion to the contrary, what really counts in determining whether a
stock is cheap or overpriced is not its ratio to the current year’s carn-
ings, but its ratio to the earnings a few years ahead. If I could build up


Origins of a Philosophy 235

in myself the ability to determine within fairly broad limits what those
earnings might be a few years from now, I would have unlocked the key
both to avoiding losses and to making magnificent profits!

In addition to learning that a low price-earnings ratio was just as apt
to be a sign that a stock was an investment trap as that it was a bargain,
acute awareness of my miserable investment performances during the
Great Bear Market made me vividly aware of something of possibly
even greater importance. I had been spectacularly right in my timing of
when the bull market bubble was about to burst, and almost right in
judging the full force of what was to happen. Yet except for a possible
small boost in my reputation among a very small circle of people, this
had done me no good whatsoever. From then on, I was to realize that
all the correct reasoning about an investment policy or about the desir-
ability or purchase or sale of any particular stock did not have the least
bit of value until it was translated into action through the completion
of specific transactions.

A CHANCE TO DO MY THING

In the spring of 1930 I made a change of employers. I only mention this
because it triggered the events that were to cause the emergence of the
investment philosophy that has guided me since that time. A regional
brokerage firm came to me and made me a salary offer which, at age 22
and for that time and place, I found quite difficult to refuse. Further-
more, they offered me a vastly more appealing work assignment than the
dissatisfying experience as a “statistician” in the investment banking arm
of the bank. With no assigned duties whatsoever, I was to be free to
devote my time to finding individual stocks which I thought were par-
ticularly suitable candidates for either purchase or sale because of their
characteristics. I was then to write reports on my conclusions to circu-
late among the brokers employed by this firm to help them stimulate
business that would be profitable for their clients.

This offer came to me just after Herbert Hoover had made his
famous “Prosperity is just around the corner” statement. Several partners
of the firm involved implicitly believed this. As a result of the 1929
crash, their total payroll had dropped from 125 employees to 75. They
told me that if T accepted their offer, I would be number 76. I was just
as bearish at the time as they were bullish. I felt sure the bear market was


236 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

a long way from over. | told them that I would come on one condition.
While they were free to fire me at any time if they did not like the
quality of my work, lack of seniority must be no influence whatsoever
if adverse financial markets forced them to make further reduction in
payroll. They agreed to this provision.

FROM DISASTER, OPPORTUNITY SPRINGS

As employers, I could not have asked for nicer people. In the ensuing
eight months, I had one of the most valuable business educational
experiences of my life. I saw at first hand example after example of
how the investment business should not be conducted. As 1930
unfolded and stocks once again continued on what seemed like an
almost endless decline, my employers’ position got more and more
precarious. Then, just before Christmas of 1930, we, who had so far
survived the economic holocaust, witnessed the grim picture of the
whole firm being suspended from the San Francisco Stock Exchange
for insolvency.

This grim news for my associates was to prove one of the most for-
tunate business developments, if not the most fortunate, of my life. For
some time I had had vague plans that when prosperity returned I would
start my own business by charging clients a fee for managing their
investments. I am purposely using this roundabout way to describe the
activities of an investment counselor or an investment advisor because
in those days neither of these terms had yet been used. However, with
almost everyone in the financial business retrenching during that
gloomy January of 1931, the only security industry job I could find was
a purely clerical and, to me, a quite unattractive one. If I had properly
analyzed the situation, I would have realized that this was exactly the
right time to start a new business of the kind I had in mind. I was to
find that there were two reasons for this. One was that, after almost two
years of the most severe bear market this nation had ever seen, nearly
everyone was so dissatisfied with their existing brokerage connections
that they were in the mood to listen even to someone both young and
advocating a radically different approach to the handling of their invest-
ments as was I. Also, as the economy reached its depths in 1932, many
key businessmen had so little to do in pursuing their own affairs that
they had the time to see someone who was calling on them. In more


Origins of a Philosophy 237

normal times, I would never have gotten by their secretaries. One of the
most worthwhile clients of my entire business career and a man whose
family’s investments I still handle was a typical example of this. Some
years afterwards he told me that on the day I called he had had almost
nothing to do and had already finished reading the sports section of the
newspaper. So when my name and purpose were told him by his secre-
tary, he thought, “Listening to this guy will at least occupy my time.” He
confessed, “If you had come to see me a year or so later, you never
would have gotten into my office.”

A FOUNDATION IS FORMED

All this was to result in several years of very hard work in a tiny office
with low overhead. With no windows and merely glass partitions to
serve as two of the walls, my total floor space was little larger than that
needed to jam together a desk, my chair, and one other chair. For this,
together with free local telephone service and a reasonable amount of
secretarial help from the secretary-receptionist of the gentleman from
whom I leased this space, I paid the princely sum of $25 per month. My
only other expenses were stationery, postage and a very occasional long
distance call. The account book still in my possession provides an indi
cation of how difficult it really was to start a new business in 1932. After
very long hours of work over and above this overhead, I made a net
profit averaging $2.99 per month for that year. In the still difficult year
of 1933, I did a trifle better, showing an improvement of just under
1000 percent, an average monthly earnings of just over $29. This possi-
bly was about what I would have made as a newsboy selling papers on
the street. Yet in what those years were to bring me in the future, they
were two of the most profitable years of my life. They provided me with
the foundation for an extremely profitable business and with a group of
highly loyal clients by 1935. It would be nice if] could claim that it was
brilliant thinking on my part that caused me to start my business when
I did rather than waiting until better times were to arrive. Actually, it was
the unattractiveness of the only job that seemed open to me that pushed
me into it.


2

Learning from Experience

siderable interest a news item about the two neighboring San

Jose companies that had intrigued me so much during my
student days at the Stanford Business School. In 1928 the John Bean
Manufacturing Co. and the Anderson-Barngrover Manufacturing
Co. had merged with a leading vegetable canning manufacturer,
Sprague Sells Corporation of Hoopeston, Illinois, to form a brand
new entity called the Food Machinery Corporation.

Asin other periods of rampant speculation the nation was in the throes
of such a stock buying mania that the supply of Food Machinery Corpo-
ration stock offered for sale rose in price in an attempt to meet the
demand. In that same year of 1928, at least twenty other new issues, and
perhaps twice that many, were sold by members of the San Francisco Stock
Exchange to eager buyers in the Bay area. The lack of soundness of some
of these issues was little short of appalling. An officer of one stock exchange
firm, that sold shares in a company that was to sell bottled water from
across the Pacific, told me that these shares were sold without a complete
set of financial statements in the hands of the underwriters, who had little
more than a photograph of the spring from which the water was supposed
to come and a minor amount of personal contact with the selling share-
holders! In the public mind, the stock of the Food Machinery Corpora-
tion was just another of the exciting new offerings of that year, neither sig-
nificantly better nor worse than the rest. It was offered at a price of $21%.

In those days, pools for the manipulation of shares were entirely
legal. A local group with little expertise in running a pool but headed

W:: I had been working at the bank, I had noticed with con-


Learning from Experience 239

by a man with great enthusiasm for Food Machinery Corporation
decided to “run an operation” in the company’s shares. The methods of
all these pools were fundamentally similar. The members would sell
stock back and forth among themselves at gradually rising prices. All this
activity on the stock tape would attract the attention of others, who
would then start to buy and take the pool’s shares off its hands at still
higher prices. Some highly skilled manipulators, some of whom had
made many millions of dollars and one of whom, a year or so later, was
to offer me a junior partnership, were quite experienced and able prac-
titioners of this rather questionable art. Manipulation was not the objec-
tive of the operators of this Food Machinery pool, however. As the
autumn of 1929 was to arrive and stocks were to face the precipice that
lay ahead, the pool managed to buy for itself most of the shares that had
been offered to the public. Although the quoted price of the Food
Machinery shares at the peak was in the high 50's, there was very little
stock in the hands of the public as a result.
