
Multiple Tops and Bottoms

301

a while. Then the market digested its gains and the stock decreased. Then
the stock regained its strength and pushed on to a new high. Then it eased
back again, not quite as low as before. Then it pushed on to yet another
new lifetime high. Then it eased back once more, again, not quite so low.
This backing and filling process kept going on for years, and for
the long-term investor, the results were marvelous. The core truth here,
though, is that through thousands of days in both bull and bear markets,
the buying interest of the stock consistently outweighed the selling interest. In other words, the bulls maintained control over the bears, because
even when the stock went to a low, it was a higher low than the low before.
The graph of this stock has small circles drawn on it to better illustrate this
series of higher highs and higher lows.
A stock with a similar pattern is shown in Figure 12.12. The growth of
this stock is even more clear, since there is an ascending trendline placed
on the chart to indicate support. As with the prior chart, this one has a
steady progression of higher highs and higher lows. A person owning this
stock, so long as this situation does not change, will probably want to remain in the stock. If they see the next high fail to supersede the prior one,
or worse, they see a low that is beneath the prior low, they may conclude
the stock has run its course.

FIGURE 12.12 Avalon Bay Communities held above its ascending trendline in
the course of making higher highs and higher lows.

302

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.13 Taser International was a phenomenal stock until it broke its series of higher highs and higher lows. Not long after, it started to sink badly.

Let’s take a look at what happens when “higher highs, higher lows”
fails. Figure 12.13 shows the chart for Taser International. From March
2003 through April 2004, it is difficult to chart the higher highs and higher
lows simply because the stock seemed to do little but go straight up. The
rise during this period was about 8,500 percent! Taser was the darling of
the financial media, and there’s no doubt someone holding this stock would
have had no reason to sell it based on any lower low.
However, things started going wrong with the stock after April 2004.
The next low it made was indeed a lower low, which broke the series.
The stock gathered its strength again, but the next high it made before
descending once more did not exceed the prior high. (Note the arrow
drawn on Figure 12.13, showing the lower high.) At this point, as the
saying goes, the writing was on the wall. The stock managed to push its
way higher, ultimately even achieving a new lifetime high in January 2005.
The damage had been done, though, and at that point, the stock lost over
80 percent of its value.
The main point of this story is to remain on the watch for a break in
the “higher highs, higher lows” series, because as crude a measure as it
is, it usually marks an important turning point. All of this holds true in

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

303

the converse for stocks in bearish formations as well. If a stock is making
a series of lower highs and lower lows, it will probably continue moving
downward until that series is broken. So if you are short a stock which is
making “lower highs, lower lows,” it is best to hold onto it until a higher
high is made. Even if you have no position in the stock, this change in
trend might mark a valuable buying opportunity for a stock that has been
descending for a while.

MULTIPLE TOPS
Part of the reason for discussing higher highs, higher lows is to prepare for
the analysis of multiple tops and bottoms. After a stock has moved steadily
higher for a while, it sometimes creates a series of similar highs, indicating a pause in that stock’s upward momentum. This is a resistance level.
There are really just two things a stock can do in a situation like this: finally push its way past resistance, moving on to a new high, or succumb to
the resistance and fail to overcome it, often falling hard in the process.
Just as the cessation of higher highs and higher lows can mark a turning point in a stock’s general direction, the establishment of a series of similar highs (that is, a multiple top) can indicate the ends of a stock’s rise and,
perhaps, a turning point. Let us turn our attention to Figure 12.14, which is
the stock for Chesapeake Energy. As you can see, generally speaking, the
stock was a fantastic performer, providing its shareholders with terrific returns for many years.
Taking a closer look at the stock’s behavior in Figure 12.15, we can
see that after the stock hit yet another all-time high of about $33, it eased
back, moved up to about $33 again, eased back once more, pushed higher
to $33, and eased back yet again. It is as if the stock had hit a wall and could
not overcome this resistance level. In real-world terms, what was going on
was that buyers and sellers had found a point of equilibrium at about $33.
At that level, there was insufficient buying interest to propel the stock any
higher, and it kept falling back.
There was a clear signal at this point that perhaps the days of a steadily
ascending stock were a thing of the past. Unless the stock could gather
the resolve to push past these prices, the sellers would maintain the upper hand. Indeed, the sellers started to overwhelm the buyers, and as Figure 12.16 plainly shows, this multiple top preceded an absolutely devastating loss in value in which the entirety of the gains shareholders had enjoyed
were laid waste.
The best way to deepen our understanding of multiple tops is
through the examination of more examples, so let’s proceed with those.
Figure 12.17 shows high-flier Alexion as it made its way from $5 to $120.

304

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.14 This stock made a consistent series of higher highs for most of
this time period.

FIGURE 12.15 Here we see instance after instance of the stock hitting the $33
level and falling back due to selling pressure.

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

305

FIGURE 12.16 The triple top circled here gave a clear warning signal that preceded a complete wipeout of the stock’s price.

FIGURE 12.17 Alexion makes two impressive runs at the $120 price point, showing a possible double top formation.

306

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

The first highlighted oval indicates the initial peak in the stock price, and
then it lost about 75 percent of its value. It subsequently regained its footing and managed to work its way back to its former peak, eliminating the
entire 75 percent loss.
Think of the mind-set of the holders of this stock at about this time. Everyone who has bought this stock is in a winning position—some of them
exceptionally so. Longer-term holders have held on through a breathtaking
collapse in stock price, only to see the stock rally 300 percent to match
its prior high. Everyone long the stock wants the same thing—for it to go
higher—but owners are understandably nervous.
This is the kind of tenuous situation in which a stock can make a multiple top. It either is going to have such an exceptionally committed group of
buyers that a new high price is reached, thus inciting even more interest, or
people anxious to take profits overwhelm the buyers and the price simply
matches the prior high.
As you can see in Figure 12.18, the latter is undoubtedly what took
place with Alexion. During the second top, the price tried to push its way
into a new high, day after day. After over a week of attempts, the stock
finally started sinking due to selling pressure, and it really never looked

FIGURE 12.18 After the stock double-topped, ALXN lost nearly 92 percent of its
peak value over the next couple of years.

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

307

back. By the time the selling was done, the stock had lost nearly 92 percent
of its peak value.
The reason for the term “multiple top” is that there can be two, three,
four, or even more tops. Whether the chart you are examining is forming
a multiple top or is simply hitting a firm resistance level is a matter of discernment. After all, if a stock hits the same price 50 times in a row, it is
not a multiple top; the stock has simply found a serious resistance level at
which buyers and sellers are in a state of equal strength.
One core characteristic of a multiple top is that there is a reasonable
amount of time space between the tops. Often, the longer the space between the tops, the better, because it illustrates that even under constantly
changing market conditions, the stock still poops out at a certain level. A
series of equal high prices over the course of a week is not a multiple top.
A high price, followed by a protracted dip, followed by a roughly equal high
price four weeks later would be a much better candidate for a multiple top
pattern.
Figure 12.19, for instance, provides us a good example of a triple top.
This is a very long-term chart, showing (on a split-adjusted basis) Huntington Bancshares (HBAN) ascending from a few pennies up to over $25.

FIGURE 12.19 Symbol HBAN started to stall at about $25, forming a series of
multiple tops.

308

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.20 Multiple tops can happen many months apart from one another,
as long as a consistent high price is being hit.

The three tops (not to be confused with the musical group) took place
over an 18-month period. Even though the stock price fluctuated between
$15 and $25—a huge range—the stock kept bumping up against the $25
price point and retreating. As you can see in Figure 12.20, by the third instance the holders of the stock had enough frustration and increased the
selling pressure.
Once the triple top was in place, the price succumbed and fell from $25
to under $10 in a little over a year (Figure 12.21). Owners of this stock who
were armed with this knowledge would have had ample opportunity to get
out of the stock near its high.
The skill in being able to pick out a multiple top while it is happening
is to be able to clearly spot the high prices among the noise of the regular
ups and downs of trading activity. Take Tower Automotive, for instance
(Figure 12.22). During 1998 and 1999, the stock fluctuated between about
$16 and $28. If you look for the highest highs during this period, two of
them stand out—one in the second quarter of 1998 and the second in the
middle of 1999.
One way to visually think of this is to imagine holding a ruler horizontal
at the top of the chart and slowing bringing it down the graph. Once you

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

309

FIGURE 12.21 HBAN suﬀered a 60 percent price decline once the triple top was
in place.

FIGURE 12.22 Tower Automotive had an impressive track record, scoring a high
price in 1998 and matching that high the next year.

310

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.23 The eﬀects of this multiple top were clear for more than six years
after the pattern completed.

hit some touch points with the ruler, if they are spread out from each other
by at least a few weeks and represent a fairly consistent new high price
being hit, there is probably a multiple top in formation. (With the possibility
that the price could push ahead to an even higher price, thus negating the
multiple top.)
One interesting result of this double top was what a major turning
point it was for this stock. After the double top was in place, the stock
spent the next six years unraveling. By 2006, this security had disintegrated into the land of penny stocks (Figure 12.23). Once again, a chartist
armed with some basic knowledge could have done very well with this
insight.
One final example of a multiple top is impressive due to the quantity of
tops it had in place: five of them, laid down over a period of 20 months. Dov
Pharmaceuticals (symbol DOVP, shown in Figure 12.24) had risen from
about $3 to about $20 in the span of a year. Over the next two years, however, the stock oscillated wildly. This chart was not a case of higher highs
and higher lows. Instead, it was showing higher lows (which is good for
bulls) and identical highs (which suggests a multiple top). A bull would
want to see higher highs instead.

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

311

FIGURE 12.24 It is clear from this graph that $20 represented extremely strong
resistance for this stock.

On five different instances, DOVP reached a price of about $20 and
then softened. Note that the price does not have to be absolutely identical
to create a multiple top. As long as the high prices are within a reasonable range—about 5 percent—they are close enough to qualify. As illustrated with Figure 12.25, after this quintuple multiple top was completed,
the effect on the stock was horrific, destroying about 90 percent of the
equity’s value.
For bulls, multiple tops are an invaluable warning sign to get out and
preserve profits. For bears, a multiple top can be a profitable signal to establish a short position in a stock and enjoy the ride down. Now we will
turn our attention to the exact opposite pattern, the multiple bottom.

MULTIPLE BOTTOMS
Just about everything you have learned about multiple tops holds true for
multiple bottoms, except that it is turned on its head. Just as the establishment of a multiple top suggests resistance, the establishment of a multiple bottom suggests support. Just as the exercise of sliding a (mental)

312

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.25 A quintuple top established by stock symbol DOVP preceded an
almost complete destruction of the stock’s value.

ruler from the top of a chart down until it hits similar highs can spot a
multiple top in the making, so, too, can sliding the same mental ruler up
from the bottom of a chart page. And just as the most valuable multiple
tops are found after a prior prolonged rise in the stock’s price, the most
lucrative multiple bottoms can be found after an extended decline in a
stock’s price.
A fine example of this is Figure 12.26, which shows the price activity
for Charter Communications (symbol CHTR). Over a 15-month period, the
stock’s price had fallen from $25 to about 70 cents. The stock then nearly
tripled in price, only to sink back down again. Five months after the initial
low was established, the stock hit this price once again before resuming its
climb. It did not hit those lows again, and a double bottom was plainly in
place, followed by a seven-fold increase in price.
The psychological value of a multiple bottom is that it helps convince
the trading public that the selling is over. If a stock has been falling hard
for a long time, it is comforting for the public to witness that a stock seems
to be hammering out a bottom for itself and that it refuses to go any lower
than a certain price point. The more times this low price point is hit without
breaking, the more confident traders can be that this price level is a strong

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

313

FIGURE 12.26 This seven-fold rise in CHTR was preceded by an important double bottom price pattern.

support zone. Any stock that has been suffering a decline needs to show
this line in the sand so that people aren’t convinced the security is simply
going to $0.
A different company (Charles & Colvard) with a nearly identical ticker
symbol (CTHR) illustrates this point vividly. The stock certainly had suffered a harrowing loss, falling from $15 to about 50 cents. But on five different occasions, highlighted in Figure 12.27, the stock refused to go beneath a certain level. As is often the case, the stock was swinging wildly
up and down during this time period, as buyers and sellers struggled with
establishing leadership. Keep in mind also that, after such a serious decline, there would be a tremendous amount of suspicion with respect to
the stock’s ability to hold onto any price gains.
The time the stock spent in 2001 pushing its way between 50 cents and
$1.50 was time well spent, as evidenced in Figure 12.28. The very strong
multiple bottom, highlighted with an oval in this chart, gave buyers the confidence to begin reentering the stock in force, and that eventually pushed
the stock toward a huge multi-thousand percentage point gain from 2002
through 2005. Incidentally, you can also see another nice bottoming pattern from 2002 through 2004 as the stock firmed up new support between

314

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.27 Here we see ﬁve separate instances of the stock hitting a low price
point, ﬁrming up the importance of this support level each time.

FIGURE 12.28 The support level in 2001 was hit many times before the stock
ﬁnally started heading upward to a gigantic percentage gain.

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

315

FIGURE 12.29 This is just about the ideal double bottom: Exactly the same low
price was established, and a healthy amount of time—nine months—separates the
two low prices.

$3 and $5. The important thing to note about this graph is how crucial the
multiple bottom in 2001 was to this stock’s long-term prospects.
If multiple bottoms take place over a long time frame, that is often a
strong indication that the bottom is so widely respected as to be almost
impenetrable. Let’s turn our attention to symbol AEM, captured in Figure 12.29. The stock hit a low of $2.50 in late 1975 and the autumn of 1976.
There was about a nine-month gap between these two events.
If, with all the gyrations of the stock market, a stock can hold firm at a
given level after having suffered through a lot of selling pressure, prospects
are good for this stock. The other benefit is that you have a very clean
stop-loss point: should the stock break beneath the support zone (in this
instance, $2.50), you would immediately exit the position and move on. No
such stop-order would have been executed for a long position in this stock,
however, which enjoyed many strong years after this double bottom was
complete.
There are even a few rare instances where huge amounts of
time—decades, even—can serve as affirmations of a strong support level.
American Airlines, known as AMR Corporation (symbol AMR) was a

316

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 12.30 Even though nearly 20 years separated these two bottoms, savvy
buyers in 2003 could have bought AMR shares at prices not seen since the depths
of the bear market in 1974.

disastrously bad stock following the terrorist attacks in the United States
in September 2001. By early 2003, the stock had lost almost its entire value,
which is particularly remarkable given AMR’s enormous presence in the
transportation market.
A trader armed with a long-term chart, like the one shown in Figure 12.30, would have noticed something remarkable as the stock plunged
from $45 to $2: a low price had been set in late 1974, after which the stock
had enjoyed a huge resurgence. This is not to say that this chart represents
a double bottom (unless the scale one is using to judge the chart is measured in centuries!). But, in a similar vein, this chart would be helpful to
a person trying to determine how low the stock could possibly go in the
worst conditions the stock had experienced before (in this case, the huge
bear market in 1973 and 1974).
There is no doubt the stock could have snapped beneath its prior lifetime low and gone to $0. But in this case, a purchase of AMR at its prior low
would have been extremely profitable, as the stock turned on the proverbial dime and blasted higher. It only took one insight—the recognition of
the lifetime low established two decades prior—to recognize this trade.

Multiple Tops and Bottoms

317

SUMMARY
This chapter has introduced us to highlighting charts (both with ovals and
rectangles), adding text notes, and identifying the higher highs, higher lows
pattern. We have also learned about multiple tops and multiple bottoms,
each of which can help us find important turning points in an equity’s direction. We can now extend our knowledge of patterns by examining one
of the most useful reversal patterns, the Head and Shoulders.

CHAPTER 13

Head and
Shoulders

o far in this book we have learned about a wide variety of analysis methods for financial charts. Saucers, multiple tops and bottoms,
trendlines, and channels are just a few of the methods we have examined. After seeing so many charts with successful outcomes of applying
these techniques, it can be tempting to place a trade on any chart that resembles one of the patterns shown. One might start to think that these
patterns yield some kind of mystical power that can be exploited by those
who understand them.
This is not the case. There is no sorcery involved with technical analysis. Any trade, after all, is a guess. It is hopefully an educated, well-informed
guess with appropriate safety measures (like stop orders) in place to minimize your risk. But remember that the word “speculate” is derived from
the Latin verb speculare, which means “to observe.” It does not mean “to
gamble.” The object of good speculation is to observe well the information
in front of you (in our case, well-drawn charts) and make a decision based
on sound principles.
The patterns in this book don’t always work. There are many times
when there seems to be a perfect setup, and the charts go sour on you.
That’s okay. As long as you have a stop price in place that shields you
from unreasonable losses, you can preserve the majority of your capital
and move on. So if you lose 5 percent on four different trades and make 50
percent on another trade, all of which were based on the same pattern, you
will still come out way ahead, because you contained your losses based on
good analytics.

S

318

Head and Shoulders

319

With this in mind, we can now turn our full attention to one of the most
powerful and easy-to-recognize reversal patterns, the Head and Shoulders
(and its twin, the Inverse Head and Shoulders).

THE HEAD AND SHOULDERS PATTERN
The Head and Shoulders pattern (henceforth referred to as H&S) has a
funny name but a powerful purpose: to indicate the possible reversal of the
security you are charting. As the name suggests, the H&S pattern looks like
a head between two shoulders. It consists of these elements:
Left Shoulder: An ascent in price (ideally following a long, major ascent
in the stock’s value), a leveling, and then a weakening back to a
certain support level known as the neckline.
Head: A further ascent in price, surpassing the high set by the left
shoulder, once again leveling off and descending back to the
neckline.
Right Shoulder: A final ascent in price, ideally not going as high as
the left shoulder (and certainly not going as high as the head), a
leveling off, and a descent back to the neckline, which it breaks
beneath on strong volume.
Figure 13.1 shows an example of a very good H&S pattern exhibited
by the stock Technical Olympia (symbol TOA). Lines have been drawn on
top of the chart to clearly show the shoulders, the head, and the neckline. The circled part indicates where the price broke beneath the neckline, completing the pattern and sending the price sharply downward, as
expected.
The H&S is a reversal pattern. It indicates that the stock is going to
change direction. As such, it is most powerful when a stock has had a long,
significant move higher in price. The ideal opportunity to exploit an H&S
pattern is when there is a lot of air beneath the pattern—that is, a long
ascent in price with very little resistance on the way down.
Take a look at Figure 13.2 for a good example of this. Here is a stock,
Helen of Troy Ltd., which moved from $4 to $26 in a little over three years.
The rectangle indicates a massive H&S pattern. This one is particularly
good because there is an extremely clean neckline (the bottom line of the
rectangle) and the right shoulder is lower than the left shoulder, indicating
a diminishment in buying strength. Once the price broke beneath the neckline, notice how swiftly the price descended. It took only about a year for
the stock to get to $4 again, with very few pauses along the way.
