
Option Premiums
The purchase price of the option is called the option premium. The option
premium is quoted in points, each point being worth $100. The premium
for a Dow Index option is paid by the buyer at initiation of the transaction.
The underlying instrument for one CBOT futures option is one CBOT
DJIASM futures contract; so the option contract and the futures contract are

AU3772_book.fm Page 348 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

348

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

essentially different expressions of the same instrument, and both are based
on the Dow–Jones Index.
Options premiums consist of two elements: intrinsic value and time
value. The difference between the futures price and strike price is the intrinsic
value of the option. If the futures price is greater than the strike price of a
call, the call is said to be “in-the-money.” In fact, you can be long the futures
contract at less than its current price. For example, if the futures price is
10020 and the strike price is 10000, the call is in-the-money and immediate
exercise of the call pays $10 times the difference between the futures and
strike price, or $10 ⋅ 20 = $200. If the futures price is smaller than the strike
price, the call is “out-of-the-money.” If the two are equal, the call is “at-themoney.” A put is in-the-money if the futures price is less than the strike price
and out-of-the-money if the futures price is greater than the strike price. It
is at-the-money when these two prices are equal.
Because a Dow Index futures option can be exercised at any date until
expiration, and exercise results in a cash payment equal to the intrinsic value,
the value of the option must be at least as great as its intrinsic value. The
difference between the option price and the intrinsic value represents the
time value of the option. The time value reflects the possibility that exercise
will become more profitable if the futures price moves farther away from
the strike price. Generally, the more time until expiration, the greater the
time value of the option, because the likelihood of the option becoming
profitable to exercise is greater. At expiration, the time value is zero and the
option price equals the intrinsic value.

Volatility
The degree of fluctuation in the price of the underlying futures contract is
known as “volatility” (cf. Resources, Appendix D, for formula). The greater
the volatility of the futures, the higher the option premium. The price of a
futures option is a function of the futures price, the strike price, the time left to
expiration, the money market rate, and the volatility of the futures price. Of these
variables, volatility is the only one that cannot be observed directly. Since
all the other variables are known, however, it is possible to infer from option
prices an estimate of how the market is gauging volatility. This estimate is
called the “implied volatility” of the option. It measures the market’s average
expectation of what the volatility of the underlying futures return will be
until the expiration of the option. Implied volatility is usually expressed in
annualized terms. Implied volatility is suggested as an input to stop calculation in Chapter 27. The significance and use of implied volatility is potentially complex and confusing for the general investor, professionals having
a decided edge in this area. Their edge can be removed by serious study.

Exercising the Option
At expiration, the rules of optimal exercise are clear. The call owner should
exercise the option if the strike price is less than the underlying futures price.

AU3772_book.fm Page 349 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2:

Advancements in Investment Technology

349

The value of the exercised call is the difference between the futures price
and the strike price. Conversely, the put owner should exercise the option
if the strike price is greater than the futures price. The value of the exercised
put is the difference between the strike price and the futures price.
To illustrate, if the price of the expiring futures contract is 7600, a call
struck at 7500 should be exercised, but a put at the same or lower strike
price should not. The value of the exercised call is $1000. The value of the
unexercised put is $0. If the price of the expiring futures contract is 7500, a
7600 put should be exercised but not a call at 7600 or a higher strike. The
value of the exercised put is $1000 and that of the unexercised call is $0.
The profit on long options is the difference between the expiration value
and the option premium. The profit on short options is the expiration value
plus the option premium. The expiration values and profits on call and put
options can often be an important tool in an investment strategy. Their payoff
patterns and risk parameters make options quite different from futures. Their
versatility makes them good instruments to adjust a portfolio to changing
expectations about stock market conditions. Moreover, these expectations
can range from very general to very specific predictions about the future
direction and volatility of stock prices. Effectively, there is an option strategy
suited to virtually every set of market conditions.

Using Futures Options to Participate in Market Movements
Traders must often react to rapid and surprising events in the market. The
transaction costs and price impact of buying or selling a portfolio’s stocks
on short notice inhibit many investors from reacting to short-term market
developments. Shorting stocks is an even less palatable option for average
investors because of the margin and risks involved and semantical prejudices.
The flexibility that options provide can allow one to take advantage of
the profits from market cycles quickly and conveniently. A long call option
on Dow Index futures profits at all levels above its strike price. A long put
option similarly profits at all levels below its strike price. Let us examine
both strategies.

Profits in Rising Markets
In August, the Dow Index is 10000 and the Dow Index September future is
10050. You expect the current Bull Market to continue, and you would like
to take advantage of the trend without tying up too much capital and also
undertake only limited risk.
You buy a September call option on Dow Index futures. These options
will expire simultaneously with September futures, and the futures price
will be the same as the cash index at expiration.
Your analysis is bullish, so the 10500 call (out-of-the-money strike price)
is a reasonable alternative at a quoted premium of 10.10. You pay $1,010 for
the call ($100 ⋅ 10.10).

AU3772_book.fm Page 350 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

350

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

The payoff: at the September expiration, the value of the Dow Future is
10610. Now, your call is in-the-money, and you exercise it and garner the
exercise value less the premium, or $90 = $10 ⋅ (10610 – 10500) – $100 ⋅ (10.10)
= $1,100 – $1,010. If the Dow Future stays at or below 10500, you let the call
expire worthless and simply lose the premium. This is the maximum possible
loss on the call. If the Dow Future increases by 101 points above the strike
price, you break even.
Instead of buying the call option, the trader could have invested $100,500
directly in the Dow stocks. Given a value of the Dow Future of 10110 in
September, he would have had a gain of $3,030. If he had invested directly in
the stocks, however, an unexpected market decline would have led to a loss.

Exploiting Market Reversals
The trader expects a reversal of the Bull Market now at 7800 and would like
some downside protection.
He buys a put with a strike price of 7700 (out-of-the-money). The put
premium is 9.80, for a total cost of $980 = $100 ⋅ 9.80. If the Index decreases
to 7600, with a corresponding decrease in the futures contract in September,
the put is worth $1,000. The maximum loss is the premium cost, which is
lost if the Dow Future is above 7700 at expiration. The trader breaks even if
the Dow Future decreases by 98 points below the strike price.

Using Puts to Protect Profits in an Appreciated Portfolio
During a sustained Bull Market, investors often search for ways of protecting
their paper profits from a possible market break. Even when fundamental
economic factors tend to support a continued market upside, investors have
to guard against unpredictable “technical market corrections” and market
over-reactions to news.
Selling stocks to reduce downside risk is costly in fees and taxwise and
sacrifices potential price gains. What is desirable in a sideways market environment is an instrument that protects the value of a portfolio against a
market drop but does not constrain upside participation. This is precisely
what put options are designed to do.

Situation 1
The market is in an uptrend in August. And the market lives in anxiety that
the Federal Reserve will tighten short-term interest rates further in the coming months. The trader has $78,000 invested in the Dow portfolio, and the
Dow Future is at 7800.
In order to hedge his portfolio, he purchases a put option on September
futures against a possible market downturn. He buys a 7600 put at a premium of 6.60, cost $100 ⋅ 6.60 = $660.
Buying the put places a floor on the value of the portfolio at the strike
price. Buying a put with a strike price of 7600 effectively locks in the value

AU3772_book.fm Page 351 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2:

Advancements in Investment Technology

351

of the portfolio at $76,000. Above its strike price, a put is not exercised and
the portfolio value is unconstrained. If the trader is wrong, and the market
goes up, he loses the premium paid for the put. Depending on which strike
price he chooses, he increases or decreases downside risk. He breaks even
when the Dow Future reaches a value of 7534 = 7600 – 66, the strike price
less the put premium. At this level, the unprotected and put-protected portfolio are equally profitable.
The similarity to life insurance is striking. If you don’t die, the premium
is wasted. But if you do….

Improving Portfolio Yields
Situation 2
All markets, as the reader is perhaps aware, are not trending. Days, weeks,
months (sometimes years) can pass while the markets grind up and down
in what are euphemistically known as trading range markets. When the
astute technician identifies one of these market doldrums and judges that it
will continue so he can reap other returns on his portfolio by selling puts
and calls on Dow Index futures.
For example, when the Dow Index is 10000 and the trader calculates that
it will not break out for the next month above 10200, he sells calls at a strike
price of 10200. The quoted premium of the 10200 call is, say, 10.10; selling a
10200 call generates $1010 income.
The trader pockets the entire premium as a profit if the index remains
below 10200 at the September expiration. The downside of this trade is that
the trader gives up price appreciation above 10200. Above 10200, the combined
value of the portfolio and short call premium is $101,010. The break-even
point is 10301, where the Dow Future is equal to the sum of the strike price
and call premium. Above this point the covered call portfolio becomes less
profitable than the original portfolio. Since the short call is covered by the
portfolio, this strategy is not exposed to the risk represented by a naked call.
The main risk is that the trader gives up the profit potential above the strike
price of the call. As is obvious to the technician, this is a bad strategy in
trending markets. Only in clearly range-bound markets would an enlightened trader want to write covered calls. The call premium collected is some
compensation for this risk, but cold comfort when the trader has misanalyzed the market. The best strike price of the call depends on the probabilities
you have assigned to future increases and behavior of the Dow.

Using Option Spreads in High- or Low-Volatility Markets
Long and short stock positions reflect definite market opinions or analyses.
The market will go up or the market will go down and the moderately
competent technician should be right about this more often than the
unwashed general public. In markets of coiling volatility (i.e., lower than

AU3772_book.fm Page 352 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

352

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

average volatility and declining), it is sometimes possible to exploit uncertainty by putting on a long straddle. The long straddle combines a long put
and a long call at the same strike price. This spread generates a return over
two ranges of market values: values below the strike price of the put and
values above the strike price of the call. It is a profitable strategy given
sufficient volatility. The Editor’s company used such a strategy immediately
before the crash of 1987 for managed accounts and collected disproportionate
profits on a very low risk position. Experienced speculators and traders
generally sell high-volatility markets and try to backspread (go long) in
chosen less volatile markets, expecting volatility to return to the mean.
Sometimes they do this by writing a short straddle, a position with a short
put and a short call at the same strike price.

Situation 3
In August, a technical analysis predicts that volatility will increase, and the
market is in a coiling process. The direction of prices is uncertain but potentially explosive. The trader buys a straddle of a long put at 7800 and a long
call at 7800. The quoted call premium is 18.90 and the quoted put premium
is 13.90. The total cost of the straddle is $3280 = $100 ⋅ 32.80. This is the
maximum loss if the Dow Future stalls at 7800.
The straddle makes a profit when the Dow Future moves enough to
recover the cost of the straddle, either below 7472 = 7800 – 328 or above
8128 = 7800 + 328. The potential upside profit is unlimited. The maximum
profit on the downside is $10 ⋅ (7800 – 328), or $74,720, if the Dow Future
goes to zero (somewhat unlikely, but one never knows what Chicken Little
the investor will do if he thinks the sky is falling).

Situation 4
In August, the investor calculates that options are overvalued and that volatility will be lower than implied volatility. He expects a dormant market to
continue through the end of the summer. He decides to sell the September
put and call at 7800, collecting $3280. The return on this short straddle will
turn negative if the Dow Future in September goes below 7472 or above
8128. The maximum loss on the downside is $10 ⋅ (7800 – 328), or $74,720,
and the loss on the upside is unlimited. The investor, however, perceives the
risk as limited, because he believes that the Dow Future will neither increase
nor decrease to these levels within the next month when the options expire.
Of course, in these cases, the trader must also consider catastrophic risk —
as, for example, the Editor’s client who was short puts in the crash of 1987
and lost $57MM.

AU3772_book.fm Page 353 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.2:

Advancements in Investment Technology

353

Perspective (EN9: Once again, do not practice the methods and
techniques described in this chapter without complete confidence
in their use. A course in futures and options is recommended, or
professional consultation.)
I like to tell these stories so that prospective options traders and general
investors are made dramatically aware of the potential dangers, as well as
the potential profits. As I have said elsewhere in this book, the novice should
work to achieve competence and experience before attempting advanced
tricks in futures and options. On the other hand, the investment use of these
instruments for prudent hedging and insurance is recommended to the
investor willing to do his homework, acquire competence, and grow in
investment skills.
Dow Index futures and futures options present new techniques of portfolio protection and profit-making for the general investor. Numerous strategies can be practiced by the moderately competent investor using these
instruments. Keep in mind always that all the methods of analytical investing
espoused in this book are the base discipline: that is, knowledge of the
instruments and their use; prudent trade management; and stop loss discipline; and close attention to the dynamics of the situation.
Above all, the existence of these instruments allows the most conservative of investors insurance and hedging techniques not previously available.
In sum, knowledge of the DJIA Futures and Options on Futures is
absolutely essential for the competent technical investor and trader.

Recommended Further Study
In view of the importance of this chapter, I note here references to advanced
material, which will also be found in Resources (Appendix D). For more
information:
Options as a Strategic Investment by Lawrence Macmillan.
(www.optionstrategist.com)
Chicago Board Options Exchange: www.cboe.com
Chicago Board of Trade, 312-435-3558 or 800-THE-CBOT.
Fax: 312-341-3168; http://www.cbot.com

AU3772_book.fm Page 354 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 355 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

part two

Trading Tactics
Midword
As a kind of foreword to the second part of this book, we might mention a
commentary, “On Understanding Science: An Historical Approach,” by
James Bryant Conant, president emeritus of Harvard.
Dr. Conant points out that, in school, we learn that science is a systematic
collection of facts, which are then classified in orderly array, broken down,
analyzed, examined, synthesized, and pondered; and then lo! a Great Principle emerges, pat, perfect, and ready for use in industry, medicine, or
what-have-you.
He further points out that all of this is a mistaken point of view which
is held by most laymen. Discovery takes form little by little, shrouded in
questioning, and only gradually assumes the substance of a clear, precise,
well-supported theory. The neat tabulation of basic data, forming a series of
proofs and checks, does not come at the start, but much later. In fact, it may
be the work of other men entirely, men who, being furnished with the
conclusions, are then able to construct a complete, integrated body of evidence. Theories of market action are not conceived in a flash of inspiration;
they are built, step by step, out of the experience of traders and students, to
explain the typical phenomena that appear over and over again through the
years.
In market operations, the practical trader is not concerned with theory
as such. The neophyte’s question, “What is the method?” probably means,
actually, “What can I buy to make a lot of money easily and quickly?” If
such a trader reads this book, he may feel that there is “something in it.” He
may feel “It’s worth a try” (a statement, incidentally, that reflects little credit
on his own previous tries). And he may start out quite optimistically, without
any understanding of theory, without any experience in these methods, and
without any basis for real confidence in the method.

355

AU3772_book.fm Page 356 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

356

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

In such cases, the chances are great that he will not immediately enjoy
the easy success he hopes for. His very inexperience in a new approach will
result in mistakes and failures. But even with the most careful application
of these methods, in correctly entered commitments, he may encounter a
series of difficult market moves which may give him a succession of losses.
Whereupon, having no solid confidence in what he is doing, he may sigh,
put the book back on the shelf, and say, “Just as I thought. It’s no damn
good.”
Now if you were about to go into farming for the first time, you might
be told (and it would be true) that the shade tobacco business offers spectacular profits. But you would not expect to gain these profits without investing capital, without studying how shade tobacco is grown, in what kinds of
soils, in what localities, nor without some experience with the crop.
Furthermore, you would need confidence — faith in the opportunity
and also in the methods you were using. If your first season’s crop were
blighted (and these things do happen), you would naturally be disappointed.
If it should happen that your second year’s crop were destroyed by a hailstorm, you would be hurt and understandably despondent. And if your third
season’s crop were to be a total loss due to drought, you would probably be
very gloomy indeed (and who could blame you?). But you would not say,
“There’s nothing to it. It’s no damn good.”
You would know (if you had studied the industry and the approved
cultivation methods) that you were right, regardless of any combination of
unfavorable circumstances, and you would know that the ultimate rewards
would justify your continuation no matter how hard the road, rather than
turn to some easier but less potentially profitable crop.
So it is with technical methods in the stock market. Anyone may encounter bad seasons. The Major Turns inevitably will produce a succession of
losses to Minor Trend operators using the methods suggested in this book.
And there will be times when a man who has no understanding of basic
theory will be tempted to give up the method entirely and look for a “system” that will fit into the pattern of recent market action nicely, so that he
can say, “If I had only averaged my trades…. If I had followed the Dream
Book…. If I had taken Charlie’s tip on XYZ…. If I had done it this way or
that way, I would have come out with a neat profit.”
It would be better, and safer, to understand at the start that no method
that has ever been devised will unfailingly protect you against a loss, or
sometimes even a painful succession of losses. You should realize that what
we are looking for is the probability inherent in any situation. And just as
you would be justified in expecting to draw a white bean from a bag which
you knew contained 700 white beans and 300 black beans (even though you
had just drawn out 10 black beans in succession!), so you are justified in
continuing to follow the methods which, over long periods, seem most surely
and most frequently to coincide with the mechanism of the market.
So this book should not be given a quick “once-over” and adopted
straightaway as a sure and easy road to riches. It should be read over and

AU3772_book.fm Page 357 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Part two: Trading Tactics
