average rollover interest would amount to almost 5 percent.

Futures contracts with different expiration dates (or “maturities”) have different prices, and they have slightly different returns. Pairing up futures contracts with different maturities creates what are known as calendar spreads.
Since both legs of a calendar spread track the price of the underlying asset,
one would think that calendar spreads potentially offer good opportunities
for mean reversion trading. But in reality they do not generally mean-revert.
To understand why, we need to understand more about what drives the returns of futures in general.

Roll Returns, Backwardation, and Contango
The fact that futures contracts with different maturities have different
prices implies that a futures position will have nonzero return even if the
underlying spot price remains unchanged, since eventually all their prices
have to converge toward that constant spot price. This return is called the
roll return or roll yield. Despite its name, a futures position suffers this return
whether we actually “roll forward” to the next contract. It is an intrinsic

115
MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

■ Trading Futures Calendar Spread

First nearby
contract expires

Third nearby
contract expires
t

log(P1)

log(P2)

log(P3)

FIGURE 5.2 Log Prices of Futures with

Different Maturities in Backwardation as a
Function of Time

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

116

part of its total return, which can be decomposed into a spot return and a
roll return.
If the contracts are in backwardation, meaning the near (close to expiring) contracts have higher prices than the far contracts, then the roll returns
will be positive; otherwise if the contracts are in contango, then the roll
returns will be negative.To see this, imagine that the spot price is unchanged
throughout time, represented by the horizontal line in Figure 5.2.
We can also pretend that the log futures prices with different maturities
conform to the same linear function of time with the same slope but with
different offsets, intersecting the spot price at expirations. The question is:
Should the slope be positive or negative? Graphically, if the nearer futures
have a higher price than the farther futures and have to intersect the horizontal line earlier, they must be upward sloping and have positive roll return, as shown in Figure 5.2. At any given time, the price of the first nearby
contract P1 is higher than that of the second nearby contract P2, and so on.
The opposite is true if they are in contango, as illustrated in Figure 5.3. (We
display log prices instead of raw prices so that a contract with a constant
compounded total return will appear as a straight line.)
Note that this graphical argument merely serves as a mnemonic, not a
proof, as, of course, real log futures prices are not linear functions of time,
they may even intersect (two contracts of different maturities having the

log(P3)

log(P2)

log(P1)

t
First nearby
contract expires

Third nearby
contract expires

FIGURE 5.3 Log Prices of Futures with Different

Maturities in Contango as a Function of Time

BOX 5.1

Mnemonic for Backwardation versus Contango
I can never remember whether backwardation means near contracts have
higher or lower price. If you are like me, you can employ the mnemonic below.
This mnemonic originated with John Maynard Keynes (Hull, 1997). He and
John Hicks argued that for normal commodities, those who actually own
the physical commodities (the “hedgers,” such as farmers or oil producers)
tend to hedge their positions by shorting futures, expecting to lose money
on their hedges. Meanwhile, the speculators are the ones who have a net
long position, and need to be compensated for taking this risk. So they will
buy only futures with positive roll return, or equivalently futures that have
lower prices than the expected future spot price; that is, the ones in “normal
backwardation.” So we should remember that “backwardation” is always
associated with “normal,” and “normal” means the futures price is always
lower than the spot price.
Of course, this argument is not completely correct, since we will see that
crude oil, a perfectly “normal” commodity, is in contango over various periods.
But this story gives us a good mnemonic.

117
MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

same price) before they expire, and finally the spot price at expiration is
unlikely to be constant throughout time. Nevertheless, Figures 5.2 and 5.3
illustrate the typical situation. A mnemonic to help us remember whether
backwardation means near contracts have higher prices than far contracts is
presented in Box 5.1.

To calculate the spot and roll returns for a set of futures contracts, it is
helpful to have a simple model of futures prices. For many commodities, we
can write
F(t, T ) = S(t)exp(γ(t − T ))

(5.7)

where t is the current time, T is the expiration time, and S(t) is the spot
price (Hull, 1997). This model implies that the (compounded) roll return
γ is constant over time. But we can take a step further, and assume that the
(compounded) spot return α is also constant:
S(t) = c eαt

(5.8)

Essentially, we want to mathematically describe those lines in Figures 5.2
and 5.3, with the slight modification that they terminate not on a horizontal
line, but one that has a nonzero slope. So the model we adopt for the price
of a future that matures at time T is
F(t, T ) = c eαtexp(γ(t − T ))

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

118

(5.9)

where c, α, and γ are constants. The total return of a contract is given by
∂(log F(t, T ))/∂t = α + γ

(5.10)

since T is fixed for a specific contract. Finally, the roll return of the futures
is given by
−∂(log F(t, T ))/∂T = γ

(5.11)

Hence, we have mathematically captured the notion that total return = spot
return + roll return.
Based on this model, we can use linear regression to estimate the spot and
roll returns of a futures series, as is demonstrated in Example 5.3.
Roll returns can be a curse on many seemingly attractive strategies
based on knowledge or intuition informed by the underlying spot price.
For example, an ETF of commodity producers (such as XLE) usually cointegrates with the spot price of that commodity. But because of the presence
of roll return, this ETF may not cointegrate with the futures price of that
commodity. Not understanding this subtlety cost me more than $100,000
in trading loss, and ruined my first year (2006) as an independent trader.

Example 5.3: Estimating Spot and Roll Returns
Using the Constant Returns Model

T=[1:length(spot)]’;
T(isBadData)=[];
res=ols(log(spot), [T ones(size(T, 1), 1)]);
fprintf(1, ‘Average annualized spot return=%f\n’, ...
252*smartmean(res.beta(1)));

Next, we will fit the forward curve (the future price as a function
of maturity date) in order to obtain the values for the roll return γ;
that is, we will pick one day at a time and fit the prices of futures
of five nearest maturities to their time-to-maturity T (measured
in months), as long as there are five consecutive contracts for the
fitting. (The forward curve might well change from contango to
(Continued )

119
MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

If we assume that spot and roll returns are truly constant throughout
time, as we did in Equation 5.9, we can use linear regression to
estimate their values. It is easy to find the spot return this way, as we
just need to regress the log of the spot prices against time. But to find
the roll return requires us to pick a fixed point in time, and regress
the prices of the various contracts against their time to maturity. In
practice, the regression coefficient will depend on that fixed time,
and also on the exact set of contracts available at that time. So despite
the assumption of constant roll returns, we will still end up with a
slowly varying estimated γ.
We will apply this procedure to a few different futures in different
categories: the Brazilian Real future BR, the corn future C, the WTI
crude oil future CL, the copper future HG, and the two-year U.S.
Treasury Note future TU.
In the following program, we assume that the spot price is
contained in an τ × 1 array spot, and the futures closing price data
are stored in a τ × M array cl, where τ is the number of trading days,
and M is the number of contracts. Certainly not all contracts exist
at all times, so we will denote the prices for those days when some
contracts are nonexistent as NaN.
We will first find the average annualized (compounded) spot
return with a simple regression below. (The program can be
downloaded as estimateFuturesReturns.m.)

Example 5.3 (Continued)
backwardation or vice versa beyond the nearest five contracts.) We
store the values of γ in a τ × 1 array gamma.
Gamma=NaN(size(tday));
for t=1:length(tday)
FT=cl(t, :)’;
idx=find(isfinite(FT));
idxDiff=fwdshift(1, idx)-idx; % ensure consecutive months
% futures
if (length(idx) >= 5 && all(idxDiff(1:4)==1))
FT=FT(idx(1:5));
T=[1:length(FT)]’;
res=ols(log(FT), [T ones(size(T, 1), 1)]);
gamma(t)=-12*res.beta(1);
end
end

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

120

To verify that Equation 5.7 is sensible, we scatter-plot the log futures
values of CL against the time to maturity at one fixed point in time in
Figure 5.4 and check that they do fall on a straight line quite neatly.
(We restrict ourselves to only five nearest contracts in this scatter plot.
Prices of contracts farther out in maturities may not fall onto the same
straight line so neatly, indicating a breakdown in Equation 5.7)

FIGURE 5.4 Scatter Plot of Log Futures Values against

Time-to-Maturity for CL 2007 January to May Contracts.
The log prices fall neatly on a straight line.

Example 5.3 (Continued)
The annualized values for γ over the period November 22, 2004,
to August 13, 2012, for CL are plotted in Figure 5.5.

121

backwardation and negative values indicate contango.

I listed the average annualized values for the spot returns α and the
roll returns γ for the five futures in Table 5.1.You can see that for BR,
C, and TU, the magnitude of the roll returns is much larger than that
of the spot returns!
TABLE 5.1 Annualized Average Spot and Roll Returns for Various Futures
Symbol

α

γ

BR (CME)

–2.7%

10.8%

C (CBOT)

2.8%

–12.8%

CL (NYMEX)

7.3%

–7.1%

HG (CME)

5.0%

7.7%

TU (CBOT)

–0.0%

3.2%

MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

FIGURE 5.5 Values of the Roll Return γ for CL. Positive values indicate

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

122

Another example: Every student of finance knows that volatility is mean
reverting; more precisely, we know that the VIX index is mean reverting.
In fact, an augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test will show that it is stationary with 99 percent certainty. You might think, then, that trading VX
futures would be a great mean-reverting strategy. (VX is the future that
tracks the VIX volatility index trading on the CBOE’s Futures Exchange
[CFE].) However, a look at the back-adjusted front-month futures prices
over time indicates that the mean reversion in VX only happens after volatility peaked around November 20, 2008 (the credit crisis), May 20, 2010
(aftermath of flash crash), and then again on October 3, 2011. At other
times, it just inexorably declines. Indeed, the ADF test shows that the
back-adjusted front contract prices definitively do not mean-revert. You
can see the difference between VIX and the front-month VX in Figure 5.6,
a difference that is entirely due to roll return. The VX future has been in
contango around three fourths of the time, and the average roll return is a
very negative annualized –50 percent (Simon and Campasano, 2012). This
persistent contango is why we find in Chapter 6 that a momentum strategy
works pretty well with VX.
Average roll returns can be quite large compared to their average spot
returns for other futures besides VX as well. Table 5.1 shows that the annualized roll return for corn is –12.8 percent compared to a spot return
of 2.8 percent, and Erb and Harvey calculated that the annualized roll
return for heating oil is 4.6 percent, compared to a spot return of 0.93
percent, over the period December 1982 to May 2004 (Erb and Harvey,
2006).

FIGURE 5.6 VIX Index versus Back-Adjusted VX Front

Contract Prices

Do Calendar Spreads Mean-Revert?

Example 5.4: Mean Reversion Trading of
Calendar Spreads
As we discussed in the main text, the log market value of a
calendar spread portfolio with a long far contract and a short near
contract is simply γ(T1 − T2), with T2 > T1. Since T1 and T2 are
fixed for a particular calendar spread, we can use the (hopefully)
mean- reverting γ to generate trading signals. In the program
(Continued )

123
MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

A calendar spread is a portfolio that consists of a long position in one futures
contract, and a short position in another futures contract with the same underlying but a different expiration month. Based on our previous experience
with spreads in general, calendar spreads would seem to be great candidates
for mean reversion: Aren’t both legs tracking the exact same underlying asset? But here again, roll returns derail our intuition.The futures price model
expressed in Equation 5.7 will make this clear.
As with any spread trading, we can choose to define the spread as the
differences of log prices of the two legs in order to generate trading signals
(see Chapter 3), assuming that we maintain the market value of the two legs
to be the same at every period. The log market value of a spread portfolio
with a long far contract and a short near contract is simply γ(T1 − T2) with
T2 > T1, according to Equation 5.7. (Again, this simple formula may not
hold if T2 − T1 is large.) The important point is that the calendar spread trading signal does not depend at all on the spot price, only on the roll return!
As we learned in Chapter 2, return series (as opposed to price series)
almost always mean-revert. Here we are considering not the total return
of a future, but the roll return component only, so things may be different.
(Though the model expressed in Equation 5.7 presupposes that the spot
and roll returns are both constant, we may nevertheless attempt to apply it
to situations where the roll return varies slowly.) We run the ADF test for
12-month log calendar spread of CL, and discovered that it is indeed stationary with 99 percent probability, and a half-life of 36 days. Furthermore, if
we apply our usual linear mean-reverting strategy to the log calendar spread
for CL, we do get an APR of 8.3 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 1.3 from
January 2, 2008, to August 13, 2012. The details of the backtest are described in Example 5.4.

Example 5.4 (Continued)
calendarSpdsMeanReversion.m below, we assume that the price of the
CL contracts is stored in a τ × M array cl, where τ is the number
of trading days, and M is the number of contracts. We compute γ in
the same way as in Example 5.3, and store the resulting values γ in a
τ × 1 array gamma. As a first step, we find the half-life of γ.
isGoodData=find(isfinite(gamma));
gammalag=lag(gamma(isGoodData), 1);
deltaGamma=gamma(isGoodData)-gammalag;
deltaGamma(1)=[];
gammalag(1)=[];
regress_results=ols(deltaGamma, [gammalag ...
ones(size(gammalag))]);
halflife=-log(2)/regress_results.beta(1);

The half-life is found to be about 36 days. To apply our linear mean
reversion strategy, we need to compute the Z-Score, with the lookback set equal to the half-life, as demonstrated in Example 2.5.
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

124

lookback=round(halflife);
ma=movingAvg(gamma, lookback);
mstd=movingStd(gamma, lookback);
zScore=(gamma-ma)./mstd;

Here comes the most difficult part. We need to pick a pair of
contracts, far and near, on each historical day, based on three criteria:
1. The holding period for a pair of contracts is 3 months (61 trading
days).
2. We roll forward to the next pair of contracts 10 days before the
current near contract’s expiration.
3. The expiration dates of the near and far contracts are 1 year apart.
Once we have picked those contracts, we assume initially that we
will hold a long position in the far contract, and a short position in
the near one, subject to revisions later.
isExpireDate=false(size(cl));
positions=zeros(size(cl));

Example 5.4 (Continued)
isExpireDate=isfinite(cl) & ~isfinite(fwdshift(1, cl));
holddays=3*21;
numDaysStart=holddays+10;
numDaysEnd=10;
spreadMonth=12; % No. months between far and near contracts.
for c=1:length(contracts)-spreadMonth
expireIdx=find(isExpireDate(:, c));
expireIdx=expireIdx(end); % There may be some missing
% data earlier on
if (c==1)
startIdx=max(1, expireIdx-numDaysStart);
endIdx=expireIdx-numDaysEnd;
else % ensure next front month contract doesn’t start
until current one ends
myStartIdx=endIdx+1;
myEndIdx=expireIdx-numDaysEnd;
if (myEndIdx-myStartIdx >= holddays)
startIdx=myStartIdx;
endIdx=myEndIdx;

125

else
end
end
if (~isempty(expireIdx) & endIdx > startIdx)
positions(startIdx:endIdx, c)=-1;
positions(startIdx:endIdx, c+spreadMonth)=1;
end
end

Finally, we apply the linear mean reversion strategy to determine
the true positions and calculate the unlevered daily returns of the
portfolio. (The daily return is the daily P&L divided by 2 because we
have two contracts.)
positions(isnan(zScore), :)=0;
positions(zScore > 0, :)=-positions(zScore > 0, :);
ret=smartsum(lag(positions).*(cl-lag(cl, 1))./lag(cl, 1), ...
2)/2;
ret(isnan(ret))=0;

(Continued )

MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

startIdx=NaN;

Example 5.4 (Continued)
This results in an attractive unlevered APR of 8.3 percent and a
Sharpe ratio of 1.3 from January 2, 2008, to August 13, 2012. The
cumulative returns curve is shown in Figure 5.7.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

126

FIGURE 5.7 Cumulative Returns of the Linear Mean Reversion Strategy

Applied on CL 12-Month Calendar Spread

Students of commodities markets know that seasonality is often a prominent feature. So you may find that for a particular market, only calendar
spreads of certain months (and certain months apart) mean-revert. However, we won’t pursue these market-dependent details here.
We can try this same linear mean reversion strategy on the VX calendar
spreads. It turns out that Equation 5.7 works only for a future whose underlying is a traded asset, and VIX is not one. (If you scatter-plot the log VX
futures prices as a function of time-to-maturity as we did in Figure 5.4 for
CL, you will find that they do not fall on a straight line.) Various researchers have suggested alternative formulae suitable for the VX future (see, for
example, Dupoyet, Daigler, and Chen, 2011), but I have found that none
can explain the mean-reverting property of VX calendar spreads in the face

FIGURE 5.8 Cumulative Returns of Linear Mean

Reversion Strategy on VX Calendar Spread

■ Futures Intermarket Spreads
As I stated in the introduction of this chapter, it is not easy to find futures
intermarket spreads (i.e., pairs of futures from different underlyings) that
are mean reverting. Nevertheless, let’s systematically round up some of the
usual suspects.
The most obvious candidate for pair trading futures is intermarket spreads
between markets that are closely related. For example, the energy complexes (WTI crude oil CL, Brent crude oil BZ, unleaded gasoline RB, and
heating oil HO, all traded on the NewYork Mercantile Exchange [NYMEX])
should offer rich potential opportunities.

127
MEAN REVERSION OF CURRENCIES AND FUTURES

of the non-mean reversion of the VX future itself. So we can rely on only
our empirical observation that an ADF test on the ratio back/front of VX also
shows that it is stationary with a 99 percent probability. If we apply our usual
linear mean-reverting strategy using ratio as the signal (and with a 15-day
look-back for the moving average and standard deviations), VX yields an
APR of 17.7 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 1.5 from October 27, 2008, to
April 23, 2012 (see Figure 5.8 for a plot of its cumulative returns), though
it performed much more poorly prior to October 2008. In the next section,
I will present graphic evidence that there is a regime change in the behavior
of VIX and its futures around the time of the financial crisis of 2008, so perhaps this abrupt change in the strategy performance is related to that as well.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

128

Before we run a Johansen test on these four contracts, we can first examine a well-known portfolio called the crack spread consisting of long three
contracts of CL, short two contracts of RB, and short one contract of HO.
This is called the crack spread because we can obtain gasoline and heating
oil by cracking the long hydrocarbon chains of crude oil molecules, and
the 3:2:1 hedge ratios come about because three barrels of CL produces
approximately two barrels of RB and one barrel of heating oil, though this
is not universally true for all refiners. One advantage of trading the crack
spread is that NYMEX offers a ready-made basket for it, with a much lower
margin requirement than if we trade them separately.
However, running an ADF test on the crack spread from May 20, 2002,
to May 4, 2012, shows that this spread is not mean reverting. The chart of
this spread (Figure 5.9) reveals a dramatic increase in value around March 9,
2007, to July 3, 2008, and then a sharp drop after that, and running the
linear mean reversion strategy on it shows negative returns for that period.
(Note that we must back-adjust the continuous contracts using prices rather
than returns in this test; otherwise, this price spread will show a discontinuous jump at rollovers, as explained in Chapter 1.)
Another spread that would seem to be a good candidate is CL and BZ in a
1:1 ratio. After all, their underlyings are both crude oils. But another quick
ADF test will show that it is far from stationary. BZ has relentlessly outperformed CL due to a variety of factors. The likely culprits include the increasing oil production in the United States (Friedman, 2012), the pipeline
bottleneck at Cushing, Oklahoma (Philips, 2012), and geopolitical concerns

FIGURE 5.9 The Crack Spread

such as the embargo against Iranian oil in 2012, which affected Europe and
therefore BZ more than the United States.
If you want to backtest intermarket spreads yourself, don’t forget to
make sure that their prices are synchronous, as I cautioned in Chapter 1. In
particular, before BZ started trading at the NYMEX on September 5, 2001,
it was traded at the Intercontinental Petroleum Exchange in London, which
obviously has a different closing time than NYMEX on which CL has always
been traded. So backtesting the BZ-CL spread before September 5, 2001,
using closing prices would be wrong. Also, we often need to multiply the
futures prices by a factor to convert points into USD.
Our search for mean-reverting intermarket futures spreads has not been
fruitful so far. But I will now discuss one unusual spread that will change that.
