
1 Howard L. Simons, “The Long, Awful Life of the Dollar Carry Trade,” Currency Trader

Magazine, January 2012, 22.

Forex for Beginners
In 2007 the credit bubble began to deflate. With the inception of the financial
crisis, risk appetite collapsed, and skyrocketing volatility caused a sudden
unwinding of carry trade positions. A short squeeze ensued, and the yen
finished the year up 25% in its strongest performance ever. As US interest
rates fell to 0%, the dollar replaced the yen as the funding currency of choice
for carry trades. Since then, the yen has risen continuously. Any long-term
trader that discerned this sea change would have profited handsomely.

Figure 7-8. The carry trade dictates long-term movements in the USD/JPY

To deploy a carry trade strategy, you need only to identify a currency pair
with a broad interest rate differential and low volatility, sit back, and start
collecting interest. If volatility rises suddenly and/or the interest rate
differential narrows, you may need to re-evaluate your position. There are a
handful of currency ETFs (such as the iPath Optimized Currency Carry Fund
and PowerShares DB G10 Currency Harvest Fund) that mimic carry trade
strategies, though their performance records are spotty.

Advanced Strategy
There are no firm standards as to what constitutes an advanced strategy.
Suffice it to say that such strategies take a long time to develop and must be
executed meticulously. Still, advanced strategies may represent the most

183

184

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
effective methods for beating the market, and outsized returns should accrue
to those with the most sophisticated strategies.
Most institutional currency traders make use of advanced technical strategies.
They use powerful computers and complex algorithms to sweep through
hundreds of combinations of indicators in search of the strongest signals.
These algorithms are closely guarded secrets and are so valuable that they
have already become the subject of several high-profile lawsuits. Fortunately,
the software that institutional traders use to develop their advanced strategies
has begun to trickle down to the retail level and is available, free of charge,
through many forex brokers, or for a fee from third-party providers. In
Chapter 9, I will offer an introduction to using such programs.
Meanwhile, advanced fundamental strategies can be developed manually or
with the aid of computers. For example, you could use regression analysis (a
tool that is available through Microsoft Excel) to compare currency
fluctuations with economic data. Or you could try to establish a tradable
correlation between a particular currency pair and another asset, such as
treasury bonds or gold prices. My personal favorite advanced strategy is
based on the correlations between currencies.
For example, let’s say that you had been eyeing the AUD/USD in early 2007,
when it was still rising. Worried that the credit bubble that was driving the
gains in the AUD/USD was about to burst, you decided to seek out another
currency pair to hedge your exposure. You pulled up the following table of
correlations and identified the JPY/EUR as the best candidate.

AUD/USD

AUD/USD

JPY/EU
R

EUR/USD

GBP/USD

USD/CAD

USD/CHF

USD/JPY

100%

-50.9%

59%

66.2%

77%

-78.8%

26.5%

The two pairs exhibited an inverse (weekly) correlation coefficient of 50.9%,
which meant that an upward move in the AUD/USD had a 50% chance of
driving a corresponding downward move in the JPY/EUR—and vice versa.
In the event that the AUD/USD didn’t perform as expected, then, you would
have been protected by your JPY/EUR position.
After opening two simultaneous long positions, you patted yourself on the
back for the continued rise in the AUD/USD. If only you hadn’t been so
stupid as to buy the JPY/EUR, whose modest decline was eroding your solid
gains. But, wait! The credit crisis struck suddenly, and the AUD/USD
collapsed! Fortunately, the inverse correlation held, and what would have

Forex for Beginners
been innumerable losses were offset by strong gains in the JPY/EUR. In fact,
you can see from Figure 7-9 that while the performance of the AUD/USD
and JPY/EUR have varied since 2007, their combined return has always been
positive. Behold, the perfect trade!

Figure 7-9. Cumulative returns from investing in the AUD/USD and JPY/EUR, separately
and together

Trading the News
Trading the news is arguably the most difficult strategy of all. When certain
economic data is released, the news can have a sudden and unpredictable
impact on the forex markets. For this reason, when big news announcements
are brewing, the majority of short-term traders will deliberately close any
positions that could potentially be impacted and/or stay out of the markets
altogether rather than risk having their trading strategies undermined by an
unexpected movement. Long-term fundamental analysts, meanwhile, pay
attention to the content of the news but may wait several days after their
release before acting.
At the same time, there are a handful of traders that thrive on the volatility
that certain news releases engender and deliberately craft strategies that stand
to profit from this phenomenon. Every day, there are literally dozens of
economic indicators that are made public, and the majority of them have zero
impact on the markets. A handful of them, such as employment indicators
(e.g., nonfarm payrolls), interest rate decisions, trade data, inflation indices,

185

186

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
retail sales, and a handful of others, however, can cause significant gyrations
in the markets.
Typically, in the days or hours leading up to an important data release, a
consensus expectation will form, and traders will consolidate their positions
in the relevant currency pair(s). In the minutes before the release, the pair
may break suddenly in a particular direction. When the data is finally
released, investors become frantic. Their aim is to either buy the trend if the
data release has conformed to expectations or to sell before the rest of the
market in the event of a surprise.
Anyone looking at the economic calendar for February 3, 2012, as seen in
Figure 7-10, would have noticed that a handful of employment indicators
were scheduled for release at 1:30 p.m. (GMT). In the half day leading up to
these data releases, the EUR/USD consolidated upward as traders planned for
a continuation of the status quo via the previous month’s figures. In fact, the
actual data beat expectations, and only 30 minutes later the USD had already
rallied by 100 PIPs. Apparently, the sell-off was too steep, and traders spent
the rest of the day building back up long positions.

b

Forex for Beginners

Figure 7-10. Charting the impact of the release of employment data on the EUR/USD

Those that sought to profit from this chain of events could have entered the
market on any number of occasions. If you subscribe to the idea, “Buy the
rumor, sell the news,” then you probably would have bought the EUR/USD
(and sold the USD/EUR) in the hours leading up to the news release and then
dumped it (and even opened the opposite position) immediately after the
news announcement. Alternatively, you might not have any opinion on the
data itself and might merely be interested in a volatility play. In this case you
could place simultaneous buy and sell orders slightly above and below the
consolidation channel (indicated by the red horizontal lines in Figure 7-10).
With the use of a One-Cancels-Other trade (which will be explained in
Chapter 9), your trading platform will automatically open a position for you,

187

188

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy
depending on the direction of the breakout. If the breakout is to the upside,
then the buy order will be triggered and the sell order will be cancelled, and
vice versa is true for a downside breakout. Of course, if you set your bands
too close together, you run the risk of falling victim to a false breakout, as in
Figure 7-10.

Basic Options Strategies
The main source of appeal for options boils down to leverage. For most
securities, the ability to make long/short bets without having to buy/sell the
security itself is a huge benefit. For example, with $25,000 you could only
afford 40 shares of Google stock, assuming a current share price of $630.
Alternatively, you could buy 2,500 Google call options for $10 each, and
achieve significantly larger gains if the share price increases than if you had
merely bought the stock itself. Given the open availability and low cost of
leverage in the forex market, however, options really aren’t much of a perk.
Any retail trader can buy a $100,000 block of currency with a modest
amount of equity capital. For this reason, options represent only a small part
of forex activity.
At the same time, traders prize options for their flexibility and unique
structure. Hedging, for example, is a risk management strategy designed to
limit losses. In options parlance, hedging usually means taking on a
secondary position to minimize losses from a primary position. For example,
let’s say that you have an open position consisting of 100,000 units of
EUR/USD and the current spot price is 1.30. In order to protect yourself from
a downside move, you could buy put options for an equivalent amount of
currency at a strike price of 1.25, thereby limiting your potential losses to
500 PIPs. You might be wondering why you shouldn’t just input a stop-loss
order instead, which would achieve the same purpose. The answer is that a
put option will not automatically exercise while a stop-loss order will. In
other words, if you take out put options and the EUR/USD falls to 1.24
before rising to 1.40, you will be able to capture all of this upside.
Conversely, you would have irrevocably locked in a 500-PIP loss with an
equivalent stop-loss order. The difference, of course, is that put options cost
money (money that could otherwise have been used for your spot position)
while a stop-loss order is free. In addition, as retail forex brokers do not
typically offer currency options, trading them requires a separate account and
a separate platform. This may prove to be more trouble than it’s worth.

Forex for Beginners

189

Still, options are conducive to a many types of unique forex trading
strategies, many of which are simply impossible to execute in the spot
market. My favorite is the straddle. A long straddle involves the
simultaneous purchase of call and put options, such that profit is earned if the
spot currency price rises or falls significantly. The long straddle is basically a
volatility play that is based on the expectation that the price of a given
currency will fluctuate significantly. Which way it moves is irrelevant—just
as long as it is a big move.
Let’s imagine that you were looking at a real-time chart of the USD/MXN
(as depicted in the first panel of Figure 7-11) and observed that the pair has
been ranging wildly over the last few months. While you know that a slight
correction is already underway, you aren’t sure whether it will continue or
whether it will swing upward suddenly. The only thing you feel relatively
certain of is that it will continue to move in big swings. The pair is currently
trading at 13.70 (indicated by the dotted red line in Figure 7-11), and you
zero in on the 13.60 call and 13.80 put option (whose strike prices are also
indicated in Figure 7-11), both of which are conveniently trading for 0.10
each. In order for you to earn a profit, the price will need to rise or fall by at
least 20 basis points so that you can earn the premiums back. You calculate
that if it breaks above 13.90 or below 13.50 (outside of the gray envelope),
you will be in the black. As can be seen from Figure 7-11, it ultimately does
so on several occasions, providing good opportunities to profitably close out
your options position. With a long straddle, your maximum loss is equal to
the combined premiums that you paid for the two options.

l

190

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy

Figure 7-11. Hypothetical options long straddle strategy and theoretical P&L chart

A short straddle, meanwhile, is based on the same concept but executed in
reverse. The goal of a short straddle is to profit from a lack of volatility by
simultaneously selling put and call options. For example, let’s say that the
USD/JPY has traded in a very tight (not volatile) range over the last two
months, as indicated in the left panel of Figure 7-12. As long as it remains
range bound, you can lock in profits by selling a 77.10 put option and 77.70
call option. Then, you can sit back and wait. In a nutshell, if the USD/JPY
price is within the gray area when the options contracts expire, then the trade
will be profitable. To close out the position prematurely, you must buy the
options back at market prices. As with a long straddle, potential profits and
losses will vary accordingly. It’s that simple.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 7-12. Hypothetical options straddle strategy and theoretical P&L chart

At the same time, there is no free lunch. Currency pairs that are less volatile
will have smaller premiums while currency pairs with greater volatility will
command proportionately higher premiums. You can play around with
different strike prices and expiration dates, and most options trading
platforms can automatically generate potential profit and loss charts so that
you can forecast how the impact on the underlying spot price (which is what
you are ultimately watching) will affect the profitability of your options
positions.
As I indicated in Chapter 2, hedging and straddles represent only the tip of
the iceberg. There are dozens of basic options strategies, hundreds of
combinations of strategies, and an infinite number of actual trades that you
can make. For better or worse, however, options tend to exist in their own
separate world. As a result, in addition to monitoring movements and
volatility levels in the spot market, options traders must also have a nuanced
understanding and specialized knowledge of their own market. In short, those
of you that are interested in trading currency options would benefit from
purchasing a book devoted exclusively to that subject.

191

192

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy

Leverage and Position Sizing
The final step of executing any forex strategy involves figuring out how
much to buy or sell. Consider, first of all, that the minimum position size is
$10,000 for a micro lot and $100,000 for a standard lot. As a result, most
traders will have to develop a certain amount of comfort with leverage. At
the same time, leverage is expensive. I’ve already discussed how leverage
can amplify gains and losses, but I also need to emphasize the fact that
leverage magnifies transaction costs. With 20 times the leverage (i.e., $5,000
equity for a $100,000 trade), for instance, a trader can expect to spend 0.2%
to 2% of account equity on a single round-trip trade. That might not sound
like much, but it can quickly add up after a series of losing trades. From
Figure 7-13, it should immediately be clear that trading a currency pair with
100 times the leverage where the spread is 5 PIPs is extraordinarily risky.
While leveraged transaction costs will seem trivial on winning trades, they
magnify the pain of losing trades.

Figure 7-13. Relative transaction costs (as a percentage of account equity) increase in
proportion with leverage

In the end, position sizing is more of an art than a science and depends on
many factors, including risk tolerance, confidence, and strategy. Those that
have a long-term outlook may feel more comfortable risking more of their
account equity on individual trades. On the other hand, holding multiple open
positions at the same time requires smaller positions and/or increased
leverage. Those that like the possibility of scaling into losing trades while
keeping leverage at a reasonable level should plan to open smaller initial

Forex for Beginners
positions. Also, it’s better to be safe than sorry. If, after acquiring several
months of experience, you feel confident in your strategy and approach to
trading, you may wish to experiment with greater leverage and larger
position sizes.

Conclusion
As with analysis, strategy can be as simple or as complex as you desire. The
most basic strategy involves the opening of a long position that you
ultimately close (hopefully, not at a loss!) with an offsetting trade. More
sophisticated traders will incorporate scaling and different types of orders
into their trading plans as part of a risk management strategy. They may trade
over multiple time frames or trade many different types of securities together
as part of an integrated cross-market strategy. Whether you decide to move
up the ladder of complexity and sophistication will depend on both how
much success you achieve and the amount of time that you are prepared to
devote to trading forex.

193

194

Chapter 7 | Trading Strategy

CHAPTER

