
Kicking it all off: Earnings season
Sports fans wait all year for the beginning of football, basketball, or baseball
season. And children can’t help but anticipate the holiday season. But it’s
earnings season that fundamental analysts look forward to.
Four times a year, shortly after the end of the quarter, companies will begin
to report their financial results to investors. Since most companies are on
a calendar year, the results generally start trickling out two weeks after the
quarter ends. Four times a year, usually in January, April, July, and October,
thousands of companies report their financial results en masse. These times
of year are called earnings season.
Aluminum maker Alcoa earned the unofficial designation as the company to
kick off earnings season. The company’s advanced accounting system allows
it to close its books very rapidly following the end of the quarter. Alcoa is the
first stock that’s a member of the Dow Jones industrial average to report its
earnings each quarter.

No data is bad data
If a company claims to be publicly traded but
doesn’t provide financial information, be highly
skeptical. The lack of financial information is
especially critical when dealing with stocks that
trade on the largely unregulated markets known
as the Pink Sheets or OTC Bulletin Board.
Unlike regulated exchanges, like the NYSE and
NASDAQ, stocks that trade on the Pink Sheets
and OTC Bulletin Board are not required to
provide any financial information to investors.
You read that right. These companies may even
have ticker symbols, but never disclose how
much they made or even how much revenue
they generated. Most of the stocks on these
markets are lightly regulated, if at all.

08 506455-ch04.indd 55

And the lack of financial information is a huge
reason why investors, especially those who
rely on fundamental analysis, are often best
served by avoiding stocks that trade on the
OTC Bulletin Board or Pink Sheets. These markets are infamous hangouts for so-called penny
stocks. These stocks, which generally trade for
a few pennies, are often just a name and little
else. Sometimes penny-stock companies claim
to have products and a management team, but
don’t actually generate any money to speak of.
Penny stocks are popular with speculators,
who like to talk up a shell company’s prospects,
get investors excited enough to buy in, and then
dump the shares for a quick profit.

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

56

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
Not all companies follow a calendar year. For instance, retailers generally
bring in a vast majority of their sales each year during December. For that
reason, many retailers close their books at the end of January, to give them
time to tally up their performance in December and give a full report for the
year. When a company ends its year, for accounting purposes in a month other
than December, it’s called a fiscal year.

Getting the earnings press release
You don’t have to be a newspaper reporter to appreciate the earnings press
release. Contrary to its name, the earnings press release is for all investors, not
just the media. After the end of a quarter, companies will publicly announce
their financial results by distributing the press release. The press release is
usually, but not always, accompanied by a conference call for investors and
analysts. During the call, the management team will go over the quarter or
year, describe the information in the earnings press release, and answer questions from the analysts who cover the company’s stock for research firms.
When you read or hear a company reported its financial results, the information almost always comes from the company’s earnings press release. While
earnings press releases are technically unofficial and preliminary, they’re usually accurate enough for investors, analysts, and the news media to use the
numbers immediately. It’s important to remember, though, that the earnings
press release is not reviewed by an accountant or auditor.
When companies issue an earnings press release, they will often notify the
regulators by filing a form 8-K. The 8-K filing is the official way to signal to the
world that the company has released critical information.
Regulators do not directly stipulate what companies must say in earnings
press releases. But generally, earnings press releases contain several key parts:
✓ Summary of the results: Most earnings press releases will give the numbers investors want most right at the top, maybe even in the headline. That
includes the revenue and earnings the company generated during the quarter and how much it grew (or shrunk) from the same quarter last year.
Be leery when a company brags about a quarter being a “record” quarter.
Even if a company’s revenue rose to a record amount, its costs may have
also run out of control and eaten into its earnings.
✓ Management comment: A member of the management team will usually
opine on how the quarter went. As you might imagine, these statements
are generally very carefully crafted, overly optimistic, and not particularly useful.
✓ Description of major business events during the year: Companies
might break down — and even provide succinct bullet points — of the
major accomplishments during the period.

08 506455-ch04.indd 56

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

57

✓ Guidance for the future: Most companies will often provide earnings
guidance, or an estimate on how much the company might earn in the
upcoming year. This guidance is important since it lets you know what
the company expects in the near future.
✓ Financial statements: The earnings press release is the first glimpse
investors will get of the company’s income statement and balance sheet.
These statements are among the most critical documents for fundamental data you’ll get.
It’s a good idea, when reading an earnings press release, to bypass most
everything except the financial statements. While earnings press releases are
intended to be honest representations of a company’s performance, companies use the first parts of the earnings press release to put their performance
in the best light. In contrast, the financial statements are the purest and leastbiased parts of the press release.

Bracing for the 10-Q
Following the earnings press release, the next document to trickle from the
company is the 10-Q. The 10-Q is the official financial report submitted by a
company to summarize its performance during the quarter.
Most companies have 40 days from the end of each fiscal quarter to produce
and provide the 10-Q to investors. Generally, companies file the 10-Q a week
or two after they provide the earnings press release.
Both the earnings press release and 10-Q serve the same basic purpose: They
tell investors how the company did, financially, during the quarter. But since
the 10-Q is written primarily to satisfy regulatory requirements, it’s usually
much more straightforward and contains less spin.
The 10-Q must be filed with the chief regulator of the financial markets, the SEC.
As a result, companies are careful to include the following key components:
✓ Financial statements: Companies don’t waste any time getting straight
to the point with the 10-Q. The key financial statements are presented
right at the top, while they’re usually at the bottom of earnings press
releases.
Don’t make the mistake of assuming since you read the earnings press
release, you don’t need to bother with the 10-Q. A vast majority of companies don’t include a statement of cash flows in the earnings press
release. The statement of cash flows, however, must be included in the
10-Q. As you’ll discover in Chapter 7, the statement of cash flows is an
extremely important document used in financial analysis.

08 506455-ch04.indd 57

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

58

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
✓ Footnotes: Just as some books just don’t fit correctly in your bookshelf,
some financial information doesn’t slip nicely into the financial statements. Unusual or noteworthy financial events might require more
description than will fit into the financial statements, and those are
available in the footnotes.
Never skip the footnotes. Companies will often throw items in the footnotes, hoping you’ll miss them as an investor. Enron, for instance, stuffed
much of the information about its cryptic partnerships in the footnotes.
✓ Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition: This section of the 10-Q is usually called the MD&A. In the MD&A, management
steps investors through its financial results for the quarter. The narrative is usually stripped down and, well, straightforward since executives
know the SEC will review it. So they don’t want to say anything that may
haunt them later.
✓ Controls and procedures: The company will let investors know if they
found any problems in the way they monitor their accounting and present the information to investors. Following the accounting scandal at
Enron, new rules from the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 forced companies
to make sure they had adequate controls in place over their accounting.
✓ Other information: Here, companies can throw in other material that
might be of note to investors. This may include any pending litigation or
whether the company sold additional stock, or is having trouble paying
interest on its debt.
Many investors don’t realize a company’s 10-Q is not officially audited by a
third-party accounting firm. That doesn’t mean you can’t necessarily trust
the numbers; just know a little more skepticism isn’t a bad idea.

Running through the 10-K
If you’ve ever run a 10-K race, you know that it can be pretty grueling if you
haven’t trained properly. The same goes for companies looking to report
their annual financial performance in the form called the 10-K. This document is a monster, and producing it is one of the biggest financial chores a
company faces. It’s also the most comprehensive piece of fundamental data
you’ll get as an investor. Most companies are required to release their 10-K filings within 75 days from the end of their fiscal year. Some smaller companies,
though, have 90 days to comply with the rules.
Due to the complexity of producing a 10-K, there can be a significant delay
between the end of the calendar year and the time the report gets released.

08 506455-ch04.indd 58

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

59

The 10-K is kind of like a company’s annual review. The level of detail of the
10-K is exhaustive, and unless you know what you’re looking for, it’s easy to
get lost in the hundreds of pages of tables and text.
That’s why fundamental analysts rarely curl up with a 10-K and read it from
start to finish like a novel. They just know how to skip around in a 10-K and
look for these key elements:
✓ Everything in the 10-Q, just for the whole year: All the data you get in
the 10-Q for the quarter, you get for the year in the 10-K. That includes
the financial statements and legal proceedings, but also, a more expanded
MD&A where the management team explains more fully how the year
progressed. The controls and procedures section may also be more
fleshed out, since the 10-K has been checked over by the auditors.
✓ Changes in accounting and disagreements with accountants: You might
not expect to see conflict and intrigue in a company’s financial report,
but sometimes you can find it here. Companies and their accountants
will state in this section whether or not they didn’t see eye to eye on
financial reporting matters.
✓ Long-term financial data: Companies give you the financial results for
the year that just ended. But you’ll also find data for the past three, five,
or even ten years. These data are very useful when looking for trends, or
changes in fundamentals like revenue and earnings.
✓ Business summary: Here, the company lays out the nitty-gritty of what it
does for a living. The company may break down its major business units
and even, in some cases, tell you which parts of the business are the
most profitable. You’ll find out how to study the profitability of a company’s units in Chapter 5.
✓ Risk factors: Imagine showing up to pick up a date, but before you leave
for the movies, he or she sits you down with a huge list of everything
that’s wrong with themselves. That’s what companies must do in their
10-Ks. If there’s a known factor that could impair a company’s fundamentals, it is required to tell you about it here.
✓ Auditor’s opinion: Close to the bottom of the 10-K, the accountants
will need to sign off on the books to indicate they reasonably reflect the
financial condition of the firm.
When reviewing a 10-K, always read the auditor’s opinion. The statement from
the auditor can be telling. While an auditor may not wave a red flag and tell
you not to buy stock, you can read between the lines. For instance, if you see
the word qualified, watch out. That means the auditor has some issues with
the way the books are kept, so you should too. Also, be careful when an auditor says a company may not be able to remain a going concern. That’s accounting talk for, “This company might not make it.”

08 506455-ch04.indd 59

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

60

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

Annual reports: A corporate beauty contest
Some companies go to great expense creating
visually stunning annual reports. Some truly
are wonders of publishing, putting some magazines to shame. Surfwear maker Quiksilver, for
instance, produces annual reports containing
full-color photos of surfers, exotic beaches,
and colorful surfboards. By contrast, Warren
Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway’s is a boringlooking document with no photos, but packed
with wisdom and worth a read even if you don’t
own the stock.

instance, in 2007 only put out a six-page fullcolor annual report that was then bundled with
a black-and-white printout of its 10-K. It said its
sparse annual report was an effort to reduce
paper waste. In fact, thinning annual reports
is a growing trend as companies look to cut
costs. Companies may produce just a few colorful pages, and slip the 10-K inside. This trend,
which really began in 2006, will likely continue
as more investors prefer to download companies’ financial information electronically.

Yet other companies try to make a statement with their annual reports. Starbucks, for

Flipping through the annual report
If you visit a CEO’s office, you’ll surely see the annual report sitting on the
coffee table. And to be sure, many companies’ annual reports are gorgeous,
well, as much as financial documents can be. The annual report is essentially the 10-K, magazine-style. There are lovely photos of smiling executives,
employees, and customers. Even the financial statements are given a face-lift,
usually printed on luxurious paper using an elegant font. The annual report
is usually released several months after the 10-K is published, often landing
around the time companies have their shareholders’ meetings.
Unlike the 10-Q and 10-K, which you can download directly from the SEC’s Web
site, the annual report is a paper-based document. If you call a company, most
times it will be happy to mail you a copy. You can also usually view an electronic
form of the paper annual report by downloading it from the company’s Web site.
The annual report is the glossy and slick version of the 10-K. Companies produce the annual report mainly to hand out to employees and customers while
courting them.
The annual report is the management team’s opportunity to put its spin on
how the year went. Most annual reports, for instance, begin with a letter to
shareholders that is generally very hopeful, even after a dismal year.

08 506455-ch04.indd 60

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

61

There’s no proxy like the proxy statement
If you’re looking for the most salacious statement released by companies,
that must be the proxy statement. The proxy statement is a document the SEC
requires companies to distribute to shareholders ahead of the annual shareholder meeting. It’s kind of like the absentee ballot you might get prior to a
presidential election.
Shareholder meetings happen every year as companies gather shareholders,
usually in the spring, to go over their initiatives and goals. The proxy is sometimes known by its regulatory name, 14A, named after the portion of the SEC
rules that stipulate what it must contain.
The proxy statement is fascinating reading because it lays out all the most
sensitive information most companies have to offer, including:
✓ Executive compensation: Not only are the annual salaries of the top
executives spelled out, but the amounts of their bonuses, too.
✓ Corporate matters subject to a vote: Companies’ proxies contain a section that looks almost like a ballot. There will be a number of measures
that require shareholder approval. Usually, the items up for a vote
include the selection of the auditing firm, and the board members standing for reelection on the board.
✓ Shareholder proposals: If a company has any ill will with shareholders,
it will become very clear in the proxy. Dissident shareholders may offer
proposals to replace the management team. Other investors might lobby
for the company to adopt more environmentally friendly manufacturing.
✓ Related-party transactions: This is one of my favorite parts of the proxy.
It shows whether any of the company’s officers or directors have business relationships with it. Individuals that have business relationships
with the company, in theory, may have trouble being impartial since
there’s a potential conflict of interest.
The proxy is so important to fundamental analysis that you can explore it
more fully in Chapter 9.

Getting up to Speed with the
Basic Accounting and Math
Even if you hated math in high school and avoided accounting in college,
you can still put fundamental analysis to use. In fact, the more you dig into

08 506455-ch04.indd 61

9/24/09 10:17:10 PM

62

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
the financials of companies and see how math and accounting can help you,
who knows, maybe you’ll get curious to learn more. And if that’s the case,
you might look into Business Math For Dummies (Wiley) or Accounting For
Dummies (Wiley).
But here, in this section, I’ll give you the basics of what you need to know
about the concept of accounting. You’ll see that accounting is really just a
way to condense millions of individual business transactions down to a form
that makes it possible for you to analyze.
When you’re studying financial statements, just remember there are three
primary functions of business you’re trying to analyze: operating activities,
investing activities, and financing activities.

Finding smooth operators
A company’s operations get the most attention. Typically, when you hear a
company is or is not “doing well,” that is a reference to the firm’s operating
activities.
Simply stated, a company’s operations are the process of converting raw
materials into products that are, hopefully, sold to customers for a profit.
Many elements go into operations, including effective new product development, which generates revenue, in addition to cost control, marketing, and
manufacturing. The income statement, explored more in Chapter 5, lets you
see how well a company is operating.

You have to spend money to make money
Unless they’ve found a goose that lays platinum eggs, all companies, at some
point, must put money back into their business. Equipment used to make
products wears out and needs to be replaced. Companies outgrow their headquarters and must acquire a bigger building. And it’s common for companies
to overhaul their computer systems to keep up with tracking their business.
When companies spend money to make more money, they’re investing in
their future. And while investing is a necessary part of doing business, it can
also be done poorly. Companies might spend too much for equipment they
didn’t need. Or worse, they might over expand, resulting in a glut of their
product, which hurts their profits. You can read more about profit margins
in Chapter 5. There are two key things for a fundamental analyst to monitor
when it comes to investment:

08 506455-ch04.indd 62

9/24/09 10:17:11 PM

Chapter 4: Getting Your Hands on Fundamental Data

63

✓ Is the return on the investment adequate? If a company is spending
money to expand, and revenue and profit aren’t growing too, you might
be throwing your money down the drain as an investor.
✓ Is the company using the equipment it has bought? In business, having
too much capacity is not a good idea. You don’t want to spend money
renting a warehouse, for instance, if it’s usually empty.

Getting in tune with high finance
So, you can understand how a company operates and how much it’s spending on itself. But who’s going to pay for all this stuff? That’s the final and critical element that accounting helps you with.
Generally speaking, companies can finance, or fund their operations, in
two ways. They can either rustle up investors, or they can borrow money.
Investors provide money, called equity capital, to companies in exchange for
a piece of the company. If all goes well, the company operates extremely well,
profits soar, and investors are very happy since their share of the company
will be worth more. When you buy stock in a company, you are an investor.
Some beginning investors incorrectly think money they use when buying a
stock goes directly to the company. That’s not usually the case. Companies sell
their stock to the public once, in a process called an initial public offering, or
IPO. When those shares sell for that first time, the companies get that money.
But after the IPO, the company doesn’t get additional cash. The shares and
money are trading hands between other investors in the secondary market.
When it comes to financing itself, a company may also look to borrow money.
Companies may borrow money from a local bank or sell IOUs, called bonds,
to the public. Investors who lend money to a company just want to get their
money back, plus an amount of interest agreed upon ahead of time.
If a company fails, investors and lenders are treated very differently. And the
difference has a big influence on whether or not you decide to buy a company’s
stock or bond.
If a company is unable to keep paying interest to its lenders, the company
goes into default. Typically, at that point, the bondholders take control of
the company. In the worst-case scenario, when a company cannot be saved,
bondholders get repaid first. So, let’s say a company defaulted and had a
giant garage sale to sell its desks and chairs. The money would be used to
pay back debt holders before stock investors see a penny. That means, as
stock investors, you’re accepting the possibility that you can lose your entire
investment.
