
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 21

Spike and
Channel Trend

P

rimary characteristics of spike and channel trend days:

r There is a spike that is made up of one or more trend bars, and it signals that
the market is breaking into a clear always-in situation. During the spike, there
is a sense of urgency and traders add to their position as they press the trade.
The spike is effectively a breakaway gap (discussed in book 2).
r The spike usually forms in the first hour and often within the first few bars of
the day.
r The stronger the breakout, the more likely there will be follow-through in the
form of a channel, and the more likely the channel will go far (see the sections
on the strength of trends in Chapter 19, and the strength of breakouts in Chapter 2 of book 2).
r When the breakout is strong, it is often the basis for a measured move where
the channel may end and you can ultimately take partial or complete profits.
r Immediately after the spike, there is a pullback that can be as short as a single
bar or as long as a couple of dozen bars.
r The trend resumes in the form of a channel. During the channel, there is a sense
of worry and uncertainty, due to the two-sided trading.
r When the market is channeling, it is better to trade it like a trending trading
range (for example, in a bull channel, it is better to buy below the low of the
prior bar and hold part of the trade for a swing, and if you take any shorts, sell
above swing highs or the highs of prior bars and primarily scalp).
r The channel will rarely break out in the with-trend direction, but when it does,
the breakout usually fails within five bars and then the market reverses.
325

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

326

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

r The channel ends at some measured move target, and often on a third push.
r If the channel breaks out against the trend, as it usually ultimately does, don’t
enter on the breakout and instead wait for the pullback (for example, if there
is a bull spike and channel and the market breaks below the channel, look to
short a lower high).
r The market usually corrects to the start of the channel, which is a test of the
gap (the spike, like all spikes, is a gap).
r The market then reverses back at least 25 percent in the direction of the trend
as it attempts to form a trading range. In a bull spike and channel, the pullback
often forms a double bottom bull flag with the bottom of the channel, which is
the bottom of the pullback that followed the spike up.
r When it is weaker, it is probably more likely a trending trading range day (discussed in the next chapter).
The spike and channel trend is the most common type of trend and is present in
some form almost every day and in every trend. There are countless variations and
there are often many smaller ones nested inside larger ones. Because it often is the
controlling force over so much price action, it is imperative that traders understand
it. It is a pattern with two components. Every trend has both a spike phase and a
channel phase, and every trend is in either of those two modes at all times. First,
there is a spike of one or more bars where the market is moving quickly. There is
a sense of urgency and everyone believes that the market has further to go. The
spike is a breakaway gap where the market quickly moves from one price level to
another. Next, there is a pullback, which can be as short as a single bar or can last
dozens of bars and even retrace beyond the start of the spike. For example, if there
is a bull spike, occasionally the pullback will fall below the bottom of the spike,
and then the channel begins. After the pullback, the trend converts into a channel,
where there is less urgency and more a sense of worry and uncertainty. This is the
wall of worry that you sometimes hear pundits mention on TV. Everyone sees twosided trading taking place and the trend constantly looks like it is about to end, yet
it keeps extending. Traders are quick to take profits, but as the trend continues,
they keep reentering or adding to their positions because they are not certain when
the trend will end and they want to make sure to participate. Rarely, there will
be a second spike phase and then another channel, but usually the second spike
becomes a failed breakout and is followed by a correction. For example, if there is
a bull spike and then a lower-momentum bull channel, the market can break out of
the top of the channel with another bull spike. Rarely, it will be followed by another
bull channel, but more often the spike becomes a failed breakout and the market
then corrects down.
When the market has a series of bars that cover a lot of points with little or no
pulling back, this strong trend is a spike. The spike can be one trend bar, a series

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

327

of trend bars with little overlap, or sometimes even a very tight channel. In fact,
a spike on a given time frame is a steep, tight channel on a smaller time frame.
Likewise, steep, tight channels are spikes on higher time frames. The spike ends at
the first pause or pullback, but if it resumes within a bar or two, it becomes either a
second spike or a spike on a larger time frame. The spike can be as small as a single
moderate-sized trend bar or it can last for 10 or more bars. Spikes, climaxes, and
breakouts should be thought of as being the same, and they are discussed more in
the chapter on breakouts in book 2. In a spike up, everyone is in agreement that this
is not an area of value for the bears and therefore the market needs to go up further
to find prices where both the bulls and bears are willing to trade. The market will
continue to quickly move higher until the bulls are willing to take some profits and
are less willing to buy new positions, and the bears are beginning to short. This
causes a pause or a pullback, and it is the first sign of significant two-sided trading.
The opposite is true for a spike down.
Almost all trends begin with a spike, even if it is a single trend bar and not
recognizable as the start of the trend until many bars later. Therefore, almost all
trends are variations of a spike and channel trend. However, when the trend has
more characteristics of one of the other types of trends discussed in this chapter,
you should trade it as that other type to maximize your chances of success.
By definition, the spike ends immediately before the first pause bar or pullback
because it is the pause that signifies the end of the spike. The market can then go on
to do any of the obvious three things: the trend can resume, the market can enter
a trading range, or the trend can reverse. The first possibility is the most common.
The market pulls back for a couple of bars, or maybe a dozen bars, and then the
trend resumes. This pullback is a gap test (remember, the spike is a gap) and the
start of the channel. When the trend resumes, it is usually less strong as indicated
by more overlapping bars, a flatter slope, some pullbacks, and some trend bars in
the opposite direction. This is a channel, and the pattern then becomes a spike and
channel trend.
The second possibility occurs if the pullback extends for more than 10 bars. It
will then have grown into a trading range, which can break out in either direction.
In general, the odds always favor the trading range breakout to be in the same
direction as the original trend. If the trading range lasts for a long time, it is simply
a flag on a higher time frame chart (for example, a three-day-long trading range on
the 5 minute chart that follows a bull spike will usually be just a bull flag on the 60
minute chart, and the odds favor an upside breakout). This is a trend resumption
situation and is discussed later in this chapter. Although the trend usually resumes
before the end of the day and the day becomes a trend resumption trend day, the
breakout from the trading range can sometimes fail or reverse within a few bars
(final flag reversals are discussed in book 3 in the chapter on reversals). Rarely, the
trading range lasts for several hours or even several days and has very small swings

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

328

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

(this is a tight trading range and is discussed in book 2 on trading ranges). As with
any trading range, the breakout can be in either direction but is slightly more likely
to be in the direction of the trend.
The third possibility is that the market reverses. As long as the pullback from
the spike is not strong enough to flip the always-in trade to the opposite direction,
the market will likely continue the trend, and the continuation will almost always be
in the form of a channel. Less often, the market will reverse and form a spike in the
opposite direction. When this happens, the market will then usually enter a trading
range as the bulls and bears fight for follow-through. The bulls will keep buying as
they try to create a bull channel to follow their bull spike, and the bears will keep
selling as they try to create a bear channel to follow their bear spike. Although the
trading range can last for the rest of the day, one side usually wins and the market
breaks out. At that point, either it forms a channel and the day becomes a spike and
channel trend day or the breakout is soon followed by another trading range and the
market forms a trending trading range day, which is discussed in the next chapter.
Besides reversing with a spike in the opposite direction, the market can also
reverse if a trading range forms after the spike. For example, if there is a bull spike
and then a trading range, in about a third of cases the market will break out of the
bottom of the trading range instead of the top. The breakout can be by a sharp, large
bear spike, but more often it is by an unremarkable bear trend bar that is followed
by a bear channel.
If it forms a channel, it is better to trade it only in the direction of the trend.
Sometimes there are large swings in the channel, which can provide countertrend
scalping opportunities as the channel progresses. Be aware that channels can last
much longer than you might imagine and they are always looking like they are reversing. There are many pullbacks along the way, trapping traders into the wrong
direction. There are usually many bars with tails, many trend bars in the opposite
direction, and lots of overlapping bars, but it is still a trend and it is very costly to
trade countertrend prematurely.
Some days have an early strong momentum move (a spike) and then the trend
continues in a less steep channel for the rest of the day. However, the channel
sometimes accelerates and follows a parabolic curve instead of a linear path. At
other times, it loses momentum and forms a flatter curve. Regardless, the start
of the channel is usually tested later in the day or in the next day or two, and the
test can then be followed by a trading range or a trend in either direction. The
important thing to realize is that if the channel is fairly tight, it is tradable only
in the with-trend direction because the pullbacks will not go far enough for a
countertrend trade to be profitable. Much less often, the channel has broad swings
and is tradable in both directions.
You should be prepared to look for entries in the countertrend direction after
there is a breakout from the channel against the trend, since there is a good chance

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

329

that the countertrend move will extend all the way back to test the start of the
channel and attempt to form a trading range. Remember that a channel, no matter
how steep, is a flag in the opposite direction. A bull channel is a bear flag and a
bear channel is a bull flag. Also, even though a channel is a sloping trading range, it
is also the first leg of a larger trading range, and the reversal is usually to the area
around the start of the channel. For example, if there is a spike up, then a pullback,
and then a bull channel, the bull channel is usually the first leg of a trading range
that has yet to unfold. The market will usually correct down to the bottom of the
channel, where it will try to form a double bottom bull flag with the bottom of the
channel. This usually leads to a bounce, which is the third leg of the developing
trading range. After the bounce, traders should begin to look for other patterns
because the predictability of the spike and channel pattern at this point has ended.
A spike is a breakout, which means that there will be a gap between the breakout
point and the first pullback, which is the start of the channel. The test to the bottom
of the channel is a test of the gap and is a breakout test.
Stock traders often describe the end of a bull channel as a crowded trade because they believe that anyone interested in the stock has gone long and there is
no one left to buy. They then expect a fast sell-off down to the start of the channel
as all of the channel buyers exit. As the stock quickly falls, they think of the bear
leg as being caused by all of the late-entering bulls with open losses quickly exiting to minimize those losses. That rush to the exits by the crowd of bulls leads to
the rapidity and depth of the sell-off. There are obviously many factors that influence every move, but this is likely an important component when there is a sharp
correction down to the start of the channel.
Since the second part of the pattern is a channel, the behavior during the channel phase is like that of any other channel. Almost all spike and channel bull patterns end with a breakout through the bottom of the channel and a test to around
the bottom of the channel. The easiest reversal setup to spot is a three-push pattern
in a channel with a wedge shape, where the third push overshoots the trend channel line and reverses with a strong reversal bar, especially if there is a second entry.
However, most of the time the reversal is not so clear and it is better to wait for a
breakout pullback setup. For example, if there is a breakout below a bull channel,
wait for a pullback to a higher high or lower high, and if there is a good bear setup,
go short. If the sell-off reaches the bottom of the channel and sets up a buy, then
look to go long for the double bottom bull flag bounce.
If there is a strong spike and any pullback, even a single bar, and then the trend
resumes, the odds favor a spike and channel trend. For example, if there is a strong
spike up that broke out of a trading range and then an inside bar, and then a bar that
falls below the inside bar but reverses up into a bull reversal bar, traders will buy
above that bar in anticipation of a bull channel. As soon as the market goes above
that bull reversal bar, a channel is in effect. It can have a single push up lasting

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

330

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

from one to several bars (a final flag reversal, which is discussed in book 3) and
then reverse into a bear leg, or it can have two or more legs and then reverse. If the
channel up is developing in an area where a reversal seems probable, like near the
top of a trading range, it may reverse after a couple of legs up, before clear channel
lines can be drawn. If it is forming in an area where a bull trend is probable, like in a
reversal up from a strong bottom pattern, it will usually have at least three pushes,
but it could have many more.
Just how far can a channel go? In a strong trend, it usually goes much farther
than what most traders believe is likely. However, if the spike is large, one measured move target is from the open or low of the first bar of the spike to the close
or high of the last bar of the spike, and then you project that same number of points
up. Another measured move target is a leg 1 = leg 2 move where the spike is leg 1
and the channel is leg 2. Look to see if a reversal is setting up once the channel is
at the measured move target.
You will usually see other measured move projections and trend line and trend
channel line targets as well, but most of these targets will fail, especially if the trend
is very strong. However, it is important to look for them because when a reversal
finally does set up, it will usually be at one of these resistance areas, and that will
give you more confidence to take the reversal trade. In general, it is far better to
look at measured move targets as areas to take profits than as locations to take
reversal trades. Traders should take a reversal trade only when the setup is strong,
and reversal trading is discussed in book 3. Experienced traders will often scalp
against the trend at measured move targets, sometimes scaling in if the market
goes against them (scaling in is discussed in book 2), but very few traders can
consistently do this profitably and most will lose money if they try.
A strong spike is a sign that the market is quickly moving to a new price level
where both the bulls and bears feel that there is value in placing trades. The market usually overshoots the value area and then pulls back into what will become a
trading range. Because both the bulls and the bears are satisfied with the prices in
this new area, the directional probability of an equidistant move is about 50 percent
in the middle of the trading range. That means that there is about an equal chance
that the market will move up X ticks before it moves down X ticks. This uncertainty
is the hallmark of a trading range. It does not matter why the market is trending.
All that matters is that it is moving quickly. You can view the move as a breakout
and a move away from some prior price or as a move toward some magnet. That
magnet can be a key price level like a prior spike, a measured move, or a trend
line. Or you can think of the breakout as a move toward neutrality where the directional probability is once again about 50 percent. This always occurs in a trading
range, so once the directional probability has fallen to 50 percent, a trading range
will become evident. A trend is simply a move from one trading range to another,
and while in the new trading range, both the bulls and the bears are placing trades

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

SPIKE AND CHANNEL TREND

331

in an attempt to be positioned for what they believe will be the next breakout. This
is discussed more in the section on the mathematics of trading in book 2.
As an example, if the market is in a bull channel, the directional probability of
an equidistant move starts to fall, and at some unknown point it hits 50 percent.
This will ultimately be the middle of the trading range, but no one yet knows where
that is and the market usually has to overshoot to the upside and downside as it
searches for neutrality. As the market is going up in the channel, traders will assume
that the directional probability of higher prices is still better than 50 percent until
it is clearly less than 50 percent. That clarity occurs at some magnet, and at that
point everyone sees that the market has gone too far. This will be the general area
of the top of the trading range, and the directional probability at the top of a trading
range favors the bears. The result is that the market will trade down in search of
neutrality, but it will usually overshoot it again because neutrality is never clear but
excess is. Once the market gets to some magnet (discussed in book 2), traders will
see that it has gone down too far and it will reverse up. Eventually, the range will
become tighter as traders home in on neutrality, which is a price level where both
the bulls and the bears feel there is value in placing trades. They are in balance
and the market is then in breakout mode. Before long, perceived value will change
and the market will have to break out again to find the new value area.
Once you recognize that a spike and channel trend is in effect, do not take
countertrend trades in the hope that an ABC pullback will extend far enough for
a scalper’s profit. This is because invariably there will not have been any prior
trend line break, and the tightness of the channel makes countertrend trading
a losing strategy. The failures of these countertrend scalps are great with-trend
setups. Just enter on a stop where the countertrend traders are exiting with their
protective stops.
Aggressive traders will enter channels using limit orders, trading with trend
until two-sided trading becomes prominent, and which point they will start trading
countertrend. For example, if there is a bear spike and then a channel, bears will
enter with limit orders at or above the highs of the prior bars. As the channel approaches support levels, they will watch to see if the bars are overlapping more,
if there are more and stronger bull trend bars, if there are more dojis, and if there
are bigger pullbacks. The more of these signs of two-sided trading that are present,
the more willing the bulls will be to buy with limit orders at and below the lows of
prior bars and swing lows, and the less willing bears will be to short above or below
bars. Bears will scale out of their profitable trades after the trend has gone on for a
while and is in the area of measured move targets or other types of support. Bulls
will begin to scale into longs in the same areas. The increased buying and reduced
selling ultimately lead to a breakout above the bear trend line.
Institutions and traders who have large enough accounts can scale into a countertrend position, expecting the market to test the start of the channel, but most

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c21

332

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

4:19

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

traders should trade only with trend until there is a clear sign of a reversal. Also,
it is risky to scale into a countertrend position in a channel in the second half of
the day, because you will often run out of time. You will find yourself holding an
ever-larger losing position and you will be forced to buy it back with a large loss by
the close. When the bears are scaling in, some will look for a large bull trend bar
that breaks above a prior swing high. They will see it as a possible exhaustive top
of the trading range that should soon form. They will place limit orders to short the
close of the bar and above its high, because they see the channel as the first leg of
a trading range, and shorting bull spikes in the area of the top of a trading range is
a standard trading range technique (discussed in book 2 on trading ranges). After
the trading range has formed, traders will look back and see that the bull channel
was the start of the range, and very experienced traders can begin to use trading
range trading techniques as the channel is forming, if they believe that the market
is in the area of the top of the soon-to-be trading range.
The spike that forms before the channel is a thin area on the chart (there is
very little overlap of adjacent bars, and is a type of breakout or measuring gap,
as discussed in the second book) where there is agreement between the bulls and
the bears that the market is mispriced, and therefore the market moves through
it quickly. Both are contributing to the rapid move away from the prices in the
spike as they search for the equilibrium that can be inferred to exist once the channel starts to form. Yes, the market is still trending because one side is still dominant, but there is finally some two-sided trading. The channel itself usually has lots
of overlapping bars and pullbacks and is essentially a steeply sloped tight trading
range. Since this type of price action represents two-sided trading, it is reasonable
to expect the start of the pattern to be tested before too long, despite how strong
the trend has been. For example, in a spike and channel bear trend, all of those
early bulls who bought at the very start of the bear channel, thinking that the spike
would become a failed breakout, are finally back to breakeven on the pullback to
that area, and this will make the pullback function like a double top. These bulls
will exit around breakeven on those early longs and may not want to buy unless the
market falls back again. This is likely an important component of the reason why
there is usually at least some downward movement after the top of the channel is
tested. Any channel is usually the first leg of a trading range and is most often followed by a countertrend move that tests the start of the channel and reveals the
trading range. At that point, the trading range usually expands in duration and has
at least a partial move in the direction of the original channel. From there, the market behaves like a trading range and is in breakout mode (traders are looking for a
breakout) and the breakout into a new trend can come in either direction.
Sometimes the channel is so vertical that it accelerates and becomes parabolic.
Although there is so little overlap between consecutive bars that it does not look
like a typical channel, this parabolic move functions like the channel phase and
