
A : Yeah, that’s correct. Once the news comes out, everyone
should have adjusted their books to the current news. So new bids

290


SURFING FOR PROFITS

and offers and new support and resistance have been set by those
prices. Having that type of conceptual framework, you can then
trade technically. You have to look at the market every day as a
different thing. You have to adjust your game plan every day. You
know, sometimes you do a trade and its really easy and sometimes
it’s very difficult. Like you go to the ocean, one day it’s calm and
beautiful. It has five-foot waves and you're just surfing. The next
day it’s 20-feet high and disorganized and you can’t even go out.
Then the next day it’s calm again. That’s kind of the way I see
the markets. You really have to just make yourself knowledgeable
about all aspects of it. Then come in and look at what’s going on
and you can formulate an idea based on that and with that idea you
can make your money. In the end we’re here just to make money
for ourselves. That’s why we trade.

Q.- Let's talk about the day-to-day basics. FX is a 24-hour day
market. It has three primary sessions, the Tokyo session, which
begins around 7 P.M. East Coast time, the London session, which
starts around 3 A.M. East Coast time, and the New York session,
which basically starts around 7:30 a.M., maybe 8:00 A.M. East Coast
time. How do you manage your trades and what is your typical day
like?

A : I try to trade in the mornings, I’m on the West coast, so I
look at the night before. I look at what’s going to happen tomorrow
based on what numbers are going to be released. It allows me to
gauge when I might want to trade and allows me to pick one point
where I can feel comfortable.

: Because you're on the West Coast and because, obviously,
you trade the primary currency pairs against the dollar, sometimes
there is very important news in the Asia-Pacific currencies which
are the yen and the Australian dollar and the New Zealand dollar.
Sometimes the news can be extremely important on the European
side, and almost always there’s important news on the U.S. side.

291


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

So do you occasionally trade the Asian session and sometimes the
USS. session?

A : Actually, I trade mainly the U.S. session and the European
session. I usually won’t trade the Asian session because that’s the
time of day I would already be done with trading. If I’ve traded
the morning session, I should be done by then and just be living
my life in a sense. I don’t want to be trading all day, 24 hours

a day.

Quits an occupational hazard in FX.

A : Yes, it is. I think you have to define yourself in this market. If
you don’t, you could lose yourself over the 144 hours that the mar-
ket’s open during the week. I know this because I think everyone
who trades FX has been through it. There are the nights you're up
all night. I learned that I don’t want to do this.

Generally I'll be up at 3:30 A.M. or 4:00 A.M. West Coast time
and I'll start my day then, at 4:30. Say I want to trade that 5:30
number, I'll make sure I’m awake an hour ahead to have every-
thing up and running and watch the news, absorb everything that’s
happened for an hour before that number comes out, and then
when it comes out, I’m ready to go and I’ve already got a game
plan.

Quit youre starting at around 3 or 4 or 5 o’clock West Coast
time, when will you finish trading? What time do you knock off for
the day?

A : Thave a goal in mind of what I want to accomplish moneywise
or tradewise for that day. I'll know what that is. Maybe because
of something that’s going to happen—I think the market is going
to be very volatile—T'll say, okay, I think because of the volatility
I'll get two good trades off it and accomplish that for my day. I'll

292


SURFING FOR PROFITS

stay however long it takes me—maybe it takes me a couple of
hours. I’ve traded—honestly—for 20 minutes, placed a trade and
then 20 minutes later I’ve closed it and it’s been up 30 pips. So
you have those days. I wish they were all like that. But then there
are days you try to trade for three or four hours, maybe, because
the market’s not as volatile but there’s still activity. It just takes
a little longer, It will take me several hours for those trades. But
it’s basically goal oriented. Say the market only moved 50 or 60
pips overnight or over a day, and to me that’s not enough volatility
to want to get in the market so I won't trade. I'll just watch the
market. There are those days, too.

Q: Doe you set a particular point goal or a dollar amount goal that
you want to reach? Also, if you can talk a bit about the amount of
risk. You said there’s a certain amount of risk you're willing to take
during the day, and it’s a dollar amount of risk. But is it also a point
amount of risk? Do you say to yourself, “If I’m 50 points out of the
money on this trade that’s my stop limit”?

A : Lalways have a hard stop because you never know what’s going
to happen. I try to keep it pretty tight. I don’t really like things to
get away by more than 40 pips or so. I think I’m a good trader. So if
something gets 15 to 20 pips away from me, I’ve got to just close it.
I know I'll make it back on the next trade or the next several trades.

Qa very interesting point you just made. You said, “I think
I’m a good trader and that’s why I keep my stops small.” You're
assuming that if it has moved 20 points against you, then the trade
you initially analyzed is just wrong and you need to get out of it.

A: Right, exactly. I’ve analyzed my trading and the analysis shows
if I am down 15 pips or so, I’m saying, “Okay, I just made the
wrong decision here.” So that’s why once it goes to 20, I just click
and close it out or at least close half the position.

293


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.we think we've come to very similar conclusion in our trading.
Basically you're either right or you should be out.

A : Exactly. You said it perfectly. You're either right or you should
be out. Then you have to gauge how good of a trader you are,
and for me it’s around that 15 pips. If I didn’t find that 15-pip
top or bottom and the currency keeps going, I may have come
in too early. But then, you know, I’m not scared to come back in
that same direction a little higher. So once that happens then, you
know, hopefully I’ve done some right risk management. Maybe I
haven't used all my leverage. Say I’ve only come in with $300,000
on the first trade and it’s gone 15 pips against me, then I'll close it.
Then I see that it starts to exhaust again. I come in with a million.
So hopefully the $300,000 that I lost 15 on becomes negated in
just 5 or 6 pips of the new larger trade and then I’m in the right
direction at the right time.

Q. just to clarify, because essentially you're talking about exhaus-
tion levels and trying to come in at the right time. You're basically
looking to come in at weak points but in the direction of the overall
strength. So if, the dollar is strong on a long-term trend, what you
want to be looking at is for the euro to rally a little bit. But once the
euro/dollar rally reaches its point of exhaustion, that’s when you
want to short it. Is that what you mean by picking those spots?

A : Yes, that’s correct. I look to do that. If I picked the right
direction, and again I’m assuming I know the overall direction, I
am going to be confident in the trade.

Q.. Talk to us about leverage. Leverage in the FX market is
enormous. It can be as large as 200 to 1, meaning that you could
control 10,000 units with as little as $50 worth of equity.

A : Right.

294


SURFING FOR PROFITS

Q.: what kind of leverage do you think is prudent and what kind

of leverage do you yourself use?

A : I don’t think there’s any point to using anything more than
maybe 5 to 10 times, something like that. But I would keep it low.
If you're trading, try it to keep it five times.

: Is that the general level you're comfortable with, do you
usually use between 5 or 10 times leverage for your positions?

A : Yes. The key is you should use the lowest amount of leverage
you can. That’s what I always tell people because you want to
spend time in this market. That’s how you're going to get better
and that’s how you're going to be a better trader if you can stay
around. I remember I think I had a mini-account that was maybe
$1,000 way back when. I loaded up on something at 100 or 200
times leverage and so my thousand bucks ended up making $4,000.
Then I loaded up again. But this time I was wrong and my account
went back to a thousand. I could have lost it all, But if you keep your
leverage low, if you lose, your $1,000 will turn into $900 instead
of nothing. I think leverage is a good and a bad thing. It’s a good
thing if you’re a good trader and that’s about it [laughter].

Q.- can you talk about your desk setup? What do you look at?
What tools do you use?

A : [have several different packages that I use. I have a couple
of algorithms I’ve developed myself and have written with several
guys. So those programs are on a [three screen]three-by-three
screen computer that runs charts. Then I have another computer
that has three screens attached to it also. That is my order entry
and news feeds. That is what I have as a setup. Then I have TVs in
my trading room, and basically that’s it. I will come in the morning
and turn everything on. I have a bunch of different news sources

295


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

that are linked, and I will try to get caught up with what happened
in the market from the day before. From there I apply all my
knowledge. I start to make decisions based on my model on my
plans. So that’s really my setup.

Q.- what particular research do you like to read?

A: I have a list of different banks and one of them is UBS. I like
to see what they're looking at. I just look at what everyone’s doing,
Honestly I don’t like to base my decision on what they are doing
because I like to have my own perspective. Even if ’'m wrong with
my perspective, that’s fine with me. I have a game plan for how
to deal with my mistake: Always have a plan on each side of your
trade. You always have to know what’s going on and reading what
other people are up to and what people are thinking helps you to
be on the leading edge of what’s happening out there. You need to
know what changes are going to be made in the FX market so that
you are always up to date with the market.

: Back to risk control. When you said there’s a certain amount
of money that you are willing to risk per day, is that a percent of
equity? Is it a hard money stop? What kind of a risk limit do you
put on yourself per day?

A : It’s one of each of those. I'll have a hard stop. But when I
get into the market, I'll have that hard stop and like I said it’s
basically 25 pips at the most. Usually if it gets around 15, I'll make
a decision—okay, do I start getting out? But then if you are asking
if ’'m down an x amount during the day, will I stop? Yeah, if I’m
down a certain dollar amount. There’s a hard stop for that also. I
feel if I made two trades in a row in the wrong direction, then I’m
missing something and there’s just no point to trade again. I have
faith in myself that I'll make money many more times than I'll lose
it, so I'l step away from the market.

296


SURFING FOR PROFITS

Q.: Have you had a situation where you've been wrong for two,
three, four, five days in a row? Have you had a bad run in your
career and how do you handle that?

A: You know, I have. Basically what I try to do is focus on the big
picture. For example, I had a bad week last week. I made money
the first day and part of the second day. Then I came in again later
in the week. Over those three sessions I didn’t make money, just
spun my wheels. That was really frustrating for me. So, in those
cases, I'll focus on the times that I was right 2 months in row or
5 months in row or 12 months in a row. I just go back in my mind
and then I just try to rest. We are an organism. If I was a computer
program that would be great. But I am not. I have step away from
the market. The market is going to be there for the next 50 years.
It’s going to be there tomorrow.

Q: Do you sometimes just go away for two or three days to clear
your mind, go to the beach?

A: Yes. Yes. Actually I surf, and after trading, after I printed my
screens, looked at the trades, logged all my stuff, I try to go the
beach and go surfing because that clears your mind. It gives you
opportunity for your mind not to think about technical analysis, it
allows you to rest. So when you come to the market again you're
fresh. You need to do that as a living, breathing human organism.
You need to take care of your mind and your body. Trading is very
demanding. It will take a physical toll on you. What I like to do is
trade for a couple weeks, make a good amount of money, and then
just go on a trip. My girlfriend and I will go to Hawaii for a week.
We go there, just hop on plane and go. We have friends we stay
with, or we'll go to Mexico for four or five days. Maybe I'll trade
for three weeks in row and then I'll take a trip for a week. Again,
I’m a trader. I chose to be a trader in order to have this type of
freedom and live this lifestyle. So I definitely take advantage of it
in a very big way. I’m not scared to be away from the market for a
week or two weeks. It doesn’t matter.

297


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: When you're away from the market for two weeks and you
come back to screens, do you ever get rusty? Or does it just come
back like riding a bicycle?

A : It’s kind of like riding a bike I would say. Although when I’m
not trading I like to watch the news and kind of absorb it. We
went on a trip to Brazil last year, and during the time I was there,
for about one month, I didn’t trade. But I watched the news and
I'd get the quotes, every day, throughout the day, just watching
Bloomberg at the hotel. Although I didn’t actually trade, I was
watching the news and position trading in my head. I would say,
based on all this, I would be buying dollars and then I’'d wake up
the next day, was I right, yeah, the dollar got strong bya penny. So I
mentally keep myself in the game, keep a pulse on what’s going on.
Then when you come back, you do have to do some extra work, be
a little more cautious in the beginning. I always suggest you come
in with a lighter leverage at the beginning. Just knock off a couple
trades and get comfortable again and then you can start stepping
it up and hopefully you're on another two-week, three-week run
of making money.

Q.: while you are physically away, you’re never really mentally
away from the market—that’s how you stay sharp?

A : Right, exactly. And during those times I try to get caught up
on my reading. I'll study some more technical analysis or I'll read
a book about trading. Even though you're away from the market,
there are always things to do that can help you become a better
trader. I get caught up on my candlestick reading.

Q.- are candlesticks your primary technical tool?

A : I use them to find tops/bottoms and reversals, but I use
different algorithms and different functions that are written by me
and my associates.

298


SURFING FOR PROFITS

Q.-You don’t rely on the standard technical indicators, oscillators,
moving averages? You have your own proprietary indicators that
you developed?

A : Yes. Several of my good friends are mathematicians and we
put them together.

Q.: How many years did it take you to feel competent in this
game?

A : In FX, you know, it took me a while even though I was a good
trader before that. It took me a while before my mind realized I
could make money trading FX.

Q.: Without giving away your secrets, what are the key things in
your mathematical algorithms that you find tend to prove them-
selves in the market? Is there an underlying mathematical truth to
the markets?

A. I think there is.

Q.: Much of academic research talks about the fact that there’s
an enormous amount of randomness, that there’s very little sta-
tionarity in the data. [Authors’ note: Most academic studies show
that past price behavior has absolutely no predictive value to future
price behavior. |

A : Right, right. I don’t know [laughter]. That’s about a theory
and I’ve heard all the theories myself, too. I think it’s all going to
be theory. It’s whether you can make money on it or not. I be-
lieve that there’s a point where there’s a guy who has a huge bid
and then a guy who has a huge offer that no one can get
through—and there’s no randomness to that. So if you can un-
derstand what I mean when I say that, conceptually there is a kind
of formula for the market. But then there’s also going to be a time
when people are going to hit that offer so many times that guy’s not
going to be there anymore and the market’s going to a new place.

299


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

So if you look at the market in that respect, I don’t think there’s
randomness. I think the randomness that’s in the market comes
from not knowing when the big guy with, say $10 billion, will sell.
Is he going to sell it right now? Or will he sell it in 10 minutes, or is
he going to sell in 20 minutes? Maybe right now the market’s going
up 10 pips and he’s selling and it’s not doing anything. But maybe if
he sells in 15 minutes, when the market is going down, and at that
point he just adds and accelerates the market downward at that
moment. So there is some randomness—but there is also order.

Q.: How do you differentiate between the two?

A : Well it’s an art. That’s why you have to define yourself. If you
define yourself you know where you are coming from.

Q.: so clarity really doesn’t come from the market but from
yourself?

A : Yeah, exactly [laughter]. Spoken like a true Zen master [laugh-
ter]. But it really does. I think you know because again, like today,
the market went up 40 pips for a few seconds after the 5:30 A.M.
announcement. Then it went down 100 pips after that. So you
could have made money long or short it—just depends when and
where you were at those 20 seconds. That’s what I mean—you
have to define yourself.

: What’s your number one rule for trading? If you were to
distill it to one key issue, what would you say it would be?

A : One key thing? Wow, that’s very broad. As a trader I think I’m
going to take that question abstractly. One key thing is if you're
going to do this, be very serious about it and work at it. Make
yourself be that trader to the nth degree, to the infinite degree
because I think if you do that that’s where you're going to find
success.

300


SURFING FOR PROFITS

Q.:s0 if you’re going to do it, take it seriously, is that your one
piece of advice?

A : Yeah, take it very seriously because, if you do, that’s when
you'll reap the benefits, I think. But if you don’t, you'll always see
the potential, but you'll never reach it. I think a lot of people see
the potential but they never take it to that next level. Then, if you're
going to trade, if there’s one thing I’m going to tell you, is keep
your leverage low. Low, low, low. That’s the key thing, especially
since that will keep you in the game. If you stay in the game and
keep playing the game, what will happen is you'll gain experience
and eventually you'll figure out the one thing that works. Then just
stick to that one thing and it will make you money.

Q.: could you replay your best trade ever?

A : You know, that’s funny. My best trade ever was a combination
of a lot of things. What happened was several years ago I was
trading the pound with a group of traders. A couple of the guys
had been up all night waiting for this number to come out, but I
actually went home, slept, came back in the morning, got set up
in like five minutes, and then the market started moving before
the numbers had come out. I can’t remember which numbers,
I think it was an unemployment number or something. But for
some reason I decided my game plan was to go short. I had my
whole game plan that I was supposed to wait for the number. But I
decided to place my trade before the number, which you shouldn’t
do. I ended up getting into position right before the number and
the number came out and the market moved about 200 pips.

Qu was waterfall.

A : Yeah, it was just amazing. And literally in that second, when
I closed the trade, I started laughing. There was a little luck obvi-
ously, and the whole point was it happened so fast everyone missed
it, There were some guys who had been waiting around for like

301


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

six, seven hours for this to happen. So it was a burn on everyone. I
kind of walked in five minutes before, made 200 pips. I was done.
We went and had breakfast and just had fun the rest of the day. I
was in New York when that happened, so it was kind of cool. That
was the most memorable trade. But really, the best trades for me
are when I just do everything right for the day. Whether I made 15
pips, 12 pips, 8 pips that day, 20 pips everything works the way it
was supposed to. Even if I’m down one day, but I took my stops, I
know that was a good, day, too. The best days are when everything
goes well according to your plan.

Q. The question everybody hates but everybody must

answer—the worse trade you've ever been in?

A : The worst trade I remember, too. I was long the dollar and the
euro/dollar was strengthening. I couldn’t close the position out. At
one time it was only down 22 pips, which for me is nothing. You
close and you trade the next day you make that back. But I couldn’t
close it, it was just mental block and it ended up going higher. I
had to close it at minus another 100 pips. It was just a weird thing
when I was a younger trader, I just couldn’t get out of this one
position. It haunts me in a good way to this day because now when
I think of that 22 pips—maybe that’s why I get nervous when it
gets around 20 pips—I just close the trade.

Quit created a sensory memory in your brain. Final question:
You bring a couple of very interesting attributes to the game. You
clearly have a highly quantitative mind and a very, very rigorous
mathematical education. But also an education in psychology, and
many people will argue that markets are not logical, they're psy-
chological. So we are wondering if your education and background
in psychology had any value, if it offered you any additional insights
that you may want to share with us about the market?
