
The first move into the overbought or oversold region is
usually just a warning. The signal to pay close attention to is the
second move by the oscillator into the danger zone. If the second
move fails to confirm the price move into new highs or new lows
(forming a double top or bottom on the oscillator), a possible
divergence exists. At that point, some defensive action can be
taken to protect existing positions. If the oscillator moves in the
opposite direction, breaking a previous high or low, then a diver-
gence or failure swing is confirmed.

The 50 level is the RSI midpoint value, and will often act
as support during pullbacks and resistance during bounces.
Some traders treat RSI crossings above and below the 50 level as
buying and selling signals respectively.

USING THE 70 AND 30 LINES TO
GENERATE SIGNALS

Horizontal lines appear on the oscillator chart at the 70 and 30
values. Traders often use those lines to generate buy and sell sig-
nals. We already know that a move under 30 warns of an over-
sold condition. Suppose the trader thinks a market is about to
bottom and is looking for a buying opportunity. He or she
watches the oscillator dip under 30. Some type of divergence or
double bottom may develop in the oscillator in that oversold
region. A crossing back above the 30 line at that point is taken
by many traders as a confirmation that the trend in the oscilla-
tor has turned up. Accordingly, in an overbought market, a
crossing back under the 70 line can often be used as a sell signal.
(See Figure 10.14.)


246 Chapter 10

4/30/73 (*DWU) Dow Utilities 03/31/98
Monthly Bar Chart ‘200
240
+ 220
200
180
180,
140
420
100
peo
Relative Strength Index (RSI) - 9 Month 100
Ah ak Me
\ " Tay Wi
Mes *
20
© eevee ewww eee e¥TEEREEE

Figure 10.14 = The RSI oscillator can be used on monthly charts. Notice the
two major oversold buy signals in 1974 and 1994. The overbought peaks in
the RSI line did a pretty good job of pinpointing important tops in the utilities.

STOCHASTICS (K%D)

The Stochastic oscillator was popularized by George Lane (presi-
dent of Investment Educators, Inc., Watseka, IL). It is based on the
observation that as prices increase, closing prices tend to be clos-
er to the upper end of the price range. Conversely, in downtrends,
the closing price tends to be near the lower end of the range. Two
lines are used in the Stochastic Process—the %K line and the %D
line. The %D line is the more important and is the one that pro-
vides the major signals.

The intent is to determine where the most recent closing price
is in relation to the price range for a chosen time period. Fourteen is
the most common period used for this oscillator. To determine the K
line, which is the more sensitive of the two, the formula is:

%K = 100 [(C - L14) / (H14 - L14)]


Oscillators and Contrary Opinion 247

where C is the latest close, L14 is the lowest low for the last 14
periods, and H14 is the highest high for the same 14 periods (14
periods can refer to days, weeks, or months).

The formula simply measures, on a percentage basis of 0 to
100, where the closing price is in relation to the total price range
for a selected time period. A very high reading (over 80) would put
the closing price near the top of the range, while a low reading
(under 20) near the bottom of the range.

The second line (%D) is a 3 period moving average of the
%K line. This formula produces a version called fast stochastics.
By taking another 3 period average of %D, a smoother version
called slow stochastics is computed. Most traders use the slow sto-
chastics because of its more reliable signals.*

These formulas produce two lines that oscillate between a
vertical scale from 0 to 100. The K line is a faster line, while the D
line is a slower line. The major signal to watch for is a divergence
between the D line and the price of the underlying market when
the D line is in an overbought or oversold area. The upper and
lower extremes are the 80 and 20 values. (See Figure 10.15.)

A bearish divergence occurs when the D line is over 80 and
forms two declining peaks while prices continue to move higher.
A bullish divergence is present when the D line is under 20 and
forms two rising bottoms while prices continue to move lower.
Assuming all of these factors are in place, the actual buy or sell sig-
nal is triggered when the faster K line crosses the slower D line.

There are other refinements in the use of Stochastics, but
this explanation covers the more essential points. Despite the high-
er level of sophistication, the basic oscillator interpretation remains
the same. An alert or set-up is present when the %D line is in an
extreme area and diverging from the price action. The actual signal
takes place when the D line is crossed by the faster K line.

The Stochastic oscillator can be used on weekly and month-
ly charts for longer range perspective. It can also be used effective-
ly on intraday charts for shorter term trading. (See Figure 10.16.)

One way to combine daily and weekly stochastics is to use
weekly signals to determine market direction and daily signals for
timing. It’s also a good idea to combine stochastics with RSI. (See
Figure 10.17.)

* The second smoothing produces 3 lines. Fast stochastics uses the first 2 lines.
Slow stochastics uses the last 2 lines.


02/07/97

(TR1600) Treasury Bonds 1600

03/13/98

Weekly Bar Chart

i hy!
Haul |

I" i"

{ 12

MN

40012,
407*28

kK

Stochastics - 14 Week

y Gert Now

Dec ve. Feb Mar

Figure 10.15 The down arrows show two sell signals which occur when
the faster %K line crosses below the slower %D line from above the 80 level.
The %K line crossing above the %D line below 20 is a buy signal (up arrow).

|
ll "

Hye

03/10/95 “ (TR1600) Treasury Bonds 1600 03/13/98
Weekly Bar Chart {
28
a *

We
a - ay ve

Figure 10.16 Turns in the 14 week stochastics from above 80 and below
20 did a nice job of anticipating major turns in the Treasury Bond market.
Stochastics charts can be constructed for 14 days, 14 weeks, or 14 months.


Oscillators and Contrary Opinion 249

09/22/95 (TR1600) Treasury Bonds 1600 03/13/98
Weekly Line Chart 12914
41201
A17MOG
144402
411043,
AO7A26
00
RSI - 14 Week :
Ay |”
UN Leo
+40,
wi) 20
Stochastics - 14 Week > ‘0
be ” % i) ‘Td Hy M1 o be
Seinen ‘

Figure 10.17 A comparison of the 14 week RSI and stochastics. The RSI
line is less volatile and reaches extremes less frequently than stochastics. The
best signals occur when both oscillators are in overbought or oversold territory.

LARRY WILLIAMS %R

Larry Williams %R is based on a similar concept of measuring the
latest close in relation to its price range over a given number of
days. Today’s close is subtracted from the price high of the range
for a given number of days and that difference is divided by the
total range for the same period. The concepts already discussed for
oscillator interpretation are applied to %R as well, with the main
factors being the presence of divergences in overbought or over-
sold areas. (See Figure 10.18.) Since %R is subtracted from the
high, it looks like an upside down stochastics. To correct that,
charting packages plot an inverted version of %R.


250 Chapter 10

08/27/97 (°SPX) S&P 500 Stock Index 03/05/98

BREE

hoy

ith | Ih
el a ali Wh Mh ali

Hh uy

iy J

fee 228

a
je als ‘i

\ vations %R - 20 Day

‘overbought

3

oversold

7 r
‘SAT TB Pariad ay VSD © Oireae Rae, as THOT

Figure 10.18 Larry Williams %R oscillator is used in the same fashion
as other oscillators. Readings over 80 or under 20 identify market extremes.

Choice of Time Period Tied to Cycles

Oscillator lengths can be tied to underlying market cycles. A time
period of !/, the cycle length is used. Popular time inputs are 5, 10,
and 20 days based on calendar day periods of 14, 28, and 56 days.
Wilder’s RSI uses 14 days, which is half of 28. In the previous
chapter, we discussed some reasons why the numbers S, 10, and
20 keep cropping up in moving average and oscillator formula-
tions, so we won't repeat them here. Suffice it to mention here
that 28 calendar days (20 trading days) represent an important
dominant monthly trading cycle and that the other numbers are
related harmonically to that monthly cycle. The popularity of the
10 day momentum and the 14 day RSI lengths are based largely
on the 28 day trading cycle and measure !|/, of the value of that
dominant trading cycle. We'll come back to the importance of
cycles in Chapter 14.


Oscillators and Contrary Opinion 251

THE IMPORTANCE OF TREND

In this chapter, we’ve discussed the use of the oscillator in market
analysis to help determine near term overbought and oversold
conditions, and to alert traders to possible divergences. We start-
ed with the momentum line. We discussed another way to mea-
sure rates of change (ROC) by using price ratios instead of differ-
ences. We then showed how two moving averages could be com-
pared to spot short term extremes and crossovers. Finally, we
looked at RSI and Stochastics and considered how oscillators
should be synchronized with cycles.

Divergence analysis provides us with the oscillator’s greatest
value. However, the reader is cautioned against placing too much
importance on divergence analysis to the point where basic trend
analysis is either ignored or overlooked. Most oscillator buy signals
work best in uptrends and oscillator sell signals are most profitable
in downtrends. The place to start your market analysis is always by
determining the general trend of the market. If the trend is up,
then a buying strategy is called for. Oscillators can then be used to
help time market entry. Buy when the market is oversold in an
uptrend. Sell short when the market is overbought in a downtrend.
Or, buy when the momentum oscillator crosses back above the
zero line when the major trend is bullish and sell a crossing under
the zero line in a bear market.

The importance of trading in the direction of the major
trend cannot be overstated. The danger in placing too much impor-
tance on oscillators by themselves is the temptation to use diver-
gence as an excuse to initiate trades contrary to the general trend.
This action generally proves a costly and painful exercise. The oscil-
lator, as useful as it is, is just one tool among many others and must
always be used as an aid, not a substitute, for basic trend analysis.

WHEN OSCILLATORS ARE
MOST USEFUL

There are times when oscillators are more useful than at others.
During choppy market periods, as prices move sideways for several
weeks or months, oscillators track the price movement very close-


252 Chapter 10

ly. The peaks and troughs on the price chart coincide almost exact-
ly with the peaks and troughs on the oscillator. Because both price
and oscillator are moving sideways, they look very much alike. At
some point, however, a price breakout occurs and a new uptrend or
downtrend begins. By its very nature, the oscillator is already in an
extreme position just as the breakout is taking place. If the break-
out is to the upside, the oscillator is already overbought. An over-
sold reading usually accompanies a downside breakout. The trader
is faced with a dilemma. Should he or she buy the bullish breakout
in the face of an overbought oscillator reading? Should the down-
side breakout be sold into an oversold market?

In such cases, the oscillator is best ignored for the time
being and the position taken. The reason for this is that in the
early stages of a new trend, following an important breakout,
oscillators often reach extremes very quickly and stay there for
awhile. Basic trend analysis should be the main consideration at
such times, with oscillators given a lesser role. Later on, as the
trend begins to mature, the oscillator should be given greater
weight. (We’ll see in Chapter 13, that the fifth and final wave in
Elliott Wave analysis is often confirmed by bearish oscillator
divergences.) Many dynamic bull moves have been missed by
traders who saw the major trend signal, but decided to wait for
their oscillators to move into an oversold condition before buy-
ing. To summarize, give less attention to the oscillator in the early
stages of an important move, but pay close attention to its signals
as the move reaches maturity.

MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE/
DIVERGENCE (MACD)

We mentioned in the previous chapter an oscillator technique
that uses 2 exponential moving averages and here it is. The
Moving Average Convergence/Divergence indicator, or simply
MACD, was developed by Gerald Appel. What makes this indica-
tor so useful is that it combines some of the oscillator principles
we've already explained with a dual moving average crossover
approach. You'll see only two lines on your computer screen
although three lines are actually used in its calculation. The faster


Oscillators and Contrary Opinion 253

line (called the MACD line) is the difference between two expo-
nentially smoothed moving averages of closing prices (usually the
last 12 and 26 days or weeks). The slower line (called the signal
line) is usually a 9 period exponentially smoothed average of the
MACD line. Appel originally recommended one set of numbers
for buy signals and another for sell signals. Most traders, howev-
er, utilize the default values of 12, 26, and 9 in all instances. That
would include daily and weekly values. (See Figure 10.19a.)

The actual buy and sell signals are given when the two
lines cross. A crossing by the faster MACD line above the slower
signal line is a buy signal. A crossing by the faster line below the
slower is a sell signal. In that sense, MACD resembles a dual mov-
ing average crossover method. However, the MACD values also
fluctuate above and below a zero line. That’s where it begins to
resemble an oscillator. An overbought condition is present when

08/21/97 (OTC) Nasdaq Composite Index 02/27/98 |

all 1750

ight jo

Figure 10.19a The Moving Average Convergence Divergence system
shows two lines. A signal is given when the faster MACD line crosses the
slower signal line. The arrows show five trading signals on this chart of the
Nasdaq Composite Index.



254 Chapter 10

the lines are too far above the zero line. An oversold condition is
present when the lines are too far below the zero line. The best
buy signals are given when prices are well below the zero line
(oversold). Crossings above and below the zero line are another
way to generate buy and sell signals respectively, similar to the
momentum technique we discussed previously.

Divergences appear between the trend of the MACD lines
and the price line. A negative, or bearish, divergence exists when
the MACD lines are well above the zero line (overbought) and start
to weaken while prices continue to trend higher. That is often a
warning of a market top. A positive, or bullish, divergence exists
when the MACD lines are well below the zero line (oversold) and
start to move up ahead of the price line. That is often an early sign
of a market bottom. Simple trendlines can be drawn on the MACD
lines to help identify important trend changes. (See Figure 10.19b.)

(12/19/96 (OTC) Nasdaq Composite Index 02/27/98

Figure 10.19b |The MACD lines fluctuate around a zero line, giving it
the quality of an oscillator. The best buy signals occur below the zero line.
The best sell signals come from above. Notice the negative divergence given
in October (see down arrow).


Oscillators and Contrary Opinion 255

MACD HISTOGRAM

We showed you earlier in the chapter how a histogram could be
constructed that plots the difference between two moving average
lines. Using that same technique, the two MACD lines can be
turned into an MACD histogram. The histogram consists of verti-
cal bars that show the difference between the two MACD lines.
The histogram has a zero line of its own. When the MACD lines
are in positive alignment (faster line over the slower), the his-
togram is above its zero line. Crossings by the histogram above
and below its zero line coincide with actual MACD crossover buy
and sell signals.

The real value of the histogram is spotting when the
spread between the two lines is widening or narrowing. When
the histogram is over its zero line (positive) but starts to fall
toward the zero line, the uptrend is weakening. Conversely,
when the histogram is below its zero line (negative) and starts
to move upward toward the zero line, the downtrend is losing
its momentum. Although no actual buy or sell signal is given
until the histogram crosses its zero line, the histogram turns
provide earlier warnings that the current trend is losing
momentum. Turns in the histogram back toward the zero line
always precede the actual crossover signals. Histogram turns are
best used for spotting early exit signals from existing positions.
It’s much more dangerous to use the histogram turns as an
excuse to initiate new positions against the prevailing trend.
(See Figure 10.20a.)


256

Chapter 10

(09/03/97

(OTC) Nasdaq Composite Index

03/10/98

saa
ene i
, ul f it
' i i bl \
\ i

|

\,

tl

a

fy
wt

MACD

ett tite

NM

MACD Histogram

x ih Minar

Figure 10.20a The MA
two MACD lines. Signals are

CD histogram plots the difference between the
given on the zero line crossings. Notice that the

histogram turns earlier than the crossover signals, giving the trader some

advanced waming.

COMBINE WEEKLIES
AND DAILIES

As with all technical indicators, signals on weekly charts are
always more important than those on daily charts. The best way
to combine them is to use weekly signals to determine market
direction and the daily signals to fine-tune entry and exit
points. A daily signal is followed only when it agrees with the
weekly signal. Used in that fashion, the weekly signals become
trend filters for daily signals. That prevents using daily signals to
trade against the prevailing trend. Two crossover systems in
which this principle is especially true are MACD and Stochastics.

(See Figure 10.20b.)


Oscillators and Contrary Opinion 257

02/28/97 (OTC) Nasdaq Composite Index 03/13/98

Weekly Bar Chart rE
il! hil TH ay ‘=
!

pe 1400
t

in ! 4300
Hity

MACD (weekly)

PAL ais
"ELIT weekly Maco Histogram an oe :

War Apr May Yun ul hog Sep Nov ieee be ‘War =

Figure 10.20b = The MACD histogram works well on weekly charts. At
the middle peak, the histogram turned down 10 weeks before the sell signal
(down arrow). At the two upturns, the histogram turned up 2 and 4 weeks

before the buy signals (up arrows).

THE PRINCIPLE OF CONTRARY
OPINION IN FUTURES

Oscillator analysis is the study of market extremes. One of the
most widely followed theories in measuring those market
extremes is the principle of Contrary Opinion. At the beginning
of the book, two principal philosophies of market analysis were
identified—fundamental and technical analysis. Contrary
Opinion, although it is generally listed under the category of
technical analysis, is more aptly described as a form of psycho-
logical analysis. Contrary Opinion adds the important third
dimension to market analysis—the psychological—by determin-
ing the degree of bullishness or bearishness among participants in
the various financial markets.


258 Chapter 10

The principle of Contrary Opinion holds that when the
vast majority of people agree on anything, they are generally
wrong. A true contrarian, therefore, will first try to determine
what the majority are doing and then will act in the opposite
direction.

Humphrey B. Neill, considered the dean of contrary
thinking, described his theories in a 1954 book entitled, The Art
of Contrary Thinking. Ten years later, in 1964, James H. Sibbet
began to apply Neill’s principles to commodity futures trading
by creating the Market Vane advisory service, which includes
the Bullish Consensus numbers (Market Vane, P.O. Box 90490,
Pasadena, CA 91109). Each week a poll of market letters is taken
to determine the degree of bullishness or bearishness among
commodity professionals. The purpose of the poll is to quantify
market sentiment into a set of numbers that can be analyzed
and used in the market forecasting process. The rationale behind
this approach is that most futures traders are influenced to a
great extent by market advisory services. By monitoring the
views of the professional market letters, therefore, a reasonably
accurate gauge of the attitudes of the trading public can be
obtained.

Another service that provides an indication of market sen-
timent is the “Consensus Index of Bullish Market Opinion,” pub-
lished by Consensus National Commodity Futures Weekly
(Consensus, Inc., 1735 McGee Street, Kansas City, MO 64108).
These numbers are published each Friday and use 75% as an over-
bought and 25% as an oversold measurement.

Interpreting Bullish Consensus Numbers

Most traders seem to employ a fairly simple method of analyzing
these weekly numbers. If the numbers are above 75%, the market
is considered to be overbought and means that a top may be near.
A reading below 25% is interpreted to warn of an oversold condi-
tion and the increased likelihood that a market bottom is near.


Oscillators and Contrary Opinion 259

Contrary Opinion Measures Remaining
Buying or Selling Power

Consider the case of an individual speculator. Assume that spec-
ulator reads his or her favorite newsletter and becomes con-
vinced that a market is about to move substantially higher. The
more bullish the forecast, the more aggressively that trader will
approach the market. Once that individual speculator’s funds
are fully committed to that particular market, however, he or
she is overbought—meaning there are no more funds to commit
to the market.

Expanding this situation to include all market partici-
pants, if 80-90% of market traders are bullish on a market, it is
assumed that they have already taken their market positions.
Who is left to buy and push the market higher? This then is one
of the keys to understanding Contrary Opinion. If the over-
whelming sentiment of market traders is on one side of the mar-
ket, there simply isn’t enough buying or selling pressure left to
continue the present trend.

Contrary Opinion Measures Strong Versus
Weak Hands

Asecond feature of this philosophy is its ability to compare strong
versus weak hands. Futures trading is a zero sum game. For every
long there is also a short. If 80% of the traders are on the long side
of a market, then the remaining 20% (who are holding short posi-
tions) must be well financed enough to absorb the longs held by
the other 80%. The shorts, therefore, must be holding much larg-
er positions than the longs (in this case, 4 to 1).
