
20

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

intensified, and Gould's methods, developed in a different monetary environment, stopped working. By 1976, he had lost most of his following, and few
people today even remember his name.
The new market cycle guru emerged in 1978. Joseph Granville stated that
changes in stock market volume preceded changes in prices. He expressed it
colorfully: "Volume is the steam that makes the choo-choo go." Granville
developed his theory while working for a major Wall Street brokerage firm.
He wrote in his autobiography that the idea came to him while sitting on a
toilet contemplating the design of floor tiles. Granville took his idea from the
bathroom to the chartroom, but the market refused to follow his forecasts.
He went broke, got divorced, and slept on the floor of his friend's office. By
the late 1970s, the market started to follow Granville's scripts as never
before or since, and people began to take notice.
Granville toured the United States speaking to overflow crowds. He
arrived on stage in a camage, issued forecasts, and chided "bagholders" who
would not recognize his theory. He played piano, sang, and, on occasion,
even dropped his pants to make a point. His forecasts were spectacularly correct; he drew attention to himself and became widely quoted in the mass
media. Granville became big enough to move the stock market. When he
announced that he was bearish, the Dow dropped over 40 points in a day - a
huge decline by the standards of that time. Granville became intoxicated
with his success. The market surged higher in 1982, but he remained very
bearish and kept advising his dwindling band of followers to continue to sell
short. The market rocketed higher into 1983. Granville finally gave up and
recommended buying when the Dow doubled in value. He continued to publish a market newsletter, a shadow of his former successful self.
A new guru entered the spotlight in 1984. Robert Prechter has made a
name for himself as an Elliott Wave theorist. Elliott was an impecunious
accountant who developed his market theory in the 1930s. He believed that
the stock market rallied in 5 waves and fell in 3 waves, which in turn could
be subdivided into lesser waves.
Like other market cycle gurus before him, Prechter had been writing an
advisory letter for many years with modest success. When the bull market
penetrated the 1000 level on the Dow, people began to pay attention to the
young analyst who kept calling for the Dow to reach 3000. The bull market
went from strength to strength, and Prechter s fame grew by leaps and
bounds.
In the roaring bull market of the 1980s, Prechter's fame swept outside the
narrow world of investment newsletters and conferences. Prechter appeared
on national television and was interviewed by popular magazines. In October
7

.

6 . MARKET GURUS

21

1987, he appeared to vacillate, first issuing a sell signal, then telling his followers to get ready to buy. As the Dow crashed 500 points, mass adulation
of Prechter gave way to scorn and hatred. Some blamed him for the decline,
others were angry that the market never reached his stated target of 3000.
Prechter's advisory business shrank, and he largely retired from it.
All market cycle gurus have several traits in common. They become
active in the forecasting business several years prior to reaching stardom.
Each has a unique theory, a few followers, and some credibility, conferred by
sheer survival in the advisory business. The fact that each gum's theory did
not work for a number of years is ignored by his followers. When the theory
becomes correct, the mass media take notice. When a theory stops working,
mass adulation of a gum turns to hatred.
When you recognize that a successful new gum is emerging, it is profitable to jump on his bandwagon. It is even more important to recognize
when a guru has reached his peak. All gurus crash- and by definition, they
crash from the height of their fame. When a gum becomes accepted by the
mass media, it is a sign that he has reached his crest. The mainstream media
is wary of outsiders. When several mass magazines devote space to a hot
market guru, you know that his end is near.
Another warning sign that a market guru has reached his peak occurs
when he is interviewed by Barron's-America's largest business weekly.
Every January, Barron's invites a panel of prominent analysts to dispense
wisdom and issue forecasts for the year ahead. The panel is usually made up
of "safe" analysts who focus on pricelearnings ratios, emerging growth
industries, and so on. It is highly atypical of Barron's to invite a hot gum
with an offbeat theory to its January panel. A gum gets invited only when
the public clamors for him, and to exclude him would diminish the prestige
of the magazine. Both Granville and Prechter were invited to the January
panel when each man was at the crest of his fame. Each guru fell within a
few months of appearing on that panel. The next time a market guru is on
Barron's January panel, do not renew your subscription to his newsletter.
Mass psychology being what it is, new gums will certainly emerge. An
old cycle gum never fully comes back. Once he stumbles, the adulation turns
to derision and hatred. An expensive vase, once shattered, can never be fully
restored.
Magic Method Gurus

Market cycle gurus are creatures of the stock market, but "method gurus" are
more prominent in the derivative markets, especially in the futures markets.

22

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

A "method guru" erupts on the financial scene after discovering a new analytic or trading method.
Traders always look for an edge, an advantage over fellow traders. Like
knights shopping for swords, they are willing to pay handsomely for their
trading tools. No price is too high if it lets them tap into a money pipeline.
A magic method gum sells a new set of keys to market profits. As soon as
enough people become familiar with a new method and test it in the markets,
it inevitably deteriorates and starts losing popularity. Markets are forever
changing, and the methods that worked yesterday are not likely to work
today and even less likely to work a year from now.
In the early 1970s, Chicago market letter writer Jake Bemstein became
hot by using market cycles to call tops and bottoms. His methods worked
well and his fame spread. Bernstein charged high fees for his newsletters, ran
conferences, managed funds, and produced an endless flow of books. As
usual, the markets changed, becoming less and less cyclical in the 1980s.
Peter Steidlmayer was another method gum whose star rose high above
Chicago. He urged his followers to discard old trading methods in favor of
his Market Profile. That method promised to reveal the secrets of supply and
demand and give true believers an ability to buy at the bottoms and sell at
the tops. Steidlmayer teamed up with entrepreneur Kevin Koy, and their frequent seminars attracted upward of 50 people who paid $1600 for a 4-day
class. There appeared to be no conspicuous examples of success among
Market Profile devotees, and the founders had a nasty falling out.
Steidlmayer got a job with a brokerage firm, and both he and Koy continued
to give occasional seminars.
Oddly enough, even in this era of fast global links, reputations change
slowly. A guru whose image has been destroyed in his own country can
make money peddling his theory overseas. That point has been made to me
by a guru who compared his continued popularity in Asia to what happens
to faded American singers and movie stars. They are unable to attract an
audience in the United States, but they can still make a living singing
abroad.

Dead Gurus

The third type of a market gum is a dead gum. His books are reissued, his
market courses are scrutinized by new generations of eager traders, and the

6. MARKET G U R U S

23

legend of the dear-departed analyst's prowess and personal wealth grows
posthumously. The dead guru is no longer among us and cannot capitalize on
his fame. Other promoters profit from his reputation and from expired copyrights. One dear-departed guru is R. N. Elliott, but the best example of such a
legend is W. D. Gann.
Various opportunists sell "Gann courses" and "Gann software." They
claim that Gann was one of the best traders who ever lived, that he left a $50
million estate, and so on. I interviewed W. D. Gann's son, an analyst for a
Boston bank. He told me that his famous father could not support his family
by trading but earned his living by writing and selling instructional courses.
When W. D. Gann died in the 1950s, his estate, including his house, was valued at slightly over $100,000. The legend of W. D. Gann, the giant of trading, is perpetuated by those who sell courses and other paraphernalia to
gullible customers.

The Followers of Gurus
The personalities of market gums differ. Some are dead, but those who are
alive range from serious academic types to great showmen. A guru has to
produce original research for several years, then get lucky when the market
turns his way.
To read about the scandals that surrounded many gurus, try Winner Takes
All by William Gallacher and The Dow Jones Guide to Trading Systems by
Bruce Babcock. The purpose of this section is simply analysis of the guru
phenomenon.
When we pay a guru, we expect to get back more than we spend. We act
like a man who bets a few dollars against a three-card monte dealer on a
street comer. He hopes to win more than he put down on an overturned crate.
Only the ignorant or greedy take the bait.
Some people turn to gurus in search of a strong leader. They look for a
parent-like omniscient provider. As a friend once said, "They walk with their
umbilical cords in hand, looking for a place to plug them in." A smart promoter provides such a receptacle, for a fee.
The public wants gurus, and new gurus will come. As an intelligent tradel;
you must realize that in the long run, no guru is going to make you rich. You
have to work on that yourself.

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

7. SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS
Trading is a very hard game. A trader who wants to be successful in the long
run has to be very serious about what he does. He cannot afford to be naive
or to trade because of some hidden psychological agenda.
Unfortunately, trading often appeals to impulsive people, to gamblers, and
to those who feel that the world owes them a living. If you trade for the
excitement, you are liable to take trades with bad odds and accept unnecessary risks. The markets are unforgiving, and emotional trading always results
in losses.

Gambling

Gambling means betting on games of chance or skill. It exists in all societies,
and most people have gambled at some point in their lives.
Freud believed that gambling was universally attractive because it was a
substitute for masturbation. The repetitive and exciting activity of the hands,
the irresistible urge, the resolutions to stop, the intoxicating quality of pleasure, and the feelings of guilt link gambling and masturbation.
Dr. Ralph Greenson, a prominent California psychoanalyst, has divided
gamblers into three groups: the normal person who gambles for diversion
and who can stop when he wishes; the professional gambler, who selects
gambling as his means of earning a livelihood; and the neurotic gambler,
who gambles because he is driven by unconscious needs and is unable to
stop.
A neurotic gambler either feels lucky or wants to test his luck. Winning
gives him a sense of power. He feels pleased, like a baby feeding at a breast. A
neurotic gambler always loses because he tries to re-create that omnipotent
feeling of bliss instead of concentrating on a realistic long-term game plan.
Dr. Sheila Blume, director of the compulsive gambling program at South
Oaks Hospital in New York, calls gambling "an addiction without a drug."
Most gamblers are men who gamble for the action. Women tend to gamble
as a means of escape. Losers usually hide their losses and try to look and act
like winners, but they are plagued by self-doubt.
Trading stocks, futures, and options gives a gambler a high but it does
appear more respectable than betting on the ponies, Moreover, gambling in
the financial markets has an aura of sophistication and offers a better intellectual diversion than playing numbers with a bookie.

7. SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS

25

Gamblers feel happy when trades go in their favor. They feel terribly low
when they lose. They differ from successful professionals who focus on longterm plans and do not get particularly upset or excited in the process of trading.
Brokers are well aware that many of their clients are gamblers. They often
try to avoid leaving messages for traders with their wives, even when they
call to confirm a trade. Amateurs are not the only ones involved in gambling-quite a bit of it goes on among professionals. Sonny Kleinfield
describes in his book, The Traders, the endemic betting on sports events on
the floors of financial exchanges.
The key sign of gambling is the inability to resist the urge to bet. If you
feel that you are trading too much and the results are poor, stop trading for a
month. This will give you a chance to re-evaluate your trading. If the urge to
trade is so strong that you cannot stay away fiom the action for a month,
then it is time to visit your local chapter of Gamblers Anonymous or start
using the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, outlined later in this chapter.

Self-sabotage

After practicing psychiatry for many years, I became convinced that most
failures in life are due to self-sabotage. We fail in our professional, personal,
and business affairs not because of stupidity or incompetence, but to fulfill
an unconscious wish to fail.
A brilliant and witty friend of mine has a lifelong history of demolishing
his success. As a young man, he was a successful industrial salesman and
was sacked; he entered training as a broker and rose near the top of his firm
but was sued; he became a well-known trader but busted out while disentangling himself from previous disasters. He blamed all his failures on envious
bosses, incompetent regulators, and an unsupportive wife.
Finally, he hit bottom. He had no job and no money. He borrowed a quote
terminal from another busted-out trader and raised capital from a few people
who had heard that he had traded well in the past. He knew how to trade and
made money for his pool. As the word spread, more people brought in
money. My friend was on a roll. At that point, he went on a speaking tour of
Asia but continued to trade from the road. He took a side trip into a country
famous for its prostitutes, leaving a very large open position with no protective stop. By the time he returned to civilization, the markets had staged a
major move and his pool was wiped out. Did he try to figure out his problem? Did he try to change? No- he blamed his broker!

26

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

It hurts to look within yourself for the cause of your failure. When traders
get in trouble, they tend to blame others, bad luck, or anything else.
A prominent trader came to me for a consultation. His equity was being
demolished by a rally in the U.S. dollar, in which he was heavily short. He
had grown up fighting a nasty and arrogant father. He had made a name for
himself by betting large positions on reversals of established trends. This
trader kept adding to his short position because he could not admit that the
market, which represented his father, was bigger and stronger than he was.
These are just two examples of how people act out self-destructive tendencies. We sabotage ourselves by acting like impulsive children rather than
intelligent adults. We cling to our self-defeating patterns even though they
can be treated - failure is a curable disease.
The mental baggage from childhood can prevent you from succeeding in
the markets. You have to find your weaknesses in order to change. Keep a
trading diary - write down your reasons for entering and exiting every trade.
Look for repetitive patterns of success and failure.

The Demolition Derby

Almost every profession and business provides a safety net for its members.
Your bosses, colleagues, and clients can warn you when you behave dangerously or self-destructively. There is no such support in trading, which makes
it more dangerous than most human endeavors. The markets offer many
opportunities to self-destruct without a safety net.
All members of society make small allowances to protect one another
from the consequences of our mistakes. When you drive, you try to avoid
hitting other cars and they try to avoid hitting you. If someone swings open
the door of a parked car, you swerve. If someone cuts in front of you on a
highway, you may curse, but you will slow down. You avoid collisions
because they are too costly for both parties.
Markets operate without normal human helpfulness. Every trader tries to
hit others. Every trader gets hit by others. The trading highway is littered
with wrecks. Trading is the most dangerous human endeavor, short of war.
Buying at the high point of the day is like swinging your car door open
into the traffic. When your buy order reaches the floor, traders rush to sell to
you - to rip your door off along with your arm. Other traders want you to fail
because they get the money you lose.

8. TRADING PSYCHOLOGY

27

Controlling Self-Destructiveness

Most people go through life making the same mistakes at sixty that they
made at twenty. Others structure their lives to succeed in one area while acting out internal conflicts in another. Very few people grow out of their problems.
You need to be aware of your tendency to sabotage yourself: Stop blaming
your losses on bad luck or on others and take responsibility for the results.
Start keeping a diary-a record of all your trades, with reasons for entering
and exiting them. Look for repetitive patterns of success and failure. Those
who do not learn from the past are condemned to repeat it.
You need a psychological safety net the way mountain climbers need their
survival gear. I found the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, outlined later
in this chapter, to be of great help. Strict money management rules also provide a safety net.
If you seek therapy for your trading problems, choose a competent therapist who knows what trading is about. You are ultimately responsible for
your own therapy and must monitor its progress. I usually tell my patients
that if a month goes by without clear signs of improvement, then therapy is
in trouble. When therapy shows no progress for two months, it is time to
seek a consultation with another therapist.

8. TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
Your feelings have an immediate impact on your account equity. You may
have a brilliant trading system, but if you feel frightened, arrogant, or upset,
your account is sure to suffer. When you recognize that a gambler's high or
fear is clouding your mind, stop trading. Your success or failure as a trader
depends on controlling your emotions.
When you trade, you compete against the sharpest minds in the world.
The field on which you compete has been slanted to ensure your failure. If
you allow your emotions to interfere with your trading, the battle is over.
You are responsible for every trade that you make. A trade begins when
you decide to enter the market and grids only when you decide to take yourself out. Having a good trading system is not enough. Most traders with good
systems wash out of the markets because psychologically they are not prepared to win.

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Bending the Rules

Markets offer enormous temptations, like walking through a gold vault or
through a harem. Markets evoke powerful greed for more gains and a great
fear of losing what we've got. Those feelings cloud our perceptions of
opportunities and dangers.
Most amateurs feel like geniuses after a winning streak. It is exciting to
believe that you are so good you can bend your own rules and succeed.
That's when traders deviate from their rules and go into a self-destruct mode.
Traders gain some knowledge, they win, their emotions kick in, and they
self-destruct. Most traders promptly give their "killings" back to the markets.
The markets are full of rags to riches to rags stories. The hallmark of a successful trader is his ability to accumulate equity.
You need to make trading as objective as possible. Keep a diary of all
your trades with "before and after" charts, keep a spreadsheet listing all your
trades, including commissions and slippage, and maintain very strict money
management rules. You may have to devote as much energy to analyzing
yourself as you do to analyzing the markets.
When I was learning how to trade, I read every book on trading psychology I could find. Many writers offered sensible advice. Some stressed discipline: "You cannot let the markets sway you. Do not make decisions during
trading hours. Plan a trade, and trade a plan." Others stressed flexibility: "Do
not enter the market with any preconceived notions. Change your plans
when markets change." Some experts suggested isolation - no business
news, no Wall Street Journal, no listening to other traders, just you and the
markets. Others advised being open-minded, keeping in touch with other
traders and soaking up fresh ideas. Each piece of advice seemed to make
sense but contradicted other equally sensible advice.
I kept reading, trading, and focusing on system development. I also continued to practice psychiatry. I never thought the two fields were connected-until I had a sudden insight. The idea that changed how I trade
came from psychiatry.

The Insight That Changed My Trading

Like most psychiatrists, I always had some patients with alcohol problems. I
also served as a consultant to a major drug rehabilitation program. It did not

9. TRADING LESSONS FROM AA

take me long to realize that alcoholics and addicts were more likely to
recover in self-help groups than in classical psychiatric settings.
Psychotherapy, medications, and expensive hospitals and clinics can sober
up a drunk but seldom succeed in keeping him sober. Most addicts quickly
relapse. They have a much better chance to recover if they become active in
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or other self-help groups.
Once I realized that AA members were likely to stay sober and rebuild
their lives, I became a big fan of Alcoholics Anonymous. I began sending
patients with drinking problems to AA and related groups, such as ACOA
(Adult Children of Alcoholics). Now, if an alcoholic comes to me for treatment, I insist that he also go to AA. I tell him that to do otherwise would
mean wasting our time and his money.
One night, many years ago, I stopped by a friend's office on the way to a
party at our department of psychiatry. We had two hours before the party,
and my friend, who was a recovering alcoholic, said: "Do you want to take
in a movie or go to an AA meeting?" I had sent many patients to AA but had
never been to a meeting, since I have never had a drinking problem. I
jumped at a chance to attend an AA meeting- it was a new experience.
The meeting was held at a local YMCA. A dozen men and a few women
sat on folding chairs in a plain room. The meeting lasted an hour. I was
amazed by what I heard - these people seemed to talk about my trading!
They talked about alcohol, but as long as I substituted the word "loss" for
"alcohol," most of what they said applied to me! My account equity was still
swinging up and down in those days. I left that YMCA room knowing that I
had to handle my losses the way AA handles alcoholism.
