
185

Tony Saliba-"One-Lot" Triumphs*
Tony Saliba came to the floor of the Chicago Board Options Exchange in 1978. After a half-year of
clerking, Saliba was ready to try it on his own. He found another trader to back him for $50,000,
and after a favorable start, nearly self-destructed. He pulled back from the brink of disaster by
altering his trading techniques, and has been successful ever since.
Saliba's trading style can be described as trying to do a little better than treading water day in, day
out, while being positioned to take advantage of the rare spectacular trading opportunity. His
fortune has been built largely by exploiting only a handful of such events. Two of these
situations—the Teledyne price explosion and the October 1987 stock market collapse—are
discussed in the interview.
The impressive aspect of Saliba's trading achievements is not the few spectacular gains he has
registered in his career. Rather, it is that these gains have been achieved by using a trading
approach exemplified by incredible risk control. In fact, at one point, Saliba managed to string
together seventy consecutive months of profits exceeding $100,000. Quite a few traders have
become multimillionaires by scoring several big hits. A much smaller number have managed to
hold on to their gains. Only the rare trader can boast both occasional dramatic gains and consistent
trading profits.
*Readers unfamiliar with options may wish to first read Appendix 2 in order to understand the
trading-related reierences in this chapter.
Although the homework required for Saliba's successful trading is extensive, he has nonetheless
managed to diversify into a wide range of other ventures, including real estate investments, a
software company, and a restaurant chain. Overall, his extracurricular business endeavors have
proven only modestly profitable, but they have indulged his appetite for variety.
During the time these interviews were being conducted, Saliba was involved in the most important
business venture of his life: negotiating with a French bank to back him with several hundred
million dollars to form a major trading company. His goal is to discover and train a generation of
successful traders.
Saliba is a likable person who makes you feel like you're one of his best friends within five minutes
of meeting. He is a person who genuinely likes people—and it shows.
On the evening before our scheduled meeting, Saliba had a minor accident, slipping on the marble
floor at the health club in the Chicago Board Options Exchange building. As I showed up at the
scheduled time, his aide told me that Tony would not be in that morning due to the accident. I left a
message. Saliba called later that day, and to spare me the inconvenience of missing my flight that
evening, or making another trip to Chicago, he arranged to meet me several hours later.
We talked at the LaSalle Club bar, which was sufficiently empty to not cause a major distraction.
Initially, I was too intensely focused on directing the interview to pay any attention at all to the
largemovie screen at the front of the bar. Later on, however, as I relaxed, I glanced at the screen as
Saliba was answering one of my questions. I instantly recognized the train scene from the movie
Risky Business in which the sensuous Rebecca DeMornay seduces Tom Cruise.
I have a bad habit of severely overscheduling my appointments, and as Saliba was my third
interview of the day, I was beginning to feel the strain. My first thought was, "Keep your eyes off
the screen, you are having a hard enough time keeping your mind focused as it is." My second
thought was, "It would be incredibly rude not to pay full attention to Tony, especially after he
literally hobbled over to spare me the inconvenience of having to reschedule our interview." My
third thought was, "Thank God I'm the one facing the screen."
What led you to become a trader?
I was a caddy for some grain traders when I was in high school. In college, a friend of mine asked
me if I would like to be a broker. I thought that he meant doing the same thing as the guys I had
caddied for. So, I said, "Yes. Great! Where?" "Indianapolis," he answered. I said, "What exchange
is in Indianapolis?" "None," he said, "you do it on the phone." I had this impression of: "Hello New
York, buy; Chicago, sell." When I got there, I found out I was a salesman.
After a few months, I asked the guys in the office, "Who makes all the money in this business?"
They said you have to be on the floor. Right there I decided to go to the Chicago Board Options
186

Exchange. On the floor, I met one of the traders I had caddied for years ago, and he grubstaked me
with $50,000.
Isn't that unusual, giving $50,000 to a kid who used to caddy for you?
It was, except that he was very wealthy and needed to get off the floor because of his high blood
pressure. He owned a seat that he had bought for only $10,000, and just needed the ability to trade
in a customer account. I was going to help him do that.
What made him think you could make it as a trader?
He had heard some rumors around the floor that I was a hotshot clerk, and he basically took a
chance on me.
What happened?
I went from $50,000 to about $75,000 in the first two weeks. I had put on all these volatility
spreads [an option position that will gain if the market becomes more volatile] and they were
getting pumped up.
Did you think, "Boy, this is easy"?
I thought, "This is it!" I mean, I was a genius. But what I was really doing was taking the opposite
side of positions the other brokers were liquidating, letting them out of the market with their profits,
while I was left holding the bag. This was spring 1979 and implied volatilities were very high
because 1978 was a very volatile year. Well, the market went nowhere, and the volatility and
option premiums collapsed. Within six weeks I had lost almost everything. The original $50,000
was down to only about $15,000.1 was feeling suicidal. Do you remember the big DC10 crash at
O'Hare in May 1979, when all those people died? That was when I hit bottom.
Was that a metaphor for your mood?
Yes. I would have exchanged places with one of those people in that plane on that day. I felt that
bad. I thought, "This is it; I've mined my life."
Did you feel guilty because you had lost someone else's money?
Yes, and I felt like a failure.
Had you started out confident?
Initially, I was very confident because before I started trading on my own, I had clerked for a
broker for four months and picked his brain clean.
And now you thought the game was over?
Yes. In June 1979,1 decided that I better find another job. I went to the Levy brothers, who owned
a chain of restaurants that my dad built for them. They said, "Any time you want a job, you can run
one of our restaurants." So, I said, "Hold that line. I am going to give it one more month,"
Did you feel better because you had a cushion?
Yes. I said, "This is great, I've still got fifteen grand in my account."
You had a stop on your life so to speak?
Exactly, exactly. I had a stop on my career. So, I decided to go back and give it one more shot.
Did the fellow who staked you know how much you had lost? Did he ever say anything?
Oh, good question, Jack. He called me every night. I' ve grubstaked many guys since then, and
three or four of them have lost more than fifty grand each. This man was a multimillionaire, and he
acted as if this was the end of the world.
Did he ever ask you for the rest of the money back?
No, he just moaned and groaned. He had become wealthy through inheritance and money he made
in another business. He really didn't know much about option trading. He had bought the seat to
have something to do with his life. He told me, "If you lose $5,000 more, we'll pull the plug." So, I
spent the next few weeks winding down my positions.
During that time, I sought advice from the more experienced brokers on the floor. They said, "You
have to be disciplined and you have to do your homework. If you do those two things, you can
make money down here. You might not get rich, but you can make $300 a day, and at the end of
187

the year that's $75,000. You have to look at it that way." It was like a light bulb went on. I realized
that this chipping away approach was what I should be doing, not putting myself at a big risk,
trying to collect a ton of dough.
At the time I was in Teledyne options, which was a very volatile market. So, I switched to Boeing,
which was a very tight, narrow range type of market. I became a spread scalper trying to make a
quarter or an eighth of a point on a trade.
I stuck strictly to my goal of trying to average $300 a day and it was working. This period taught
me to be regimented and disciplined.
То this day, I live by the credo of hard work, homework, and discipline. I teach my guys that.
Anyway, at this same time, I still had the remnants of a big spread position in Teledyne that I was
in the process of liquidating. It was a position that would lose in a rising market. One day after I
had been trading Boeing for about five weeks, Teledyne started moving up sharply. I was not going
to let it get me again. I rushed into the Teledyne pit to take my position off. I was hearing floor
brokers come in with orders, and all of a sudden I found myself responding to them. I was adapting
the same technique I had learned in Boeing to Teledyne, except instead of scalping for an eighth or
a quarter, I was scalping for halves and dollars.
What size were you trading at the time?
I was doing one lot at a time. The guys didn't like me because I was getting in their way. They
wanted to do ten- or twenty-lot orders.
In other words, you were just a nuisance.
Exactly.
How did you get someone to take one lot?
On the options floor, it's first come, first served. If you have 100 to sell and someone bids first for
just one, you have to do his one before you do 99 with the number two guy. The broker could
ignore you if he wants, but if he does, he's breaking the rules.
Were you ignored?
The brokers never did, but the market makers on the floor did.
By brokers, you mean order fillers?
Yes. The floor brokers are the order fillers, and the market makers are the locals who trade for
themselves. On the options exchange, the two are separate.
Were you the only one-lot trader in Teledyne?
For the most part, yes.
Did you take a lot of ribbing?
Oh, did I! They called me "one-lot" for the longest time. The individual who gave me the hardest
time was the best trader in the crowd. He had made millions and was virtually a legend in his own
time. He started leaning on me and ribbing me right from the beginning. He made my life
miserable.
Did your ego get dented by these really successful traders railing you?
Oh, yes. And, it went on for almost a year, day in, day out.
W`re you tempted to pick up your trading a little bit?
I did, but not for that reason. My backer, who had given me such a hard time when I was down,
was the prod. Although he didn't know that much about trading, he did give me one piece of very
useful advice. Once I started turning it around, he told me to increase my size. He said, "Tony, a
banker makes his first loan and he is very careful, but as he gets more comfortable, he makes his
loans bigger. You need to increase your size."
How did the harassment you were taking on the floor finally end?
When they introduced puts in June 1980, the lead trader, who had given me the hardest time, hated
them. He said they were bad for the business and he didn't want to trade them. I seized that
opportunity to really study what puts would mean to us, and I was one of the first market makers to
start trading puts.
188

Actually, it opens up a whole range of new strategies.
Oh, unbelievable. These other guys were set in their ways, even though they had only been there a
couple of years. Sooner than you might think, this nmnber one trader befriended me and suggested
that we work together. We started working on advanced strategies, getting real creative and
abstract.
Were you working these out on a computer?
No, we did everything by hand. Writing out all these "what-ifs."
Didn't you still have to be guessing right on price and volatility direction?
You would have to guess right on volatility. However, we didn't have to peg market direction,
because we were setting up spreads that had a big edge. For example, one option might be highly
overvalued because it was popular among the member firms.
Eventually, I felt I was doing more of the work, while this top trader in the pit was counting on his
ability to muscle the market. He would also stray from the strategies we had worked out and even
started doing things to try to hurt me. I would say, "What are you doing?" He would just answer, "I
changed my mind."
Finally, I just said, "Forget it, I'm working on my own." I started taking on more size. When
interest rates went through the roof in 1981 and early 1982, my strategies worked really well and I
started making a lot of money. Then in the bull market in 1982,1 had days when I was making
$200,000 a day. The guys in my clearinghouse couldn't believe the sheets; there was just tons of
paper.
What kind of trades were you doing?
I was doing everything. I consider myself a matrix trader. I trade everything on the screen as it
interrelates to everything else. My basic strategy, however, was buying butterflies [a long or short
position at one strike price balanced by an opposite position in higher and lower strike options—for
example, long one IBM 135 call, short two IBM 140 calls, and long one IBM 145 call] and
offsetting that with an explosion position.
By buying butterflies, do you mean you were long the middle or long the wings [that is, the
higher and lower strike price options]?
Long the wings. Your risk is limited, and if the market does not move widely, time decay works in
your favor. [Barring a favorable price move or an increase in volatility, the value of an option
erodes steadily over time. In a relatively flat market, the premium erosion in options with a strike
price near the market price—"middle" in butterfly spread—will be greater than that of options
further removed from the strike price— "wings" in spread.] Of course, I tried to buy the butterflies
as cheap as I could. If I chained enough of them together, my profit zone would be fairly wide.
Then I would do an explosion position in a more distant month.
What do you mean by the term "explosion position"?
That's basically my own term. An explosion position is an option position that has limited risk and
open-ended potential, which will profit from a large price move or an increase in volatility. For
example, a position consisting of long out-of-the-money calls and long out-of-the-money puts
would be an explosion position.
It sounds like the basic unifying feature of the explosion position is that as the market moves,
the delta [the expected price change in the option position given a one-unit change in the price
of the underlying market] increases in your favor. So, you are really betting on volatility.
Exactly.
In effect, this is the opposite of what you do with the butterfly.
Yes. I put on the butterfly in the front month, where time is working for me, and the explosion
position in the mid- or back-month. Then I complement that with scalping to help pay for the time
decay in the explosion position.
In other words, the explosion position is your money bet in case of a big move, while your
scalping is paying the bills, that is, the time decay cost of the explosion position.
Exactly.
189

Were you always offsetting one position with another? In other words, were you always delta
neutrafl [An option position in which total equity will remain roughly unchanged for small
price changes in either direction.]
Usually, but once in a while I would take a significant net position.
What was your first really big trade?
Teledyne in 1984. The stock had dropped sharply and I was building up a position in the out-of-themoney October calls. Well, the stock started inching back up, but these guys from the Pacific Coast
Exchange, where they also list Teledyne, were leaning on my longs. They just kept battering them
on the close every night. Instead of shying away, I stepped up and would buy them. "You want to
sell them at ГА, I'm 1'л bid for fifty." This went on for over ten trading days.
Why were these Pacific Coast traders leaning on the calls?
The stock had gone down from 160 to 138, and then inched its way back up to 150.1 guess they
didn't think it was going to go up anymore. On May 9 at 9:20 they stopped trading in Teledyne
because of news pending. The news comes across the tape: "Teledyne Announces a Stock
Repurchase Program at $200 per Share."
Buying back their own stock?
Yes. The stock was at $155, and I owned the $180 calls. Overnight, I made millions. The stock
eventually went up to $300. The next four to five months were great.
What happened after that?
One of my goals in life was to become a millionaire before I was thirty and retire. Well, I was a
millionaire before I was twenty-five. I had decided to retire when I was thirty. On May 5, 1985, my
thirtieth birthday, I walked off the floor and said good-bye to everybody and that was it. I was
never going to come back to the floor.
How far were you up then?
About $8-9 million.
Did you know what you were going to do?
I didn't really know. I thought I'd stay in the business somehow, but work off the floor.
How long did your retirement last?
About four months.
Were you bored?
Yes. I missed the markets. I missed the excitement.
So, in the beginning, money was the goal, but once you got there it became.
Yes, it became secondary. Maybe if I had a wife and kids, or someone special in my life, I might
not have gone back. But trading was my life. It made me feel like something; it gave me a reason
for being.
I understand one of your best trading periods was the week of the October 1987 stock crash.
Tell me about it.
I was expecting a big move, but I didn't know if it would be up or down. So, I started building the
same type position that I had in Teledyne.
The butterfly spread combined with the explosion position.
Yes.
What was the explosion position in this case?
In this case, it was formed by buying out-of-the-money puts and out-of-the-money calls in the back
months. To counterbalance this position, I had butterfly spreads in the front month, which would
profit from time decay.
What told you the market was going to have a big move?
You could feel it in the wild gyrations that were occurring by late September.
Did you expect the move to be on the downside by that time?
190

Actually, I thought it was going to be on the upside. At first, I thought we were going to attack the
old highs again.
When did you change your mind?
On Wednesday of the week before the crash, the market fell apart. Thursday, it didn't bounce back,
but kind of churned. Now, if it had rallied on Friday, then I would have been confused. But instead,
the market cracked on Friday. At that point, I was sure we were going down.
Because it was the end of the week?
Yes, and there is a high correlation between the action on a Friday and the follow-through on the
next Moniday—at least on the opening.
Did you have any inkling of the siize of the impending move on the following Monday?
Do you know what I really thought was going to happen Monday? I thought the market would open
lower, go down sharply, and then bounce back to about unchanged. I actually bought out-of-themoney calls that Friday for protection.
But you said you thought the market was going down?
Yes, but I just wanted to have some insurance. A trader once told me, "Saliba, in stealing second,
you never take your hand off first until your other hand is on second." That's the way I am; I always
have insurance.
Still, you must have been awfully confident that the market was going sharply lower on
Monday morning. According to the cover story in Success magazine [April 1988], it sounds
like you knew the market would collapse. It says you even deliberately chose to go to the
office instead of the floor to avoid being influenced out of your position by all the confusion
on the floor. Isn't that highly unusual for you to go to the office instead of the floor on a
trading day?
Yes, if I'm trading, I'm on the floor. But that article is completely misleading. They wrote it that
way to sell magazines. They make it sound like I planned and plotted to avoid the floor that day.
That's not the story. I was concerned about the positions held by my clearing firm. One guy in
particular had a huge position, which he wasn't closing, and I had to spend a great deal of time on
the phone. Now, that's not as dramatic as the way the magazine wrote it up, but that's what really
happened.
Didn't you also sell your seat that day? You must have been really confident the market was
going down to sell a seat.
I hit that seat before the market opened. I figured if I didn't hit the bid for the seat, someone else
would. Anyway I had seven seats; I just sold one.
Was this the first time you traded a seat? I mean seats aren't exactly a liquid market.
Yes, it was the first time I did it like that: trading the seat round turn in one day. But I have traded
seats before. I trade them depending on my mood in the market. On balance though, I want to be
long seats. I believe in our industry.
But in that circumstance, it did seem like a good trade?
I figured, "Hey, I have a lot of exposure in seats—a few million dollars worth—I better take some
protection." I sold that seat for $452,000 in the morning and bought it back the next afternoon for
$275,000.
How much did you make that Monday?
That has caused me a lot of headaches. I would rather not say.
Obviously, your big money was made in the out-of-the-money puts. What percentage of that
position did you keep as of Monday's close?
About 95 percent.
You kept most of it! But the profits were so huge. Wasn't it tempting to just take it?
The reason I didn't cover was because I felt my long puts hadn't gone up enough. They all went to
parity. The puts that were thirty points in-the-money were trading at $30. In other words, the option
191

premiums consisted almost entirely of intrinsic value; the market wasn't giving them any time value
premium. Given the enormous market volatility, I thought that was crazy.
So, you figured you would wait till the next day.
Yes, and do you know what I did to hedge myself? I bought more insurance at the close on
Monday. I covered hundreds of my short calls.
You were basically buying more volatility.
It was the best thing I could have done. The next day they didn't know what they wanted more of:
Half the world wanted puts, and half the world wanted calls.
But everybody wanted volatility.
That's when the register really started ringing. It was the day that the sun was so close to the earth
that everybody needed zinc ointment, and I was the only guy that had some left.
Let's take the other side of the fence: What did the traders who got buried in October do
wrong?
They took for granted that Monday would be a normal day. They started out long, thinking the
market was just correcting and was due for a bounce. Then they bought on the way down; they
bought every dip.
Did some traders just freeze?
Sure, some did. I have one friend, who is a million-dollar annual earner. On Tuesday morning, I
walk in and say, "Hey, Jack, what do you think? Are you going to get them today?" But he just
stood there. He didn't say a word to me. He looked shell shocked. He just kept going over his
sheets, looking for something to do, but not knowing what to do. So he missed all the opportunity.
Why was the way you responded to the market so different from the way your friend
responded?
He wasn't sure what his position risk was. I always define my risk, and I don't have to worry about
it. I walk into the pit every day with a clean slate, so that I can take advantage of what is going on.
A clean slate sounds like you come in with a flat position every day, but you obviously hold
positions overnight.
I mean that I'm always hedged, and I'm always prepared.
Do you always know the maximum risk in a position that you hold? Do you always know
what your worst case is?
Yes. Now, what could happen? The market sits, it explodes, or something in between. But no
matter what happens, I know my worst case. My loss is always limited.
Why do so many traders who come to the floor end up losing everything?
I think the biggest problem with some traders that come on the floor is that they think they are
bigger than the market. They don't fear the marketplace, and they lose sight of their discipline and
the hard work ethic. Those are the traders who get blown out. But most guys on the floor really
work hard.
What is the biggest misconception the public has about the marketplace?
The idea that the market has to go up for them to make money. You can make money in any kind of
market if you use the right strategies. With futures, options, and the underlying markets, there are
enough tools available to set up a game plan for any situation.
In other words, the public has too much of a bullish bias?
Yes, it is the American way: The market has to go up. The government never said anything about
program trading when we were in a three-year bull market. Once the market started going down, all
of a sudden, program trading became a major concern, and they set up commissions galore.
For the average person, like my mom or dad and their relatives, the biggest misconception is that
they think when the market goes up, you make money, and when it goes down, you lose. People
need to approach it from a more neutral standpoint and say, "I'm going to be a little long in this
category and short in this category, but limit my short-side risk because it is infinite."
192
