
Stock Dividends and Stock Splits
It is important that investors understand the essential difference
between a stock dividend (properly so-called) and a stock split.
The latter represents a restatement of the common-stock structure—in a typical case by issuing two or three shares for one. The
new shares are not related to specific earnings reinvested in a specific past period. Its purpose is to establish a lower market price for
the single shares, presumably because such lower price range

Shareholders and Managements

493

would be more acceptable to old and new shareholders. A stock
split may be carried out by what technically may be called a stock
dividend, which involves a transfer of sums from earned surplus
to capital account; or else by a change in par value, which does not
affect the surplus account.*
What we should call a proper stock dividend is one that is paid to
shareholders to give them a tangible evidence or representation of
specific earnings which have been reinvested in the business for
their account over some relatively short period in the recent past—
say, not more than the two preceding years. It is now approved
practice to value such a stock dividend at the approximate value at
the time of declaration, and to transfer an amount equal to such
value from earned surplus to capital accounts. Thus the amount of
a typical stock dividend is relatively small—in most cases not more
than 5%. In essence a stock dividend of this sort has the same overall effect as the payment of an equivalent amount of cash out of
earnings when accompanied by the sale of additional shares of like
total value to the shareholders. However, a straight stock dividend
has an important tax advantage over the otherwise equivalent
combination of cash dividends with stock subscription rights,
which is the almost standard practice for public-utility companies.
The New York Stock Exchange has set the figure of 25% as a
practical dividing line between stock splits and stock dividends.
Those of 25% or more need not be accompanied by the transfer of
their market value from earned surplus to capital, and so forth.†
Some companies, especially banks, still follow the old practice of

* Today, virtually all stock splits are carried out by a change in value. In a
two-for-one split, one share becomes two, each trading at half the former
price of the original single share; in a three-for-one split, one share becomes
three, each trading at a third of the former price; and so on. Only in very rare
cases is a sum transferred “from earned surplus to capital account,” as in
Graham’s day.
† Rule 703 of the New York Stock Exchange governs stock splits and stock
dividends. The NYSE now designates stock dividends of greater than 25%
and less than 100% as “partial stock splits.” Unlike in Graham’s day, these
stock dividends may now trigger the NYSE’s accounting requirement that
the amount of the dividend be capitalized from retained earnings.

494

The Intelligent Investor

declaring any kind of stock dividend they please—e.g., one of 10%,
not related to recent earnings—and these instances maintain an
undesirable confusion in the financial world.
We have long been a strong advocate of a systematic and clearly
enunciated policy with respect to the payment of cash and stock
dividends. Under such a policy, stock dividends are paid periodically to capitalize all or a stated portion of the earnings reinvested
in the business. Such a policy—covering 100% of the reinvested
earnings—has been followed by Purex, Government Employees
Insurance, and perhaps a few others.*
Stock dividends of all types seem to be disapproved of by most
academic writers on the subject. They insist that they are nothing
but pieces of paper, that they give the shareholders nothing they
did not have before, and that they entail needless expense and
inconvenience.† On our side we consider this a completely doctrinaire view, which fails to take into account the practical and
psychological realities of investment. True, a periodic stock dividend—say of 5%—changes only the “form” of the owners’ investment. He has 105 shares in place of 100; but without the stock
dividend the original 100 shares would have represented the same

* This policy, already unusual in Graham’s day, is extremely rare today. In
1936 and again in 1950, roughly half of all stocks on the NYSE paid a
so-called special dividend. By 1970, however, that percentage had declined
to less than 10% and, by the 1990s, was well under 5%. See Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas J. Skinner, “Special Dividends and the
Evolution of Dividend Signaling,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 57, no.
3, September, 2000, pp. 309–354. The most plausible explanation for this
decline is that corporate managers became uncomfortable with the idea
that shareholders might interpret special dividends as a signal that future
profits might be low.
† The academic criticism of dividends was led by Merton Miller and Franco
Modigliani, whose influential article “Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation of Shares” (1961) helped win them Nobel Prizes in Economics. Miller
and Modigliani argued, in essence, that dividends were irrelevant, since an
investor should not care whether his return comes through dividends and a
rising stock price, or through a rising stock price alone, so long as the total
return is the same in either case.

Shareholders and Managements

495

ownership interest now embodied in his 105 shares. Nonetheless,
the change of form is actually one of real importance and value to
him. If he wishes to cash in his share of the reinvested profits he
can do so by selling the new certificate sent him, instead of having
to break up his original certificate. He can count on receiving the
same cash-dividend rate on 105 shares as formerly on his 100
shares; a 5% rise in the cash-dividend rate without the stock dividend would not be nearly as probable.*
The advantages of a periodic stock-dividend policy are most
evident when it is compared with the usual practice of the publicutility companies of paying liberal cash dividends and then taking
back a good part of this money from the shareholders by selling
them additional stock (through subscription rights).† As we mentioned above, the shareholders would find themselves in exactly
the same position if they received stock dividends in lieu of the
popular combination of cash dividends followed by stock subscriptions—except that they would save the income tax otherwise
paid on the cash dividends. Those who need or wish the maximum
annual cash income, with no additional stock, can get this result by
selling their stock dividends, in the same way as they sell their subscription rights under present practice.
The aggregate amount of income tax that could be saved by substituting stock dividends for the present stock-dividends-plussubscription-rights combination is enormous. We urge that this

* Graham’s argument is no longer valid, and today’s investors can safely
skip over this passage. Shareholders no longer need to worry about “having
to break up” a stock certificate, since virtually all shares now exist in electronic rather than paper form. And when Graham says that a 5% increase in
a cash dividend on 100 shares is less “probable” than a constant dividend
on 105 shares, it’s unclear how he could even calculate that probability.
† Subscription rights, often simply known as “rights,” are used less frequently than in Graham’s day. They confer upon an existing shareholder the
right to buy new shares, sometimes at a discount to market price. A shareholder who does not participate will end up owning proportionately less of
the company. Thus, as is the case with so many other things that go by the
name of “rights,” some coercion is often involved. Rights are most common
today among closed-end funds and insurance or other holding companies.

496

The Intelligent Investor

change be made by the public utilities, despite its adverse effect on
the U.S. Treasury, because we are convinced that it is completely
inequitable to impose a second (personal) income tax on earnings
which are not really received by the shareholders, since the companies take the same money back through sales of stock.*
Efficient corporations continuously modernize their facilities,
their products, their bookkeeping, their management-training programs, their employee relations. It is high time they thought about
modernizing their major financial practices, not the least important
of which is their dividend policy.

* The administration of President George W. Bush made progress in early
2003 toward reducing the problem of double-taxation of corporate dividends, although it is too soon to know how helpful any final laws in this area
will turn out to be. A cleaner approach would be to make dividend payments
tax-deductible to the corporation, but that is not part of the proposed legislation.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 19

The most dangerous untruths are truths slightly distorted.
—G. C. Lichtenberg

W H Y D I D G R A H A M T H R OW I N T H E TOW E L?
Perhaps no other part of The Intelligent Investor was more drastically
changed by Graham than this. In the first edition, this chapter was one
of a pair that together ran nearly 34 pages. That original section (“The
Investor as Business Owner”) dealt with shareholders’ voting rights,
ways of judging the quality of corporate management, and techniques
for detecting conflicts of interest between insiders and outside
investors. By his last revised edition, however, Graham had pared the
whole discussion back to less than eight terse pages about dividends.
Why did Graham cut away more than three-quarters of his original
argument? After decades of exhortation, he evidently had given up
hope that investors would ever take any interest in monitoring the
behavior of corporate managers.
But the latest epidemic of scandal—allegations of managerial misbehavior, shady accounting, or tax maneuvers at major firms like AOL,
Enron, Global Crossing, Sprint, Tyco, and WorldCom—is a stark
reminder that Graham’s earlier warnings about the need for eternal
vigilance are more vital than ever. Let’s bring them back and discuss
them in light of today’s events.
TH E ORY VE R S U S PRACTI CE
Graham begins his original (1949) discussion of “The Investor as Business Owner” by pointing out that, in theory, “the stockholders as a class
are king. Acting as a majority they can hire and fire managements and
bend them completely to their will.” But, in practice, says Graham,
497

498

Commentary on Chapter 19

the shareholders are a complete washout. As a class they show neither intelligence nor alertness. They vote in sheeplike fashion for
whatever the management recommends and no matter how poor the
management’s record of accomplishment may be. . . . The only way to
inspire the average American shareholder to take any independently
intelligent action would be by exploding a firecracker under him. . . .
We cannot resist pointing out the paradoxical fact that Jesus seems
to have been a more practical businessman than are American shareholders.1

Graham wants you to realize something basic but incredibly profound: When you buy a stock, you become an owner of the company.
Its managers, all the way up to the CEO, work for you. Its board of
directors must answer to you. Its cash belongs to you. Its businesses
are your property. If you don’t like how your company is being managed, you have the right to demand that the managers be fired, the
directors be changed, or the property be sold. “Stockholders,”
declares Graham, “should wake up.” 2

1

Benjamin Graham, The Intelligent Investor (Harper & Row, New York,
1949), pp. 217, 219, 240. Graham explains his reference to Jesus this way:
“In at least four parables in the Gospels there is reference to a highly critical
relationship between a man of wealth and those he puts in charge of his
property. Most to the point are the words that “a certain rich man” speaks to
his steward or manager, who is accused of wasting his goods: ‘Give an
account of thy stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer steward.’ (Luke,
16:2).” Among the other parables Graham seems to have in mind is Matt.,
25:15–28.
2
Benjamin Graham, “A Questionnaire on Stockholder-Management Relationship,” The Analysts Journal, Fourth Quarter, 1947, p. 62. Graham points
out that he had conducted a survey of nearly 600 professional security analysts and found that more than 95% of them believed that shareholders have
the right to call for a formal investigation of managers whose leadership
does not enhance the value of the stock. Graham adds dryly that “such
action is almost unheard of in practice.” This, he says, “highlights the wide
gulf between what should happen and what does happen in shareholdermanagement relationships.”

Commentary on Chapter 19

499

TH E I NTE LLIG E NT OWN E R
Today’s investors have forgotten Graham’s message. They put most of
their effort into buying a stock, a little into selling it—but none into owning it. “Certainly,” Graham reminds us, “there is just as much reason to
exercise care and judgment in being as in becoming a stockholder.” 3
So how should you, as an intelligent investor, go about being an
intelligent owner? Graham starts by telling us that “there are just two
basic questions to which stockholders should turn their attention:
1. Is the management reasonably efficient?
2. Are the interests of the average outside shareholder receiving
proper recognition?” 4
You should judge the efficiency of management by comparing each
company’s profitability, size, and competitiveness against similar firms
in its industry. What if you conclude that the managers are no good?
Then, urges Graham,
A few of the more substantial stockholders should become convinced
that a change is needed and should be willing to work toward that
end. Second, the rank and file of the stockholders should be openminded enough to read the proxy material and to weigh the arguments on both sides. They must at least be able to know when their
company has been unsuccessful and be ready to demand more than
artful platitudes as a vindication of the incumbent management. Third,
it would be most helpful, when the figures clearly show that the
results are well below average, if it became the custom to call in outside business engineers to pass upon the policies and competence
of the management.5

3

Graham and Dodd, Security Analysis (1934 ed.), p. 508.
The Intelligent Investor, 1949 edition, p. 218.
5
1949 edition, p. 223. Graham adds that a proxy vote would be necessary
to authorize an independent committee of outside shareholders to select
“the engineering firm” that would submit its report to the shareholders, not
to the board of directors. However, the company would bear the costs of
this project. Among the kinds of “engineering firms” (cont’d on p. 501)
4

500

Commentary on Chapter 19

THE ENRON END-RUN
Back in 1999, Enron Corp. ranked seventh on the Fortune 500
list of America’s top companies. The energy giant’s revenues,
assets, and earnings were all rising like rockets.
But what if an investor had ignored the glamour and glittering
numbers—and had simply put Enron’s 1999 proxy statement
under the microscope of common sense? Under the heading
“Certain Transactions,” the proxy disclosed that Enron’s chief
financial officer, Andrew Fastow, was the “managing member”
of two partnerships, LJM1 and LJM2, that bought “energy and
communications related investments.” And where was LJM1
and LJM2 buying from? Why, where else but from Enron! The
proxy reported that the partnerships had already bought $170
million of assets from Enron—sometimes using money borrowed
from Enron.
The intelligent investor would immediately have asked:
• Did Enron’s directors approve this arrangement? (Yes, said
the proxy.)
• Would Fastow get a piece of LJM’s profits? (Yes, said the
proxy.)
• As Enron’s chief financial officer, was Fastow obligated to act
exclusively in the interests of Enron’s shareholders? (Of
course.)
• Was Fastow therefore duty-bound to maximize the price
Enron obtained for any assets it sold? (Absolutely.)
• But if LJM paid a high price for Enron’s assets, would that
lower LJM’s potential profits—and Fastow’s personal
income? (Clearly.)
• On the other hand, if LJM paid a low price, would that raise
profits for Fastow and his partnerships, but hurt Enron’s
income? (Clearly.)
• Should Enron lend Fastow’s partnerships any money to buy
assets from Enron that might generate a personal profit for
Fastow? (Say what?!)
• Doesn’t all this constitute profoundly disturbing conflicts of
interest? (No other answer is even possible.)

Commentary on Chapter 19

501

• What does this arrangement say about the judgment of the
directors who approved it? (It says you should take your
investment dollars elsewhere.)
Two clear lessons emerge from this disaster: Never dig so
deep into the numbers that you check your common sense at
the door, and always read the proxy statement before (and after)
you buy a stock.
What is “proxy material” and why does Graham insist that you read
it? In its proxy statement, which it sends to every shareholder, a company announces the agenda for its annual meeting and discloses
details about the compensation and stock ownership of managers
and directors, along with transactions between insiders and the company. Shareholders are asked to vote on which accounting firm should
audit the books and who should serve on the board of directors. If you
use your common sense while reading the proxy, this document can
be like a canary in a coal mine—an early warning system signaling that
something is wrong. (See the Enron sidebar above.)
Yet, on average, between a third and a half of all individual investors
cannot be bothered to vote their proxies.6 Do they even read them?
Understanding and voting your proxy is as every bit as fundamental
(cont’d from p. 499) Graham had in mind were money managers, rating agencies and organizations of security analysts. Today, investors could choose
from among hundreds of consulting firms, restructuring advisers, and members of entities like the Risk Management Association.
6
Tabulations of voting results for 2002 by Georgeson Shareholder and
ADP’s Investor Communication Services, two leading firms that mail proxy
solicitations to investors, suggest response rates that average around 80%
to 88% (including proxies sent in by stockbrokers on behalf of their clients,
which are automatically voted in favor of management unless the clients
specify otherwise). Thus the owners of between 12% and 20% of all shares
are not voting their proxies. Since individuals own only 40% of U.S. shares
by market value, and most institutional investors like pension funds and
insurance companies are legally bound to vote on proxy issues, that means
that roughly a third of all individual investors are neglecting to vote.

502

Commentary on Chapter 19

to being an intelligent investor as following the news and voting your
conscience is to being a good citizen. It doesn’t matter whether you
own 10% of a company or, with your piddling 100 shares, just
1/10.000 of 1%. If you’ve never read the proxy of a stock you own,
and the company goes bust, the only person you should blame is
yourself. If you do read the proxy and see things that disturb you, then:
•
•
•

vote against every director to let them know you disapprove
attend the annual meeting and speak up for your rights
find an online message board devoted to the stock (like those at
http://finance.yahoo.com) and rally other investors to join your
cause.
Graham had another idea that could benefit today’s investors:
. . . there are advantages to be gained through the selection of one or
more professional and independent directors. These should be men
of wide business experience who can turn a fresh and expert eye on
the problems of the enterprise. . . . They should submit a separate
annual report, addressed directly to the stockholders and containing
their views on the major question which concerns the owners of the
enterprise: “Is the business showing the results for the outside stockholder which could be expected of it under proper management? If
not, why—and what should be done about it?7

One can only imagine the consternation that Graham’s proposal
would cause among the corporate cronies and golfing buddies who
constitute so many of today’s “independent” directors. (Let’s not suggest that it might send a shudder of fear down their spines, since most
independent directors do not appear to have a backbone.)
W H O S E M O N E Y I S I T , A N Y W AY ?
Now let’s look at Graham’s second criterion—whether management
acts in the best interests of outside investors. Managers have always
told shareholders that they—the managers—know best what to do with

7

1949 edition, p. 224.

Commentary on Chapter 19

503

the company’s cash. Graham saw right through this managerial
malarkey:
A company’s management may run the business well and yet not give
the outside stockholders the right results for them, because its efficiency is confined to operations and does not extend to the best use
of the capital. The objective of efficient operation is to produce at low
cost and to find the most profitable articles to sell. Efficient finance
requires that the stockholders’ money be working in forms most suitable to their interest. This is a question in which management, as such,
has little interest. Actually, it almost always wants as much capital from
the owners as it can possibly get, in order to minimize its own financial
problems. Thus the typical management will operate with more capital
than necessary, if the stockholders permit it—which they often do.8

In the late 1990s and into the early 2000s, the managements of
leading technology companies took this “Daddy-Knows-Best” attitude
to new extremes. The argument went like this: Why should you
demand a dividend when we can invest that cash for you and turn it
into a rising share price? Just look at the way our stock has been
going up—doesn’t that prove that we can turn your pennies into dollars
better than you can?
Incredibly, investors fell for it hook, line, and sinker. Daddy Knows
Best became such gospel that, by 1999, only 3.7% of the companies
that first sold their stock to the public that year paid a dividend—down
from an average of 72.1% of all IPOs in the 1960s.9 Just look at how
