
119

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 120

120 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 6-26:
A hammer
with
confirmation
on a chart of
DELL stock.

Figure 6-27:
A hammer
with no
confirmation
on a chart of
DELL stock.

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 121

Chapter 6: Single-Stick Patterns That Depend on Market Context
Shorting with a hanging man pattern
Now for a look at a successful hanging man. Figure 6-28 is a chart for the
stock of Toll Brothers, symbol TOL. If you aren’t familiar with Toll Brothers,
it’s a homebuilder focusing on the higher end of the housing market. If you
remember what happened to the housing market in 2007, you can see why
this is a good short example.
Figure 6-28 shows how you could have made money when the housing market
first started to tank. I’m not saying that trading housing-related stock is the
way to offset any potential losses in the value of your home, but this was a
chance to take advantage of the fall in value of a home-building company as
it anticipated the drop in housing prices and home sales activity.
Right at the very peak of a trend in the TOL stock, a hanging man appeared. If
you happened to already own this stock (also called being long), that was a
pretty scary signal that may have suggested that it was time to take your
profits and move on to a less risky investment. If you were in the market looking for a stock to short, that would’ve looked like a swell opportunity. After
the hanging man, a very dramatic reversal occurred, and the downtrend continued for several weeks.

Figure 6-28:
A hanging
man short
signal on
TOL.

121

11_178089 ch06.qxp

2/27/08

9:38 PM

Page 122

122 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Finally, I provide you with a hanging man that doesn’t get confirmed. Sorry
for the abundance of examples using retail stocks, but I’ve had a profitable
history with them, and they often make good examples. Figure 6-29 is a chart
of the stock for Kohl’s Stores (KSS).
A very encouraging hanging man appears on the chart in a defined uptrend.
However, after waiting patiently overnight for confirmation of the end of the
uptrend and a shorting opportunity, a trader is surprised to see a gap opening
and a continuation of the uptrend. If she’s following the rules (as she should
be) and waiting for the confirmation of the hanging man, all she gets is disappointment. But it could be worse: If she’d jumped the gun and sold, it
would’ve cost her even more.

Figure 6-29:
A failing
hanging
man short
signal on
KSS.

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 123

Chapter 7

Working with Bullish
Double-Stick Patterns
In This Chapter
 Understanding double-stick patterns that signal a trend reversal
 Working with double-stick patterns that tell you a trend will continue

C

ompared to the single-stick patterns in Chapters 5 and 6, double-stick
patterns are difficult to come by. But these patterns can be very powerful and profitable if you put in the time and effort to monitor them.
I tackle a number of double-stick patterns in this chapter, and each of them
consists of two days. I’ll refer to the first day as the setup day, and I’ll call the
second day the signal day. When you’re looking for double-stick patterns,
you’ll have to start paying attention to the possibility of a pattern developing
on the setup day, and you’ll react (trade) if you see what you need to see on
the signal day.
In this chapter I cover some double-stick patterns that signal a trend reversal
and a few that signal a trend continuation. The reversal signals are more fun,
because they help you to outsmart the crowd and buy near the end of a trend.
The trend confirming signals are useful if you’re already on the right side of a
trend, or if you’re considering going against a trend, and you’re looking for
a signal that can kindly tell you to reconsider.
If you want to go hunting for double-stick patterns, I must warn you that
you’re bound to suffer some disappointments. Often, you see the beginnings
of a double-stick pattern on the first day, but you can get discouraged when
the pattern doesn’t shape up correctly on the second day. Your patience may
be tested, and you may want to bag it and work only with single-stick
patterns, but doing so is like playing the game without all the equipment
you need to play it well.

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 124

124 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Bullish Reversal Patterns
A wide variety of two-day patterns signal the end of a downtrend and the
beginning of an uptrend, and those patterns are the focus of this section.
There’s an old saying in trading that “the trend is your friend.” It’s based on
the idea that getting (and staying) on the right side of the trend is the best
way to make a profit in the market. I don’t disagree with that sentiment, but
plenty of traders make a good living catching changes in trend. It’s not the
easiest type of trading, but it can be rewarding. This type of trading basically
involves trying to pick a top or bottom of a trending move. Because this
involves going against the current type of market and against the majority
of participants, it’s a difficult process.
If your trading strategy is dependent on catching trend changes, make sure
that you’re humble and quick to acknowledge when you’re wrong about a
trade. Use orders that force you to take a small loss before you rack up big
losses.
Throughout this section, I include patterns that work and ones that fail, and I
point out where a trade starts to go wrong. In these examples, you can see
how bad a trade can get if you don’t play it safe and take a small loss to prevent losing big.

Bullish engulfing pattern
The first two-stick pattern is the bullish engulfing pattern. The pattern’s name
comes from the fact that the signal day engulfs the setup day. Both the wick
and the body of the second day completely cover the same ground as the
first day and then some. Also the first day of this bullish pattern is a down
day, with the second day starting out looking like there’s going to be more
bearish trading, but this selling is reversed by the emergence of buying —
so much buying that the previous day’s open and highs are both surpassed.
(There’s also a bearish version of this pattern, and it’s covered in Chapter 8.
In fact, most of the bullish two-stick patterns I discuss in this chapter have a
bearish counterpart.)

Spotting the bullish engulfing pattern
To find the bullish engulfing pattern, take these steps:
1. First look for a setup day with a dark candle.
2. Then look to see if the signal day is bullish.
If so, you’re on the right track, but the following statements must also be
true in order for your pattern to be a full-fledged bullish engulfing pattern:

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 125

Chapter 7: Working with Bullish Double-Stick Patterns
• The wick of the signal day is longer than the wick of the setup day.
• The high of the signal day is higher than the high of the setup day.
• The low of the signal day is lower than the low of the setup day.
• The candle of the signal day is longer than the candle of the setup
day. (In this case the signal day’s close is higher than the setup
day’s open, and the open of the signal day is lower than the close
of the setup day.)
Figure 7-1 includes two days that create a bullish engulfing pattern.

Figure 7-1:
A bullish
engulfing
pattern.

The trading activity that creates this pattern is extremely bullish:
 On Day 1 (the setup day) the bears dominate.
The open is near the high, and they push the price down all day until the
close ends up near the low.
 On Day 2 (the signal day) the bears are at it again and move the price a
bit lower before the bulls come roaring in.
They arrive on the scene and immediately start pushing prices up, and
they don’t stop. The bulls exceed the prices from the previous day and
even push the closing price up over where trading commenced the previous day.
When a bullish engulfing pattern occurs in a downtrend, that indicates that
the bulls have been pushed around for some time before the pattern developed and that they’re geared up to continue their buying assault on the
bears for days to come.

125

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 126

126 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Using the bullish engulfing pattern for savvy trading
If you’re vigilant and lucky enough to spot a bullish engulfing pattern, trading
on it can yield some very appealing results. Figure 7-2 is a real-world example
of the bullish engulfing pattern on a chart of the ETF that represents the
members of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), which is known as the
Diamonds because its symbol is DIA. (An ETF or exchange traded fund is a
security that trades like a stock, but represents a basket of stocks or an
index.)
The DIA is a popular trading vehicle among short-term traders who try to
profit from the direction of the Dow Jones Industrial Average from day to day
and also among long-term investors who seek exposure to all DJIA stocks
without having to buy all 30 of them individually.
Although it’s not picture perfect, Figure 7-2 is a useful example of how the bullish engulfing pattern develops and how it can work out profitably. The bears
dominate the setup day, leaving the close near the low. On the signal day, the
DIA opens lower than the previous close and appears to trade lower — bad
news for the bulls. But at some point during the day, the bulls rally with some
strong buying and push the DIA much higher, to the point where the close of
the day is higher than the high of the setup day. The resulting price action
includes several days where the bulls are firmly in the driver’s seat.

Figure 7-2:
A bullish
engulfing
pattern
developing
on a chart of
the DIA ETF.

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 127

Chapter 7: Working with Bullish Double-Stick Patterns
That leads me to an important question: How do you know when the bullish
engulfing pattern’s signal is no longer valid? My rule of thumb is if the low of
the setup day is violated, then the signal is no longer good. To work this rule
into your trading strategy, place a sell stop on the low of the setup day, not
the signal day. Other traders may suggest that the sell stop be placed on the
closing price of the setup day or even the opening price of the signal day, and
you may want to consider those options as you get comfortable trading on
the bullish engulfing pattern. Keep in mind, though, that things can get pretty
miserable if you hold onto this trade for too long.

A failing bullish engulfing pattern
Figure 7-3 is an example of what happens when good bullish engulfing patterns
go bad, using the Euro currency futures contracts to show the price action
when the setup day’s low is violated a few days after the pattern arises.
The setup day in this example is very encouraging. There’s a definite downtrend, and all the other bullish engulfing pattern criteria check out. But things
sour quickly. The bulls lose the fight, and the result is a very bearish day. No
matter what you choose to be your failure level, this day should be when you
throw in the towel.

Figure 7-3:
A bullish
engulfing
pattern that
fails on
a Euro
currency
futures
chart.

127

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 128

128 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
As I was compiling real-world examples for this book, I had an extremely
tough time finding a bullish engulfing pattern that didn’t work out profitably
if it was correctly traded. Bullish engulfing patterns don’t always work, but
finding one is an exciting prospect, and the chances are very good that if you
trade on it wisely, the result will be bright.

Bullish harami
In general, a harami is a two-day pattern with the candle of the setup day
that’s longer than the candle of the signal day. This pattern can almost be
considered the opposite of the bullish outside day and be called a bullish
inside day.
The first day is very bearish and occurring in a downtrend. On the second
day, the bulls take a shot at moving prices higher. There’s not too much success because although the second day closes up slightly, it closes lower than
the first day’s open, and the first day’s high is never surpassed. However, it’s
a day where the bulls may have started to take a stand and stop the current
downtrend, because the second day is an up day and the low of the first day
isn’t penetrated.
Harami is the Japanese word for pregnant; if you draw an outline of the harami
pattern, it looks like a pregnant woman.

Identifying the bullish harami
If you want to identify a true bullish harami, the pattern and the market must
have the following features:
 The relevant market or stock is in a downtrend.
 The setup day has a longer candle than the signal day.
 The setup day has a black candle, with the open greater than the close,
and that candle is fairly long.
 The signal day’s candle has an open lower than its close.
 The open of the signal day is higher than the close of the setup day.
 The low of the setup day is lower than the signal day’s low, and the high
of the setup day is higher than the high of the signal day.
 The signal day’s open is higher than the setup day’s close.
 The signal day’s close is lower than the setup day’s open.
Figure 7-4 is a picture of two days that create a bullish harami. Note: The high
and low of both days don’t come into play on this pattern — just the open
and close.

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 129

Chapter 7: Working with Bullish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 7-4:
A bullish
harami
pattern.

The setup day of the harami is a down day that follows a bearish trend. On
the signal day, the open is up from the first day’s close, and the bulls rule the
day, because the close is higher than the open. Since there has been a downtrend, the bulls may be a bit timid, worried that the bears are going to come
back and push to new lows. The confidence the bulls gain when this doesn’t
occur should translate to more buying, and a reversal of the downtrend that
culminated in the bullish harami.

Trading based on the bullish harami
Now for a couple of examples of the bullish harami that help you figure out
what to do (or not do) when you spot one on your own. I start with a successful appearance of the pattern at the end of a downtrend. The result is an
attractive trend reversal.

Getting a nice buy signal on the bullish harami
Figure 7-5 is a chart of the futures contract that trades on the Australian dollar.
The bears push the price down from the open until the close for eight days in
a row. Finally, on the signal day of the bullish harami, the bulls find a level
where they’re ready to start buying. This day is the first of many days where
the bulls push prices back up from the depths where the bears had pushed
them.
Notice in Figure 7-5 that the high of the signal day is a little higher than the
setup day. This example helps me make the point that the bullish harami is
just the opposite of the bullish engulfing pattern. (See the earlier section
entitled “Bullish engulfing pattern”.) With a bullish engulfing pattern, all four
price components of the candlestick are involved, but only the open and close
matter when you’re working with a harami.

129

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 130

130 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 7-5:
A bullish
harami on a
chart of the
Australian
dollar
futures.

Seeing a bad example of the bullish harami
Like most other patterns, the bullish harami can go awry. Figure 7-6 is a chart
of IBM. A bullish harami appears because IBM’s stock has been trending
down slowly. Some up days exist, but most are down days for a few weeks
leading up to the harami pattern. Any bullish inklings from the harami don’t
last very long.
The failure level of a bullish harami can vary depending on your preference.
I use the open of the signal day as my stop level, and I suggest you use the
same level in your trading efforts. In Figure 7-6, this level holds up for less
than a day, and although there’s some sideways trading for a few days, the
downtrend resumes in time.

Bullish harami cross
Much like the doji with all its variations, the harami has more than one version.
A doji pattern has an open that’s higher than the close of the setup day and a
close that’s lower than the open of the setup day. This section covers the bullish harami cross — a special variety of harami — which actually involves a doji
pattern, which is covered in Chapter 6, but should always be considered an
indicator of a potential reversal.

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 131

Chapter 7: Working with Bullish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 7-6:
A bullish
harami on a
chart of IBM
followed by
bearishness.

Recognizing the bullish harami cross
The bullish harami cross starts out just like its cousin the bullish harami (see
the previous section, “Bullish harami”), and it must contain the following
characteristics:
 It appears during a downtrend.
 Its setup day is a long black candle.
 Its signal day is a doji.
It’s much easier to understand the specifics of the bullish harami cross if you
see a good example, so check out Figure 7-7.

Using the bullish harami cross for profitable trading
The bullish harami cross isn’t a common pattern, but when it appears, the
trend reversal may be pretty abrupt. Also, if the pattern doesn’t hold and
the downtrend continues, this failure usually happens quickly.

A nice buy signal from the bullish harami cross
To get an idea of how you can trade to turn a profit with the bullish harami
cross, look at Figure 7-8. That’s a chart of the Australian dollar futures, with
a bullish harami cross that successfully signals a trend reversal. I actually
traded this pattern, and the results were strong.

131

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 132

132 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns

Figure 7-7:
A bullish
harami
cross
pattern.

Figure 7-8:
A bullish
harami
cross on an
Australian
dollar
futures
chart.

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 133

Chapter 7: Working with Bullish Double-Stick Patterns
When this pattern reared its head, I was looking for an entry point for trading
long on the Australian dollar futures contract. I had been monitoring it for a
while, and I bought near the close of the bullish harami cross’s signal day.
This pattern adheres to the rules for a buy signal because it’s at the bottom
of a downtrend, and the doji’s open and close fall within the setup day’s open
and close. Soon after I got in, I was happily rewarded with an uptrend that
lasted for several weeks, and you can enjoy the same kind of results if you
spot the bullish harami cross in a similar environment.

Failing to give a good buy signal
Look again closely at Figure 7-8. There was a failed harami cross a few days
before the successful one. I noticed this pattern, and it cost me a little before
I profited from the one that worked so well. Figure 7-9 adds a highlight where
the failed signal occurred.
For this failed signal, I placed my sell stop on the low of the doji day. I know
that contradicts what I said in the regular bullish harami section earlier in
this chapter, but since the open and close of the signal day on a bullish
harami cross are in such a small range, I generally use the close of the previous day as a stop.

Figure 7-9:
A failed
bullish
harami
cross on an
Australian
dollar
futures
chart.

133

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 134

134 Part II: Working with Simple Candlestick Patterns
Sometimes using stops that don’t allow for some market fluctuation gets you
out of a successful trade too quickly. On the other hand, placing a stop with
too much wiggle room can get you out of a bad trade long after it would’ve
been prudent. Placing stops is as much an art as a science; it’s one of the
more difficult parts of trading. See Chapter 5 for a quick refresher on stops.

Bullish inverted hammer
The bullish inverted hammer is a fairly rare pattern. This pattern occurs in a
downtrend, and the first day (setup day) is a bearish candle — usually a long
bearish candle. The second, or signal, day is actually the inverted hammer;
this is the rare part because the price action that creates an inverted hammer
is fairly rare.
In order to get the inverted hammer as the signal day, you should start with
gap down and end with a close near the opening gap price. Usually with
much volatility associated with a gap opening, it would be rare to have the
open and close in the same price proximity.
In this section, I demonstrate what the two days that create the bullish
inverted hammer look like.

Spotting the bullish inverted hammer
Like many bullish patterns, the bullish inverted hammer is preceded by some
sort of downtrend. The setup day is a down day — a continuation of the
prevailing downtrend. The signal day is the inverted hammer. I explain the
hammer in Chapter 6, and this pattern is just an opposite version of it.
The inverted hammer has a long wick on the top, and its candle takes up a
small part of the bottom of the whole candlestick. The body may be white or
black, but because the high is way above the rest of the candlestick, you can
tell that most of the trading activity occurs in a small area near the low. The
low serves as a support level for upcoming days. Take a look at Figure 7-10
for a handy visual representation.

Understanding how to trade on the bullish inverted hammer
To initiate a trade using the bullish inverted hammer, wait until the open of
the subsequent day. Initiate a position only if the open of that day is higher
than the low of the inverted hammer day.
Think of it this way. For the bullish inverted hammer to be considered valid,
it needs to be confirmed by the open of the day immediately after its appearance. If that open is higher than the signal day’s low, you’re clear to buy, and
you should put your stop in at the same time.

12_178089 ch07.qxp

2/27/08

9:48 PM

Page 135

Chapter 7: Working with Bullish Double-Stick Patterns

Figure 7-10:
The bullish
inverted
hammer
pattern.

MAY BE BLACK
OR WHITE

Checking out a successful bullish inverted hammer
Figure 7-11 is a chart of an ETF that focuses on financial stocks. The official
name is the Financial Select Sector SPDR, and the symbol is XLF. I’m going to
stick with XLF for simplicity’s sake. The inverted hammer appears after a
down day and is confirmed by a higher opening. I chose this specific chart
because there’s no question that the open on the day after the pattern confirms the bullish signal. If you see a bullish inverted hammer confirmed like
this, you should put on a long trade quickly because an uptrend is likely on
the way.
The bullish inverted hammer often appears, and the following day’s open
won’t confirm the bullish signal. If you see that develop, wash your hands of
any trades involving that pattern immediately.
