
Fig 6.10 Shooting Star Candles And Volume
If we took this price pattern, as shown in Fig 6.10, and imagine that these were in fact three simultaneous
candles, each with increasing volume, then based on this combination of candle pattern and volume, do we
think the market is likely to rise or fall?
Clearly, the market is going to fall and the reason is very straightforward. First, we have seen three consecutive
candles, whose high has failed at exactly the same price level, so there is weakness in this region. Second we
have three shooting stars, which we already know are signs of weakness, and finally we have volume. We have
rising volume on three identical candles at the same price point on our chart. The market is really struggling at
this level, and the last two could certainly be considered part of the selling climax.
Moreover, if these signals were to appear after a period of sideways price action, then this gives the signals
even more strength, as we are then validating our VPA analysis with another technique of price analysis, which
is support and resistance.
It is very easy with hindsight to look back and identify tops and bottoms. What is far more difficult is to try and
identify major turning points in real time so I have created the schematic in Fig 6.11 to explain how this action
plays out on a chart. It will also allow me to introduce other broader aspects of this methodology.

Fig 6.11 Typical Price Action And Shooting Star Candles
If we take the left hand side of the schematic first. The market has been trending higher, when a shooting star
candle appears on the chart, perhaps it even has above average volume. Does the appearance of this candle
signify a major reversal of trend or simply a minor pause and pullback? The answer is, based on this candle, we
do not know.
All we can say for sure, is that we have seen a bullish trend develop in the previous sessions, and now we have
some weakness. We know that the signal has some validity, as it has appeared after the market has been rising
for some time, and this is one of the points I was trying to highlight earlier. We have to consider all these signals
in the context of what has gone before.
In this case we had a nice bullish trend developing, when a shooting star candle appeared with above average
volume. The chart now has our full attention. What do we do? Do we jump in and take a trade?
Absolutely not. As I mentioned earlier the market does not turn on a dime. It pauses, reflects, then rises, pauses
once again and then falls.
We wait for the next candle to form to see if it is confirming this weakness, perhaps some narrow spread up
candles, followed by another shooting star. The appearance of the first shooting star is our cue to sit up and
take note. It is our cue to check the subsequent candles for confirmation of the initial weakness, and try to
deduce with VPA whether this is a sign of longer term weakness or merely a temporary pause. At this point we
would also be considering price congestion areas on the chart for clues. After all, if we are in a price region
where the market has reversed previously, then this too is a strong signal, and in addition may also give some
clues as to the likely depth of any reversal.
In addition, if the price action has only recently broken out from an accumulation phase, then it is unlikely to be

the start of any reversal lower, and once again this is a key point. To always consider where we are in the
context of the trend and its relation to recent consolidation phases of price action during which the insiders
would have been accumulating. After all, it is very unlikely that a new trend would have been started and then
promptly reverse, particularly if a successful test had followed. So the context of where the candle comes in
relation to the ‘bigger picture’ is important and helps to answer the question.
The next step is to check the higher and lower time frames for a broader perspective on this signal and for
context, as well as applying VPA to these timeframes.
For example, if this price action had appeared on a one hour chart, and on checking the 15 minute chart, we
could see two shooting star candles had formed in that time frame, both with above average volume, this gives
confirmation that any reversal may be more significant. Furthermore, the 15 min chart may also have significant
areas of price congestion which would also contribute to our analysis. All this analysis takes minutes, if not
seconds while waiting for the next candle to form.
Using multiple time frames also gives us a view on the longer term trend, and may also help to answer the
question of whether the appearance of this shooting start candle is merely a minor reversal or the start of a
longer term change in trend. This is one of the many advantages of using multiple time frames for chart
analysis. Furthermore, using multiple time frames will give a perspective on how long we are likely to be
holding any position.
This makes perfect sense. After all, if the longer term trend is bullish, and we are trading short on a faster time
frame chart, then it's likely that we will only be holding this position for a limited period of time, as we are trading
against the dominant trend for the session. Once again, this will help to answer the question of whether this is a
trend reversal, or simply a minor pause and pull back.
There are a variety of techniques to help us ascertain whether the market is at ‘a top’ and these will be outlined
in detail later in the book. However, I wanted to introduce some of these here. Multiple time frame analysis, VPA
analysis, price congestion and candle pattern analysis can all be used to help us answer this question.
Furthermore, a rising market with falling volume is also a classic sign of weakness.
The shooting star may have been preceded with a narrow spread up candle on high volume, again classic
signs of weakness, but they still do not answer the question of whether this is a minor pull back or a major
reversal in trend. To do this we need help, and that help comes from using VPA in other time frames, along with
the techniques which you will also discover later.
One such technique is the depth and extent of any price congestion as the longer a market moves sideways at
a particular level the more likely a breakout and reversal.
Moreover, VPA is an art and not a science, which is why trading software cannot do this analysis for us. The
analysis we carry out on each candle, candle pattern, associated volumes, and associated price across multiple
time frames to assess and determine the dominant trend, is all subjective. Initially it takes time to learn which is
why I have written this book in order to short cut the learning curve for you.
The five principles mentioned at the start of this chapter apply to all candles, and all our VPA analysis, but as
the shooting star and its opposite number the hammer are so important, I felt it was appropriate to introduce the
basic concepts of the next levels of VPA analysis here.
Just to complete this commentary on the shooting star candle, not only do these appear in up trends, but they
also appear in down trends, and here they act as confirmation of weakness, particularly if they appear shortly
after the start of the move lower. The appearance of a shooting star candle in a downtrend which follows a
selling climax could be a test of demand as the market moves lower. Furthermore, if the shooting star is
accompanied by low volume, and the market had been in sideways congestion for a period following the selling
climax, this also confirms the insiders testing demand as the market moves away from the distribution phase.
The shooting star is a sign that the market has been pushed higher, but there is no demand so falls back to
close, at or near the open.
Shooting star candles may also appear at minor reversals deeper in the trend, as the downwards pressure
pauses and pulls back higher. Here again, if the candle is accompanied with above average volume, it is only
telling us one thing, namely the market is still weak, and we have not yet reached the buying climax at the

bottom of the trend.
This pattern of price action is the insiders selling back to the market some of the inventory they have collected
from panicked sellers who had bailed out earlier. This inventory in the warehouse has to be sold as the market
moves lower. After all, the insiders don't like to buy anywhere other than at their target price, in other words, a
wholesale price.
Some buyers will come in at these pull backs, thinking the market has bottomed out, and about to turn higher,
whilst others continue to sell. This price action occurs all the time in a price waterfall, as the market moves
lower and fast. The insiders have to stop the fall, pause, push the market higher using the media and sell into
the created demand whilst also dealing with the ongoing selling that is continuing to arrive. The volume will
therefore be above average or high, showing further weakness to come.

The Hammer Candle
Price action – strength
The hammer is the second of our three 'premier' candles and another classic candle that we look out for in all
markets and time frames. It is the classic candle of strength, for either temporary strength, or as a signal for
longer term price reversal.
A hammer is formed when in a session, the price has fallen, only to reverse and recover to close back near the
opening price. This is a sign of strength with the selling having been absorbed in sufficient strength for the
buyers to overwhelm the sellers, allowing the market to recover. The hammer is so called as it is 'hammering
out a bottom', and just like the shooting star, is immensely powerful when combined with VPA.
Once again, the five principles outlined at the beginning of the chapter apply to the hammer candle, and again it
is very easy to become over excited as soon as you see this candle. It is so easy to jump into what we think is
going to be a change in trend. If the market has been moving lower fast, which they generally do, it is unlikely
that a reversal will take effect immediately. What is far more likely, is that the market will pause, mover higher,
and then continue lower once again. In other words posting a short squeeze.
As we now know, the insiders have to clear inventory which has been sold in the move lower, and the first
signal of a pause is the hammer, as the insiders move in to buy, supporting the market temporarily. They may
even push it higher with a shooting star candle. The hammer is signalling 'forced buying' by the insiders, and
the shooting star is signalling 'forced selling' by the insiders. Whilst they do move bearish markets fast, there is
always selling that has to be absorbed at higher levels, and this inventory has to be cleared before moving
lower once again. After all, if this did not happen, the insiders would be left with a significant tranche of
inventory bought at high prices, and not at wholesale prices.
A price waterfall will always pause, pull back higher, before continuing lower. As always, volume holds the key,
and if the volumes have been rising in the price waterfall lower, then this is a strong signal of further weakness
to come. Therefore, a single hammer will simply not be enough to halt the move lower, even if the volume is
above average. As always, the price action that follows is key, as is the price and volume in the associated time
frames along with any price congestion in the vicinity. This is the same problem as before and the question that
we always have to ask, whenever we see a hammer or a shooting star, is whether the price action is signalling
a pause in the longer term trend, or a true reversal in trend.
The power of the hammer candle, just like the shooting star, is revealed, once we see a sequence of two or
three of these candles accompanied by high or extremely high volume. It is at this point we know, for sure that
we are in the realms of a buying climax and only have to be patient and wait for the insiders to complete their
task, before they begin to take the market higher.
Furthermore, we also have to remember that once the buying climax is completed, we are likely to see one or
more tests using the hammer candle. These candles may be less pronounced than the true hammer, perhaps
with relatively shallow wicks, but the principle will be the same. The open and close will be much the same, and
there will always be a wick to the lower body.
For a successful test, the volume needs to be low too, and there is also likely to be more than one test in this
phase. These tests can appear both in the price congestion area of accumulation as well as in the initial phase

of any breakout, as the price action moves back into an old area of heavy selling immediately above.
These are the two candles which are our number one priority in reading of price and volume. As I'm sure you
will recall from the introduction to Volume Price Analysis, all we are looking for, on any candle or sequence of
candles, is validation or anomaly. Is the volume validating the price action and what signal is this sending to us,
or is it an anomaly, and therefore sending us a very different signal.
In a sense, there is never an anomaly with a shooting star candle, since the price action is sending a clear
message on it's own. As any price action trader will tell you, this candle is a signal of weakness, in itself. There
is no other interpretation. The market has risen and then fallen in the session, therefore the market MUST be
weak. What volume does is put this weakness into context, which is why I have shown the schematic with the
three volume bars, low, average and high (or even ultra high). A shooting star with low volume is a sign of
weakness, but probably not significant, unless it is a test of demand following a selling climax as we start the
downwards move lower.
A shooting star with average volume is telling us there is weakness, it is a relatively strong signal, and the pull
back may be more significant than in the first example on low volume. Finally, we have the shooting star with
high or ultra high volume and this is where the professional money is now selling out. Whether it's the market
makers in stocks and indices, or the big operators in futures, or the market makers in forex, or the big operators
in bonds, it doesn't matter. The insiders are selling out, and we need to prepare and take note, as a big move is
on the way!
The point is this. There is never an anomaly with a shooting star, only ever a validation of the strength of the
signal. The volume always confirms the price action with a shooting star, and all we have to do is consider
whether it is low, average or high to ultra high, and frame this in terms of the preceding price action across our
time frames, and track the subsequent candles as they unfold on the chart.
The same points apply to the hammer candle. Once again, there is NEVER an anomaly with a hammer candle.
The price action tells us all we need to know. In the session, for whatever reason, the price has moved lower
and then recovered to close near or at the open. It is therefore a sign of strength, and the volume bar then
reveals the extent of this strength.
Once again, I have shown three hammer candles with three volume bars, low, average and ultra high as we can
see in Fig 6.12.
A hammer with a low volume candle is indicating minor weakness, average volume suggests stronger signs of
a possible reversal, whilst ultra high signals the insiders buying heavily, as part of the buying climax. The
volume is giving us clues on how far the market is likely to travel. An average volume bar with a hammer
candle, may well give us an intra day scalping opportunity. And there is nothing wrong with that. A low volume
hammer is simply telling us that any reversal is likely to be minor, as there is clearly little interest to the upside at
this price level.

Fig 6.12 Hammer Candles And Volume
This raises another point which I feel I should also mention here.
VPA not only helps us get INTO low risk trading positions, it also helps to KEEP us in those positions, which is
often one of the hardest things to do in trading. Holding a position and staying in a trend can be very difficult,
and I believe is one of the hardest skills to master. It is also a primary reason why so many traders fail. After all,
it is staying in a trend where we maximise any profit, and a trend can be from a few minutes or hours, to several
days and weeks.
We all know as traders, that the market only goes up in steps and down in steps, never in a straight line, and we
have to stay in positions through these minor pull backs and reversals. This is one of the many great powers of
VPA as it will help to keep you in an existing position, and give you the confidence using your own analysis, to
truly see inside the market.
For example, the market may be moving lower, we are short the market, and we see a hammer formed. Is this a
reversal in trend and time to exit, or merely a short term reversal in a longer term trend lower? If the volume is
low, then clearly the insiders are not buying at this level. Perhaps the hammer is followed by a shooting star on
average to high volume, a sign of weakness in the down trend, and confirming the analysis of the hammer
candle. The market is weak and our analysis using VPA has given us the confidence to hold the position in the
market through this pullback. Without volume, we would have little idea of the strength or weakness of this price
activity. With volume, it is all revealed, and we can base our decisions accordingly.
This is the power of VPA. Not only does it get us into trades, but it helps keep us in, and finally gets us out.
Taking the above example again in Fig 6.12, and the hammer which arrives with high or ultra high volume. This
is an early warning signal of a potential reversal. The big money is moving in, and as a short seller it is
potentially time to exit the market, take some or all of our profits off the table, and prepare for a long position

when the break out occurs.
Getting into a trade is the easy part, staying in and then getting out at the right time is very difficult. And this is
where VPA is such a powerful technique in giving us the insight we need into market behaviour. Once you
begin to interpret and understand what the price and volume relationship is signalling, then you have arrived at
trading Nirvana.
Now finally, if we do see the hammer candle at the top of a bullish trend, it has a different name, and a
completely different interpretation. This will be covered later in this chapter when we consider other candles
and candle patterns, as we continue to build on our knowledge.
This is what I meant by Principle 4 – a candle can have a very different meaning depending on where it
appears in the overall trend. At the top of a trend the hammer is called a ‘hanging man’ and when it appears in a
candle pattern with a shooting star is signalling weakness.
The final candle in our trio of premier candles is the doji, but not just any doji candle, it is the long legged doji.

The Long Legged Doji Candle
Price action – indecision
There are many variants of the doji candle, and you will see them continuously in every chart. They are all
characterised in the same way with the open and close being the same or very close, and with a wick to the
upper and lower body.
This is the price action which creates the unique pattern of the doji candle, or doji cross. Whilst there are many
different sizes and types of doji candle, there is only ONE which I believe is significant in the context of VPA,
and that is the long legged doji.
In itself the doji candle signifies indecision. The market is reaching a point at which bullish and bearish
sentiment is equally balanced. In the context of what actually take place in the session, it is something like this.
The market opens, and sentiment takes the price action in one direction. This is promptly reversed and taken in
the opposite direction, before the opening market sentiment regains control and brings the market back to the
opening price once more. In other words, there have been some wild swings in price action within the session,
but the fulcrum of price has remained in the middle.
The key point about this type of doji candle, is that both the upper and lower wicks are long in comparison to the
body, and should resemble what I used to call, a 'daddy long legs' – a small flying insect with very long legs!
The power of the candle lies in it's predictive power as a potential signal of a reversal in trend. Just like the
hammer and the shooting star, the price action alone gives us a firm signal, but when combined with volume, it
becomes immensely powerful. The price action in the candle is sufficient, in itself, to tell us visually that there is
indecision. After all, if this were not the case, then the candle would be very different in construction.
Once again, the price action reveals the sentiment, which in this case is indecision and therefore a possible
reversal. The long legged doji can signal a reversal from bearish to bullish, or bullish to bearish, and the
change in direction depends on the preceding price action. If we have been in an up trend for some time, and
the long legged doji appears, then this may be the first sign of a reversal in trend to bearish. Conversely, if we
see this candle after the market has been falling for some time, then this may be signalling a reversal to bullish.
However, unlike the shooting star and the hammer candle, with the long legged doji candle we CAN have an
anomaly in volume. Once again as we can see in Fig 6.13 I have shown the candle with three volume bars
beneath, and the one which is an anomaly is the first one on low volume.
Let me explain why this is an anomaly, and also introduce another concept here which fits neatly into this
section.

Fig 6.13 The Long Legged Doji
Why is low volume on such a candle an anomaly? Well, let's think about this logically. The market has moved
sharply in both directions and finally closed back or near the opening price. This price action is a sign of
volatility in the market, as the market has swung back and forth in the session. If the market were not volatile,
then we would see a very different type of candle. Therefore, if the market is volatile, why is there low volume.
Volatile markets require effort and as we know effort and result go hand in hand. However, in this instance we
have no effort (low volume) and a big result (wide price action). Clearly this is an anomaly, and the only logical
answer is that the price is being moved by the insiders, who are simply not joining in at the moment. The most
common reason for this is stop hunting, where the market makers and insiders are moving prices violently, first
one way and then the other, to shake traders out, and to take out stop and limit orders in the process. They are
not buying or selling themselves, but simply 'racking' the price around, generally using a news release as the
catalyst, and this brings me to an important point in the VPA story.
The long legged doji is seen most often during a fundamental news release, and the classic one for the US
markets is the monthly Non Farm Payroll data, released on the first Friday of every month. On the release, price
behaviour becomes extremely volatile, where this candle is created repeatedly when economic data such as
this is released. The market swings violently one way, then the other, and then perhaps back again. It is the
ideal opportunity for the insiders to whipsaw traders in and out of positions fast, taking out stops and other
orders in the market at the same time.
And the reason we know this is happening is volume, or rather the lack of it. If the volume is low, then this is
NOT a genuine move, but an ANOMALY. For the price to behave in this way takes effort, and we are seeing this
with no effort, as shown with low volume. The insiders are simply manipulating prices, and in this case, the long
legged doji is NOT signalling a reversal, but something very different. Insider manipulation on a grand scale at
this price level. It may well be that the market does reverse later, but at this stage, we stay out, and wait for
