
The questions, which were always enforced by torture, were of the most absurd and
disgusting nature. The inquisitors were required to ask the suspected whether they had
midnight meetings with the devil? whether they attended the witch's sabbath on the
Brocken? whether they had their familiar spirits? whether they could raise whirlwinds
and call down the lightning? and whether they had sexual intercourse with Satan?
Straightway the inquisitors set to work; Cumarius, in Italy, burned forty-one poor women
in one province alone, and Sprenger, in Germany, burned a number which can never be
ascertained correctly, but which, it is agreed on all hands, amounted to more than five
hundred in a year. The great resemblance between the confessions of the unhappy victims
was regarded as a new proof of the existence of the crime. But this is not astonishing. The
same questions from the "Malleus Maleficarum," were put to them all, and torture never
failed to educe the answer required by the inquisitor. Numbers of people whose
imaginations were filled with these horrors, went further in the way of confession than
even their tormenters anticipated, in the hope that they would thereby be saved from the
rack, and put out of their misery at once. Some confessed that they had had children by
the devil; but no one, who had ever been a mother, gave utterance to such a frantic
imagining, even in the extremity of her anguish. The childless only confessed it, and were
burned instanter as unworthy to live.
For fear the zeal of the enemies of Satan should cool, successive Popes appointed new
commissions. One was appointed by Alexander VI, in 1494; another by Leo X, in 1521,
and a third by Adrian VI, in 1522. They were all armed with the same powers to hunt out
and destroy, and executed their fearful functions but too rigidly. In Geneva alone five
hundred persons were burned in the years 1515 and 1516, under the title of Protestant
witches. It would appear that their chief crime was heresy, and their witchcraft merely an
aggravation. Bartolomeo de Spina has a list still more fearful. He informs us that, in the
year 1524, no less than a thousand persons suffered death for witchcraft in the district of
Como, and that for several years afterwards the average number of victims exceeded a
hundred annually. One inquisitor, Remigius, took great credit to himself for having,
during fifteen years, convicted and burned nine hundred.
In France, about the year 1520, fires for the execution of witches blazed in almost every
town. Danaeus, in his "Dialogues of Witches," says they were so numerous that it would
he next to impossible to tell the number of them. So deep was the thraldom of the human
mind, that the friends and relatives of the accused parties looked on and approved. The
wife or sister of a murderer might sympathise in his fate, but the wives and husbands of
sorcerers and witches had no pity. The truth is that pity was dangerous, for it was thought
no one could have compassion on the sufferings of a witch who was not a dabbler in the
art: to have wept for a witch would have insured the stake. In some districts, however, the
exasperation of the people broke out, in spite of superstition. The inquisitor of a rural
township in Piedmont burned the victims so plentifully, and so fast, that there was not a
family in the place which did not lose a member. The people at last arose, and the
inquisitor was but too happy to escape from the country with whole limbs. The
Archbishop of the diocese proceeded afterwards to the trial of such as the inquisitor had
left in prison.

Some of the charges were so utterly preposterous that the poor wretches were at once
liberated; others met a harder, but the usual fate. Some of them were accused of having
joined the witches' dance at midnight under a blasted oak, where they had been seen by
creditable people. The husbands of several of these women (two of whom were young
and beautiful) swore positively that at the time stated their wives were comfortably asleep
in their arms; but it was all in vain. Their word was taken, but the Archbishop told them
they had been deceived by the devil and their own senses. It was true they might have had
the semblance of their wives in their beds, but the originals were far away, at the devil's
dance under the oak. The honest fellows were confounded, and their wives burned
forthwith.
In the year 1561, five poor women of Verneuil were accused of transforming themselves
into cats, and in that shape attending the sabbath of the fiends -- prowling around Satan,
who presided over them in the form of a goat, and dancing, to amuse him, upon his back.
They were found guilty, and burned. [Bodin, page 95. Garinet, page 125. "Anti-demon de
Serclier," page 346.]
In 1564, three wizards and a witch appeared before the Presidents Salvert and D'Avanton:
they confessed, when extended on the rack, that they anointed the sheep-pens with
infernal unguents to kill the sheep -- that they attended the sabbath, where they saw a
great black goat, which spoke to them, and made them kiss him, each holding a lighted
candle in his hand while he performed the ceremony. They were all executed at Poitiers.
In 1571, the celebrated sorcerer, Trois Echelles, was burned in the Place de Greve, in
Paris. He confessed, in the presence of Charles IX, and of the Marshals de Montmorency,
De Retz, and the Sieur du Mazille, physician to the King, that he could perform the most
wonderful things by the aid of a devil to whom he had sold himself. He described at great
length the saturnalia of the fiends -- the sacrifices which they offered up -- the
debaucheries they committed with the young and handsome witches, and the various
modes of preparing the infernal unguent for blighting cattle. He said he had upwards of
twelve hundred accomplices in the crime of witchcraft in various parts of France, whom
he named to the King, and many of whom were afterwards arrested and suffered
execution.
At Dole, two years afterwards, Gilles Garnier, a native of Lyons, was indicted for being a
loupgarou, or man-wolf, and for prowling in that shape about the country at night to
devour little children. The indictment against him, as read by Henri Camus, doctor of
laws and counsellor of the King, was to the effect that he, Gilles Garnier, had seized upon
a little girl, twelve years of age, whom he drew into a vineyard and there killed, partly
with his teeth and partly with his hands, seeming like wolf's paws -- that from thence he
trailed her bleeding body along the ground with his teeth into the wood of La Serre,
where he ate the greatest portion of her at one meal, and carried the remainder home to
his wife; that, upon another occasion, eight days before the festival of All Saints, he was
seen to seize another child in his teeth, and would have devoured her had she not been
rescued by the country-people -- and that the said child died a few days afterwards of the

injuries he had inflicted; that fifteen days after the same festival of All Saints, being again
in the shape of a wolf, he devoured a boy thirteen years of age, having previously torn off
his leg and thigh with his teeth, and hid them away for his breakfast on the morrow. He
was, furthermore, indicted for giving way to the same diabolical and unnatural
propensities even in his shape of a man, and that he had strangled a boy in a wood with
the intention of eating him, which crime he would have effected if he had not been seen
by the neighhours and prevented.
Gilles Garnier was put to the rack, after fifty witnesses had deposed against him: he
confessed everything that was laid to his charge. He was, thereupon, brought back into
the presence of his judges, when Dr. Camus, in the name of the Parliament of Dole,
pronounced the following sentence:-"Seeing that Gilles Garnier has, by the testimony of credible witnesses, and by his own
spontaneous confession, been proved guilty of the abominable crimes of lycanthropy and
witchcraft, this court condemns him, the said Gilles, to be this day taken in a cart from
this spot to the place of execution, accompanied by the executioner (maitre executeur de
la haute justice), where he, by the said executioner, shall be tied to a stake and burned
alive, and that his ashes be then scattered to the winds. The Court further condemns him,
the said Gilles, to the costs of this prosecution."
"Given at Dole, this 18th day of January, 1573."
In 1578, the Parliament of Paris was occupied for several days with the trial of a man,
named Jacques Roller. He, also, was found guilty of being a loup-garou, and in that shape
devouring a little boy. He was burnt alive in the Place de Greve.
In 1579, so much alarm was excited in the neighbourhood of Melun by the increase of
witches and loup-garous, that a council was held to devise some measures to stay the evil.
A decree was passed, that all witches, and consulters with witches, should be punished
with death; and not only those, but fortune-tellers and conjurors of every kind. The
Parliament of Rouen took up the same question in the following year, and decreed that
the possession of a grimoire, or book of spells, was sufficient evidence of witchcraft; and
that all persons on whom such books were found should be burned alive. Three councils
were held in different parts of France in the year 1583, all in relation to the same subject.
The Parliament of Bourdeaux issued strict injunctions to all curates and clergy whatever,
to use redoubled efforts to root out the crime of witchcraft. The Parliament of Tours was
equally peremptory, and feared the judgments of an offended God, if all these dealers
with the devil were not swept from the face of the land. The Parliament of Rheims was
particularly severe against the noueurs d'aiguillette, or "tyers of the knot;" people of both
sexes, who took pleasure in preventing the consummation of marriage, that they might
counteract the command of God to our first parents, to increase and multiply. This
Parliament held it to be sinful to wear amulets to preserve from witchcraft; and that this
practice might not be continued within its jurisdiction, drew up a form of exorcism,
which would more effectually defeat the agents of the devil, and put them to flight.

A case of witchcraft, which created a great sensation in its day, occurred in 1588, at a
village in the mountains of Auvergne, about two leagues from Apchon. A gentleman of
that place being at his window, there passed a friend of his who had been out hunting,
and who was then returning to his own house. The gentleman asked his friend what sport
he had had; upon which the latter informed him that he had been attacked in the plain by
a large and savage wolf, which he had shot at, without wounding; and that he had then
drawn out his hunting-knife and cut off the animal's fore-paw, as it sprang upon his neck
to devour him. The huntsman, upon this, put his hand into his bag to pull out the paw, but
was shocked to find that it was a woman's hand, with a wedding-ring on the finger. The
gentleman immediately recognized his wife's ring, "which," says the indictment against
her, "made him begin to suspect some evil of her." He immediately went in search of her,
and found her sitting by the fire in the kitchen, with her arm hidden underneath her apron.
He tore off her apron with great vehemence, and found that she had no hand, and that the
stump was even then bleeding. She was given into custody, and burned at Riom in
presence of some thousands of spectators. [Tablier. See also Boguet, "Discours sur les
Sorciers;" and M. Jules Garinet, "Histoire de la Magie," page 150.]
In the midst of these executions, rare were the gleams of mercy; few instances are upon
record of any acquittal taking place when the charge was witchcraft. The discharge of
fourteen persons by the Parliament of Paris, in the year 1589, is almost a solitary example
of a return to reason. Fourteen persons, condemned to death for witchcraft, appealed
against the judgment to the Parliament of Paris, which for political reasons had been
exiled to Tours. The Parliament named four commissioners, Pierre Pigray, the King's
surgeon, and Messieurs Leroi, Renard, and Falaiseau, the King's physicians, to visit and
examine these witches, and see whether they had the mark of the devil upon them.
Pigray, who relates the circumstance in his work on Surgery, book vii, chapter the tenth,
says the visit was made in presence of two counsellors of the court. The witches were all
stripped naked, and the physicians examined their bodies very diligently, pricking them
in all the marks they could find, to see whether they were insensible to pain, which was
always considered a certain proof of guilt. They were, however, very sensible of the
pricking, and some of them called out very lustily when the pins were driven into them.
"We found them," continues Pierre Pigray, "to be very poor, stupid people, and some of
them insane; many of them were quite indifferent about life, and one or two of them
desired death as a relief for their sufferings. Our opinion was, that they stood more in
need of medicine than of punishment, and so we reported to the Parliament. Their case
was, thereupon, taken into further consideration, and the Parliament, after mature counsel
amongst all the members, ordered the poor creatures to be sent to their homes, without
inflicting any punishment upon them."
Such was the dreadful state of Italy, Germany, and France, during the sixteenth century,
which was far from being the worst crisis of the popular madness with regard to
witchcraft. Let us see what was the state of England during the same period. The
Reformation, which in its progress had rooted out so many errors, stopped short at this,
the greatest error of all. Luther and Calvin were as firm believers in witchcraft as Pope
Innocent himself, and their followers showed themselves more zealous persecutors than
the Romanists. Dr. Hutchinson, in his work on Witchcraft, asserts that the mania

manifested itself later in England, and raged with less virulence than on the Continent.
The first assertion only is true; but though the persecution began later both in England
and Scotland, its progress was as fearful as elsewhere.
It was not until more than fifty years after the issuing of the Bull of Innocent VIII. that
the Legislature of England thought fit to make any more severe enactments against
sorcery than those already in operation. The statute of 1541 was the first that specified the
particular crime of witchcraft. At a much earlier period, many persons had suffered death
for sorcery in addition to other offences; but no executions took place for attending the
witches' sabbath, raising tempests, afflicting cattle with barrenness, and all the fantastic
trumpery of the Continent. Two statutes were passed in 1551; the first, relating to false
prophecies, caused mainly, no doubt, by the impositions of Elizabeth Barton, the Holy
Maid of Kent, in 1534, and the second against conjuration, witchcraft, and sorcery. But
even this enactment did not consider witchcraft as penal in itself, and only condemned to
death those who by means of spells, incantations, or contracts with the devil, attempted
the lives of their neighbours. The statute of Elizabeth, in 1562, at last recognized
witchcraft as a crime of the highest magnitude, whether exerted or not to the injury of the
lives, limbs, and possessions of the community. From that date, the persecution may be
fairly said to have commenced in England. It reached its climax in the early part of the
seventeenth century, which was the hottest period of the mania all over Europe.
A few cases of witch persecution in the sixteenth century will enable the reader to form a
more accurate idea of the progress of this great error than if he plunged at once into that
busy period of its history when Matthew Hopkins and his coadjutors exercised their
infernal calling. Several instances occur in England during the latter years of the reign of
Elizabeth. At this time the public mind had become pretty familiar with the details of the
crime. Bishop Jewell, in his sermons before Her Majesty, used constantly to conclude
them by a fervent prayer that she might be preserved from witches. Upon one occasion,
in 1598, his words were, "It may please your Grace to understand that witches and
sorcerers, within these last four years, are marvellously increased within this your Grace's
realm. Your Grace's subjects pine away even unto the death; their colour fadeth -- their
flesh rotteth -- their speech is benumbed-- their senses are bereft! I pray God they may
never practise further than upon the subject!"
By degrees, an epidemic terror of witchcraft spread into the villages. In proportion as the
doctrines of the Puritans took root this dread increased, and, of course, brought
persecution in its train. The Church of England has claimed, and is entitled to the merit,
of having been less influenced in these matters than any other sect of Christians; but still
they were tainted with the superstition of the age. One of the most flagrant instances of
cruelty and delusion upon record was consummated under the authority of the Church,
and commemorated till a very late period by an annual lecture at the University of
Cambridge.
This is the celebrated case of the Witches of Warbois, who were executed about thirtytwo years after the passing of the statute of Elizabeth. Although in the interval but few
trials are recorded, there is, unfortunately, but too much evidence to show the extreme

length to which the popular prejudice was carried. Many women lost their lives in every
part of England without being brought to trial at all, from the injuries received at the
hands of the people. The number of these can never be ascertained.
The case of the Witches of Warbois merits to be detailed at length, not only from the
importance attached to it for so many years by the learned of the University, but from the
singular absurdity of the evidence upon which men, sensible in all other respects, could
condemn their fellow-creatures to the scaffold.
The principal actors in this strange drama were the families of Sir Samuel Cromwell and
a Mr. Throgmorton, both gentlemen of landed property near Warbois, in the county of
Huntingdon. Mr. Throgmorton had several daughters, the eldest of whom, Mistress Joan,
was an imaginative and melancholy girl, whose head was filled with stories of ghosts and
witches. Upon one occasion she chanced to pass the cottage of one Mrs. or, as she was
called, Mother Samuel, a very aged, a very poor, and a very ugly woman. Mother Samuel
was sitting at her door knitting, with a black cap upon her head, when this silly young
lady passed, and taking her eyes from her work she looked steadfastly at her. Mistress
Joan immediately fancied that she felt sudden pains in all her limbs, and from that day
forth, never ceased to tell her sisters, and everybody about her, that Mother Samuel had
bewitched her. The other children took up the cry, and actually frightened themselves
into fits whenever they passed within sight of this terrible old woman.
Mr. and Mrs. Throgmorton, not a whir wiser than their children, believed all the absurd
tales they had been told; and Lady Cromwell, a gossip of Mrs. Throgmorton, made
herself very active in the business, and determined to bring the witch to the ordeal. The
sapient Sir Samuel joined in the scheme; and the children thus encouraged gave loose
reins to their imaginations, which seem to have been of the liveliest. They soon invented
a whole host of evil spirits, and names for them besides, which, they said, were sent by
Mother Samuel to torment them continually. Seven spirits especially, they said, were
raised from hell by this wicked woman to throw them into fits; and as the children were
actually subject to fits, their mother and her commeres gave the more credit to the story.
The names of these spirits were, "First Smack," "Second Smack," "Third Smack," "Blue,"
"Catch," "Hardname," and "Pluck."
Throgmorton, the father, was so pestered by these idle fancies, and yet so well inclined to
believe them, that he marched valiantly forth to the hut where Mother Samuel resided
with her husband and daughter, and dragged her forcibly into his own grounds. Lady
Cromwell, Mrs. Throgmorton, and the girls were in waiting, armed with long pins to
prick the witch, and see if they could draw blood from her. Lady Cromwell, who seems
to have been the most violent of the party, tore the old woman's cap off her head, and
plucking out a handful of her grey hair, gave it to Mrs. Throgmorton to burn, as a charm
which would preserve them all from her future machinations. It was no wonder that the
poor creature, subjected to this rough usage, should give vent to an involuntary curse
upon her tormentors. She did so, and her curse was never forgotten. Her hair, however,
was supposed to be a grand specific, and she was allowed to depart, half dead with terror
and ill usage. For more than a year, the families of Cromwell and Throgmorton continued

to persecute her, and to assert that her imps afflicted them with pains and fits, turned the
milk sour in their pans, and prevented their cows and ewes from bearing. In the midst of
these fooleries, Lady Cromwell was taken ill and died. It was then remembered that her
death had taken place exactly a year and a quarter since she was cursed by Mother
Samuel, and that on several occasions she had dreamed of the witch and a black cat, the
latter being of course the arch-enemy of mankind himself.
Sir Samuel Cromwell now conceived himself bound to take more energetic measures
against the sorceress, since he had lost his wife by her means. The year and a quarter and
the black cat were proofs positive. All the neighbours had taken up the cry of witchcraft
against Mother Samuel; and her personal appearance, unfortunately for her, the very ideal
of what a witch ought to be, increased the popular suspicion. It would appear that at last
the poor woman believed, even to her own disadvantage, that she was what everybody
represented her to be. Being forcibly brought into Mr. Throgmorton's house, when his
daughter Joan was in one of her customary fits, she was commanded by him and Sir
Samuel Cromwell to expel the devil from the young lady. She was told to repeat her
exorcism, and to add, "as I am a witch, and the causer of Lady Cromwell's death, I charge
thee, fiend, to come out of her!" She did as was required of her, and moreover confessed
that her husband and daughter were leagued with her in witchcraft, and had, like her, sold
their souls to the devil. The whole family were immediately arrested, and sent to
Huntingdon to prison.
The trial was instituted shortly afterwards before Mr. Justice Fenner, when all the crazy
girls of Mr. Throgmorton's family gave evidence against Mother Samuel and her family.
They were all three put to the torture. The old woman confessed in her anguish that she
was a witch -- that she had cast her spells upon the young ladies, and that she had caused
the death of Lady Cromwell. The father and daughter, stronger in mind than their
unfortunate wife and parent, refused to confess anything, and asserted their innocence to
the last. They were all three condemned to be hanged, and their bodies burned. The
daughter, who was young and good-looking, excited the pity of many persons, and she
was advised to plead pregnancy, that she might gain at ]east a respite from death. The
poor girl refused proudly, on the ground that she would not be accounted both a witch
and a strumpet. Her half-witted old mother caught at the idea of a few weeks' longer life,
and asserted that she was pregnant. The court was convulsed with laughter, in which the
wretched victim herself joined, and this was accounted an additional proof that she was a
witch. The whole family were executed on the 7th of April, 1593.
Sir Samuel Cromwell, as lord of the manor, received the sum of 40 pounds out of the
confiscated property of the Samuels, which he turned into a rent-charge of 40 shillings
yearly, for the endowment of an annual sermon or lecture upon the enormity of
witchcraft, and this case in particular, to be preached by a doctor or bachelor of divinity
of Queen's College, Cambridge. I have not been able to ascertain the exact date at which
this annual lecture was discontinued, but it appears to have been preached so late as 1718,
when Dr. Hutchinson published his work upon witchcraft.
