
RECORDS AND RESULTS
Most market participants lose more money in bad positions and have a lower %WIN than the
conscious mind admits. Besides strong discipline, maintain objective and current records of all
position activity. Let a spreadsheet or software program determine success, not the biased and
ambitious mind. Never allow the broker-dealer to maintain the only trading account record. Brokerdealers make frequent recording errors, usually in their own favor. Realize that earned interest will
distort loss reporting. Filter this out of personal records.
Format records to conform with tax reporting requirements. This will save much aggravation during
filing times and display profit-loss in the same way as the government sees it. Always add
transaction costs into basis and sale prices. Commissions can hide significant losses, especially on
smaller accounts. Consider separate records to see how these fees impact different strategies or
track the spread lost through each execution to estimate the impact of overtrading.
Broker records and trade slips don’t offer full analysis of how well different tactics work. Review
the trading plan and decide what additional information to track from day to day. Input these
supplementary data into a spreadsheet that will average and compile performance over time. Actual
holding period, share size, and win-loss streaks make perfect additions to standard %WIN,
AvgWIN, and AvgLOSS statistics.
Assemble daily data important to survival but avoid too much information. Profit alone decides the
swing trader’s fate. Application of knowledge and discipline determines profit. Detailed records can
uncover weaknesses and optimize strategies, but they won’t stop poor execution. If information
serves no purpose, ditch it and focus on major performance issues. Stay flexible. New strategies
introduce new challenges that require a fresh look and objective feedback. Keep the spreadsheet
loaded and ready to examine major concerns as they arise.

INNER TRADER
Are you ready for the truth about your current obsession with the markets? While exact figures
remain closely guarded by the industry, the swing trading failure rate likely stands well over 70%.
So chances are good that new participants will eventually lose all or part of their equity accounts
and be forced to move on to less stressful hobbies. To avoid this fate, take the pursuit very seriously
and find an original trading strategy that takes full advantage of the unique characteristics of the
short-term markets.
The trading fascination lies in the favorable time/profit curve. Short-term markets generate sharp
price swings that capture the public’s attention. This encourages experienced investors to abandon
buy-and-hold strategies and concentrate on these quick turns. But they soon realize that short-term
profits depend on highly effective time management. This critical demand requires far more skill
than most new traders anticipate and they wash out quickly.
Neophytes see market speculation as an exciting way to make money and break out of the business
world. The discipline routinely attracts over-40 white males with professional backgrounds in other
occupations. They believe that their financial success in one career will quickly translate into
trading profits. These well-capitalized participants apply the same ambition that works so well in
the business world’s pecking order. But testosterone can’t force money from the markets, and quiet
introspection builds better strategies than bravado. Those who finally survive the game all tell a
common tale: this fascinating pursuit was the hardest challenge they ever faced.

Aspirants must commit many hours to market study or avoid trading entirely. Develop a predatory
instinct, avoid greed, and view this occupation as a lifelong quest. Work hard to complete every
analysis in detail, and don’t cut corners. Part-timers can succeed but must specialize on a few
strategies and skip broader study. Match execution with effort or pay the price. Highly trained
market professionals stand ready to empty careless wallets, and only adequate preparation will
uncover the secrets that produce consistent profits.
Watch the clock and become a market survivor. Develop an intuitive sense of how positions will
react to intraday cycles. Learn to coordinate trades so they align with these underlying tendencies.
For example, don’t buy weakness in the last hour if price is below support. Time-of-day favors
further declines for these issues near market close. The first and last hours attract most participants.
But they carry higher risk than any other time period. Avoid this excitement until specific strategies
can address the increased risk. Early opportunities disappear quickly and trap unskilled players.
Highly profitable setups appear throughout the middle hours. Use this quieter time to build up
trading skills and avoid the crowd.
Develop an original style that avoids the most volatile stocks. Markets generate small-scale
inefficiencies all the time. Learn to recognize the odd daily quirks that produce high-probability
setups. Notice strange behavior and apply simple techniques to capitalize on it. Give up the
excitement of chasing parabolic stocks and find quiet opportunity that books higher profits with less
stress. In any case, always travel a different path than the restless crowd.
Focus on optimizing entry and exit. Work out a detailed strategy before each trade that accurately
measures reward and risk. Write it down if possible and don’t stop until consistent performance
proves mastery of the game. Play single direct price thrusts, stay defensive, and manage size to
control risk. When buy signals don’t line up perfectly, skip the trade or enter a smaller position.
Profit depends on discretion and wise execution. When one opportunity passes, another will appear
like magic. And remember that precise entries on mediocre positions make more money over time
than bad executions on good ones.
Apply cross-verification to all trading decisions. Technical convergence through identical levels
greatly enhances the odds for success. Use it for both analysis and position management. Enter
setups when S/R points repeatedly to an obvious ET level. Compare upper- and lower-pane
indicators to measure the trend-range axis. When Fibonacci retracements, MA ribbons, and
trendlines all work together, load the trading gun and take profits with confidence and ease.

AVOIDING SELF-DESTRUCTION
The markets provide the perfect mechanism to confirm just how screwed up someone’s life really
is. Money represents power in modern culture. Swing traders seek to master this force and become
true wizards of the game. But the subconscious mind often has its own agenda. Many participants
don’t really want to succeed in market speculation, so they project hidden inadequacies into their
trading performance, all the while thinking, ‘‘Yes, I’m bad and don’t deserve the good things that
trading will bring me.”
The business world forces employees to perform a laundry list of duties for an extended period of
time before rewarding them with a paycheck. This rat-in-the-maze mentality deeply affects our
view of money. It trains us to believe that our financial fates are in the hands of a powerful third
party who controls wealth. But successful swing traders must recognize their own power in the
creation of capital. Learning this simple skill may take a lifetime of effort to undo years of bad
programming.

The markets require a level of discipline that most fail to achieve in the rest of their lives. So why
should it be any different with trading? Stock positions offer endless opportunities to break rules
and ignore danger. Wise participants recognize non-market limitations and deal with those before
proceeding on the path to profit.
Losing weight, quitting smoking, and exercising regularly all improve the odds for trading
longevity. Add stress reduction and watch performance improve faster than taking a weekend stock
course.
Swing trading frustrates those who find great achievement in other walks of life. Few other
disciplines require constant loss to reach their goals. The pain of losing money stands beside profit
throughout the road to success. Accept this unpleasant fact and prepare to deal with the emotional
rollercoaster. Both winning streaks and drawdowns test rational behavior and trading strategies.
Stay focused and stick to the plan. Participants who lose concentration face a gambler’s paradise.
And just like all games of chance, expect to leave the bright lights with very empty pockets.
Greed and fear bring out the extremes in human behavior. But swing traders can control the impact
of emotion with solid rules and strict self-discipline. Rules must apply to all circumstances,
regardless of how it feels or the short-term financial impact. Few can maintain this discipline
perfectly, and most find themselves in dangerous situations. At those critical times, decide quickly
how to steer the boat back into the harbor before it gets sunk.
See the setup with both sides of the brain. As skills evolve, an accurate inner voice adds a powerful
new dimension to reasoned analysis of the price chart. Growing knowledge internalizes the market
swing and tunes into natural opportunity. Go ahead and follow those trade instincts unless solid
reasons dictate another path. But don’t confuse intuition with impulse. High levels of frustration and
excitement can push bad trades without good reasons. Fall back on the numbers when in doubt.
Promising stock opportunities turn into disasters. Time works against the swing trader when
conditions turn dangerous, and waiting to be right is the best way to be wrong. Those who hesitate
in the face of doom get taken out of the action for a very long time. Fortunately, most patterns warn
of impending shocks. Sharp reversals rarely occur in a single bar, and well-marked signposts
scream the need for a fast exit. Always protect the trading account and listen to the chart’s message
regardless of what it says.
Many participants seek excitement from the markets. They get a sharp adrenaline rush every time
they execute a new position. Unfortunately the same rush comes whether they win or lose. This
builds operant conditioning that rewards loss as well as gain. Getting high on the markets draws a
quick path to failure. Successful swing traders kill the thrill and practice inner detachment through
each execution. They experience long periods of boredom but don’t use mediocre setups to escape
the monotony.
Never marry a stock position. Don’t bother to find out too much about the trading vehicle beyond
basic sector analysis. Swing traders understand that stocks represent numbers and nothing else.
Remember that message board surfers don’t seek the truth. They seek validation for their point of
view. Participants find easy support for distorted beliefs that make it more difficult to exit a loser
when it’s time to get out. Get away from the boards for weeks or months at a time and realize that
only one point of view really counts when it comes to the markets.

FIGURE 4.12
Impending price shocks may offer little warning. Lucent violates a rising trendline and breaks through a double
top only two bars before a 20-point, overnight gap down. Swing traders must act quickly on early danger signals
to avoid being crushed by the crowd.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

5 CHAPTER
MASTERING THE TOOLS

PATTERNS VS. INDICATORS
Swing traders apply both art and science to uncover market mysteries. The subjective mind studies
chart patterns and looks for common shapes from times past. The practical mind rarely trusts the
eyes and seeks truth in the cold, hard numbers. Effective trade preparation combines these diverse
tasks into a single, well-organized plan. The cooperative brain first digests vast amounts of
information to arrive at probabilities regarding the direction of price movement. Then it organizes
this output into vision and tactical planning.
The mind plays tricks on what the eye perceives. The human brain attempts to construct order from
visual chaos and sees promising patterns even in random data. Unfortunately, this false order may
tranquilize the eye but lacks truth or predictive power. And it bleeds trading accounts until effective
filters stop this noise from passing into the system.
Technical indicators apply truth serum to endless chart patterns. They bypass distorted vision and
output simplified plots that draw important conclusions about current price activity. Profitable
setups depend on seeing reality rather than illusion. Mathematics cross-verify odd chart formations
and predict what to expect next. The lower pane reveals hidden characteristics through convergence
or divergence with bar information. Some even measure relative position to a cyclical axis.
Market mathematics churns blocks of price and volume into well-digested summaries. Swing
traders then apply time restraints and compare output to observable price development. This taps a
market’s unique 3D mechanics. Use specific time intervals to identify unique trends and conditions
within that period alone. Then compare this information to similar statistics from other intervals and
conclude what market action will likely do next.
Technical indicators flash many false signals. Simple price input often elicits dangerous output.
Promising results may point to opportunities that apply to the wrong time frame. Bad exchange or
vendor data generate indicator peaks and valleys with no truth. These quirks and limitations
frustrate sincere efforts to uncover market clarity. Above all else, learn when indicators offer the
keys to the kingdom and when even Bozo the Clown should pass on the revelations.
Chart patterns and technical indicators are not created equally. A highly skilled technician can trade
successfully using only a bar chart. But the most powerful set of market indicators has little value
when viewed in the absence of price. Just try this simple exercise: buy a stock at oversold or sell it
at overbought without looking at price. Not a good way to make money.
Chart patterns reveal quirks of crowd greed-fear behavior. They represent universal fractals that
repeat over and over again through all time frames. Best of all, they point to exact locations for lowrisk trade opportunities. But neophytes should never rely on patterns alone for trade execution.
Triangle and flag reading takes little effort, while technical indicator interpretation requires serious
study. So many borderline participants walk the easier path and fail miserably when their profit
depends on precise application of these powerful tools.

MANAGING TECHNICAL TOOLS
Physics teaches that energy sources leave telltale signatures in the form of exhaust or radiation.
Similarly, chart patterns with true predictive power emit evidence that mathematics can detect and

measure. When trading signals converge through both types of analysis, odds sharply increase that
the opportunity will produce a valid result.
Understand two common indicator quirks and shorten the learning curve. First, well-known authors
publish endless variations of the same few technical studies. Stick with the classics until they stop
working or limit personal trading style. Second, all technical indicators suffer from the same
limitation: they only work through certain market phases and not others. Identify primarily
conditions in advance of setup analysis to avoid false readings.
Beware of the overbought-oversold trap. This convenient terminology implies a trading response
when oscillators push into extreme territory. But this questionable strategy robs profits in trending
markets. For example, common wisdom says to sell when Stochastics punches above 80 or to buy
when it drops below 20. But this response fails during major breakouts and breakdowns. Always
look to the pattern first before trying to interpret a technical indicator, and remember Martin
Zweig’s classic advice that “the trend is your friend.”
FIGURE 5.1
Average directional movement (ADX) signals the end of Qualcomm’s record-breaking rally more than 2 weeks
before the daily price bar trendline breaks. Well-tuned technical indicators pick up important changes in crowd
behavior well in advance of price patterns. Use them to filter trade setups through convergence-divergence
feedback and their unique charting landscape features.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Use both pattern analysis and technical indicators to predict future price movement. But the
indicator must support the pattern rather than the other way around. Patterns handle reward:risk
measurements as well as price targets and identification of the optimum execution target. Apply
indicators to uncover hidden divergence and flag impending reversals. For example, don’t buy
congestion in anticipation of a breakout when Stochastics rolls over sharply from an overbought
state. Or avoid short sales in bear markets when RSI turns up from an oversold state.
FIGURE 5.2
Oscillators work well in flat markets but lose their power during strong trends and emit false signals. Classic
trading wisdom advises to sell stocks when the Stochastics indicator reaches over 80 into overbought
territory. But that would have been bad advice during this intraday Oracle rally. The indicator struck 80 but the
stock continued to rise for another 3-½ points. Notice how the indicator double top offered a much better sell
signal as a sideways market took over the action.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Trading tools must address both numbers and emotions to locate promising setups. While stateof-the-art software builds very complex buy-sell signals, most indicators miss the emotional tension
that ultimately drives price change. Turn to the visual examination of recurring price and volume
patterns for this essential task. Effective pattern analysis uncovers crowd behavior as it finds signal
within the random noise of stock charts. Classic formations contain response fractals that predict
how volatility and price movement will evolve over time. A seasoned pattern reader can often
ignore mathematics (and fundamentals) when underlying price development paints a sharp picture.

But most swing traders still need to apply math-based indicators to verify important observations
and filter bias.
Recognize the unique appearance of each technical indicator. Many print characteristic patterns,
while others oscillate between two extremes. For example, On Balance Volume (OBV) can display
a head and shoulders formation with the same predictive power as its better-known cousin. But even
the most effective indicators emit both signal and noise. Learn when to listen to their distinctive
message and when to ignore them.
Every good analysis should validate current conditions through both forward (strength) oscillators
and backward (momentum) indicators. Popular oscillating tools, such as RSI and Stochastics,
identify overbought-oversold markets. Moving averages and MACD look back and measure
momentum change. Or swing traders can just draw simple trendlines and channels in all time
frames and use those instead as primary momentum tools.
Build custom settings to address specific styles and personal goals. Modern trading software
features dozens of prepackaged indicators that study different aspects of market behavior. Learn
how these common tools respond to changing conditions, and then examine their calculations in
detail. Slowly adjust settings and look at the resultant shift in output. Over time, small changes will
add considerable horsepower to profit performance.
Apply analysis tools equally to all time frames. But adjust indicator settings to the special
characteristics of each holding period. Many strategies work best when the math aligns to the
common crowd view. This taps its herd behavior and allows the swing trader to anticipate its next
move. For greater flexibility, toggle between popular and custom settings to review the differences
in signal output.
Pack indicators into 5-minute and 60-minute charts to track the intraday markets. Fill both upper
and lower plots with layered information so that a single glance effectively captures current
conditions. Apply 5-8-13 Bollinger Bands to identify short-term trends and intraday S/R. Place a
smoothed five-bar stochastics under candlesticks to measure oscillation between buying and selling
behavior. Then plot a classic 12-26-9 MACD histogram beneath the 60-minute bars to visualize
broad intraday swing cycles.
Apply classic 20-day Bollinger Bands to track crowd behavior for swing positions from 1 day to 3
weeks. Plot a 14 day, smoothed RSI beneath price to measure longer-term overbought-oversold
conditions. If possible, observe daily volume with a color-coded histogram that marks up days in
green and down days in red. Place a 60-day volume moving average right across the spikes to signal
when individual sessions draw unexpected interest. And always toggle between daily and weekly
views for all indicators to view broad cycles that may affect position management.
PRICE, TIME, AND VOLUME
Build indicator knowledge through study of the core elements of price, time, and volume. Largescale technical analysis requires highly complicated math inputs to gauge public sentiment and
broad cash flows. But common data bits effectively measure individual stocks. The vast majority of
popular indicators use only simple snapshots of price and/or volume over specified points in time.
Many oscillators measure the distance between a bar’s closing price and range high to predict
underlying buying power. Price itself represents the ultimate leading indicator with these simple
tools. But keep in mind that derivative calculations always emit slower information than the data

itself. While this smoothing process benefits swing traders who tend to act too quickly, it can also
generate late signals.
FIGURE 5.3
Look at the same Oracle chart as the last illustration with a trend-following MACD histogram under the price
action instead of Stochastics. Simple MACD tactics that buy a break above the –0- line and sell the first down
histogram would capture about 2/3 of the rally. Trend-following indicators work very well in rising or falling
markets but emit false signals in sideways ranges.
