
183

c05.indd 183

1/13/09 10:05:07 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

price charts, pinpointing precise support/resistance levels and momentum signals. This type of ultra-short-term technical analysis presents its
own set of issues and difficulties. But when done correctly, it can certainly lend considerably to the news trading process.
Generally, news trading is one of the most challenging and difficult approaches to forex. But if a trader has all of the necessary
tools and sensibilities to tackle this type of trading, there are certainly potential profits to be made from the news.

C ontrarian Trading — The Majority
Doesn ’t Rule
Unlike most of the other methods and strategies discussed in this
chapter, contrarian trading is more of a philosophy than a specific
method or strategy. The root of this philosophy lies in the assumption
that the general consensus is wrong, and that the astute trader can
profitably exploit this by taking the opposite side of the consensus.
Putting this into practice can take several forms. One way to be a
contrarian is to pay close attention to what mass media headlines are
saying—and then planning trades in the opposite direction. For example, after a prolonged drop in the U.S. dollar’s exchange rate, once
the mass media begin to foretell a doomsday scenario for the dollar,
contrarians may begin looking into either buying the dollar or covering their shorts. Conversely, when mass media portray a rosy picture
of the U.S. dollar after a prolonged exchange rate appreciation, a contrarian may soon wish either to go short or close out existing longs.
The simple logic behind this philosophy is the belief that the
news media, in reflecting and influencing general public sentiment,

184

c05.indd 184

1/13/09 10:05:08 AM

C o n t r a r i a n Tr a d i n g — T h e M a j o r i t y D o s e n ' t R u l e

are usually either wrong, extremely late, or both. The contrarian
assumption is that by the time the mass media have begun to highlight market extremes, there is usually not a great deal more uncommitted capital available to move price much further in the same
direction. In other words, if almost everyone has already bought into
the euro, and then the media begin saying that the euro should keep
going up, who else is left to continue pushing price action much
further from there? The amount of new capital that is available to be
injected into the currency diminishes dramatically once the major
traders have already staked out their positions in the market.
This form of contrarian thinking also comprises the primary idea
behind one method of applying the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission’s (CFTC) Commitments of Traders (COT) Report.
Among other valuable pieces of information, this weekly document
issued by the CFTC displays slightly delayed reporting on the net
positioning of major market players in the currency futures markets.
By revealing the net futures positioning of these major players, this
COT document can be used by contrarians to trade against extreme
relative positioning in the spot forex market.
For example, if the COT report shows that major speculators have
been drastically and increasingly net long in the British pound against
the U.S. dollar in the past several months, and the current data has just
hit the recent peak high in the magnitude of these net long positions,
traders may begin looking for the next opportunity to short the pound
in a classic contrarian maneuver. Again, the logic here is that if all the
large players have already bought the British pound throughout a long
and swift price run-up, who else is left to keep pushing price up even
further? Therefore, the contrarian indication in this hypothetical COT

185

c05.indd 185

1/13/09 10:05:08 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXHIBIT 5.16

COT Report

Source: U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) at www.cftc.gov.

example is of a potentially bearish impending price move for the
pound. Exhibit 5.16 displays a COT report sample from the CFTC.
The current report can be found at the following direct link: www
.cftc.gov/dea/futures/deacmesf.htm.
Specific methods for using the COT report to trade forex are
beyond the scope of this book, but all forex traders should at least
be aware that such a report exists and can be of great use in forming
contrarian trade opinions.
Another form of contrarianism occurs in technical trading, especially in the context of breakouts. Because many false breakouts
occur on foreign exchange charts, astute contrarian traders have

186

c05.indd 186

1/13/09 10:05:08 AM

Backtesting—History Repeats Itself

learned to “fade the break,” or trade in the opposite direction of the
breakout. This strategy was discussed earlier in this chapter in the section on breakout trading. It can be an extremely risky way to trade,
as it goes directly against the trend and momentum of the market.
But if proper risk controls are put into place, it can also be a very
effective way to capitalize on the many false and premature breaks of
support and resistance.
Generally, contrarian traders will trade against anything that represents popular opinion. When all of the analysts and media are saying
one thing, it is almost certain that the contrarians are doing the opposite. The primary goal of any contrarian trader is to buy the market at
a bottom or short the market at a top. These traders relish the thought
of competing with less experienced traders who are prone to partake
in frenzied buying near peaks and frantic selling near troughs.
Although many traders will agree that contrarian trading often
makes a lot of sense, to actually become a practicing contrarian takes
an iron will, nerves of steel, and great risk management skills. While
contrarian traders are frequently correct in their assumptions, trading
against the trend and against the masses can often be an endeavor
fraught with potentially disastrous pitfalls. It is certainly not a recommended approach for beginners. But even for experienced contrarian traders, much caution must be taken to ensure that one does
not inadvertently step into the path of a speeding train.

B acktesting — Histor y Repeats Itself
For any technical trading strategy that has concrete and specific
trade entry/exit rules, backtesting that strategy allows the trader to

187

c05.indd 187

1/13/09 10:05:08 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

simulate its expected performance using historical price data. With
backtesting, traders can actually test how well their strategies would
have done if executed in the past.
Many technical trading strategies possess the qualities to be backtested effectively. Most importantly, they must not have any ambiguity
in their rules. One example of a simple strategy that may easily be
backtested is as follows: Go long when the 5-period moving average
has crossed above the 20-period moving average AND the MACD
Histogram has crossed above the zero line AND DMI+ is above
DMI. Sell short when the 5-period moving average has crossed
below the 20-period moving average AND the MACD Histogram has
crossed below the zero line AND DMI is above DMI. Although
this simple example has not been tested by this author, it illustrates the
characteristics of a strategy that is conducive to backtesting.
Although a backtest may appear to be the perfect method for
identifying the most profitable trading strategies, one major caveat
should be mentioned here. Using past price data to simulate future
results often misleads traders into believing that their backtested
performance will always translate into similar results in actual, realtime trading. Many potential factors can and will make hypothetical performance and actual performance differ significantly. Among
these factors is the fact that markets change considerably over time.
A strategy that may have worked one way for the past five years
may work in an entirely different way for the next five years as the
market changes and evolves. Often, for example, technical indicators that gave profitable signals in the past are subsequently unable
to replicate their performance going forward. This phenomenon can
be extremely frustrating, but it is an integral aspect of what makes

188

c05.indd 188

1/13/09 10:05:09 AM

Backtesting—History Repeats Itself

trading such a challenging endeavor. Additionally, in terms of trade
execution, trading a strategy in real-time may be much different from
the way the strategy is backtested. These differences can potentially
skew the results in a significant manner.
Given that past and hypothetical performance may not always
be indicative of future results, however, backtesting is still the best
available method for evaluating a strategy without actually trading
it in a real-time environment. Backtesting a strategy provides enormous benefits to the trader, most important of which is a reasonable
expectation of that strategy’s potential worth and usefulness.
There are two primary methods of backtesting a trading strategy. The first, and most popular, method is automated backtesting.
This requires software that has this capability. A simple Internet
search will produce many links to this type of software. Automated
backtesting entails using a specialized program into which a trader
inputs the specific rules and criteria of the strategy. The software
then automatically applies those rules to past price data and tallies
the hypothetical profits, losses, and other pertinent information. An
entire picture of past performance is created in this way.
A less-practiced method of backtesting is performed manually
and visually by the trader. Armed with concrete strategy rules, the
trader would scroll back in time on a chart and manually apply
the strategy as if it was in a real-time environment. Performance data
would then be recorded manually by the trader. Ideally in this type
of backtesting, the trader would advance the chart bar-by-bar in
order to refrain from seeing price action subsequent to the trade at
hand. This eliminates trading in hindsight, which can be detrimental
to an objective backtest.

189

c05.indd 189

1/13/09 10:05:09 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

One of the major disadvantages of manual backtesting, when
compared with automated backtesting, is the significant potential
for human error in executing simulated trades and recording performance results. Furthermore, it takes a great deal of work and
discipline to simulate trades manually over a large data set without
straying from the strict rules of the strategy. Finally, the normal range
of human emotions and biases that often interfere with actual trading can also be a detrimental factor in achieving objective backtest
results. That being said, however, manual backtesting can provide the
trader with a real “feel” for actually trading a given strategy. This
provides valuable trading experience, albeit simulated, that no automated backtest could possibly provide.
Whether performed manually or automatically, backtesting can
be one of the most important elements of finding and/or building
a solid trading strategy. This vital practice can save traders a great
deal of time and money that might otherwise be wasted on trading
unprofitable strategies.

A utotrading — Robots for Hire
Closely tied to backtesting is the concept of autotrading. As mentioned in the previous section, automated backtesting utilizes a
software trading platform to place hypothetical trades when predetermined trading signals appear on historical price data. The purpose
of this is to test the potential viability and profitability of a trading
strategy. Autotrading goes a step further by actually executing real
trades on current, real-time market prices. When a predetermined
signal emerges, the software actually places a trade automatically.

190

c05.indd 190

1/13/09 10:05:09 AM

Autotrading—Robots for Hire

This is usually initiated only when all proper backtesting has indicated the likely success of the trading system.
Autotrading is common in foreign exchange trading. Many
hedge funds and other entities that manage money via forex trading
use some form of autotrading in their daily activities. In addition,
many private, individual traders have also begun to adopt autotrading to execute their thoroughly backtested and highly optimized
forex trading strategies.
For these traders, autotrading is accomplished using an Application
Programming Interface (API), which connects the trader’s system to
the dealer’s trade execution structure. APIs require programming skills
on the part of either the trader or a programmer hired by the trader.
But once all of the trading rules and criteria are determined by the
trader, programming an API can be relatively straightforward for anyone with programming experience.
After the specific trading rules and criteria are determined,
the strategy is backtested with positive results, and the API is programmed, autotrading is almost as simple as flipping a switch to
begin the trading process. When this occurs, not only are trades
entered when predetermined technical criteria are met, but trade
exits in the form of stop losses and profit limits can also be programmed into the API. This creates an entire self-contained system
for trading foreign exchange.
As with backtesting, any nondiscretionary technical trading strategy that has clear-cut, unambiguous rules is a good candidate for
autotrading. In fact, if a trader has optimized and perfected this type
of a black-and-white trading strategy that runs devoid of human
judgment, autotrading is perhaps the best way to execute it, as it

191

c05.indd 191

1/13/09 10:05:10 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

effectively eliminates all human biases, errors, and emotions in the
trading process.

C hapter Summar y
Three general approaches to forex, including position trading, swing
trading, and day trading, outline the primary styles that have been
adopted by many forex traders in the market today. Position trading attempts to capitalize on longer-term trends, and can employ
both fundamental and technical analysis to determine directional
bias. Swing trading is generally a purely technical style that looks to
exploit short- to medium-term swings, or turns, in the market. Day
trading is the shortest-term approach that seeks to get in and out of
position within a given trading day using extremely short charting
timeframes and well-defined technical signals.
Besides these general approaches to trading foreign exchange,
there are other delineations of trading methodology. On the technical trading side, these include trend trading, range trading, breakout
trading, and pattern trading. Trend trading, or trend following, utilizes
primarily technical analysis to identify the overall trend, and then to
determine the best place to enter that trend. In the absence of a trend,
traders will often go into range trading mode, where lows are bought
and highs are sold during sideways trading ranges. When a range or
support/resistance level is broken to the upside or to the downside,
breakout trading takes precedence. Traders will then buy on a break
above or sell on a break below. One type of breakout trading occurs
when chart patterns are broken. Common examples of traded patterns
include head-and-shoulders, triangles, wedges, flags, and pennants.

192

c05.indd 192

1/13/09 10:05:11 AM

Chapter Summary

Yet other common methods for trading forex include strategies
that utilize the powerful analytical tools of Fibonacci, pivot points,
and Elliott Wave. Each of these tools commands its own loyal following among traders, and each has its own unique approach to
forecasting price movement.
Divergence trading seeks to identify instances when price and
an oscillator are diverging in direction. This often means a potential
loss of momentum in the prevailing price direction and therefore a
possible impending reversal. Divergence signals are often reliable in
helping to forecast or confirm these potential market turns.
Multiple timeframe trading is an excellent all-encompassing methodology for entering into high-probability currency trades. Starting
on the longest timeframes to identify trend, multiple timeframe traders then drill down to progressively shorter timeframes in order to
determine, and ultimately pinpoint, the most advantageous trade entry
points.
Point & figure trading utilizes an entirely different type of chart
from the commonly used bar or candlestick charts. Point & figure
charts are filled with Xs and Os, and they excel at identifying trends,
support/resistance, and breakouts, while minimizing the representation of market noise.
On the fundamental analysis side, carry trading, news trading, and
contrarian trading are some of the primary strategies and methods.
Carry trading works on the interest rate differential inherent in currency pairs, and seeks to earn a positive yield on both this differential
and directional exchange rate movement. News trading exploits price
spikes and other types of fast price action that occur around economic
data releases and fundamental news announcements. Contrarian

193

c05.indd 193

1/13/09 10:05:11 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

trading takes the position that the general consensus as expressed by
the media, the analysts, and the trading public, is inherently wrong,
and that it is best to trade against this consensus at market extremes.
Finally, backtesting and autotrading are two important components of implementing trading strategies that generally do not rely
upon the trader’s judgments or discretion. These types of strategies
are primarily technical in nature, and they must necessarily have
rules and criteria that are unambiguous. Backtesting allows the trader
to determine if a given strategy would have been profitable using
past price data, which is an indication of how it might potentially
perform in the future. In contrast, autotrading actually executes real
trades automatically according to a pre-programmed set of instructions that sets trade entries, stop losses, and profit limits.

194

c05.indd 194

1/13/09 10:05:11 AM

CHAPTER 6

Important Elements
of Successful Foreign
Exchange Trading
After reading this chapter, you will be
able to:
●

Understand some of the most important elements of
successful trading that many novice traders are reluctant
to learn.

●

Recognize the crucial difference that good risk management and money management can make in forex trading.

●

Realize that most experienced and successful traders
hold the preservation of capital as their top priority,
thereby helping to ensure that they are at least around
to trade another day.

●

Apply proper and consistent trading discipline to strive
for the best chances of success in forex trading

●

Appreciate the necessary elements that go into a comprehensive trading plan.

195

c06.indd 195

1/13/09 10:11:31 AM

E l e m e n t s o f S u c c e s s f u l F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

T he Boring Side of Success
After all of the excitement learning about trading strategies that
seem to hold great promise of future profits, most novice traders are
reluctant to come back down to earth and learn about the “boring”
side of successful trading. This includes risk management and money
management, discipline and psychology, and a proper trading plan.
Some novice traders may deem these subjects unnecessary, as
long as their “sure-thing” trading strategy produces profits. But this
line of thinking could not be further from the truth. In order to
maintain any hope of becoming consistently successful, traders must
learn and internalize certain good habits that have nothing to do
with market analysis or the mechanics of putting in trades. Rather,
these crucial elements of intelligent trading constitute a way of life
that virtually all of the most successful traders have adopted to one
degree or another. Let us begin with a discussion of risk.

