
Chapter 16

Combining Techniques
In This Chapter
▶ Finding out just how straightforward trading can be
▶ Looking at complexity
▶ Figuring out positive expectancy
▶ Discovering setup trading

I

ndicators are roughly grouped into three types — trend, momentum, and
sentiment. Technical heads argue over which category to file any particular indicator. Relative strength, for example, is a momentum concept that is
used to measure market sentiment (overbought or oversold).
The key point is that using one indicator increases profits and lowers losses.
Combining two indicators works even better. You can add as many indicators
and trading rules to your charts as you can hold in your head or program
into your computer.
This chapter surveys some combinations of techniques and offers guidance
on the process of putting techniques together to forge a systematic approach
to trading. Before you get to full-scale trading systems (see Chapter 17),
though, you need to examine the compatibility of indicators. You also need
to know that adding indicators multiplies the difficulty of the trading decision. That’s where this chapter comes in handy.

Standing the Test of Time: Simple Ideas
Many professional traders make a living by applying the same simple indicators and the same simple rules, over and over again, on the same small set
of securities. “It can’t be that easy!” you think. But it is. Professionals have a
superhuman ability to focus on a single narrow set of circumstances. They
know from experience that the indicator and rule produce a profit most of
the time. If it fails to produce a profit this time, too bad. They put it behind
them and move on to the next trade.

www.pdfdummies.com

268 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
One of the oldest trading concepts is also one of the simplest — Richard
Donchian’s 5/20 system, which uses a trend-following principle. You buy
when the 5-day moving average crosses above the 20-day moving average
and sell when the closing price crosses below the 5-day moving average.
Both the buy-and-sell crossover signals are qualified according to additional
filtering criteria, specifically that a crossover has to exceed the extent of the
previous crossover in the same direction, proving its street credentials, so to
speak. (See Chapter 12 for information on moving averages and filtering.)
Another simple but effective one-rule concept is to buy when the price moves
above the range established in the first x number of minutes of trading. Its
inventor, Toby Crabel, calls this strategy the opening range breakout. The
opening range breakout is a volatility breakout setup (see the section on
“Evaluating Efficient Entries and Ruthless Exits: Setups” later in the chapter).
With the opening range breakout, you can improve the odds of getting a successful trade by adding one or more confirmation qualifiers, such as:
✓ The preceding bar was an inside day or doji (see Chapter 8).
✓ The x-minute opening range over the past three to ten days was narrowing
(see Chapter 14).
✓ The opening is a gap from the day before (see Chapter 7).
As the two classic cases illustrate, even the simplest trading rule based on a
single indicator uses confirming filters, patterns, or another indicator.
But which two indicators should you choose? Or should you choose three, or
four, or more? Because technical analysis has produced thousands of standalone indicators and patterns, the number of possible combinations and permutations is humungous. By the time you add time constraints, such as “Buy
30 minutes after the open (or high or low or close) if x, y, and z occur,” the
number of potential trading regimes is in the millions.
The key reason for adding confirming indicators is to overcome the inconvenient little fact that every indicator fails some of the time. By requiring
a second indicator that gives the same buy or sell signal, you increase the
probability that your trades are profitable.
As I say in Chapter 5, you must take five steps in planning and managing the
trade. At each step you have to decide which indicators to follow, but you
don’t have to use the same indicators for each step. Your entry rule can be
based on one set of indicators that is different from the set of indicators you
use to exit. You can change your indicator set at any time if your eye spots
something on the chart that normally you wouldn’t use but is too big and obvious to neglect. You can even change your stop-loss rules, either the initial stop
when the trade is young or the trailing stop as the trade progresses — as long
as you have an indicator-based reason and you still have a stop at all times.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 16: Combining Techniques

Adding a New Indicator:
Introducing Complexity
An indicator used to establish a new position usually has an inherent implied
exit rule, as in the case of the Donchian 5/20 moving average from the earlier
section, “Standing the Test of Time: Simple Ideas.” You enter on the up-cross
and exit on the down-cross. But what if the down-cross doesn’t occur until
after you have started taking losses?
Another big issue arises after you have been stopped out or taken the preset
profit. How do you know whether to reenter? Do you use the same or different rules to reenter in the same-direction trade? I have asked this question
of about 30 high-level system designers and traders. About half say that the
indicators and rules for reentry are the same as for the entry and about half
say that you should have a different set of indicators and rules for reentry.
Adding a new indicator piles on complexity and can get tricky. When you combine indicators, sometimes they contradict one another. One indicator says
buy, while a different indicator says sell. This conflict is very common.
The price of your security, for example, crossed above its moving average
and you bought it. The trend has been in place for a while. Now a momentum
indicator like RSI or MACD is signaling that the security is overbought and
will retrace. You don’t know if the retracement will be minor or become a fullblown reversal. You know that the moving average lags the price action — no
help there. Do you accept the sell signal from the swing indicator?
No single correct answer exists. Sometimes momentum indicators are wrong,
and the retracement doesn’t occur at all, leaving you with the problem of
where to reenter your trend, which is running away without you. But even
after the most exhaustive backtesting and observation, you still are wrong
some of the time no matter which decision you make. The purpose of combining indicators is to improve the odds of being right about the next price
move, but you will never be right 100 percent of the time.
The only way to know whether two or more indicators work well together is to
backtest them together, with the trading rules meticulously stipulated. Testing
a single indicator is easy. Testing multiple indicators and rules for various
contingencies is hard work and often raises more questions than it answers.
And many people don’t have the time or aptitude for backtesting. In that case,
at the least take the time to observe the indicators on the chart and estimate
how well they work together. After reading the following section and some
practice, you should be able to see matching signals, divergences, support
and resistance, and patterns. Expert traders say, “Trade what you see on the
chart,” and it’s good advice.

www.pdfdummies.com

269

270 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Choosing a ruling concept
Here’s the bottom line: You have to choose a ruling concept. Making that
choice establishes whether you are a trend-follower or a swing trader, or if
you are a swing trader through and through, how fast and how frequently
you want to trade.
Switching indicators, even in mid-trade, is okay if you see something compelling on the chart — as long as you appreciate that you’re changing your trading plan. To override your ruling concept is like abandoning your date at the
prom when you spot a prettier girl. You can’t evaluate an indicator properly if
you don’t apply it consistently, and you can’t evaluate your skills as a trader
if you switch focus. But at the same time, your ultimate purpose in trading is
to make money, not to prove that your indicators are valid. Just be aware that
you may be taking more risk when you adopt a new technique that you have
not used before or backtested. If set properly, your stop can save you if your
embrace of a new indicator goes south.
For example, your security may be on a rising trend when suddenly you
notice a candlestick, like a hanging man (see Chapter 8), that is a big warning
and decide to exit early even though your indicators are not signaling a sell
and your stop is still far away.
Figure 16-1 shows another example. In this case, say you decide to use the
Donchian 5/20-day moving average crossover. You get a sell signal. A little
later, the price bounces and you get a buy signal followed in a few weeks by
another sell signal — a whipsaw. But before then, you can’t avoid noticing
the double top, even though pattern recognition is not one of the indicators
in your toolkit. But it’s the gorilla in the room on this chart, so you run right
out and research it. The rule in double-top analysis is that after the confirmation point is reached, the price often pulls back above it before resuming
the downtrend, giving you a better opportunity to go short. This time you
follow the double-top rule and avoid the moving average-generated whipsaw.
Pattern recognition served you well.
A wide knowledge of indicators can help make your trading more adaptive and
flexible. But it’s human nature that when you have a hammer, everything looks
like a nail. Beware of imagining double tops on every chart after the successful
trade exemplified in Figure 16-1 and beware of believing that every double top
delivers this outcome. A series of successful trades on a single indicator doesn’t
make it a magic indicator that always works. I can’t say it often enough — no
indicator works all the time.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 16: Combining Techniques

MOVING AVERAGE
CROSSOVER SELL SIGNAL
DOUBLE TOP
CONFIRMATION
LINE

Figure 16-1:
Trade what
you see.

13.90
13.85
13.80
13.75
13.70
13.65
13.60
13.55
13.50
13.45
13.40
13.35
13.30
13.25
13.20
13.15
13.10
13.05
13.00
12.95
12.90
12.85
12.80
12.75
12.70
12.65
12.60
12.55
12.50
12.45
12.40
12.35
12.30
12.25
12.20
12.15
12.10

Studying a case in complexity
Combining indicators can be messy and complex. By studying the case I
present here, you can see just how complicated one security trade can be
and how choosing your indicators can make all the difference.
A trend-following concept like the moving average crossover accepts late
entries and lower profits, because moving averages always lag the price
action. Say you decide that you want to improve the moving average system,
so you add two additional indicators:
✓ You want to enter earlier, so you add a momentum indicator.
✓ You want to exit closer to the high, so you also add an overbought
indicator (a sentiment indicator).
In Figure 16-2, the main window shows the primary trading concept, a version
of the moving average crossover. You buy when the 5-day moving average
closes above the 20-day moving average (the thicker line) and sell when the
price closes below the thinner 5-day moving average. Say you want to identify the entry sooner. You jazz it up by adding a momentum indicator at the
bottom of the chart that tells you when momentum is on the rise, giving you
an earlier entry than the moving average by three days. At the top is a different momentum indicator (relative strength) telling you when the price is
coming down off an overbought level. This gives you an exit one day earlier.

www.pdfdummies.com

271

272 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
EARLY EXIT INDICATOR

RE-ENTRY
LOSS
PRIMARY EXIT INDICATOR
PRIMARY ENTRY INDICATOR
Figure 16-2:
Confirming
indicators.

EARLY ENTRY INDICATOR

Using the moving average alone makes you a profit of $2.51 in three weeks,
but when you accelerate the entry and exit by using the additional indicators,
you boost profitability by over 50 percent, as shown in Table 16-1.

Table 16-1

Indicator Trading Results

Indicator Trading Rule(s)

Buy

Sell

Profit

Moving Average Concept

$64.35

$66.86

$2.51

With Momentum and Relative Strength

$63.38

$67.32

$3.94

At a glance, the case in Figure 16-2 seems to be a successful integration of
three indicators that accelerates entry and exit and makes you more money.
But in reality, you may have opened a can of worms. The following are some
examples of problems that can arise when you combine indicators.

Trading decisions multiply exponentially
Indicators add up arithmetically, but trading decision complexity multiplies
exponentially. For example, what if the momentum indicator gives you a false
reading? As I mention in Chapter 4, indicators are wrong a lot. In the example
in Figure 16-2, the early entry worked, but plenty of times it doesn’t. You need
an exit strategy — a stand-alone, stop-loss rule — for that early entry when it’s
incorrect. The best rule for this type of situation may be to exit when you lose
a simple percentage of capital at stake.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 16: Combining Techniques
Concepts can mirror each other
The purpose of using multiple indicators is to get confirmation that a signal
is likely to be correct. Obviously, if you’re using a momentum indicator,
you don’t get independent confirmation from another momentum indicator,
because they’re both using the same conceptual principle.
In the case of Figure 16-2, the confirming indicators are a near match for one
another. The relative strength indicator in the top window looks suspiciously
like the momentum indicator in the bottom window. And it is! A technical
trader named Tushar Chande studied the correlation among various momentum concepts. He found that momentum and the relative strength indicator
shown on this chart (Mr. Chande’s own version) are over 90 percent correlated. (See Chapter 13 for a discussion of all the guises momentum can
assume.) When two things are highly correlated, it means that they move
more or less in lockstep.

Concepts sometimes clash
Two or more concepts don’t always play well together. For example, see
Figure 16-3. The stochastic oscillator, momentum, and MACD are all used to
improve the timing of entries and exits. On this chart, you have a sell signal
from the moving average crossover. You use a trailing stop-loss based on the
average true range (see Chapter 5). It gets hit. Should you exit? Dumb question! Of course you should exit. You should always follow your stops.

STOCHASTIC OSCILLATOR

MOMENTUM

MACD

MOVING AVERAGE CROSSOVER
SELL SIGNAL

Figure 16-3:
Conflicting
signals.

www.pdfdummies.com

TRAILING STOP LOSS
IS HIT AT THIS BAR

273

274 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
But after the exit, now what? Look at the stochastic oscillator. It says not
only should you exit the short position, but you should buy. The two moving
average crossover indicators do not confirm, and momentum in the next
window is wavering around the center buy/sell line and doesn’t confirm
that you should exit the short position, let alone create a new long position.
MACD in the next window has a crossover to the upside but the entire indicator remains under the bull/bear line. This situation suggests a trend change
might be coming (or might not).
Here’s how to reconcile these clashing indicators:
1. Backtest or observe on the chart which of the momentum indicators
is right a greater percentage of the time and use only that one. In particular, decide whether a crossover in the MACD suffices or you need
the buy signal to be over the center buy/sell line, too.
2. Obey the stop and wait for a clearer picture of where this price move is
going. In other words, this chart isn’t suited for stop-and-reverse trading.
3. Consult the big-picture linear regression-based channel trendlines (see
Chapter 10). The basic assumption is that a trend once in place tends to
remain in place until something comes along to break it. In Figure 16-3, you
have three highs over the channel top but no closes over the channel top.
You, therefore, suspect that the trend might be changing (from the stochastic oscillator and MACD) but you do not have a preponderance of evidence.
When looking at multiple indicators, add up the ones that say buy, the ones
that say sell, and the ones that say “stay out” or are hard to read, and go with
the course of action that has the preponderance of evidence on its side. You
seldom have a trading decision that is proven beyond a reasonable doubt, and
so preponderance of evidence is the reasonable course.

Additional entry and exit issues may arise
You don’t know what to do next. You have obeyed your stop-loss and exited
the trade, but you are chomping at the bit to get back in this security.
Don’t get back into a security until you get a confirmed buy signal from two
or more indicators, and they don’t have to be the original indicators you used
on the last trade as long as they are indicators that you understand and trust.
You’re not taking any risk when you have no position. See Figure 16-4 that
shows what happens next after the Figure 16-3 chart.
You have a buy signal from the stochastic oscillator. But you don’t get confirmation from the channel breakout for a whole month. Three days after that,
you get the moving average crossover. Now you’re back to Step 1 of the trade
plan outline, determining the basic direction of the price.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 16: Combining Techniques
Oddball combinations are not that odd
In practice, no combination is oddball. Any combination that works on your
securities in your time frame is perfectly acceptable. I know one trader whose
setup consists of the divergence of support and on-balance volume in a very
short time frame (minutes, in fact). He finds it over 90 percent reliable — and
that’s awfully good.

STOCHASTIC OSCILLATOR BUY SIGNAL

BREAKOUT OVER DOWNWARDSLOPING CHANNEL

Figure 16-4:
The next
trade.

MOVING AVERAGE CROSSOVER
BUY SIGNAL

You don’t need to use moving averages and momentum as essential ingredients in your indicator combinations. They are basic indicators that many
traders use, and not “beginner’s indicators” at all. But some traders find
confirmation from others indicators altogether, such as combining pivot
point lines with candlestick interpretation to get viable trades, complete
with stops. Other traders use Fibonacci counts to figure out where the price
lies in the wave continuum. Even traders who observe Fibonacci counts are
unproven may use Fibonacci or Gann retracement levels to guess where to
place a stop, which is less costly than using maximum adverse excursion
(although usually more costly than a trailing stop).
Use the KISS approach — keep it simple, stupid. Especially if you are a novice
at technical analysis, don’t add too many conditions and try to account for
every contingency.

www.pdfdummies.com

275

276 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Expecting a Positive Result
The main reason to add bothersome complexity is to improve gains or
reduce losses, or both. But you need to have some idea that the overall conditions are right to make any trade in the first place. This section can help
you do just that.

Calculating positive expectancy
technically
The first question to ask yourself is whether the security in front of you right
now offers an opportunity to make a profit. As statisticians say, you want to have
a positive expectancy that a gain is possible. Not every security offers a profit
potential. If it is range-trading sideways with low volatility (see Chapter 14),
profit potential is low unless you know how to trade options.
In general terms, a positive-expectancy trade is one that
✓ Displays a bar configuration or pattern that generates profits a high
percentage of the time
✓ Has multiple confirming indicators, as discussed in the “Adding a New
Indicator: Introducing Complexity” section earlier in the chapter
✓ Offers an obvious exit, like a spike high or the downside break of a
support line that occurs before your stop-loss kicks in
Think of the trade as a process in which the evidence mounts that the indicators
are correct. Don’t neglect the configuration of the price bars themselves and
obvious patterns. See Figure 16-5 and take a look at the following numbered list
that corresponds to the numbers on the chart:
1. The price puts in three days of higher highs and higher lows, and then
rises above a resistance line (see Chapter 10).
2. The price gaps to the upside (see Chapter 7).
3. At the same time, the price crosses above the 20-day simple moving
average inside the Bollinger band (Chapter 14).
4. A few days later, the relative strength indicator in the top window
crosses the buy/sell line to the upside.
5. A few days later, the MACD in the bottom window crosses its buy/sell
line to the upside, confirming RSI.
6. Finally, the price breaks out above the Bollinger band top, a continuation signal that suggests the trend will keep going up.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 16: Combining Techniques

4

3

6
7

EXIT

1 AND 2
Figure 16-5:
A positiveexpectancy
trade.

5

You can trade this chart any number of equally valid ways, depending on
your appetite for risk. You can say to yourself, for example, that the first
indicator (three higher highs with three higher lows plus break of resistance)
gives you a 25 percent expectancy that the price is going to rise farther. The
gap gives you another 25 percent. The cross of the 20-day moving averages
gives you a further 25 percent. You now assign a 75 percent probability of
a further price rise — in fact, a full-blown trend. By the time you get to the
fourth confirming indicator, you’re 100 percent convinced.
Where does the 25 percent come from? You determine it — from experience,
from backtesting, and from reading other traders’ work. Go back and look at
the history of gaps in this security. If you’re trading a security that has gaps
only once a year or so and every time the move continued in the same direction, you’re safe in giving it a pro-entry value. On the other hand, you may be
looking at a security that gaps a lot without delivering the expected move in
the direction of the gap. In that case, be sensible — don’t assign the gap any
weight toward the trade.
You may not like the number 25 percent. Okay, pick a different number. Just
be careful not to pick such low numbers that you postpone entry until the
move is practically over. Each individual views risk differently. Some traders enter on the three higher highs (with higher lows), and get in before the
break of the resistance line and the gap, for example, improving their gain
from this trade over the trader who waits for confirmation from the gap.
