
- 168 -

John Grisham

The Broker

but somehow $3,000 sounded about right. "Can you go four thousand?" he
asked.
Another frown, another hard study of the monitor, then it revealed the
answer. "Sure, why not? I know where to find you, don't I?"
"Good. I'll keep you posted on the stock."
"Is this a hot tip, something on the inside?"
"Give me a month. If the price goes up, I'll come back and brag a little."
"Fair enough."
Richard was opening a drawer, looking for forms. Neal said, "Look,
Richard, this is just between us boys, okay? Know what I mean? Lisa won't
be signing the papers."
"No problem," the banker said, the epitome of discretion. "My wife doesn't
know half of what I do on the financial end. Women just don't understand."
"You got it. And along those lines, would it be possible to get the funds in
cash?"
A pause, a puzzled look, but then anything was possible at Piedmont
National. ''Sure, give me an hour or so."
"I need to run to the office and sue a guy, okay? I'll be back around noon to
sign everything and get the money."
Neal hustled to his office, two blocks away, with a nervous pain in his
stomach. Lisa would kill him if she found out, and in a small town secrets
were hard to bury. In four years of a very happy marriage they had made all
decisions together. Explaining the loan would be painful, though she would
probably come around if he told the truth.
Repaying the money would pose a challenge. His father had always been
one to make easy promises. Sometimes he came through, sometimes he
didn't, and he was never too concerned one way or the other. But that was
the old Joel Backman. The new one was a desperate man with no friends, no
one to trust.
What the hell. It was only $4,000. Richard would keep it quiet. Neal would
worry about the loan later. He was, after all, a lawyer. He could squeeze in
some extra fees here and there, put in a few more hours.
His primary concern at that moment was the package to be shipped to
Rudolph Viscovitch.

- 169 -

John Grisham

The Broker

With the cash bulging in his pocket, Neal fled Culpeper during the lunch
hour and hurried up to Alexandria, ninety minutes away. He found the store,
Chatter, in a small strip mall on Russell Road, a mile or so from the Potomac
River. It advertised itself online as the place to go for the latest in telecom
gadgetry, and one of the few places in the United States where one could
purchase unlocked cell phones that would work in Europe. As he browsed
for a few moments, he was astounded at the selection of phones, pagers,
computers, satellite phones-everything one could possibly need to keep in
touch. He couldn't browse for long-there was a four o'clock deposition in his
office. Lisa would be making one of her many daily check-ins to see what, if
anything, was happening downtown.
He asked a clerk to show him the Ankyo 850 PC Pocket Smart- phone, the
greatest technological marvel to hit the market in the past ninety days. The
clerk removed it from a display case and, with great enthusiasm, switched
languages and described it as "Full QWERTY keyboard, tri-band operation
on five continents, eighty megabyte built-in memory, high-speed data
connectivity with EGPRS, wireless LAN access, Bluetooth wireless
technology, IPv4 and IPv6 dual stack support, infrared, Pop-Port interface,
Symbian operating system version 7.0S, Series 80 platform."
"Automatic switching between bands?"
"Yes."
"Covered by European networks?'
"Of course."
The smartphone was slightly larger than the typical business phone, but it
was comfortable in the hand. It had a smooth metallic surface with a rough
plastic back cover that prevented sliding when in use.
"It's larger," the clerk was saying. "But it's packed with goodies- e-mail,
multimedia messaging, camera, video player, complete word processing,
Internet browsing-and complete wireless access almost anywhere in the
world. Where are you going with it?"
"Italy."
"It's ready to go. You'll just need to open an account with a service
provider."

- 170 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Opening an account meant paperwork. Paperwork meant leaving a trail,
something Neal was determined not to do. "What about a prepaid SIM
card?" he asked.
"We got 'em. For Italy it's called a TIM-Telecom Italia Mobile. It's the
largest provider in Italy, covers about ninety-five percent of the country."
Til take it."
Neal slid down the lower part of the cover to reveal a full keypad. The clerk
explained, "It's best to hold it with both hands and type with the thumbs.
You can't fit all ten fingers on the keypad." He took it from Neal and
demonstrated the preferred method of thumb-typing.
"Got it," Neal said. Til take it."
The price was $925 plus tax, plus another $89 for the TIM card. Neal paid in
cash as he simultaneously declined the extended warranty, rebate
registration, owners program, anything that would create paperwork and
leave a trail. The clerk asked for his name and address and Neal declined. At
one point he said, with great irritation, "Is it possible to simply pay for this
and leave?"
"Well, sure, I guess," the clerk said.
"Then let's do it. I'm in a hurry."
He left and drove half a mile to a large office supply store. He quickly found
a Hewlett-Packard Tablet PC with integrated wireless capability. Another
$440 got invested in his father's security, though Neal would keep the laptop
and hide it in his office. Using a map he'd downloaded, he found the
PackagePost in another strip mall nearby. Inside, at a shipping desk, he
hurriedly wrote two pages of instructions for his father, then folded them
into an envelope containing a letter and more instructions he'd prepared
earlier that morning. When he was certain no one was watching, he wedged
twenty $100 bills in the small black carrying case that came with the Ankyo
marvel. Then he placed the letter and the instructions, the smartphone, and
the case inside a mailing carton from the store. He sealed it tightly, and on
the outside he wrote with a black marker please hold for marco lazzeri. The
carton was then placed inside another, slightly larger one that was addressed
to Rudolph Viscovitch at Via Zamboni 22, Bologna. The return address was
PackagePost, 8851 Braddock Road, Alexandria, Virginia 22302. Because he
had no choice, he left his name, address, and phone number on the registry,
in case the package

- 171 -

John Grisham

The Broker

got returned. The clerk weighed the package and asked about insurance.
Neal declined, and prevented more paperwork. The clerk added the
international stamps, and finally said, "Total is eighteen dollars and twenty
cents."
Neal paid him and was assured again that it would be mailed that afternoon.

- 172 -

John Grisham

The Broker

