
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

182

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

failed breakout. However, it is not uncommon to see failed breakouts spend more time
consolidating before breaking out and working on a second breakout attempt. These are
certainly not the cleanest and easiest trades, and most traders will find that they enjoy
the best success restricting their involvement to first breakout attempts.
It is easy to overcomplicate these trades and to try to factor too many additional
levels and patterns into the trading plan. At the end of the day, the first pullback following
a breakout is nothing more than a pullback; there is no need for a complicated trade
management plan if you already have the skills to trade pullbacks on other contexts.
Profit Target These are standard pullbacks, so standard pullback profit targets apply
with one caveat: trends from good breakout levels tend to be exceptional trends. There
is a better than average chance that any ensuing trend will extend for several legs with
strong impulse moves. It still makes sense to maintain the discipline of taking partial
profits, but it also makes sense to allow yourself the opportunity to participate in the
potentially outsized trend run. This is another place where as a trader you will need to
tailor the plan to fit your personality, but, of course, the key is to actually have a plan. Do
not put yourself in a situation in which you have to make reactive decisions on the fly.
Comments In some sense, this is a hybrid trade, combining characteristics of both
breakout and pullback trades, but it can be simplified further: it is really nothing more
than a simple pullback trade.
One last thought on breakout trades: we have not considered the higher time frame in
these trade setups, and it often does not matter. A clear breakout level on the trading time
frame will usually be an even clearer resistance level on the higher time frame, but there
are cases where the breakout is further supported by the higher time frame structure.
For instance, if an upside breakout on the trading time frame comes near the bottom
of a higher time frame pullback in an uptrend, then the trading time frame breakout is
essentially a breakout entry into the higher time frame pattern. Time frames often have
complex interactions with influences flowing in both directions, but these considerations
can sometimes add significant support to individual trade setups.

Al Brooks, in Reading Price Charts Bar by Bar: The Technical Analysis of Price Action for
the Serious Trader (2009), discusses many variations of breakout trades. Though many of
his comments and trading ideas are speciﬁc to intraday index futures, most of them can
be applied with some modiﬁcation to other markets and time frames. Brooks’s approach is
diﬀerent from mine in that he focuses much more on the minute details of each individual
price bar and its relationship to previous bars, while I tend to think there is much more
noise and randomness in the market at most times. Regardless, his book oﬀers a valuable
perspective and good food for thought.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Practical Trading Templates

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

183

FAILED BREAKOUTS

Trade Type
Support/resistance holding.
Concept

Most breakouts fail.

Setup When most traders think of breakout trades, they think of big, dramatic winning trades, and it is not hard to find examples like this. However, the trader actually
trading breakouts quickly comes face-to-face with a harsh reality: failed breakouts are
more common than winning breakouts. This is not an indictment of the breakout trading
concept, because exceptional reward/risk ratios can compensate for lower probability.
Furthermore, good breakout traders know how to prequalify their trades by focusing on
the patterns that tend to support successful breakouts and may have a higher winning
percentage than might be expected. There certainly is money to be made trading breakouts, but it is also worthwhile to spend some time thinking about the patterns associated
with breakout failures.
It is difficult to nail these patterns down because it is not uncommon for good breakouts to have reactions that violate the breakout level. Imagine the frustration of the trader
working with this flawed plan: pay into the actual breakout, and flip the position short
if the breakout level does not hold. In the very common case of a volatile breakout with
a pullback that violates the breakout level, this trader will first take a loss on the long
position, and will now be positioned short as the pullback in the new uptrend begins its
advance. This is a futile plan, but many developing traders fall into this trap because they
attach too much importance to the retest of the actual breakout level. It is important to
understand how the market really moves, rather than clinging to some idea of how the
market logically should work.
There are two setup conditions to consider: the strength of the move beyond the
breakout level, and the character of the first reaction after the breakout. Good breakouts
should have strong momentum, volume, and interest beyond the level. If this does not
happen, it is more likely that the breakout will fail, perhaps painting a spring or upthrust
outside the previous support or resistance level. In successful breakouts, the first reaction should be controlled and in proportion to this breakout thrust. It should look like
a good pullback in the new trend, for that is exactly what it is. If the breakout fails, it

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

184

TRADING STRATEGIES

FIGURE 6.20 A Failed Breakout Below Support in Crude Oil

will be through a failure of this first pullback; this is a critical point in breakout trading.
If the first reaction is very strong (i.e., the first downswing after an upside breakout or
vice versa for a breakdown through support), it suggests a failure of the break interest
and greatly increased probability of trade failure. This is potentially confusing, so some
examples may help to clarify.
Figure 6.20 shows a failed breakdown attempt below support. The actual bar of the
breakout was a good entry, showing strong momentum through support, and the subsequent consolidation was also consistent with the breakout play. Most traders trading this
pattern should have been short, and should have been holding through the three small
bars following the point marked A. Though not a large pattern, these bars were a pullback or consolidation near the extreme of the previous downthrust and below previous
support. However, even with this generally constructive setup, the trade failed as buyers
stepped in and swept the market back above support at B, possibly fueled by additional
short-covering volatility. This is nothing more than a classic pullback failure via strong
countertrend momentum emerging in the pullback.
Figure 6.21 shows another example of a failed breakout, this time an upside breakout in Goldman Sachs (NYSE: GS). There were several elements that should have put

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Practical Trading Templates

185

FIGURE 6.21 A Failed Upside Breakout Attempt in GS

the long pullback trader on warning: the actual breakout at A was not on good momentum and did not show strong conviction. The pullback (four black candles beginning two
bars after A) retraced most of the breakout thrust. Though the penetration back through
the breakout level is not in itself cause for concern, it is not good to see so much of the
breakout retraced so easily. The actual failure came at point B, as the stock put in a failure test at the previous high. This is one of the standard ways in which pullbacks fail and
a good opportunity to use another trading pattern (the failure test from the beginning of
this chapter) in a supporting context. Good trading is nothing more than the disciplined
application of a few relatively simple fundamental building blocks.
Trigger Conceptually, this is the most problematic of the trade setups because we
have to strike a balance between waiting for confirmation that the breakout has failed
while still getting a good trade location. In terms of actual execution, the breakout failure is nothing more than a failed pullback. Breakout traders need to understand that
the pullback pattern is a critical building block for these trades, and it is important to
understand the patterns that suggest pullbacks failing and continuing.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

186

May 10, 2012

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

Stop Saying most breakouts fail trivializes many of the issues we face trading these
patterns because of the extreme volatility associated with breakouts and their failures.
Being caught on the wrong side of a breakout trade (whether a successful or a failed
breakout) is bad news. Stop placement is fairly simple, as the ultimate stop is above the
extreme of the initial pullback thrust, but in this trade you must respect your stop fully
and without question. If the stop is hit, get out of the trade. Do not try to trade around
it; do not try to average your price. Just get out. You may play these games and get away
with it 30 times in a row, but the 31st trade could wipe out many months’ profits. There
is danger here—real tail risk—that is hard to comprehend and impossible to quantify.
Profit Target There are two likely resolutions to these trades. In some markets (for
instance, longer-term commodities) failed breakouts can be absorbed into a large-scale
consolidation. After spending some time working off the failure, the market may make
another breakout attempt and continue to grind higher. The second possibility is that the
market may truly melt down and collapse after a failed breakout. This outcome is slightly
more likely in shorter time frames, but what we are looking for here is a violation of
the base before the breakout and wholesale panic as trapped traders scramble to adjust
positions. A good trading plan will consider both possibilities, with a provision to take
partial profits at a relatively close target while holding a portion for a larger swing.
From a practical standpoint, it probably makes sense to use the same profit targets
on all trades, taking first partial profits at a point equal to the risk on the trade. In my
own trading plan, I tend to be be aggressive in taking those profits on failed breakout
trades, perhaps even exiting more than half of my position at the first target. As in all
other trades, I will adjust that target to respect the geometry of the pattern. If a target is
beyond a clear and significant level, adjust it by moving it slightly inside the level. This is
nothing more than trading common sense.
Comments This is the most complex and least well defined of the major trade setups.
Newer traders are probably best advised to not focus on this trade until some success is
achieved with the other setups, but it is important to study these failure patterns even if
you only intend to trade breakouts in the direction of the initial breakout. Awareness of
how patterns fail and how trades fail can help you limit your losses and manage losing
trades with equanimity. After you have traded many breakouts and internalized many
variations of these patterns, you will begin to develop some intuition about them. Until
then, the guidelines in this chapter will help you avoid some of the more serious and
more obvious mistakes in trading these patterns.

SUMMARY
This has been a fairly long list of potential trading patterns, presented in the order in
which I believe most traders should learn them. We started with the simplicity of the

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Practical Trading Templates

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

187

failure test, progressing to more complex pullbacks, then to the special situation of pullbacks after trend changes. Last, the volatile set of breakouts were added, and failed
breakouts, which can be touchy, subjective, and dangerous, bring up the rear, so the
progression is from simple and well-defined to complex and potentially confusing. There
are only three core concepts here, which express the tendency of the trend to continue
and the tendency of support and resistance to both hold and break. The other trade setups are derived from combinations of these core trading concepts. If this chapter has
been confusing, consider this alternate classification.
Primary Trades
r Pullback: The sine qua non of trend trading patterns (trend continuation).
r Failure test: A quick-and-dirty countertrend entry with a well-defined risk point
(support/resistance holding).
r Breakout: The ultimate expression of support/resistance failing.
Derived Trades
r Anti: A trend termination pattern that uses the pullback pattern as an entry and for
confirmation.
r Buying support in a pullback: Basically a failure test entry into the pullback pattern.
r Paying a breakout of a pullback: A combination of a lower time frame breakout with
a trading time frame pullback.
r Breakout, entering in base before: Anticipatory entry into a breakout trade; may use
support at the bottom of the base as an entry trigger, so the trade is actually a support
holding trade.
r Breakout, entering on first pullback following: Puts a simple pullback entry and probability in the context of a breakout trade.
r Breakouts, failed: A more complex version of the failure test; many of these are simple higher time frame failure test trades, but the motivating patterns are the failure
patterns of pullbacks.
This is not an exhaustive list of the trade entries I have used successfully, but it is a
list of the most important ones. Notice the trades that are not here: no trades in ranges
unless the range is a more significant structure in another time frame, no simple buying
or selling at support levels, and no fading overextended markets. I have not found these
to be reliable trades, nor have they been profitable for me over a very large sample size.
If I have a burning desire to execute one of these trades, I can usually accomplish it
within one of the trade structures I have already set out. For instance, rather than simply
shorting into a runaway bull market that I feel has gone too far, I can wait for the market
to make a buying climax and then enter on the Anti. The trade may still fail, but it is at
least supported by a real pattern with a defined risk point.
It is also interesting to consider where these trading patterns fall in the course of
the idealized market structure outlined in Chapter 2. In accumulation, we can buy failure
tests of the low of the range, especially if the higher time frame supports an advance. The

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c06

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:38

Printer: Hamilton Printing

188

TRADING STRATEGIES

breakout trades naturally belong at the transition between accumulation and markup.
The pullback variations are, of course, the ideal tools for trading both the markup and
markdown periods. The transitions from markup to distribution (and from markdown to
accumulation) are a bit more problematic. For example, we actively try to avoid having
positions within those areas until they are set to break out, and even catching the exact end of the trending period may result in meager profits as the market simply chops
sideways. Regardless, the Anti pattern is the ideal tool to catch these turns, and it is also
common for trends to end with a final failure test at the highs.
The patterns in this chapter are more than a menu of trade setups to be used à la
carte according to the trader’s whim. Rather, this simple set of trading patterns offers a
comprehensive tool kit for approaching market structure and price action in any market
and any time frame. Consider the cycle:

r Buying support in a range via failure tests (springs) near the bottom of the range.
r Entering in a base preceding a breakout.
r The actual breakout.
r The first pullback following a breakout.
r Pullbacks as the new trend gains steam.
r The possibility for complex pullbacks as the trend matures. Monitoring the strength
of pullbacks gives insight into trend integrity.

r A possible failure test at the eventual high of the trend.
r An Anti at the high of the trend.
r Selling resistance near the previous trend extreme via failure tests (upthrusts).
r Entering early in anticipation of a breakdown through support.
A trader can trade this entire cycle, or can use these trades as signposts to monitor
the health of the market and its transition from one regime to another. Within this relatively simple set of patterns lies the key to all price action and market structure. Properly
applied, this sequence is nothing less than a complete analytical methodology.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c07

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:44

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 7

Tools for
Confirmation

There are in fact four very significant stumbling blocks in the way
of grasping the truth . . . namely, the example of weak and unworthy
authority, longstanding custom, the feeling of the ignorant crowd,
and the hiding of our own ignorance while making a display of our
apparent knowledge.
—Roger Bacon

s more information always better? Some traders, when they are considering a trade,
will use multiple indicators and analytical tools, solicit opinions from other traders,
and even consider elements such as fundamentals that do not really have a bearing
on their time frame. This approach can lead to “paralysis by analysis” as so many factors are considered, with so many conflicting points of view, that the trader simply does
not know what to do. The justification offered for this approach is that an officer on a
battlefield would want every possible piece of information, wouldn’t he? Perhaps not.
It might be better for the decision maker to have processed intelligence from verified
and trusted sources that has already been filtered from the massive flow of raw information. In trading, the equivalent is to focus on a few simple tools that are completely
understood—depth of information, rather than breadth.
It is critical that traders understand the subtleties of every tool they use. They should
know how they react in every possible market environment, and furthermore, must understand the complex interactions between multiple tools. This may lead to an approach
that disregards a lot of information that many traders assume to be useful, but, for instance, why would you use indicators that do not add to your analysis? Why would you
listen to news that is old news and is already fully priced into the market? Why would
you try to guess how complex fundamental factors might influence the price if you do not
have the skills to fully understand those fundamentals? Why would you solicit opinions
from traders who may trade with completely different styles and may be less competent

I

189

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c07

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:44

Printer: Hamilton Printing

190

TRADING STRATEGIES

and knowledgeable than you are? Traders do all of these things, but most of them do not
make sense. Limit your scope to tools that truly add value.
So far, we have looked at a number of trading patterns and templates that allow the
trader to trade in alignment with the dominant forces in the market and to take advantage
of the slight statistical edge that exists around some specific market structures. These
patterns are tradable on their own, in isolation, but they become more powerful when
placed in the context of the higher time frame and supported by price action on the lower
time frame. Though we have touched on this idea in other places, this chapter now offers
some concrete examples and suggestions for maximizing the power of the interaction
of these multiple time frames. It will also cover the use of a few specific indicators in
considerable detail; use this as a departure for your own work with your preferred tools
and indicators.
Next, we consider tools to quantify relationships between markets; a good understanding of the connections and interactions between various markets can be a powerful
tool for teasing out nonrandom price action from the random noise. This is not a subject
to be approached lightly, as it is possible to spend many years digging deeply into the
connections between various asset classes and individual markets. We will begin this
work by looking at some tools to quantify these relationships and some potential issues
that may arise when contemplating these cross-market relationships. Again, everything
in this chapter should be taken as a template and a suggestion for your own work and
exploration—adapt these ideas and make them your own.

THE MOVING AVERAGE—THE STILL CENTER
Many trading books will tell you to use a specific moving average like a 21-period exponential or a 50-period simple moving average. Anytime anyone tells you to use a certain
average length, the logical question is: “Why that one and not another?” There is no magic
to any moving average—they are all pretty much created equal, which is to say that all
work sometimes and do not work other times. If you are viewing moving averages as support or resistance, or price crossing a moving average as a significant signal, you might
want to reconsider your approach to these tools. There is great value in reducing everything to simple elements, to first principles, and then building the analytical structure
up from that foundation. To that end, Appendix B takes a deep look at the differences
between two commonly used moving average types and examines how they behave in
different market environments. Though this understanding might not be useful for all
traders, mastery rests on a perfect grasp of basic elements.

Ideas for Using Moving Averages
Traders have many ideas and approaches to using moving averages, but many of the
things that are supposed to happen around moving averages are based on market lore

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c07

JWBT634-Grimes

Tools for Conﬁrmation

May 10, 2012

7:44

Printer: Hamilton Printing

191

and do not pass simple statistical tests. People will claim that certain averages are important because “hedge funds buy there,” “everyone watches those averages,” or “it becomes
a self-fulfilling prophecy,” but it is extremely difficult to support these claims with quantitative tests. Tests of statistical tendencies around moving averages fail to find that any average is objectively better than another, or in fact, that there is any verifiable edge around
these averages at all. Regardless, there are practical ways to use these tools in trading.
As a Trend Indicator One potentially useful application of moving averages is to
use them as confirming trend indicators. For instance, when scanning many charts, a
quick glance at a moving average—which summarizes the price structure, smoothes out
the bumps, and highlights the overall trend—can give a quick read on the overall market
structure.
There are two broad ways to use moving averages as trend indicators, which can be
used separately or combined. The first is very simple: when price spends a lot of time on
one side of a moving average, this suggests the market is trending in that direction; see
Figure 7.1 for an example. Note that price may occasionally dip to the average, or even
cross a bit to the other side, but it remains mostly above the average.
The second idea, which is closely related, is that a moving average will slope in the
direction of the trend. A flat moving average is more indicative of a trading range, while
up-sloping and down-sloping averages suggest uptrends and downtrends. As Figure 7.2
