
Specialty insurer: Insurers who specialize in niche markets can often de-
velop relationships and underwriting expertise that can give them rea-
sonable returns. If the markets are relatively small and nonstrategic,
other insurers may not be attracted. Left to themselves, specialty insur-
ers have more leeway to set prices. Markel has made specialty insurance
pay by insuring niche markets such as summer camps, yachts, and
sports organizations.

A record of financial strength: Insurance is worthless if the insurer won't
survive a disaster to be able to pay the resultant claims. Insurance cus-
tomers usually prefer insurers who possess the financial strength to survive
a disaster (such as September 11, 2001, or Hurricane Andrew) and still be
able to pay claims. Berkshire Hathaway increasingly wins catastrophe
reinsurance (insuring other insurers against large claims) business because
the company is renowned for possessing the capital strength to be able to
pay large claims on losses such as Florida hurricanes or an earthquake in
California.

A rational management team with a significant portion of its personal wealth
invested in the business: Poor underwriting can quickly destroy profits.

Many management teams slash prices to bring in customers, but if prices


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

are not high enough to cover losses, the company loses money. Manage-
ment teams who are also large shareholders are more exposed to the po-
tential pain that large underwriting losses can inflict, and teams like this

usually set reasonable prices and produce better profits over the long term.

Investor's Checklist: Asset Management and Insurance

»

Look for diversity in asset management companies. Firms that manage a
number of asset classes—such as stocks, bonds, and hedge funds—are
more stable during market gyrations. One-hit wonders are much more
volatile and are subject to wild swings.

Keep an eye on asset growth. Make sure an asset manager is successful in
consistently bringing in inflows greater than outflows.

Look for money managers with attractive niche markets, such as tax-
managed funds or international investing.

Sticky assets add stability. Look for firms with a high percentage of stable
assets, such as institutional money managers or fund firms who specialize
in retirement savings.

Bigger is often better. Firms with more assets, longer track records, and
multiple asset classes have much more to offer finicky customers.

Be wary of any insurance firm that grows faster than the industry average
(unless the growth can be explained by acquisitions).

One of the best ways to protect against investment risk in the life insurance
world is to consider companies with diversified revenue bases. Some prod-
ucts, such as variable annuities, have exhibited a good degree of cyclicality.
Look for life insurers with high credit ratings (AA) and a consistent abil-
ity to realize ROEs above their cost of capital.

Seek out property/casualty insurers who consistently achieve ROEs above
15 percent. This is a good indication of underwriting discipline and cost
control.

Avoid insurers who take repeated reserving charges. This often indicates
pricing below cost or deteriorating cost inflation.

Look for management teams committed to building shareholder value.
These teams often have significant personal wealth invested in the busi-

nesses they run.

263




19

Software

THE SOFTWARE INDUSTRY is intensely competitive, but it has economics
few industries can match. Although the up-front costs for creating software
are huge, production costs are not largely because software can be burned on
a compact disc or delivered over the Internet for almost nothing. When a
company such as Microsoft hits a home run with a product like Windows, it
can generate operating margins in excess of 40 percent.

Established software companies are cash cows, too. Working capital man-
agement is typically good because software can be stored and shipped elec-
tronically. This leads to low inventory and accounts receivable balances. And
because little capital is required to build software, successful software com-
panies generate tons of free cash flow.

Finally, software companies have excellent growth prospects. Companies
will continue to buy technology that makes business run more smoothly.
Software can automate tasks, such as accounting, and improve relationships
with customers. High labor costs encourage the use of software because

time-consuming tasks, such as budgeting, can be reduced and increase

Michael Trigg with Pat Dorsey.


266

SOFTWARE

productivity. And when firms face tough times with falling revenues, soft-

Ware can help cut costs.

Segments of the Software Industry

There are many nooks and crannies in the software industry. But a common
theme is that most are oligopolies, with only a few controlling the majority of
sales. Because technology buyers are inherently conservative and loath to buy
products from a vendor that might go out of business and leave them stranded
for basic service, companies are increasingly buying only from industry lead-

ers, Here are some of the bigger segments of the software industry.

Operating System

An operating system runs all the other programs on a computer. Tasks include
sharing memory between applications and handling directions from external
hardware such as printers. There are few opportunities in this market, with
Microsoft's Windows operating system running more than 90 percent of the
world’s PCs. However, the Linux operating system has slowly become a re-
spectable alternative for servers. (A server is a large computer running pro-
grams that serve an entire company rather than a single user.) However, Linux
specialists such as Red Hat have struggled to make money because the soft-
ware can be downloaded free over the Internet.

Database

Database software collects data so it can be easily accessed and updated. High
switching costs make this market attractive because it’s tough to move data
from one database to another. But it’s also mature, with growth unlikely to
exceed the high single digits over the long haul because most firms already
have databases in place. Oracle, IBM, and Microsoft dominate the market:
Oracle tends to have superior technology, while IBM and Microsoft offer

cheaper prices.

Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
Enterprise resource planning aims to improve back-office business tasks, such
as accounting and human resources. For instance, an accounting application

makes it easier to perform basic tasks such as budgeting and billing; human


SEGMENTS OF THE SOFTWARE INDUSTRY

resources software can keep track of employee performance. Like database soft-
ware, the ERP market isn’t growing very fast because most large companies al-
ready have some type of ERP system installed. SAP, PeopleSoft, and Oracle are

the big names in this segment.

Customer Relationship Management (CRM}

Customer relationship management software keeps track of client data, such
as purchasing histories, so salespeople and customer service employees can
tailor specific product offerings to customers. This creates selling opportuni-
ties and improves customer satisfaction. Unlike ERP, however, which can au-
tomate a finite number of back-office tasks, there’s no necessary limit to how
companies can interact more effectively with customers. Siebel Systems is the
800-pound gorilla in the industry, but traditional ERP vendors such as SAP
and PeopleSoft have been catching up.

Security

With more products and services being sold online, sensitive data is more
available to employees and customers, but also to harmful hackers. The dam-
age caused by viruses and stolen credit card numbers alone has created
tremendous demand. Growing products include firewalls, virtual private net-
works, antivirus, and intrusion detection. Check Point Software and Syman-

tec have been two of the biggest benefactors thus far.

Video Game

This segment of the sector is dominated by Electronic Arts. It’s costly to sup-
port the numerous hardware platforms, such as Microsoft's Xbox and Sony's
PlayStation, and the industry is also cyclical, with new platforms emerging
every few years. Numerous platforms (e.g., Atari) are no longer viable. Last,
low barriers to entry make it easy for an upstart with a popular game to achieve

success,

Miscellaneous
Not all software companies compete in industries with several established
players. For example, Intuit dominates tax preparation and small business

software with very little competition. Likewise, Adobe dominates graphic

267


268

SOFTWARE

design software; products such as Photoshop and Illustrator have near mo-
nopolies on their respective niches. Often, companies that dominate a
smaller niche are more attractive investments than household names that

serve larger markets.

Economic Moats in the Software Industry
Given the rapid pace of technological change, wide moats are tough to
build in the software industry. Because barriers to entry are low, today’s
winner can quickly become tomorrow’s loser if a competitor can develop a
more innovative product and the industry leader can’t successfully keep up.
This is what makes investing in software companies difficult. Not only is
it tough for investors to assess how successful a product will be, but know-
ing how long that technology will remain is virtually impossible for tech-
nology novices.

The trick is to look for companies that have gone beyond superior tech-
nology in creating their competitive advantages. Look for the following char-
acteristics.

High Customer Switching Costs

High switching costs make it tough for customers to use a competitor's prod-
uct without significant hassle. For example, Autodesk has a lock on the ar-
chitecture and construction design software market because architects and
engineers are trained to use the software early in their careers. Switching to a
competing program isn’t very attractive to folks who have been working with
Autodesk for years. For the most part, software companies that benefit from
this moat have products that are either too expensive or too time-consuming

for customers to stop using,

Network Effect

Adobe is an excellent example of this economic moat at work in the software
industry. With more than 500 million copies of Acrobat Reader downloaded,
Acrobat has become the standard for creating and viewing documents elec-
tronically. People are more likely to create documents using Acrobat because

they know the majority of personal computer users already have the Acrobat


SOFTWARE ACCOUNTING IOI

Reader installed. Likewise, people download Acrobat Reader because it’s the

most popular way to share and view documents online.

Brand Names

Some software firms have managed to create strong brands that deter com-
petitors. For example, Intuit’s QuickBooks and TurboTax are two of the most
well-known names in retail software. When people think of small business or
tax software, they think of Intuit. Despite the fact that people come into con-
tact with software every day, this moat is rare because the majority of software

has very little consumer appeal.

Software Accounting 101

In general, software companies have fairly clean financial statements with
minimal debt and fairly simple capital structures. However, there is some jar-
gon you should understand to help you dig into the industry, as well as some

metrics that are more common to the software industry than to others.

License Revenue

License revenue is the best indication of current demand because it repre-
sents how much new software was sold during a given time. It’s a very prof-
itable source of revenue because software can be produced for almost
nothing after it has been developed. Service revenue, which is the other
major type of revenue that many software firms report, is less profitable be-
cause it’s expensive to employ consultants to install software. Keep an eye on
trends: Increasing license revenue indicates healthy demand, whereas declin-
ing license revenue may indicate that growth is slowing because licenses

drive future service revenue.

Deferred Revenue

Although it’s recorded as a liability on the balance sheet, deferred revenue is a
good liability to have—it represents cash the company has received before
some services have been performed. It’s common for software companies to get
paid for consulting and maintenance work up front, so tracking deferred rey-

enue can give you a good estimate of the potential trend in future revenues.

269


270

SOFTWARE

Rising deferred revenue indicates a healthy backlog of business, whereas
declining deferred revenue may suggest business has started to slow because

fewer sales will be recognized in the future.

Days Sales Outstanding (DSO}

Days sales outstanding indicates the number of days that it takes a company
to collect its outstanding receivables. Refer to the balance sheet and income
statement and calculate this formula: accounts receivable/(revenues/number
of days in the reporting period). The absolute DSO number is less important
than the trend in DSOs. Falling DSOs indicate a company is collecting its
outstanding accounts faster than before, whereas rising DSOs may indicate
that the company has extended easier credit terms to customers to close deals
and boost revenues. However, this practice merely steals revenue from future
periods and may lead to revenue shortfalls. In an industry where demand can
change quickly, rising DSOs are often the first signal that a firm’s products

are no longer as hot as they once were.

Red Flags

Like many companies, software firms sometime try to make themselves look
better than they are. Here are a couple of accounting issues to watch out for
when you're analyzing software firms.

Revenue Recognition Changes
According to the Securities and Exchange Commission, improper revenue
recognition is the biggest issue involved in the restatement of financial re-
sults, and the corporate graveyard is scattered with software companies that
illegally recognized revenues. Going by the book, revenues should not be rec-
ognized until they're actually earned, which takes place when products have
been delivered or services have been performed, a price has been agreed on,
and there’s reasonable assurance that payment will be collected.

Watch out when management changes the rules for recognizing revenue.
In 2001, for example, RSA Security began booking some sales after products
were shipped to distributors, whereas it had previously recognized sales only

after end users had purchased products. Even though management felt that


HALLMARKS OF SUCCESS FOR SOFTWARE COMPANIES

relationships with certain distributors were strong enough that the eventual
sale of products to customers was guaranteed, RSA was able to boost sales ar-
tificially by stuffing its distribution channels with more inventory than could
be sold in a normal amount of time. This practice stole revenue from future

quarters and ultimately led to massive sales shortfalls.

Questionable Transactions

Shady deals that boost sales are notorious in the software industry. One of the
most prevalent occurs when an organization both sells to and invests in an-
other company. Another questionable transaction—called a swap deal—takes
place when a vendor and customer simultaneously buy the other's products.
Although engaging in these back-scratching techniques is legal, these transac-
tions give a false picture of the overall health of business.

Hallmarks of Success for Software Companies

In addition to a wide economic moat, there are five hallmarks of success
that we look for in successful software companies: increasing sales, long
track records, expanding profit margins, large installed customer bases, and
great management. If you can find companies that possess all five character-
istics, you've probably identified the creme de la créme of the software
industry.

Increasing Sales

Unlike mature industries such as consumer goods, software is relatively new
and should grow faster than the economy. Successful software companies
should increase revenue at least 10 percent annually in stable economic con-
ditions. Steady growth indicates a company has either a growing demand for
its software, loyal customers, or the ability to raise prices without losing busi-
ness. In addition, successful companies typically have large amounts of recur-

ring service revenue locked in.

Long Track Record
The low barriers to entry of the software industry contrast with high barriers to

success—it’s easy to start up a software firm, but it’s much more difficult to

271


xo

SOFTWARE

create one that’s still around after several years. Thus, look for software com-
panies that have thrived during multiple business cycles and have solid results
during both the peaks and valleys of IT spending. Sticking with firms with at
least five years’ worth of historical financial data will keep you from getting
burned by the flashes in the pan.

Expanding Profit Margins

Successful software companies should be able to expand margins over time
through economies of scale. Once software is developed, the marginal cost
of producing additional copies is virtually nil, which means that each
new dollar of sales should fall straight to the bottom line. Also, look for
companies with high-margin license revenue increasing as a percentage of

total sales.

Large Installed Customer Bases

Successful software companies typically have large customer bases that re-
main loyal to their products and services. Because technology buyers are in-
herently conservative and loath to buy products from a vendor that might
go out of business, they are more prone to continue buying software from
companies they trust. In the lousy IT spending conditions of the past few
years, many established firms have performed well by relying on their large
customer bases.

Great Management

The saying “buy the jockey, not the horse” has even more relevance in
the software industry because a company’s most important assets are the
people (i.e., the programmers, salesforce, and management) who come to
work every day. One negative characteristic of management in the software
industry, however, is the egregious use of stock options. Because there’s a
shortage of top-notch programmers, its not uncommon for management
to give away big chunks of the company at the expense of shareholders to
lure talented employees. If you can find a management team in the soft-
ware industry that has resisted the temptation to give out huge option
grants every year, you've definitely found a team that’s willing to go against
the grain.


CONCLUSION

What's Not to Like about Software?

The software industry is highly cyclical, with sales hinging on economic con-
ditions and IT spending. The problem is that in good times software com-
panies thrive, and in bad times they're some of the hardest hit. The primary
reason for this cyclicality is that many corporations view software as a discre-
tionary purchase that can be deferred in tough times. In other words, when
the economy and business suffer, cutting IT spending is a quick way to buffer
profit declines.

Software companies that cater to corporations have back-end loaded
quarters in which the majority of deals are closed in the final days of the
reporting period. This makes it difficult to monitor how business is per-
forming until the quarter has ended, which increases the risk of a big dis-
appointment. In addition, buyers know that if they wait until near the
end of the quarter, a software salesman is likely to slash prices to get a deal
done and meet the company’s sales quota. But heavy discounting can hurt
profitability.

Finally, software companies are rarely cheap. The average price-to-earnings
ratio of the three largest software companies by market capitalization—
Microsoft, Oracle, and SAP—was 56 between 1998 and 2002. This compares
to an average price-to-earnings ratio of the S&P 500 of 25 times during that
time span. Investors often bid up software stocks because of their excellent
growth prospects, high returns on invested capital, and tons of cash flow. But
even compared with other IT-related industries, such as hardware, software
firms are typically rewarded with premium valuations because most have

clean balance sheets with tons of cash and virtually no debt.

Conclusion

Software companies have impressive financial characteristics, including excel-
lent growth prospects, high returns on invested capital, and pristine financial
health. The improvements that software provides—increasing revenues, cut-
ting costs, improved productivity—should outweigh any temporary lull in
IT spending, But investors will most likely experience disappointing returns
by investing in the industry blindly. Our advice is to pick stocks with eco-
nomic moats that create barriers to entry, as well as ones that trade at dis-

counts to intrinsic value. Don’t get seduced by great technology alone.

273


274

SOFTWARE

Investor's Checklist: Software

»

The software industry has economics few industries can match. Success-
ful companies should have excellent growth prospects, expanding profit
margins, and pristine financial health.

Companies with wide moats are more likely to produce above-average re-
turns. But superior technology is one of the least sustainable competitive
advantages in the software industry.

Look for software companies that have maintained good economics
throughout multiple business cycles. We prefer companies that have been
around at least several years.

License revenue is one of the best indicators of current demand because it
represents how much new software was sold at a given time. Watch for
any license revenue trends.

Rising days sales outstanding (DSOs) may indicate a company has ex-
tended easier credit terms to customers to close deals. This steals revenues
from future quarters and may lead to revenue shortfalls.

If deferred revenue growth slows or the deferred revenue balance begins to
decline, it may signal that the company’s business has started to slow down.
The pace of change makes it tough to predict what software companies
will look like in the future. For this reason, it’s best to look for a big, dis-
count to intrinsic value before buying.

