
H

A

FIGURE 19.2 Triangle and cosine ratio

Within a circle (the unit circle), we can create a triangle from each point along the circle
perimeter. As demonstrated in Figure 19.3, using the radius length of the circle as the hypotenuse
and the length along the horizontal axis to an intersection perpendicular to the perimeter point,
we can calculate the cosine of the angle between each hypotenuse and the axis line for each point
along the perimeter. The cosine value is the ratio of the length along the x-axis (X’) divided by
the radius of the circle. The cosine value will always be one or less because X’ can never be
larger than the radius. As the point works its way around the circle counterclockwise, we can plot
the series of cosine values in another chart with the angle (in radians) along the x-axis and the
cosine value along the y-axis, as shown in Figure 19.4. As you can see in the figure, this results
in a curve with values oscillating between –1 and 1. This curve is known as a cosine wave and is
the basis for calculating the existence of cycles or waves in time series data.

Download at www.wowebook.com

453

Chapter 19 Cycles
Point on Circle
Defined by Radius
and X'

s

diu

Ra

X'

As the radius moves to the left, X' becomes smaller until X' is 0,
and then X' becomes negative.

FIGURE 19.3 Unit circle

Cosine Value

2

0

2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

X'
(In Radians)

FIGURE 19.4 Plot of cosine curve

Download at www.wowebook.com

454

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

Of course, cycles can have different parameters. They can be long from bottom to bottom,
high and short, and begin from different locations. The location along the cycle of each point can
be defined by the following formula:
f(x) = a x cos(bx + c) + d
Where: a is the amplitude
bx is the period (constant b times x time in radians)
c is the phase (in radians)
d is the error factor
Rather than fully understanding the derivation of cosine waves, it is important to know the
specific variables that determine the waveform. Amplitude is the distance from the horizontal
axis to the extreme peak or trough. In Figure 19.4, it is 1. An amplitude of 2 would result in a
cosine wave twice the height of the cosine waves with an amplitude of 1. Period s the distance
between consecutive lows or consecutive highs. In our usage, the period is the time along the
horizontal axis that it takes for the cycle to return to its original position. Figure 19.5 shows two
cosine waves with different phases. Phase determines how far from the y-axis the particular
cycle begins. It thus determines the offset between two cycles of different phases.

Cosine Value

2

0

2
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

X'
(In Radians)

FIGURE 19.5 Cosine waves with different phases

If we know the parameter constants for each variable, we can plot any cosine wave. If there
are multiple cosine waves, we can calculate each and add them together in what is called summation. James Hurst more thoroughly developed this idea in his book, The Profit Magic of Stock
Transaction Timing (1970). The presumption in markets is that there is no one specific cycle but

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 19 Cycles

455

many cycles that, when summed, form the plot of prices. The forecasting problem then is to
reverse the process and go from the price plot to the cosine formula to determine how many
cosine waves and their parameters exist in the data. From this knowledge, presumably the direction of prices can be foretold by extrapolating the waves into the future.
Like all theories related to the markets, the theory of cycles is logical but impossible to
quantify, at least with the present level of mathematics. Many methods have been invented to recognize waves in time series data, but none has been able to duplicate market price sequences with
reliable accuracy. There are many reasons for this, the primary one being that the parameters in
the cosine functions of market prices are not constants. Hurst calls this the principle of
“variation.” Amplitude and period, for example, vary over time. Most mathematical means of
determining cosines from time series data assume that the parameters are constants. This does
not mean that the standard methods of analysis of time series are useless, however. The changes
in parameters appear to take place slowly rather than suddenly. By analyzing prices through conventional cosine analysis over specific but different periods, we can see how the parameters
change. Amplitude appears to change quickly at times, but period appears to change more
slowly. Thus, if we can at least estimate the period with some degree of accuracy, as analysts, we
have a useful indicator. We cannot predict future price levels, but with an estimate of period, we
can potentially predict the timing of future highs and lows.

Other Aspects of Cycle Analysis
There are several other aspects of cycle analysis of which the technical analysis needs to be
aware. Accuracy concerns exist because cycle periods are indefinite and have error. Cycle translations and inversions make cycle analysis more difficult. However, due to harmonic properties,
determining one cycle period often leads the analyst to determining cycle periods that are multiples of that initial cycle.
Accuracy
Just because the analysis of financial time series data may suggest cycles exist does not imply
that the cycles are precise. As mentioned earlier, all three aspects of a wave vary over time, and
as wave is added to wave, the errors become large. Because market cycles tend to synchronize at
lows, the estimate of the phase is relatively easy. The analysis just begins at a major price low
where presumably most cycle lows coincide. The estimate of amplitude varies too much for projection purposes. Amplitude is often called the “power” of the cycle in electronic analysis circles,
where it tends to be a constant in those applications. In the financial world, power can be influenced greatly by exogenous, unpredictable events. The study of amplitude becomes nonproductive. The third aspect of the cosine wave, the period, often remains relatively constant but can
sometime have large errors. Estimates are based on immediate past price history. As an example,
a 20-day cycle low can occur several days before or after the expected 20 days from the last low,
which itself may have been several days before or after its ideal location. The 20-day cycle, from

Download at www.wowebook.com

456

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

spectral or other analysis, may only be 19.2 days, or it may be 20.4 days. Cycle periods, therefore, are indefinite and have error. This means that for investment purposes, all cycles should be
used only as a guide. Even the well-established, seasonal cycle has actual high and low dates that
vary considerably from year to year.
Harmonics
One of the interesting aspects of cycles first observed by Hurst in market data is that cycles tend
to have period lengths a multiple of two or three longer or shorter than the next larger or smaller
cycles. In other words, a cycle of 20 days will indicate that another longer cycle of either 40- or
60-days length exists and that another shorter cycle of 7 or 10 days exists. The longer is either
two times or three times the observed cycle, and the shorter is either 1/3 or 1/2 the observed
cycle. This observation is useful when one specific cycle is determined because it leads the analyst to what intervals to look for in longer and shorter cycles. Hurst believed that the ratio of two
is more common. Others, such as Tony Plummer (2003), have hypothesized that three is the correct multiple.
In the April 1987 issue of Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities Magazine, Frank
Tarkany compared his analysis of weekly market cycles with that of three other well-known analysts. Table 19.1 provides a summary of Tarkany’s comparisons. All four of the analysts found
26-week cycles; this 26-week cycle is the base cycle. These analysts also noticed multiples of 26
weeks, suggesting that an autocorrelation exists between cycle periods. These cycle periods are
called nominal periods because they occur regularly in most financial time series data.
TABLE 19.1

Harmonics of the 2-Week Cycle in the Stock Market

Weeks
in Cycle

Gann

234
208
182
156
130
104
78
52
26
13
6.5
3.25
1.625

182
156

Garrett

Hurst

Tarkany

221
214
178

234

234,237

156

178
156
134

78
52
25,26
12,13

25
10

6,7,8
3

2

78
52
26
13

78

6.5
3.25
1.625

6,7
3

22,23
12

26-Week
Harmonic

Potential
Cause

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1/2

Business cycle
Presidential cycle

18-month cycle
Seasonal cycle
Base cycle
Quarterly reports

1/4
1/8
1/16

14-day cycle
7-day cycle

Source: Tarkany (1987)

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 19 Cycles

457

Notice that several of the cycles appearing in Table 19.1 are stock market cycles we have
mentioned in previous chapters. The well-known presidential cycle is very dependable, as is the
seasonal cycle. They are both multiples of the 26-week base cycle—the seasonal cycle by two,
and the presidential cycle by eight (or 2 × 2 × 2). Thus, the Hurst hypothesis that cycles tend to
occur in multiples of two or three seems to make sense.
Inversions
One of the most difficult observations for the analyst to face is the inversion. Occasionally,
where a cycle low is expected, a peak occurs instead. For example, look at Figure 19.1. Where
we would be expecting to see the second 20-day low, we actually see a high in this chart. This is
an example of an inversion. No satisfactory explanation has been given for its existence, but several observations have been noted.
Inversions can occur at either peaks or troughs, but most often occur at peaks in harmonic
cycles when the next longer cycle is at a peak. This make sense only if the next higher order cycle
is a multiple of two. For example, a cycle of 20 days should make a low every 20 days. If the next
higher order cycle is 40 days, synchronous with the 20-day cycle, and peaking, a 40-day peak
ideally should occur just as a 20-day cycle is making a low. Thus, the 20-day cycle low is masked
by the peaking of the 40-day cycle and is often difficult to decipher. When this occurs, the
inverted cycle low often has just a small very short-term “dip” within the peak of the higher order
cycle. This dip resembles an M where the small low between the two small peaks is the actual
cycle low that is being overcome by the longer cycle. Proof of the low coinciding with the
longer-cycle high occurs when the subsequent decline breaks below the dip. If a longer cycle is
due to peak, this is the sign that its declining portion has begun.
Previously we noted that cycles are not strict harmonics but specific time-separated events.
The habit of producing lows at constant intervals can be interspersed with highs at the same
intervals because both are important market events. Thus, a long string of events occurring at
specific intervals that is primarily dominated by low events but interspersed with occasional high
events at the same periodic times can look like a harmonic wave for the period that the lows are
occurring but be confusing from a cyclical standpoint. However, the progression is only a time
sequence of events. Analysts thus assume inversions are anomalies within a harmonic-type wave
when the wave is actually an event wave, not a true mathematically defined cycle.

TRANSLATION
The reason that we study lows in cycle analysis is because longer and shorter cycles tend to synchronize at lows. Peaks, on the other hand, almost never synchronize. Peaks, ideally, should
occur at the halfway period of the cycle. A 20-day cycle, for example, should have a peak 10
days from its last low. This rarely occurs. Peaks can occur earlier or later than the halfway point.
Their location away from the center point is called translation. A right translation in a cycle is
when the peak is beyond the halfway point, and a left translation is when the cycle peak occurs
before the halfway point. Usually, the underlying trend from a longer cycle determines the
amount of translation in the shorter cycle. In Chapter 12, “Trends—The Basics,” we noticed that
trend directions determined the shape of the corrective trends. In an uptrend, for example, the

Download at www.wowebook.com

458

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

upward trends were long and the corrections were short. These were translating right because the
peaks were beyond the halfway point between the lows. If the peak had occurred at the halfway
point, we would be suspicious about the continuation of the upward trend. Because cycles are
nested and synchronous, the shorter cycle is dominated by the trend of the next longer cycle.
Again, let us look at Figure 19.1. The first marked low (in early February) is both a 20-day
and a higher order cycle low. From that point on for more than two cycles, the trend is sharply
upward. This upward strength of the longer cycle is influencing where the peak for the first, second, and third 20-day cycles will occur. As it is, the peak for the first cycle is past the midpoint
of the 20-week cycle period. In the second 20-day cycle, the peak is even farther to the right of
its midpoint, suggesting that the trend is becoming even steeper. This movement of the actual
peak beyond the midpoint of the cycle is called right translation and is characteristic of all peaks
when dominated by the strength of a longer, rising trend.
In the 20-day cycle beginning in May during the decline in prices, the peak to the cycle is
only four days after the low. This cycle is left translated.
The diminution of “rightness” or “leftness” suggests that the higher order cycle is also
beginning to change direction. Translation is, thus, useful in checking where the overlying
longer-term cycle trend direction is headed or if it is changing direction.

HOW CAN CYCLES BE FOUND IN MARKET DATA?
Conventional wave-filtering mathematics has gone through tremendous growth and development
in the past 50 years. Data transmission, voice and image transmission, electronic signaling, and
other developments in the electronic age necessitated more sophisticated mathematics to recognize and understand waveforms. Now we have bandpass filters, digital signal processing (DSP),
wavelet modeling, nonlinear spectral analysis, higher order spectral analysis (HOSA), and derivatives of each. For our purposes, however, this sophistication is unnecessary. Because waveforms
in prices, if they exist, are not based on constant parameters, we need only to make initial estimates of a cycle period to satisfy our requirements. Once we have an estimate of period, we have
information that is useful for projection and useful for determining the “window” or moving
average length in indicators that best represents the trading period of interest.

Fourier Analysis (Spectral Analysis)
The most common and simplest method of wave analysis in a time series data is Fourier analysis. Fourier analysis, available in most mathematics software programs, has many variations. It
has specific problems, however, in that it requires a large amount of data. For market forecasting,
the more data that is involved, the more the waves can change and neutralize the calculations of
parameters. Thus, Fourier analysis should be used only as a basic method of analyzing cycles in
market time series data. A faster method, called Fast Fourier Transforms (FFTs), reduces the
computation time of the analysis. A second problem with Fourier analysis is that it does not
maintain the phase relationships between cycles. In other words, if one cycle crosses the horizontal axis after or before another, the difference in these phases is not recorded. This makes projection of the combination of the cycles very difficult. Figure 19.6 displays an example of spectral
analysis.

Download at www.wowebook.com

459

Chapter 19 Cycles

Auto-Correlation Estimate By Rainbow
Power-Spectral Density

Time (sec): 0.01 to 0.32
zeroFill = 96%
Noise Variance = 1.865658

10

Power

20

50

40

30

20

10

10

20

30

40

50

30

40

50
Frequency
Adapted from Rainbow 5.04 by
Optimal Designs Enterprise

FIGURE 19.6 Display of spectral analysis of time series data for cycles

Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis
In the early 1980s, John Ehlers (2002) developed a method that attempts to solve the problems of
Fourier analysis without compromising the accuracy of the results. His method, Maximum
Entropy Spectral Analysis (MESA), is available through his software company, MESA Software.
The method requires only a short time series to determine the inherent cycles in the data. It determines the most recent and most relevant waves for projection and records the different phases of
each cycle recognized.

Simpler (and More Practical) Methods
Fourier analysis and MESA provide methods for determining cycles but depend upon complex
mathematics. Often, simpler tools, such as detrending, envelopes, or centered moving averages,
can help identify cycles. At times, even the naked eye can observe cycles without the aid of complicated mathematics and sophisticated computer software.

Download at www.wowebook.com

460

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

Observation
In many cases, the low points of dominant cycles in market data are obvious to the eye. The exact
cyclical low can often be difficult to determine, but the general oscillation of the cycle is plain. In
his book, The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing, Hurst, the father of cycle analysis in the
stock market, used a method of envelopes that he traced along the major highs and lows in a price
chart. These envelopes were not predetermined like a filter but were drawn freehand on the chart.
When prices touched the upper and lower edges of the band, Hurst drew an arrow at the bottom
of the price chart for later inspection. When he was done with the freehand estimates, he looked
at the arrows drawn and determined if any obvious stable period separated the arrows. Figure
19.7 shows what this hand-drawn method might look like.
70.00

X - U.S. Steel Corporation
65.00

60.00

55.00

50.00

45.00

40.00

Dec

’10

’Feb

’Mar

’Apr

’May

’Jun

’Jul

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 19.7 Envelopes—Hurst hand-drawn method (X daily: December 14, 2009–July 22, 2010)

Of course, such methods are fraught with danger. The human mind often imagines cycles
where they do not exist or invents turning points to fit a preconceived notion of an existing cycle.
Hurst’s method was just the beginning observation of the potential for cycles in financial data. If
it appeared reasonable that cycles existed in the data, he would then use more sophisticated
methods, such as Fourier analysis and moving averages, to find the specifics.
Oscillators are another method of determining with the eye if cycles exist in financial data.
Many of the indicators in Chapter 18, “Confirmation,” show oscillations about a central horizontal line. By observing the lows especially, because cycles tend to synchronize at lows, one can

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 19 Cycles

461

observe if the times separating each low are at regular intervals. If so, a cycle is suspected to exist
in the data.
If a cycle is suspected, one way of quantifying it more accurately is to mark a dot on the
bottom of the chart page just below each low. Then, using a blank piece of paper, mark a line on
the edge of the paper, move the paper such that the line is placed on the first dot on the chart, and
draw another line on the paper at the point where the next dot lies. This gives a measured distance between the two dots on the paper. Then move the first paper line to the second dot and
draw a line on the paper where the third dot occurs on the chart. This second line should be near
the earlier line for the second dot but is rarely exactly on it. Now two cycle lengths have been
measured, and the difference in period can be seen immediately. Continue to move the paper
across the dots, making lines to mark the length between each subsequent cycle bottom. When
you’re done, the paper will show the range of periods between dots and thus give an estimate of
the cycle period. By placing the first line on the last dot, the range of lines from previous cycles
will give an estimate of the range in which to expect the next cyclical bottom.
The eyeball measurement of cycle lengths can also be done with a ruler or a drafting
divider. In this case, the distance between the first and second dot is measured and recorded; then
the distance between the second and third dot is measured and recorded; and so on. Once
imported into a spreadsheet, the mean, standard deviation, and other statistical measures can be
determined for all the intervals.
Detrending
Because specific cycle behavior is highly dependent on the direction of the next higher order
cycle, the first step in recognizing if a cycle exists in the data is to “detrend” it. Detrending is
done merely by dividing the current prices by a moving average of those prices. The resulting
plot will oscillate above and below a zero line, and the lows of the plot will correspond to the
lows in the cycle being analyzed.
Figure 19.8 shows an example of this detrending method. The detrended line is constructed
by dividing the current closing price by an 11-day SMA. The cycle with a 35-day period (slightly
shorter than the ideal 40 days) shows up clearly in the plot.
As a further example, Figure 19.9 shows detrending using a six-day SMA, roughly half the
length of the SMA used in Figure 19.8. The plot in Figure 19.9 shows more clearly the cycle
lows 18 days apart, the half-cycle of the 35-day cycle shown in Figure 19.8.
When prices are detrended using the daily closing price as the numerator, especially as we
lengthen the denominator, the plot becomes very erratic and difficult to interpret. The solution is
to use a moving average in the numerator as well, but this presents some problems that must first
be addressed.

Download at www.wowebook.com

462

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules
