The market had made a sharp rally, but the confluence of resistance
numbers held the market back, as shown in the 15-minute chart in Figure
5.24. In this chart, you will see the bearish engulfing pattern form as the

154

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 5.24
Used with permission of esignal.com.

market makes a violent reversal. Longer-term prices did recover and moved
even higher as of the writing of this book. The point is that by using pivot
points combined with candle patterns, you can time your entries and exits
in the market for a better price point. That is an outstanding advantage
from a risk-reward perspective.
In this example, prices did stall over time before continuing higher.
However, the weekly and monthly resistance targets kept prices in a consolidating pattern, as you can see from the daily chart in Figure 5.25. It is interesting to note that the exact high was formed by a shooting star pattern.
The value in using and identifying these confluence levels is that a
trader/analyst/investor is given both elements for successful trading: price
objectives combined with a specific time period. It is up to the trader to
manage a trade or to identify the magnitude of the reversal. Not all outcomes are the same, but the markets do react off these numbers; so that is
why we are looking to combine pivot point analysis with another dimension
of market analysis.
The second part of the trading equation using pivot points is combining
the idea of how to filter the numbers to help identify which support or resistance numbers to use to determine market condition. Remember we cov-

Pivot Points

155

FIGURE 5.25
Used with permission of esignal.com.

ered the fact that in a bearish market condition, the actual pivot point
would act as resistance. Confluence, or the cluster of support or resistance
numbers, also works within a specific time period. For example, when the
actual pivot point lines up at or near the market direction number or moving average of the pivot point and a resistance target number, we should
study that specific price zone for signals that indicate a shift in momentum.
This is the part where we need to comprehend what the charts and price action are revealing.
Candle patterns do just that in a clear visual manner. As you look at Figure 5.26, you will see that the exact high of the trading session on 1/20/2006
was formed by a doji. A confluence existed with the lining up of the daily
pivot point, the market direction numbers, and the R-1. The market never
even had the strength to test the resistance levels. By the end of the day, the
Dow fell another 100-plus points from the last price you see on this chart—
the low was 10673 that day. Once the low close doji signal occurred and the
shift in momentum occurred by making lower closing lows, a sharp sell-off
developed.
The September 2004 Active Trade Magazine published an article I
wrote and made it a cover story. It was on the power of pivot point conflu-

156

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 5.26
Used with permission of esignal.com.

ence and how calculating pivot points on more than one time frame can
help identify certain price levels that are likely to repel prices. The article
(p. 68) was titled “Pivot Points and Right Side Chart Analysis.” You may
have read that article or seen the issue—it was the one with President Bush
and Senator Kerry on the cover. The article’s focus was on not only entry
prices and risk management, but also profit objectives and how to trade
around the support and resistance numbers. What was most interesting
about that article was the fact that the confluence of daily, weekly, and
monthly numbers lined up near 1160 (see Table 5.5) and the exact high for
March 5, 2004, was 1163.50.

TABLE 5.5

Confluence

Time Frame

Confluence Number

Monthly R-1
Weekly R-2
Daily R-2

1161.50
1162.00
1159.25

Pivot Points

157

The average price level derived from the confluence numbers was
1161.00. The high for the year took less than 15 minutes to form and was
made by a doji and a shooting star on a 5-minute chart, as Figure 5.27
shows. That high held for 11 months, until after the November elections.
The point to this example is that the power of confluence worked to repel
prices. The outcome can be different each time, meaning we don’t know
what the percentage of retracement of price reversal will be. The general
idea, however, is that as a trader you should respect the notion that the
market will at least pause and more than likely generate a significant trading opportunity.
The particular setup that initiated a sell signal was my signature low
close doji trigger, one of the patterns on which we go into detail in the next
few chapters! This pattern and the high close doji at or near pivot point support targets are the highest probability trade signals I use.

FIGURE 5.27
Used with permission of esignal.com.

158

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

SUMMARY
Remember that pivot point support and resistance levels are a great gauge
of what a potential turning point or a predicted range in a given time period
will be. The more time periods or confluence of target numbers that line up,
the higher is the probability that a strong market reaction will occur. Therefore, it is important to raise your attention when prices reach these predicted price support and resistance numbers. If you apply proper risk and
trade management techniques, as will be covered in the next few chapters,
you should see a tremendous turnaround in your trading performance.

CHAPTER 6

Pivot Point Moving
Average System

he moving average is one of the most widely utilized indicators in
technical analysis because the moving average is easily identifiable
and easy to back-test. Many automated trading systems use moving
averages or some derivative of a moving average to generate buy and sell
signals. Moving averages are considered classic indicators and are very
popular with traders today. Most technicians view the moving average as a
way to signal a change in the direction of the trend, as well as a way to
smooth out the volatility of the market. In Chapter 2, we covered a key component in understanding the concept of trend, which in essence gives you
the ability to understand the concept of momentum. Remember this: “In a
bullish environment, buying begets buying.” Higher closing highs bring
higher highs as momentum and assigned values (the closes) are justified.
The law of physics that states that “a body in motion tends to stay in motion
until a force or obstacle stops or changes that motion” applies in this scenario because higher assigned values can induce more buying from existing
buyers and can attract new buyers. Once again, the opposite is true of a
bearish market: Lower closing lows bring lower lows as momentum and assigned values are justified. The lower assigned values induce more selling
by existing sellers and can attract new sellers into the market.
When prices have appreciated and all buyers have exhausted their resources to add more long positions in a bull market, prices have reached
what is known as absolute value. Prices will more than likely consolidate
for a period of time before they change direction and reverse lower in
value. The opposite is true in a downtrending market. An important com-

T

159

160

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

ponent to remember is that price action typically moves from trend phase
to congestion and can either continue with the original trend or reverse the
trend. Momentum and the psychology of the perception of the value of a
given market in a given time period are what will move prices from a consolidation, or congestion phase, back to a trending condition.

DETERMINING TREND DIRECTION
Simply put, one way to determine the trend is by drawing trend lines. In
an uptrend, we should see a sequence of higher highs and higher lows, so
we would draw a line against the lows and extend it outward to forecast a
support level sometime in the future. In a downtrend, as the sequence of
events shows lower highs and lower lows, we would draw a line against the
top of the highs and extend it outward to help forecast a resistance point in
the future.
Another method used in determining trend line support and resistance
is through the use of moving averages. The most popular method of using a
moving average is to average the closing prices (sometimes referred to as
the settlement prices) of a defined number of sessions. The moving average
is a lagging indicator. The purpose of the moving average is to indicate the
beginning and the ending of a trend. Since the moving average follows the
market, the signals it generates occur after the trend has already changed.
It is argued that most traders (or about 70 percent) lose their money in the
markets. If the reason is that most traders focus on moving average values
that are predetermined by default settings in their charting software packages or if they use the media’s favorite 200-day moving average, it’s no wonder that people lose. The majority are following the same indicator.

BEAT THE STREET
As Yogi said, “If you want to do better than the average bear, then you have
to think better than the average bear!” If you want to beat the Street, then
you need to think better than the Street—use a different set of values or understand how signals are generated. You do not want to follow and trade off
what everyone else is looking at; so when it comes to moving averages, you
want to look at a different set of conditions and time periods. Think for a
minute: If lots of traders are watching for trade signals on 10, 20, and 50 periods and if the statement holds true that the majority of traders lose, then
why do you want to trade based off signals on those moving averages? It
might serve you well to watch these indicators so you can see where others

Pivot Point Moving Average System

161

get in or out of trades, but certainly not to follow those, which would be the
same as succumbing to crowd mentality. Some traders and technical analysts use various ways to calculate moving averages, such as the simple, the
weighted, and the exponential. I prefer the simple moving average and a
different set of values for my moving average, namely the pivot point.

THE SIMPLE MOVING AVERAGE
The simple moving average (the arithmetic mean) is the most popular moving average used in technical analysis. The simple moving average is the
sum of the closing prices over a period of sessions divided by the number
of sessions. For example, a 10-day moving average would be the sum of the
past 10 days’ closing prices divided by 10. Each new day would drop the
first day’s closing price and add the new day’s closing price. As new data is
added to the calculation, old data is removed. By averaging the price data,
a smoother line is produced, and the trend is much easier to recognize. The
disadvantage of the simple moving average is that it only takes into account the time period of the sessions covered in the calculation and that it
gives equal weight to each day’s price.
In Chapters 4 and 5, we covered the pivot point formulas and the significance of pivot points as support and resistance. As you will recall, the
pivot point calculation provides the mean (average) for the session’s trading range, or high, low, and close: (H + L + C)/3.
This moving average section discusses how the moving average helps
clarify the market’s price flow by extending price analysis over a certain period of time. In this manner, moving averages can accentuate when a market enters an extreme condition by how far it departs from the mean. Price
action either will move toward the moving average or will return to the
moving average to retest that level.
The “Market Direction” number that was shown in the Excel sheet in
Figure 5.8 is a combination of the use of price session information (pivot
point number) over a period of time (moving average). The market direction number utilizes cumulative data from the high, the low, and the close
for a session. This information provides a clear picture of the “average true
price” for that time period. The market direction number is then calculated
by taking the average pivot number from the past three periods. Any time
frame can be utilized to calculate the number. However, the longer the time
frame, the more significance the number will hold. To calculate the market
direction number, add three pivot points from the same session, and divide
the sum by three. The purpose of using the pivot point in the moving average calculation is that the pivot point will show the continuance of the
trend.

162

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Market Direction =

Pivot + Pivot + Pivot
3

As stated previously, the market direction number, which is a three-period pivot point moving average, can act as a support number in bullish
conditions and has a high degree of importance when one of the pivot point
calculations for the current session coincides with or is near that number.
The market direction number holds true as a resistance number in a bear
market condition. If another number coincides with the market direction
number, such as the actual pivot point or an R-1 (resistance level one)
number, then it would serve as the target high number for that specific time
period. Another way of using the three-period pivot point moving average
is as a point of reference or fair value. For example, when the market price
departs, or deviates, too far from the mean, then you can use the extreme
resistance or support number, such as R-2 or S-2 (support level two), or
the farthest target number of that direction, as a potential turning point.
When various time frames are incorporated into the analysis (daily,
weekly, and monthly), there is more certainty that the target price level can
generate the anticipated reaction. If the market gaps too far from the daily
pivot point moving average, use the monthly and/or weekly target support
and resistance numbers to help identify a targeted reversal support or resistance point. Figure 6.1 shows a spot foreign exchange (forex) British
pound daily chart with the three-period pivot point moving average overlaid on top of prices. Notice that as the market changes conditions from
bearish (downtrend) to bullish (uptrend), prices bounce off the moving average as a support line and then trade off the moving average as it acts as
a ceiling of resistance. If you notice the price action from November 15 to
November 25, you will see that the market entered a consolidating phase as
prices moved above and below the moving average. The moving average
went virtually in a flat line with a bias to an upside slope. This was hinting
that prices were getting ready to change direction. When you watch the
moving average in relation to the underlying price action, sometimes you
can get clues as to the true market price direction using the pivot point
moving average. Due to the weighting of the high, low, and close combined, the moving average factors in the typical price of that time period,
thus giving a better gauge of market value. If the close is closer to the high,
the average will be at a higher assigned value. Using the three-period pivot
point will help you filter out much of the market noise and will give you a
truer sense of the market’s fair value within the price range of the past
three trading periods.
At times, the slope, or angle, of the moving average can give you a clue
as to the market’s true strength or weakness, especially when combined

Pivot Point Moving Average System

163

FIGURE 6.1
Used with permission of esignal.com.

with candlestick charting. The slope helps filter out the noise, and you can
see if the market’s value is progressively appreciating or depreciating.
When a market goes from the trending phase into the consolidation phase,
it is the slope of the pivot point moving average that can help you identify
the potential price direction the market makes next from the consolidating
phase, such as if the market will make a continuation or a trend reversal
move. For added clarity, when combined with identifying a high-probability bottom or top-forming candle, you have added confirmation of a potential move.
In Figure 6.2, the graph shows a representation of a pivot point moving
average in a declining trend phase. Then as prices consolidate as the pivot
point average measures the typical price rather than the close, we can determine what the true market value is and which way prices tend to be
moving. Markets sometimes demonstrate extreme volatility at turning
points, and the moving average approach can help filter out the noise inflicted by wide price swings. These swings often lead to confusion or
worse—traders getting whipsawed, causing loss in trading equity.

164

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Moving average
with a higher slope
indicates a bullish bias.

FIGURE 6.2

As the moving average slopes up, it indicates that the market values are
also tending to trade higher. Eventually, we see a trend reversal, which is
what the direction of the moving average indicated.
In Figure 6.3, let’s look at a five-minute chart on the Chicago Board of
Trade (CBOT) mini-Dow contract. Just to clarify, the minimum tick fluctuation is a one-point move, and every point is worth $5. So the overall contract value is $5 times the index. If the Dow is at 10500, the contract value
is $52,500. This may not make sense now, but as you read the book further,
you will understand what the low close doji sell signal is about and what the
specific rules are for entering on this pattern. For purposes of illustrating
what phase a market goes in and how the pivot point moving average can
help you follow a market, let’s look at the sequence of events:
• The market develops into a downtrend.
• At the bottom, a bullish reversal candle pattern forms.
• Prices start trading wildly, but the moving averages (M/As) are sloping
higher.
• The market reverses and then goes into a sideways channel or consolidating phase. (If you examine the pivot point moving averages, you
will see they were pointing higher while prices were in the congestion
phase.)
• Prices finally break out and continue the uptrend.

Pivot Point Moving Average System

165

FIGURE 6.3
Used with permission of esignal.com.

This chart was from 2/10/2006; prices went on to trade that day as high
as 10963. The moving averages did alert you to the internal strength, and the
price direction did continue higher—a pretty good method for getting a
clue to the market’s next move.
In Figure 6.4, we have the CBOT mini-Dow contract, which shows that
the market was coming out of the congestion, or consolidation, period in
late October. The three-period pivot point moving average was also flatlining with an upward slope in the direction of the moving average. Once the
market made a break for it by establishing the uptrend, the average helped
identify the trending condition. As the chart illustrates, the pivot point moving average actually hugs the market’s lows when in an uptrend and the
highs in a downtrend. It also helps to identify the conditional changes when
the market makes reversals.
This moving average approach works just as well for active day trading
markets, such as the e-mini–Standard & Poor’s (S&P) shown in the 5minute chart in Figure 6.5, as it does for swing or position traders. This
method can help active day traders to see and to confirm changes in price
conditions, such as when the market is in a consolidating period to trend-

166

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 6.4
Used with permission of esignal.com.

ing mode. Notice how the moving average acts as a support once the market starts the breakout in the uptrend.
The three-period pivot point moving average works as a tool to confirm
triggers and exits by price action closing above or below the moving average pivot line. In Figure 6.6, we have a 15-minute chart on the spot forex
Japanese yen currency. As the market forms a bottom at 9:00 A.M., notice
how the moving average shows a cup formation and that the price of the
market closes above the moving average. This gives us a clue that the market is starting to change from a bearish trend condition to a consolidating
phase and that the market is starting to move into a reversal of the current
trending condition. As the market starts to establish higher highs and
higher lows, it also is closing above prior highs and, most important, closing above the three-period pivot point moving average. Now the average
starts to act as a support target until prices reach the top, and the moving
average starts to flatline again as prices go into another consolidating
phase. The Japanese yen chart provides a good example of a high close
hammer trigger, confirmed by the price closing above the moving average
pivot line.

Pivot Point Moving Average System

167

FIGURE 6.5
Used with permission of esignal.com.

TRADING TRIGGER STRATEGY
• After a Downtrend. If the price closes above the moving average (M/A)
and above the prior time period’s highs, with a sequence of higher highs
and higher lows, enter a long position, as the uptrend is now confirmed.
You will want the moving average to have formed a flat line or a highersloping angle. Place a stop below the lowest low point.
Closing Price > M/A = Go long or exit shorts
• After an Uptrend. If the price closes below the moving average and
below the prior time period’s lows, with a sequence of lower highs and
lower lows, enter a short position, as the downtrend is now confirmed.
You will want the moving average to have formed a flat line or a lowersloping angle. Place a stop above the highest high point.
Closing Price < M/A = Go short or exit longs
When trading based off the market direction number or three-period
pivot point moving average, there is no need to wait for the value of the

168

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 6.6
Used with permission of esignal.com.

moving average to start rising or falling to determine the trigger to enter the
market. A close above the moving average will trigger a long position, and
a close below the moving average will trigger a short position. However,
you want to see the moving average values follow the direction of the price
move in the desired trade.

CONDITIONAL OPTIMIZED MOVING
AVERAGE SYSTEM
