
The interest rate charged on loans by the Federal Reserve to mem-

Doji A candlestick term; used to describe a time period when the open and the
close are nearly exact. It is a strong sell signal, but a cautionary warning at bottoms.
Easing

Modest decline in price.

Economic indicator A statistic that indicates current economic growth rates and
trends, such as retail sales and employment.
ECU

European currency unit.

Effective exchange rate An attempt to summarize the effects on a country’s
trade balance of its currency’s changes against other currencies.
Elliott Wave Analysis theory developed by Ralph Elliott, based on the premise
that prices move in two basic types of waves: impulse waves, which move with the
main trend, and corrective waves, which move against the main trend.
Euro dollars U.S. dollars on deposit with a bank outside of the United States and,
consequently, outside the jurisdiction of the United States. The bank could be either
a foreign bank or a subsidiary of a U.S. bank.
European Monetary System (EMS) A system designed to stabilize if not eliminate exchange risk between member states of the EMS as part of the economic convergence policy of the European Union (EU). It permits currencies to move in a
measured fashion (divergence indicator) within agreed bands (the parity grid) with
respect to the ECU and consequently with each other.
Exchange control
rency.

Rules used to preserve or protect the value of a country’s cur-

Exchange for physicals (EFP) A transaction generally used by two hedgers who
want to exchange futures for cash positions; also referred to as “against actuals” or
“versus cash.”
Exercise The process by which options traders convert an options position into
the underlying futures or derivative market; e.g., the buyer of a call option would

322

GLOSSARY

convert his or her calls for a long position, and the buyer of a put option would convert his or her option to a short futures contract.
Face value The amount of money printed on the face of the certificate of a security; the original dollar amount of indebtedness incurred.
Falling three methods A bearish continuation pattern similar to the Western
version of a bear flag. It is a four- but mostly a five-candle pattern composition.
Fast market Rapid movement in a market caused by strong interest by buyers
and/or sellers. In such circumstances, price levels may be omitted, and bid-andoffer quotations may occur too rapidly to be fully reported.
Fed The United States Federal Reserve System. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) membership is compulsory for Federal Reserve members. The corporation had deep involvement in the savings-and-loan crisis of the late 1980s.
Federal Reserve System

The central banking system of the United States.

Fed fund rate The interest rate on Federal Reserve System funds. This is a closely
watched short-term interest rate because it signals the Fed’s view as to the state of
the money supply.
Fibonacci numbers and ratios A series of numbers that when added together
continue to infinity. The ratios are the math calculations, which are the sum of the
relationships between the numbers derived either from dividing the series numbers
or, in some cases, taking the square roots of the numbers. The common ratio numbers are 0.38%, 0.618%, 50%, and 100%.
Fill or kill An order that must be entered for trading, normally in a pit, three times;
is immediately canceled if not filled.
Financial instrument One of two basic types: a debt instrument, which is a loan
with an agreement to pay back funds with interest, and an equity security, which is
a share or stock in a company.
First notice day According to Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) rules, the first day
on which a notice of intent to deliver a commodity in fulfillment of a given month’s
futures contract can be made by the clearinghouse to a buyer. The clearinghouse
also informs the sellers of whom they have been matched up with. Each exchange
sets its own guides and rules for this process.
Fixed exchange rate Official rate set by monetary authorities; often permits fluctuation within a band.
Flexible exchange rate An exchange rate with a fixed parity against one or more
currencies with frequent revaluations.
Floating exchange rate An exchange rate determined by market forces. Even
floating currencies are subject to intervention by the monetary authorities.
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee, which sets U.S. money supply targets,
which tend to be implemented through Fed Fund interest rates, and so on.

Glossary

Foreign exchange (forex)
chase of another.

323
The purchase or sale of a currency against sale or pur-

Forex market Usually referred to as the over-the-counter market where buyers
and sellers conduct foreign currency exchange business.
Forward margins Discounts or premiums between the spot rate and the forward
rate for a currency; usually quoted in points.
Forward operations Foreign exchange transactions on which the fulfillment of
the mutual delivery obligations is made on a date later than the second business day
after the transaction was concluded.
Forward outright A commitment to buy to or sell a currency for delivery on a
specified future date or period. The price is quoted as the spot rate plus or minus the
forward points for the chosen period.
Forward rate Quoted in terms of forward points, which represent the difference
between the forward rate and the spot rate. To obtain the forward rate from the actual exchange rate, the forward points are either added or subtracted from the exchange rate. The decision to add or subtract points is determined by the differential
between the deposit rates for both currencies concerned in the transaction. The
base currency with the higher interest rate is said to be at a discount to the lower interest rate quoted currency in the forward market. Therefore, the forward points are
subtracted from the spot rate. Similarly, the lower interest rate base currency is said
to be at a premium, and the forward points are added to the spot rate to obtain the
forward rate.
Free reserves Total reserves held by a bank minus the reserves required by the
authority.
Full carrying charge market A futures market where the price difference between delivery months reflects the total costs of interest, insurance, and storage.
Fundamental analysis A method of anticipating future price movement using
supply and demand information; also a method to study the macroeconomic factors
(including inflation, growth, trade balance, government deficit, and interest rates)
that influence currency and financial markets.
G7 (Group of Seven) The seven leading industrial countries: the United States,
Germany, Japan, France, the United Kingdom, Canada, and Italy.
Gann, William D. An early pioneer in technical analysis who is credited with a
mathematical system based on Fibonacci numbers and with the Gann Square and
Cycle studies.
Gap A mismatch between maturities and cash flows in a bank or individual
dealer’s position book. Gap exposure is effectively interest rate exposure.
GLOBEX A global after-hours electronic trading system used on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME).

324

GLOSSARY

Golden cross A bullish term used when one or more shorter-term moving averages cross above a longer-term moving average; generally generates a buy signal.
Gold standard The original system for supporting the value of currency issued.
This is where the price of gold is fixed against the currency; it means that the increased supply of gold does not lower the price of gold but causes prices to increase.
Good until canceled An instruction to a broker that, unlike normal practice, does
not expire at the end of the trading day; usually terminates at the end of the trading
month.
Gravestone doji
of the range.

A long range day where the open and the close are near the low

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Total value of a country’s output, income, or expenditure produced within the country’s physical borders.
Gross National Product (GNP) Gross domestic product plus “factor income from
abroad,” i.e., income earned from investment or work abroad.
Hammer A candlestick pattern that forms at bottoms. At market tops, the same
construction is called a “hanging man.” The shadow is generally twice the length of
the real body.
Harami A two-candle candlestick pattern that can be seen to mark tops and bottoms. The second candle of this formation is contained within the real body of the
prior session’s candle.
Hard currency Any one of the major world currencies that is well traded and easily converted into other currencies.
Head and shoulders A pattern in price trends that, according to chartists, indicates a price trend reversal. The price has risen for some time, at the peak of the left
shoulder; profit taking has caused the price to drop or to level. The price then rises
steeply again to the head before more profit taking causes the price to drop to
around the same level as the shoulder. A further modest rise or level will indicate
that a further major fall is imminent. The breach of the neckline is the indication to
sell.
Hedging The practice of offsetting the price risk inherent in any cash market position by taking an equal but opposite position in the futures market. Hedgers use
the futures markets to protect their businesses from adverse price changes.
High wave A candle that has a wide range with a small real body that develops in
the middle of that range. It has significance as a reversal formation, especially if several of these form in succession.
Horizontal spread The purchase of either a call or a put option and the simultaneous sale of the same type of option with typically the same strike price but with
a different expiration month; also referred to as a “calendar spread.”
IMF

International Monetary Fund; established in 1946 to provide international liq-

325

Glossary

uidity on a short and medium term and to encourage liberalization of exchange
rates. The IMF supports countries with balance-of-payments problems with the provision of loans.
IMM International Monetary Market; part of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
that lists a number of currency and financial futures.
Implied rates The interest rate determined by calculating the difference between
spot and forward rates.
Implied volatility A measurement of the market’s expected price range of the underlying currency futures based on the traded option premiums.
Indicative quote

A market maker’s price that is not firm.

Inflation Continued rise in the general price level in conjunction with a related
drop in purchasing power; sometimes referred to as an excessive movement in such
price levels.
Initial margin The margin required by a foreign exchange firm to initiate the buying or the selling of a determined amount of currency.
Interbank rates The bid and offer rates at which international banks place deposits with each other; the basis of the interbank market.
Intercommodity spread The purchase of a given delivery month of one futures
market and the simultaneous sale of the same delivery month of a different, but related, futures market.
Interdelivery spread The purchase of one delivery month of a given futures contract and the simultaneous sale of another delivery month of the same commodity
on the same exchange; also referred to as an “intramarket spread” or “calendar
spread.”
Interest arbitrage Switching into another currency by buying spot and selling
forward, and investing proceeds in order to obtain a higher interest yield. Interest
arbitrage can be inward (from foreign currency into the local one) or outward (from
the local currency to the foreign one). Sometimes better results can be obtained by
not selling the forward interest amount. In that case, some treat it as no longer
being a complete arbitrage because if the exchange rate moved against the arbitrageur, the profit on the transaction may create a loss.
Interest rate swaps An agreement to swap interest rate exposures from floating
to fixed or vice versa. There is no swap of the principal. It is the interest cash flows,
be they payments or receipts, that are exchanged.
Intermarket spread The sale of a given delivery month of a futures contract on
one exchange and the simultaneous purchase of the same delivery month and futures contract on another exchange.
Internationalization Referring to a currency that is widely used to denominate
trade and credit transactions by nonresidents of the country of issue. The U.S. dollar and the Swiss franc are examples.

326

GLOSSARY

Intervention Action by a central bank to effect the value of its currency by entering the market. Concerted intervention refers to action by a number of central
banks to control exchange rates.
Introducing broker (IB) A person or an organization that solicits or accepts orders to buy or sell futures contracts or commodity options but does not accept
money or other assets from customers to support such orders.
Inverted market A futures market in which the relationship between two delivery months of the same commodity is abnormal.
Island chart pattern Formed when the market gaps in one direction and then in
the next session gaps open in the opposite direction, leaving the prior day’s bar or
range seeming like an “island” on the chart. At tops, this is extremely bearish; and
at bottoms, it is considered extremely bullish. This is a rare chart pattern and is similar in nature to the Japanese candlestick pattern called the ”abandon baby.”
J trader An independent electronic trading order entry platform provider by Pats
Systems that routes orders to the exchanges trading systems, such as the Chicago
Board of Trade’s E-CBOT system and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s GLOBEX
system.
Lagging indicators Market indicators showing the general direction of the economy and confirming or denying the trend implied by the leading indicators.
Last trading day (LTD) The final day on which trading may occur in a given futures or options contract month.
Leading indicators Market indicators that signal the state of the economy for the
coming months. Some of the leading indicators include average manufacturing
workweek, initial claims for unemployment insurance, orders for consumer goods
and material, percentage of companies reporting slower deliveries, change in manufacturers’ unfilled orders for durable goods, plant and equipment orders, new
building permits, index of consumer expectations, change in material prices, prices
of stocks, and change in money supply.
LEAPS Long-Term Equity Anticipation Securities; options that have an extended
life as long as five years; generally used for options on stocks.
Leverage The ability to control large dollar amounts of a commodity with a comparatively small amount of capital.
Liability In terms of foreign exchange, the obligation to deliver to a counterparty
an amount of currency either in respect of a balance sheet holding at a specified future date or in respect of an unmatured forward or spot transaction.
Limit order A request to deal as a buyer or a seller for a foreign currency transaction at a specified price or at a better price, if obtainable.
Liquidation Any transaction that offsets or closes out a previously established position.
Liquidity The ability of a market to accept large transactions.

Glossary

327

Long The condition of having bought futures contracts or owning a cash
commodity.
Long-legged doji A specific doji that forms when the open and the close occur
near the middle of a wide-range trading session.
Maintenance margin A set minimum margin that a customer must maintain in
his or her margin account. If the cash amount in a trading account drops below the
margin level and a margin call is generated, then a trader must either send additional funds to get the account back to the initial margin level or liquidate positions
to satisfy the call.
Make a market The action of a dealer quoting bid and offer prices at which he or
she stands ready to buy and sell.
Managed float The regular intervention of the monetary authorities in the market
to stabilize the rates or to aim the exchange rate in a required direction.
Managed futures Represents an industry comprised of professional money managers known as commodity trading advisors who manage client assets on a discretionary basis, using global futures markets as an investment medium.
Margin The amount of money or collateral that must be initially provided or thereafter maintained to ensure against losses on open contracts. Initial margin must be
placed before a trade is entered. Maintenance or variation margin must be added to
initial margin to maintain against losses on open positions. The amount that needs
to be present to establish or thereafter maintain is sometimes referred to as “necessary margin.”
Margin call A claim by one’s broker or dealer for additional good faith performance monies, usually issued when an investor’s account suffers adverse price
movements.
Market maker A person or firm authorized to create and maintain a market in an
instrument.
Market order An order to buy or to sell a financial instrument immediately at the
best possible price.
Market profile
time brackets.

A method of charting that analyzes price and volume in specific

Mark to market The daily adjustment of an account to reflect accrued profits and
losses; often required to calculate variations of margins.
Microeconomics The study of economic activity as it applies to individual firms
or well-defined small groups of individuals or economic sectors.
Midprice or middle rate The price halfway between two prices, or the average of
both buying and selling prices offered by the market makers.
Minimum price fluctuation The smallest increment of market price movement
possible in a given futures contract.

328
Momentum

GLOSSARY

The measure of the rate of change in prices.

Morning doji star
formed by a doji.

A bullish three-candle formation in which the middle candle is

Moving average A way of smoothing a set of data; widely used in price time series.
National Futures Association (NFA) The self-regulatory agency for futures and
options markets. The primary responsibilities of the NFA are to enforce ethical
standards and customer protection rules, to screen futures professionals for membership, to audit and monitor professionals for financial and general compliance
rules, and to provide for arbitration of futures-related disputes.
Nearby month
spot month.

The futures contract month closest to expiration. Also called the

Net position The amount of currency bought or sold that has not yet been offset
by opposite transactions.
Offer The price at which a seller is willing to sell; the best offer is the lowest such
price available.
Offset The closing out or liquidation of a futures position.
Offshore The operations of a financial institution that, although physically located in a country, has little connection with that country’s financial systems. In certain countries, a bank is not permitted to do business in the domestic market but
only with other foreign banks; this is known as an “offshore banking unit.”
One cancels other A contingency order instructing a broker to cancel one side
of a two-sided entry order.
Opening range A range of prices at which buy and sell transactions take place
during the first minute of the opening of the market for most markets.
Open interest The total number of futures or options contracts of a given commodity that have been neither offset by an opposite futures or option transaction
nor fulfilled by delivery of the commodity or option exercise. Each open transaction
has a buyer and a seller; but for calculation of open interest, only one side of the
contract is counted.
Open outcry Method of public auction for making verbal bids and offers in the
trading pits or rings of futures exchanges.
Option A contract that conveys the right, but not the obligation, to buy or to sell
a particular item at a certain price for a limited time.
Out-of-the-money option An option with no intrinsic value; i.e., a call whose
strike price is above the current futures price or a put whose strike price is below
the current futures price.
Overbought The condition of a specific move when the market price has risen
too far too fast and is set up for a corrective pullback or period of consolidation; the
opposite of oversold.

329

Glossary

Overnight A deal from today until the next business day.
Overnight limit Net long or short position in one or more currencies that a dealer
can carry over into the next dealing day. Passing the book to other bank dealing
rooms in the next trading time zone reduces the need for dealers to maintain these
unmonitored exposures.
Oversold The condition of a specific move when the market price has fallen and
is in a position for a corrective rally or a period of consolidation; the opposite of
overbought.
Par The face value of a security; e.g., a bond selling at par is worth the same dollar amount it was issued for or at which it will be redeemed at maturity.
Parities The value of one currency in terms of another.
Pegged A system where a currency moves in line with another currency; some
pegs are strict while others have bands of movement.
Piercing pattern A candlestick formation involving two candles formed at bottoms of market moves. The first candle is a long dark candle; the second candle
opens lower than the dark candle’s low and closes more than half way above the
first candle’s real body.
PIP (percentage in points) One unit of price change in the bid/ask price of a currency. For most currencies, it denotes the fourth decimal place in an exchange rate
and represents 1/100 of 1 percent (0.01%).
Pit The area on the trading floor where futures and options on futures contracts
are bought and sold. It is customary for Chicago markets to refer to the individual
commodity trading areas as pits, whereas in New York, they are referred to as
“rings.”
Pivot points The mathematical calculation formula used to determine the support or resistance ranges in a given time period. These formulas can be used to calculate intraday, daily, weekly, monthly, or quarterly ranges.
Point-and-figure A charting style that tracks the market’s price action by representing increases with plotting Xs on a chart and downside corrections with Os. Time
is not an issue with this method; rather, it is concerned with pure price movement.
Position The netted total commitments in a given currency; can be flat or square
(no exposure), long (more currency bought than sold), or short ( more currency
sold than bought).
Premium
