
Wait for the Ideal Situation
Exercise of the imagination is quite logical in theoretical analysis but when practical
trading commitments are at stake let the student wait for the ideal situation. For
instance, the practical student will find days, weeks, even months, passing by, in certain individual cases, without a chart presenting any sort of a pattern or formation
definite enough to justify an actual trading commitment. His patience will thus be
sorely tried at times but it is almost self-evident that patience is a prime requisite and
that it is far better to wait for the ideal situation than to rush into actual cash commitments merely through a desire for action when the situation is not strong enough
or definite enough to warrant it.
Practical profits are often possible during the process of building formations, but
by far the more certain and larger profits are made in the rapid moves in the direction of the major trend which come between these area formations or preparation
periods. It is much better to be patient, to restrain one’s ambition for profits, and to
stay out of the market entirely when no perfect patterns appear for a time, rather
than to become impatient and rush in enthusiastically on less than ideal situations.
Too hasty action often leads to eventual loss of profits, capital and confidence.
– 414 –

TRADING TACTICS

Remember the old traders’ adage: ‘‘There are three rules for making money in the
stock market. They are (1) Patience, (2) Patience, and (3) More Patience.

Too Close Contact with Market Inadvisable
In our occasional references up to now to actual market action taken on technical
forecasts, it has been inferred that all trades were to be executed at the opening on
the morning following the completed chart picture, or the trading decision. For the
normal and average student trader this is unquestionably the best procedure. In all our chart study
Three rules for making
we have taken the attitude that the student is not
money in the stock
watching the ticker, is not in a brokerage office or
market are (1) Patience,
board-room, is not even in direct touch with his bro(2) Patience, and (3) More
ker. The professional trader, the quick-turn artist,
Patience.
the scalper, may watch the minor moves of the market during the day’s trading and may derive benefit
therefrom in the form of better opportunities for catching sharp swings during the
day when they are just getting under way. But the average chart student will seldom
if ever lose very much by holding himself aloof from constant communication with
the ticker and, indeed, he is much more likely to benefit by divorcing himself from
the excitement, the conversation, the gossip, the impetuosities, and the nerve strain,
which emanate from watching the erratic fluctuations within the day’s market from
the dubious vantage point of the board-room. Many professional operators are past
masters in the art of so splitting or bunching their orders as to make the tape produce the effect they desire at a certain time of the day on the crowds who are watching it in the board-room.
The ideal aim of the chart student is to let the action of the market speak for itself
in forecasting its own technical position, and it is exceedingly difficult to assume the
calm open-mindedness necessary for such an ideal, while exposed to the psychological tides of board-room gossip, news, hopes and fears.

Regular Time for Daily Chart Consideration
We have previously noted (in Study I) that it is well for the student to have one certain, regular and habitual time each day for making up his charts, preferably after
the close in the evening. He can then evaluate the day’s movements at his leisure,
bestowing as much or little time as seems necessary from the importance of the shifting scene, and if he is not in close touch with his broker, he can make out his orders
in calm and unhurried serenity and mail them the same evening, to reach his broker
early the next morning.
– 415 –

STUDY XII

Limited vs. Market Orders
In our practical trading examples we have also assumed that orders are entered ‘‘at
the market’’ rather than at limit prices. We hold to no dogmatic theory or rule on this
point. There are plenty of occasions when it is more advisable to place limit orders
and to take the smaller chance of missing out on execution and possibly even on a
profitable move, rather than to take the larger chance of being caught by an overnight spread, or a wide opening. Limit orders are generally advisable, of course, in
excited trading, where spreads are probable, or on important news breaking after
the close. They are also useful where the habitual, or probable, daily range is wide,
and where it seems logical that some time during the following day will see the price
temporarily at a more favorable level than is probable at the opening.
With such not so very common exceptions, however, it would seem to be the better policy to trade at the market instead of with limit orders. The disappointments
and losses and errors of judgment which result from the failure of execution on limit
orders more than outweigh, in the long run, the small advantages which may
accrue. In the majority of cases the trader is not justified in trading at all unless he
can see the probability of a worthwhile move of at least four or five points.
It is manifestly foolish and illogical, therefore, for the trader to take a chance on
missing out entirely on this profitable move of many points merely on the chance
that he may save from a fraction to a point or so by placing a limit order instead of
a market order.

Intestinal Fortitude – a Word to the Naturally Conservative
In concluding our discussion of various practical suggestions for using our basic
chart knowledge: in actual trading, a word about ‘‘nerve’’ or intestinal fortitude may
not be out of place. We hesitate to address this portion of our observations to the
general mass of average readers because in most cases we find that the average student is more apt to need words of caution and of restraint rather than encouragement to action. But there is most certainly a definite type of individual who is so
conservative as to need a word or two on decision and initiative and action. Whether
fortunately or unfortunately, this class of personality is in the minority, but it may
frankly be stated that it is this class, also, which makes the most consistent success
in technical chart trading.
The student who has the innate character most favorable to profitable chart trading is the individual who will naturally attain to a conservative and skeptical attitude toward all of our chart rules, and will therefore fear to tread where others, less
capable perhaps, rush in blindly and over-confidently to their ultimate loss. Though
– 416 –

TRADING TACTICS

those of careful and skeptical temperament are probably in the minority, they are the
successful minority, and our constant reiteration of caution, conservatism and mistrust of all technical rule and theory has probably struck in them a more responsive
chord than in the larger group for whom such admonitions are intended. This small,
conservative class of souls may therefore need to pay special attention to our final
advice of this study, which is the gospel of decisive action when conscientious study
has led to definite and sincerely grounded conclusions.

The Too Conservative Student
The conservative student will err on that side of his nature. He may, for that reason,
be more successful in the long run. But, contrary as it may seem, he must guard
against over-conservatism, against over-caution, against too much doubt and timidity. The chief stumbling block for this type is his hesitation. He reasons out a perfectly clear and correct case for a certain type of direct and definite action. Then he
weighs the opposite possibilities too carefully, and decides to wait.
His market movement gets away from him. His judgment was correct but the
longer he procrastinates, the more hesitant he becomes, the more psychologically
uncertain, and the less likely to make profit from his correct analysis. The result of
such procrastination is not only a possible psychological upset but, in not uncommon cases, the tendency finally to force himself to rush in without the usual careful
analysis and sound sense, at a time when the movement which was forecast with
proper logic some time ago, is just about over with, or is about to reverse itself for a
technical correction at least.

The Conservative vs. the Overconfident Type
The reader must decide for himself in which class he belongs, and he should have
no great difficulty in properly determining whether this advice is for him or for an
entirely different dispostion. If it is for him, then his aim should be to give direct and
prompt expression to the dictates of his study and analysis, once they have led him
to a basically sound conclusion.
The individual who is naturally conservative and calculating, will find a special
blessing in recourse to the stop-loss order. By using this type of protection whenever
he fears the upsetting of a conscientious and searching analysis, he may venture definite action on his conviction, with the serenity that comes from knowing exactly
how much it is possible to lose in case the market does move unexpectedly in opposition to analytical conclusions.
We do not want to give the impression that the individual who cannot sincerely
place himself in this class of conservative or cautious traders is doomed to failure in
– 417 –

STUDY XII

practical chart trading. Far from it. It merely happens that conservatism in moderate doses is a propitious characteristic for market success, but conservatism may be
carried to profitless extremes just as easily as radicalism. A healthy mingling of decisiveness and conservatism is the ideal mixture for the successful trader, as for most
other careers as well.

The Danger of Stubborness
The decisiveness which we have recommended to the too conservative trader as a
desirable quality to cultivate should not, however, be carried to the extreme of overconfidence or stubborn persistence in a decision which has been contraverted by
subsequent chart action. If the stock does not act according to one’s primary analysis, then the market itself is trying to tell the trader to change that analysis.
One of the greatest fundamental mistakes which the chart trader can make is to
assume that success or failure is the result entirely of his own analysis. This is perhaps true to a large degree but it is a dangerous attitude for it tends to make the
trader feel that the market movement rests upon him, upon his analysis, upon his
ideas of what should happen in the future, and thus it begets both over-confidence
and stubbornness. The successful trader should realize that his analysis has nothing
to do directly with market movement. It is not the trader telling the market what it
must do, but rather the market telling the trader. The market speaks constantly, and
through technical analysis the trader tries to interpret and understand the market’s
action and advice. But it is important always to realize that the market can change
its tone of converse at any moment and that preconceived notions based upon previous technical whisperings are distinctly out of place.
If the market action was the foundation of a technical forecast last week but has not acted in accorNot the trader telling the
market what it must do, dance with that forecast during the present week,
but the market telling the then give technical action the right to change its
mind and thus the trader’s mind, and do not
trader.
assume a stubborn attitude, of feeling that last
week’s analysis, however ideal and certain it
seemed then, must endure indefinitely.

But Give the Market a Chance to Act
On the other hand, the technical chart trader must not lack in patience. Stubborness
and overconfidence are to be avoided, but so are impatience and over-eagerness for
quick action. There is no necessity for changing last week’s analysis simply because
it has not worked out as quickly as was then indicated. There is no reason for chang– 418 –

TRADING TACTICS

ing one’s mind or market position on a basis merely of delay, sluggishness or inactivity, but only on the basis of true and definite action in direct opposition to the previous analysis.
Review of our various chart examples cited in previous studies will serve to present myriad examples where the analysis was correct but where the indications
came early in the technical formations and where considerable patience was needed
to carry out successfully the initial forecast. If a commitment is justified at all by the
chart action the fulfillment is worth waiting for patiently.

Weigh Risks in Advance
Another general principle, somewhat allied with all of the foregoing but especially
with a healthy conservatism, is a rational weighing of the total risk involved in any
commitment, in advance of making that commitment. This principle implies that
before any individual stock is bought or sold, the trader will assume that his hopes,
his expectations, his plans, his technical analysis, may all turn out to be just about
100% wrong. Postulating the action of the stock on that basis, he should consider
what course he would pursue if such an unfortunate event should come to pass.
This may seem like an easy, logical and commonplace thing to do, but it is, in fact,
extremely uncommon among the general run of traders. The truth is that the great
majority of stock market losses would be completely avoided if such a mental
process of looking ahead at both sides of the situation were indulged in. The average trader, even of fair experience and ability, is so prone to become wrapped up in
his own analysis, his own expectations of what is going to happen to the commitment he is about to make, that he fails to give any thought whatever to the other side
of the picture which may possibly develop after he has actually made his commitment.
If a trader is considering the purchase of a stock at around 45 he is naturally confident that it is going to advance and his mind is filled with the pleasant anticipation
of selling out the stock later on at around 55, perhaps, or 60. His analysis may well
be correct, but something may transpire to upset it entirely, and he is false to his own
position if he fails to weigh the most serious consequences that may befall him in
the, even remote, possibility of his judgment being wrong, or of the market’s turning unexpectedly against him.

Helps to Avoid Over-trading
Such a mental weighing of all possibilities, including the worst, brings rewards
either through cutting of losses, through freedom from over-worry or, more usually,
through the guarantee of well-laid plans for any possible contingency. Considera– 419 –

STUDY XII

tion of every possibility brings a healthy conservatism, perhaps desertion of the
anticipated commitment or, better still, either an actual or a mental stop-loss price at
which the possible future loss will be limited.
It is likely also to result in scale trading, or at least in keeping down to conservative levels the units of trading. This latter point is an important one. Over-trading
brings much greater loss, financial and psychological, than it does profit. That assertion can be guaranteed, purely from the wealth of his own experience, by any market analyst and adviser, before whose consideration pass many living examples of
the failures that result originally, almost entirely and directly, from over-trading.
This fault was at the bottom of the majority of tremendous losses and even
tragedies which followed the ‘‘new era’’ bull market of 1929. Profits seemed so certain that the average trader did not stop to think about losses. So long as he could
borrow money he never stopped to consider how much he might possibly lose
through his over-trading commitment if his judgment should be wrong. If he
thought first of buying 20 shares of a certain stock he immediately calculated mentally the profit which a 10 point advance would bring him. But that was only $200.
Not enough. Not fast enough. The simple way to increase profits faster was merely
to increase his commitment, even on slender margin, to say 100 shares with a mental profit of $1,000, or to 1,000 shares, with a mental profit of $10,000.
But he forgot utterly about considering his potential and possible loss if the stock
declined instead of advancing. He forgot entirely about the bleak prospects of long
years of worry, struggle, despair which he might have to spend in paying off his
loan, in recouping his capital, if, by some odd chance, things did not go just as he
fondly imagined they must go.
Avoid over-trading, and decide before you go into the market how much of your
total capital you should risk in your trading operations. Don’t spread yourself out
too thin; keep something always in reserve against the unexpected.

Don’t Lean Too Heavily on Outside Advice
Finally, when all that we have learned from this course of study, from experience,
from studious research, from all other channels, has been digested and made a part
of our practical market knowledge, let us remember that we are our own masters in
the matter of personal market actions. Let us remember that no one is infallible, any
more than our charts are infallible, that no finite being has the ability to foresee
exactly what any stock is going to do.
Let us remember then that, within reasonable boundaries, and still avoiding overconfidence and self-sufficiency, we have approximately an equal basis for analysis
with most other traders; that the garnering of various rumors, opinions and news
figments, is likely to distract our attention from a genuinely sound and scientific
– 420 –

TRADING TACTICS

approach to our problem; and that if we are intent on analyzing pure technical
action, we shall not need to clutter up our imaginations too much with outside facts.
The market itself will evaluate all such data for us, together with much important
inside information that we could not obtain for ourselves or from our most trusted
authorities.
We need not shut our eyes to fundamentals, or close our minds to basic trends and
figures, to earning reports, balance sheets, business prospects, public psychology
and such elements of assistance. Our technical chart
studies are merely supplemented by such aids
The garnering of various
when they are reliable, are properly evaluated and
rumors, opinions and
reasonably used. But we need pay scant attention,
news figments, is likely
in our technical analysis, to ticker talk, to board- to distract our attention.
room gossip, to brokerage advice, rumor, unconfirmed report and hearsay.

Let the Market Do its Own Forecasting
In short, we may let the market, and our proper analysis of its own technical action,
be sufficient for our own personal guide as to what is going on inside the secret sanctums of the directors’ meeting room, the corporation order books, the private conferences of professional operators and the other indefinite mediums of gossip and
unfounded rumor.
We need not go near a brokerage office in person; we need certainly not hang over
the ticker or devour the news releases as they come over the heated wires. Without
ignoring other basic news and confirmed information, we may rather sit back in our
own office or study, not secure in our own conceit, not smug with contented overconfidence, but assured none the less that if we have properly prepared ourselves,
properly attuned our inner ear and eye, with study, with patience, with hard work,
experience and understanding, then our most faithful friend in practical market
operation is the market itself, as it outlines in the present its probable future course
for those who can successfully read its signs and signals.

Judging Personal Aptitude for Chart Trading
By no means will every individual find himself eminently fitted for chart trading.
For one thing, it requires time, interest and patience to a fairly high degree. Probably the most important characteristics are a basic sincerity and a desire to learn, for
practical experience is the fundamental key to success. And only actual trading or
simulation of actual trading, will show the neophyte how well-fitted he is for successful and active trading.
– 421 –

STUDY XII

It would be slightly foolhardy for an inexperienced student to plunge immediately into practical trading with cold, hard-earned cash, to test his mettle. Paper
trading is the proper substitute and affords a pleasant, painless and comparatively
simple means of testing groundwork, experience and practical ability in the market
without the immediate risk of capital.
Paper trading requires no cash, no brokerage account, no rash plunge into the
maelstrom of actual trading. It requires merely an adequate set of charts and a notebook. If the paper trader will study his charts, formulate his opinion of proper
action, and enter his theoretical trades on paper for anywhere from a month to a
year, and will follow this test with perseverance, with regularity, with close simulation of actual cash trading, and above all with conscientious honesty and sincerity
to himself, he should discover very quickly whether or not it would be wise for him
to continue his technical trading with the risk of actual cash capital.

Paper Trading
If paper profits do not work out successfully under the conditions of trading previously tested, the student need not lose hope, though he should assuredly refrain
from entering the market until he has hit upon different methods which do yield a
consistent profit. He may need to trade more actively, but more probably less
actively. He may be better suited for long-swing trading, for cyclical investment or
for commitment in only certain lines.
The worst that can happen, in any case, is a paper loss, and if the student is sincerely interested, then further testing, longer experience and healthy patience
should lead him to discover ultimate success on such foundations as have tried to
set forth in our study.

SUMMARY AND REVIEW
In the earlier chapters of our course we have attempted a fairly complete observation of the individual chart patterns which may prove of assistance in our general
study of technical stock market action. In the later chapters we have attempted to coordinate this material into a comprehensive science from which the student may
proceed to his own practice and experience in technical analysis.
As we come to the end of our Course, therefore, it should be helpful to devote a
little time to a general summary. In reviewing our catalog of formations, for instance,
there are certain chart patterns which generally suggest reversal of the previous
price movement. Most of these are area formations of some sort, and are little more
than varying pictures of a highly normal and natural rounding off process as the
– 422 –
