
Confidence to Pull the Trigger Comes from Within

311

If you are not trading with an indicator, a plan, or a software program,
then write your rules down on your computer screen. This is one method
that can help keep you on track when you start trading out of impulse or
from an emotional state of mind.

TRACK AND CHART YOUR TRADES
A trading diary is a great way to check and confirm your trading execution
entries and exits. In fact, most charting software has the capability to go
back to see when you executed a trade. Think what this can do for a trader.
If it is followed properly, it can and most likely will help you to improve
to a new level of self-discipline and ultimately lead to increasing your selfconfidence. How? If you execute when the signals call for action, you can
validate whether you responded when called to do so. You can check your
work. You will find out if you hesitated when your methods called for you
to exit and if you timed it per the system or not. One lesson we teach our
students at Trading Triggers University is to save a chart and print it out
with the entry scale-out and exit. Printing the chart out helps you to see
clearly how you respond or react to the trade signals. It will reinforce the
validity of your system or any system, including my Defcon program with
Genesis Software. By printing out and cataloging your trades by a chart,
you will gain more experience in identifying the patterns that drive your
trading signals. It also keeps track of or “inventories” what went right or
what went wrong with a trading plan. It will allow you to study and examine the results in black and white. On successful trading days, it will be
good to capitalize on your successes so that they can be repeated. Of
course, on bad days, it can allow you to focus on what went wrong so that
you can understand and improve on it so that you stop repeating the same
mistakes over and over again.

TWO CASES IN POINT
If you map out a game plan, trade off the “numbers,” or have a trading system, when you print out your chart and examine your trades, you are grading your own homework. I have posted on my web site a daily Dow Report
to which the Chicago Board of Trade links. Every day after the market
closes, I post two numbers based on my teachings and on what we went
over in this book. Those numbers are what I believe the high and/or low of
the session will be; and then, based on the market direction number, I will
post a trade recommendation. Figure 12.3 shows a direct quote that was for

312

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 12.3
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Monday, February 13, 2006. The initial resistance level was 10983, and my
target support was 10865. The exact low was 10865, and a high close doji
pattern formed.
This is not rocket science. Why would I state the day before what type
of pattern to look for and at what price? We know the reasons why I select
a high close doji trigger based on the statistical findings in Chapter 7. When
I introduce two other dimensional market analysis approaches, such as a
moving average and pivot point analysis, all you need is the patience to wait
for the signal to materialize. It is a high-probability setup; and in this case,
the trade resulted in a 38-point gain, or $190 per contract, in less than an
hour. The only drawback on this trade was that you had to wait until the
end of the day for it to materialize. No pressure, no worries, just profits. A
nice trade. And if you print out a chart and plot your entries and exits, you
will begin to see more clearly how a trade develops; and you will reinforce
your subconscious mind on what to look for in the next trade and improve
your confidence from within to win.
There are many who visit my site just to see my numbers selection for
the market. I also include what the projections are for the week. For day

Confidence to Pull the Trigger Comes from Within

313

traders and swing traders, it helps them also identify a potential confluence
support level based on pivot point analysis. Feel free to visit and check the
numbers yourself at www.nationalfutures.com; just click on the link that
says Daily Dow Report. Even better: You now have your own Pivot Point
Calculator, provided on the accompanying CD to this book.
Another case in point as to why it is helpful to print out and catalogue
charts that track your trades is that it will help you to visually back-test the
methods. The more you see the patterns recur, the more assurance you will
have in the methodology.
The topic I covered in Chapter 5, demonstrating how to filter the pivot
point price projections, based on the moving average approach, gives me
an edge by reducing the noise or eliminating excess information. It helps
me to narrow the field to what the potential range might be of a given market for a specific time frame. If I have a predetermined point of view that
the market might see a low of 1257 and a high of 1273, once I identify a pattern and conditional change in the price action, I can enter a position. In
Figure 12.4, I have a trade example in the e-mini–S&P (Standard & Poor’s)
that demonstrates how the market was contained within the bearish target

FIGURE 12.4
Used with permission of esignal.com.

314

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

selected pivot point numbers based on the system. Remember, if bearish,
then the target low will be near S-2 and the high will be near the first resistance level (R-1). If you stick to the rules and look for buy signals near
support and sell signals near resistance, follow the game plan, add the
other two dimensional factors such as a high close doji or hammer pattern,
with the moving average indicating a conditional change, then you enter a
position. As the market starts to show momentum loss as indicated by
shadows, scale out of half of your positions, place a hard stop at breakeven, and then wait to see the flow of the market. If you print out your
chart and plot your entry price, your scale-out price, and then the price
where you exited on the balance of your positions, you will not only grade
the trading system but also your performance and how you react to market conditions.

SIMULATED TRADING
It goes without saying that the more practice you have, the better you will
perform. But if you practice the wrong thing over and over, then there is little hope for improvement. That is not a line for a trader—that was a line
from a golf pro to a bad golfer. It just so happens that it applies to trading.
Almost any brokerage firm will give you a free trial to a simulated trading
account for you to bang around on. With no real money on the line, you really are not putting your time to good use. It is extremely advisable if you
never traded or if you switch to a new company to get accustomed to the
trading platform that may be unique to that company. That makes all the
sense in the world.
A trader needs to take action when a trigger is generated, rather than
taking a wait-and-see attitude and then reacting to the market long after the
market has moved. As a trader, you need to be quick. A sudden brain spasm
spawned by fear, doubt, or greed will most likely not bring consistently
good results. Hesitation is a trader’s enemy; that is why I say, “Plan your
trade, and then trade your plan.”
Simulated trading can help you test a trading method, but what about
testing your emotional response to market conditions? How will you develop the confidence from within to win? What will seriously help the
trader who enters too early or too late and can’t hold on to the winner?
What can help the trader who hesitates and can’t pull the trigger?
For starters, you need to not trade with what we call “scared money.”
That’s the money that you are afraid of losing, that you protect so well that
you end up losing it. Remember in Chapter 11 that we went over the performance sheet on the trading system results. The payout ratio is the

Confidence to Pull the Trigger Comes from Within

315

amount of the average winner versus the loser. If you cut out of a winning
trade too early and do so randomly because you need to make a profit, then
you are possibly setting yourself up for a financial meltdown because you
are not letting your winners ride.
One question that new investors ask me is why they did better at paper
trading than they did when they traded with real money. The answer is
easy. They let their emotions such as fear, doubt, complacency, greed, anxiety, excitement, and false pride interfere with their rational and intellectual
thoughts. When dealing with real money, you are faced with the realization
that you and your money can part.
Simulated trading is good to understand the mechanics of a trading execution platform. However, putting real money on the line is what will test
your trading skills. Here is a suggestion: If you want to really see if you have
what it takes to be a professional trader who can execute a testable trading
system, then trade with the smallest lot or position size for a period of six
weeks or two months. You may not make lots of money if you are consistently right, but you will develop the confidence to act on your signals when
your self-imposed training session is completed. If you trade stocks, instead of trading 200 shares of an $80 or $100 stock, trade 50 shares. This
will help you feel more at ease, and it will also put your emotions to the test
as you are trading with real money.
Here is another suggestion: Open an ultra-mini-sized foreign exchange
(forex) account and apply the trading signal to that market. This is a nifty
idea for those who are beginners and still have day jobs. The markets trade
24 hours a day, you can afford to hold positions overnight, and you have
money on the line so that you will be more realistic in execution of your
trading plan. You can trade at night and execute trading signals in an extremely liquid market. If you have a system that works reasonably well
based on statistical back-testing studies, the only confidence that should be
in question is your ability to execute the signals. That is what trading a
mini-forex account can do for you. It will exercise your emotional intellect.
You will learn that when you place a trade, it is an educated decision, not
merely a guess. One web site to visit is www.fxtriggers.com to help select
a forex account and to open a simulated trading account and develop the
knowledge that will give you the confidence to execute and act on the trading signals. Building confidence in yourself and in your trading skills is extremely important in stimulating an optimistic winning attitude. Opening a
mini-forex account just may help a newcomer using a technical-based system. Over a period of time, as your trading skills improve, so will your attitude. As Thomas Jefferson once said, “Nothing can stop the man with the
right mental attitude from achieving his goal: Nothing on earth can help the
man with the wrong mental attitude.”
If you want to follow what the moneymakers do, have a good plan,

316

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

method, or system and execute when a trigger presents a call to action.
Maintain a winning attitude!
I believe the principles in this book combining candles and pivots will
keep you on the right side of the profit ledger. It is the method I have used
for over 25 years. I have taught my own family to use these setups, and they
have served us well. My former students have expressed gratitude in seeing
a method and applying the concepts whether it is stock, futures, or forex.
Some have moved on to open their own brokerage firms, and even other educators come to learn my technique. There is back-tested data to support
the validity and frequency of patterns. All you need to do is apply the
knowledge and follow the rules.

LIVE BY THE RULES
If you follow the rules of any methodology, then you have a better chance
of succeeding. That applies toward any aspect in life, for that matter. As
Leonardo da Vinci stated, “Simplicity breeds elegance.” Keep things simple.
• Look for buy signals near support.
• Look for sell signals near resistance.
• When the system triggers a signal, act on it.
• When a system says get out, get out!
I wish you well in all your trading endeavors. Remember that if you act
on validated signals, your actions are validated. If the method has merit,
then your rewards should have merit.
All the best,
John L. Person

Glossary

Actualize The underlying assets or instruments that are traded in the cash market.
Adjustable peg An exchange rate regime in which a country’s exchange rate is determined (i.e., pegged) in relation to another currency, often the dollar or French
franc, but may be changed from time to time.
Aggregate demand Total demand for goods and services in a country’s economy; includes private and public sector demand for goods and services within the
country and the demand of consumers and firms in other countries.
Aggregate risk Size of exposure of a bank to a single customer for both spot and
forward contracts.
Aggregate supply Total supply of goods and services in a country’s economy
from domestic sources (including imports) available to meet aggregate demand.
Appreciation Describes the strengthening of a currency in response to market demand rather than by official action.
Arbitrage The action of a simultaneous buy and sell of a similar or like commodity or futures product that may be made in different contract months, on different
exchanges, and in different countries in order to profit from a discrepancy in price.
Arbitrage channel The range of prices within which there will be no possibility to
arbitrage between the cash and futures market.
Ask

The price at which a currency or instrument is offered.

Asset In the context of foreign exchange, the right to receive from a counterparty
an amount of currency either in respect of a balance sheet asset, such as a loan, or
at a specified future date in respect of an unmatched forward or spot deal.
Asset allocation Dividing instrument funds among markets to achieve diversification or maximum return.
At best An instruction given to a dealer to buy or sell at the best rate that can be
obtained in a given time period.
At or better

An order to deal at a specific rate or better.

317

318

GLOSSARY

Backwardation

The amount by which the spot price exceeds the forward price.

Balance of payments A systematic record of economic transactions during a
given period for a country. (1) The term is often used to mean either (i) balance of
payments on “current account” or (ii) the current account plus certain long-term
capital movements. (2) The combination of the trade balance, current balance, capital account, and invisible balance, which together make up the balance-of-payments total. Prolonged balance-of-payment deficits tend to lead to restrictions in
capital transfers and/or decline in currency values.
Bank rate The rate at which a central bank is prepared to lend money to its domestic banking system.
Base currency United States dollars; the currency to which each transaction will
be converted at the close of each position.
Basis The difference between the cash price and the futures price.
Basis point For most currencies, denotes the fourth decimal place in the exchange rate and represents 1/100 of 1 percent (0.01%). For such currencies as the
Japanese yen, a basis point is the second decimal place when quoted in currency
terms or the sixth and seventh decimal places, respectively, when quoted in reciprocal terms.
Basis trading Taking opposite positions in the cash and the futures markets with
the intention of profiting from favorable movements in the basis.
Basket A group of currencies normally used to manage the exchange rate of a currency.
Bear

An investor who believes that prices are going to fall.

Bearish A down-trending market or a period in which prices depreciate in value.
Bid

The price at which a buyer has offered to purchase a currency or instrument.

Book The summary of currency positions held by a dealer, a desk, or a room; a
sum total of assets and liabilities.
Bretton Woods The site of the conference that in 1944 led to the establishment of
the postwar foreign exchange system that remained intact until the early 1970s.
The conference resulted in the formation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The system fixed currencies in a fixed exchange rate system with 1 percent fluctuations of the currency to gold or to the U.S. dollar.
Bullish Referring to an up-trending market or to a period in which prices appreciate in value.
Bull market

A prolonged period of generally rising prices.

Bundesbank

Central Bank of Germany.

Cable A term used in the foreign exchange market for the U.S. dollar/British
pound rate.
Candlestick charts

Charting method that involves a graphic presentation of the

Glossary

319

relationship between the open, the high, the low, and the close. Color schemes are
used to illustrate the real body of a candle, which is the difference between a lower
close than the open (black or dark) and a higher close than the open (white).
Capital risk The risk arising from a bank having to pay the counterparty without
knowing whether the other party will or is able to meet its side of the bargain.
Carrying charges The cost associated with holding or storing cash or physical
commodities and financial instruments. Four variables are involved: storage, insurance, finance charges, and/or interest payments on borrowed monies.
Cash Usually refers to an exchange transaction contracted for settlement on the
day the deal is struck. This term is mainly used in the North American markets and
those countries that rely for foreign exchange services on these markets because of
time zone preference (i.e., Latin America). In Europe and Asia, cash transactions are
often referred to as “value same day deals.”
Cash market The market in the actual financial instrument on which a futures or
options contract is based.
Cash settlement A procedure for settling futures contracts through payment of
the cash difference between the future and the market price, rather than through
the physical delivery of a commodity.
CBOT

Chicago Board of Trade.

Central bank A country’s head regulatory bank, which is responsible for the development and implementation of monetary policy.
CFTC Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which is the federal regulatory
agency in charge of overseeing the futures and nonbank forex industry.
Closed position A transaction that leaves the trade with a zero net commitment
to the market with respect to a particular currency.
CME Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
COMAS Conditionally Optimized Moving Average System, which incorporates
two different time-period moving averages with two different variables, such as a
simple moving average based on the close and a second value based on the pivot
point.
Commission The fee that a broker may charge clients for dealing on their behalf.
Commodity A financial instrument or a product that is used in commerce and is
mainly traded on a regulated commodity exchange. The types of products are agricultural (such as meats and grains), metals, petroleum, foreign currencies, stock
index futures, single stock futures, and financial instruments (such as interest rate
vehicles like notes and bonds).
Commodity trading advisor (CTA) A registered individual or entity that advises
others, for compensation or profit, in buying or selling futures contracts or commodity options; also includes exercising trading authority over a customer’s account and providing research and analysis through newsletters or other media.

320

GLOSSARY

Conversion The process by which an asset or liability denominated in one currency is exchanged for an asset or liability denominated in another currency.
Conversion account A general ledger account representing the uncovered position in a particular currency. Such accounts are referred to as “position accounts.”
Convertible currency A currency that can be freely exchanged for another currency (and/or gold) without special authorization from the central bank.
Copey

Traders’ slang for the Danish krone.

Correspondent bank The foreign bank’s representative who regularly performs
services for a bank that has no branch in the relevant center, e.g., to facilitate the
transfer of funds. In the United States, this often occurs domestically due to interstate banking restrictions.
Counterparty The other organization or party with whom an exchange deal is
being transacted.
Countervalue The dollar value of a transaction in which a person buys a currency
against the dollar.
Country risk The risk attached to a borrower by virtue of its location in a particular country; involves examination of economic, political, and geographical factors.
Various organizations generate country risk tables.
Coupon The interest rate on a debt instrument expressed in terms of a percent on
an annualized basis that the issuer guarantees to pay to the holder until maturity.
Cover To close out a short position by buying currency or securities that have
been sold short.
Covered arbitrage Arbitrage between financial instruments denominated in different currencies, using forward cover to eliminate exchange risk.
Credit risk Risk of loss that may arise on outstanding contracts should a counterparty default on its obligations.
Cross rates

Rates between two currencies, neither of which is the U.S. dollar.

Current account The net balance of a country’s international payments arising
from exports and imports together with unilateral transfers, such as aid and migrant
remittances; excludes capital flows.
Day trader A speculators who takes positions in commodities that are iquidated
prior to the close of the same trading day.
Dead cross A term used when a sell signal is generated when one or more
shorter-term moving averages cross below a longer-term moving average.
Deal date The date on which a transaction is agreed on.
Dealer A person who acts as a principal in all transactions, buying and selling for
his or her own accounts; opposite of broker.
Deal ticket The primary method of recording the basic information relating to a
transaction.

321

Glossary

Deferred month The more distant month in which futures trading is taking place,
as established from the active nearby or front contract delivery month.
Deflator Difference between real and nominal gross national product (GNP),
which is equivalent to the overall inflation rate.
Delivery date The date of maturity of a contract, when the exchange of the currencies is made; more commonly known as the “value date” in the forex or money
markets.
Delivery risk A term to describe when a counterparty might not be able to complete one side of the deal, although willing to do so.
Depreciation A fall in the value of a currency due to market forces, rather than to
official action.
Discount rate
ber banks.
