
GC..()67: Gold Comox IPII) Cadj Uq IDaily bars,
MOYlngA'1I (C,501 0041011200& . SSl.1 (..Jl ,l)

.1.

- . 1100.0

1515.0

Gold Long Trend

l{l5QAI

1000.0

100.0
,
,
"""i~n~!"7.~"'7.;;~~~~~f.i1~
fit.:;;;l';' ' ' '; :t\2A~~*,"r·'''t;213
iJ;:
d1i;;<:.o:r'';;l·~*"i1~ii;i''''''··,j;\f,O~fit.
" !~\·4'iwc;i;;'t;;~*",
';<"'#·0iasms
;;;;-i;G;;;
H!r·~T,
- ~3tt;ii
- 3Joa';:'1dU'"""",
;;:;
;'~lim-..,J1 67M

FIGURE 3 .1 Gold Long Trend
TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

62

DESIGNING THE TRADE

SP.CJ67: Sap 500 Index (PI) Cadjl./q (Dally bora)

1QI34IW . 1111l101

11f18101

12tI2JtJ1

FIGURE 3.2 S&P 500 Short Trend
TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

OC:067: GoldComex(PII) Cadjl./q (Daily bora)
~

Gold Counter-trends

.,/'\1

I'

11

11'1"',."

II I'
11t,1'1I!·j

FIGURE 3.3 Gold Long Counter-trends
TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved .

" ~)' ,.'O\·jnuAVg (C ,SO I 04«)1"2008',, 881.8 {-13'.3j

63

Some Essentials of Trading
SP-467: S&P 500 Index IPIII Cad) Uq IDll1y "'rs)
MovingAvg(C,50) -41210809:04 _ 1319.0 ("Aj

1650.0' <
1625;0'

S&P 500 Long Counter-trends

· 16OO.Q

151$.0
· 1S50J)

··:.. 1525.0 f
--: 1500.1) 0

· 1475..1)

- ,.50,0
1425J) i

08/31101

0Wt711)1

101Q1107

1011~1

10129f01

11112J1J7

11f01Q1

12/11107

1712&07

G1ftMIB

01rlS108

~

02JZ5I0B

03t10108

03l25I08

S3P soo Counter~

FIGURE 3.4 S&P 500 Short Counter-trends
TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

Looking at Figure 3.4, we can see that in the S&P 500 market there
were only six counter-trends that could be easily identified over the same
time frame.

USING THIS BOOK TO ITS
FULLEST POTENTIAL
This book, while it can stand on its own, can also be enhanced by your
reading Winning the Trading Game. If you have a reliable trading system or set of strategies that you feel confident in, you can also use them
in conjunction with this book. As long as you can pull together the necessary elements on the chart: entry, loss, profit, trend, and counter-trend, you
have a key to unlocking the market's natural behavior and how you should
react to it.
There are no short cuts to learning how to skillfully trade the market of
your choice. The time invested can be well worth the effort, though. Mix options with futures, right next to stocks with commodity indexes. By knowing essential prices, the direction of the market, and the daisy chain effect,
you have an effective tool set that is designed to minimize your losses and
maximize your profits.

64

DESIGNING THE TRADE

The basic and advanced strategies presented in later chapters were not
invented by me. Professional traders and a handful of retail traders have
taken advantage of some of the ideas presented in this book and have met
with limited success in applying them in their day-to-day trading.
The reason for the limited success most likely stems from underutilization of the core components discussed throughout this chapter. The lack
of success also stems from looking at the world of trading in an either/or
scenario: win or lose, in or out. This can be fatal. It leaves little room for
the imagination to work and contributes to a lack of control, which leads
to irrational trading decisions.
By taking a step back to look at trading through the eyes of the professionals, you should realize that you do not have to adhere to any rigid
or arbitrary standards of trading and interacting with the market. You can
carve your own path in the markets, with a set of tools designed to help
you preserve your capital. By reading further, you continue on a course
that strengthens your approach to the market and actually minimizes your
losses.
The techniques given are designed to expand your risk management
palette. Where novice traders are oftentimes too content to use stops and
limits to manage their loss (Le. risk), there is a risk management world out
there, full of choices.
In this book we show you that world. Nine straightforward strategies
are presented in familiar settings and you can see how and when to apply the ideas. The last six strategies take a heavy-handed approach toward
earning an income in your account while you trade.
Turn some of your bad trades around into potentially profitable ones.
These techniques will find their way into your trading and you will see results. At the same time, these tactics are not the Holy Grail. They are meant
to be part of an overall trading plan and should complement your shortterm and long-term trading goals.
While trading is not easy to do, its individual components are fairly
simple to describe- go long, go short, or do nothing. Yet there are so many
permutations that it is difficult to pick and choose the right path. By utilizing anyone of these 15 strategies you will be restricting the number of
permutations to some likely culprits. Learning this alone is worth much
more than the price of this book. So sit back and relax and use this book
as both a guide and as a reference in your day-to-day trading.

"'R'I'II

Basic Strategies

his section is a breakdown of nine strategies that have been compiled to help minimize your risk and increase your opportunity for
success. Risk minimization is of utmost importance to professional
traders and should be no less of a concern for retail traders. While none of
these techniques is new, it's the context they've been put in that gives them
a refreshing new life; this is an important distinction.
In the world of trading there are winners and losers. The winners focus on hedging their trading and the losers don't. Whether you are a professional speculator or a corporation that actually owns the products you
are buying and selling, what makes the difference is how you interact with
the market when it is moving against you. You can be reactive or proactive;
the choice is yours.
For the reactive, a stop is good enough along with the hope that market will move in your direction. For the proactive, a combination of tools
is used to exploit inherent market discrepancies. One such market discrepancy is the daisy chain effect. The daisy chain effect highlights the obvious
insurance aspects of the market products developed over that last 20 years.
By integrating the spot market with the futures market, and then throwing
in the options market, an entirely different level of trading sophistication
evolves.
This is what the basic strategies in the following chapters are meant
to do. They open your eyes to how the spot market is protected by the
futures market and how options can protect both the spot and futures market. Taken to its logical conclusion, you can effectively trade both sides of

T

65

66

BASIC ST RAT EGIES

the market's movement, while limiting your exposure to anyone side. This
is a significant skill when it comes to fast-moving volatile markets.
These strategies have been broken down into four sections dealing
with a time frame that each is best suited for. Whether the risk management strategy can best be used for day, swing, or position trading is secondary to understanding the logic of how and why it works at all. With the
right risk management strategy you can fluidly switch from a day trade to
a position trade and back again. This comes from being willing to not be
pigeonholed into a time frame, yet being open enough to know when one
is needed.

(; •• \ .- 'r ~ R 4

Holding the Bull
and the Bear
by the Tails
Prediction is very difficult, especially about the
future.
-Niels Bohr

oone can predict the future with 100 percent accuracy. Even the
world's most famous seer, Nostradamus, left much to be desired in
his cryptic messages. Predicting the future when it comes to making
money is more uncertain. What makes predicting price moves even more
difficult is that no matter what the news is, many more in:fl.uences affect the
price that aren't reported and that we don't know about.
Even with the near impossible task of predicting the future, traders
still attempt it. It is as if retail traders feel forced or pressured to predict the
markets' direction regardless of the likelihood oftheir prediction's success,
which makes the trading more of a matter of "my team is better than your
team." If you are long or bullish a market you look to justify your position,
if you are short or bearish a market you look to justify your position, and
there is no in between.
This narrow view of the market, long or short, pigeonholes a trader
in such a way that opportunities are missed. The market moves in only
one of three directions (up, down, and sideways) at any given time. The
sideways or consolidation pattern occurs 80 percent of the time. So if
a trader limits his trading to being long or short he cuts out two-thirds
of his market opportunities and he finds himself reacting to the market
80 percent of the time.
This can be a frustrating way to interact with the market. You are constantly on the defensive, from deciding to pick a trade, long or short, or

N

67

68

BASIC STRATEG IES

from having to quickly make a decision to jump into a trade once it breaks
out from its consolidation pattern. There is a better way to trade.
The secret of professional traders is that they rarely choose a side.
They do their best to increase their odds of success by positioning themselves to take advantage of a nascent trend before it develops. The best
way to do that is to be ahead of the curve. If you can anticipate where the
market is going, you stand to make the most from any developing market
trend. Yet if we can't predict the future, how can we anticipate where the
market is going? Don't make a choice of being long or short. Be in a position to take advantage of both.

STRADDLE, STRANGLE, AND EXECUTION
Being long and short the market at the same time is practically a revolutionary concept for retail traders, while professional traders have been doing it
since the futures market's inception. Somehow the concept has either been
lost or is considered a form of trading blasphemy when it is suggested that
retail traders incorporate this strategy into their trading. Retail traders often confuse being long and short in the market simultaneously with being
delta neutral.

Delta neutral is defined in Investopedia as "A portfolio consisting of
positions with offsetting positive and negative deltas. The deltas balance
out to bring the net change of the position to zero."
The intent of a delta neutral position is to create a net change of zero.
This is in direct contrast to the goal of trading both sides at the same time,
with the intent to switch over to the winner. So while in the early stages of
being long and short the market simultaneously is to diminish your losses,
and one may negate the other in the process, holding on to both positions
after a trend has clearly been defined is not the intent and is in fact selfdefeating.
Throughout the following chapters we look at various strategies that
combine long and short positions to give you a distinct advantage over
traders that simply pick long or short positions alone, hoping for success. While the strategies in later chapters become more sophisticated,
they are still accessible to any trader of any level as long as the goal is to
manage risk.
In this chapter we expose how to properly use two long-short strategies. The first strategy we look at is a straddle and the second strategy is a
strangle. Both strategies share a few things in common: They incorporate
options, they require that you have a long and short option on simultaneously, and they are affected by delta.

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

69

Delta is defined by Investopedia as "the ratio comparing the change in the price
of the underlying asset to the corresponding change in the price of a derivative."
This works in a pretty straightforward way. If you purchase a call and the
delta is 0.2, for every $1 that the underlying asset increases, the call increases
by $0.20. On the other hand, if you purchase a put, then the delta is quoted as a
negative number. As the underlying asset increases in value, the put decreases.
A put option with -0.5 decreases $0 .50 for every $1 move in the underlying
asset.
Delta is one of five risk measurements that are calculated on options . It is
only one of three that we talk about throughout the book . The other two are
theta, which measures an option's price change based on time sensitivity, and
vega, which looks at an option's relationship to volatility.

Straddle and strangle strategies can also be traded in a buy side or sell
side fashion. In this chapter we look only at the buy side aspect of both of
these strategies. The sell side has the ability to expose a trader to unlimited
risk, even though traders can profit from premiums. Since the intent of this
chapter and the next several chapters to protect you from risk, not expose
you to unnecessary risk, then we do not explore sell side straddles and
strangles in this chapter.
The key difference between the two strategies is the price. When
you implement a straddle you purchase two at-the-money options. At-themoney options are the most expensive options you can purchase. On the
other hand, strangles require that you purchase two out-of-the-money options. Out-of-the-money options typically are less expensive than at-themoney options, but volatility can playa factor in option pricing.
You have a distinct advantage in your trading when you apply either
of these two strategies to news announcements and potentially ambiguous
governmental data releases.

Historical commodity and futures option data is difficult to come by. Do your
best during your demo or paper trading to track relevant option pricing data.

Straddle
Technically, a straddle is considered the purchase or sale of an equal number of puts and calls, with the same strike price and expiration dates. Realistically speaking, a straddle is a way to give yourself a choice. The most

70

BASIC STRATEGIES

difficult part of trading is choosing whether you are going to be long or
short; the second most difficult part is giving up that choice once it has
been made.
Straddles, like all of the other strategies in the book, teach you to be
aware of the rhythm of the market. You learn how to put the reality of
the market ahead of your desire to see the market do what you want it to
do. This is essential to succeed in trading. When you decide to execute a
straddle you are leaving your choice of market direction up to the market
itself, as it should be. You then are required to cut off the less profitable
position immediately. It is well worth the expense of the straddle to learn
both these lessons.

Straddles teach you how to:

1. Let the market decide the direction it wants to go in
2. Cut the losing position immediately

3. Focus on the benefits of risk management, not expense

Don't be fooled into believing that you cannot afford to put on a straddle. If it is the best choice for the situation, then execute it. If you are an
active trader or a day trader, a straddle may be the perfect solution for you
to achieve your goals. Whether it is a Fed announcement, Consumer Price
Index report, or jobless claim numbers, it can be very difficult to get a bead
on the market's intended direction. So instead of forcing an artificial or
rumored direction on your trading, use a straddle to establish your initial
position.
From there you can do one of two things:
1. You can close out the losing position and ride out the profits from the

winning position before the end of the day.
2. You can hold on to your winning position and convert it from an active
trade to a position trade.
Either way you come out ahead of the person who simply guesses or
predicts the market's direction and has a 50/50 shot of getting it right. Does
the person who guesses the market's direction have the ability to make
more money? Of course! If he guesses right, there is no losing trade that
eats away at part of his profits. On the other hand, it is an all-or-nothing

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

7.

proposition. If he guesses wrong, there is no profitable trade to pick up
the slack.
The question to ask yourself as a trader is whether you capable of trading with a 50/50 level of certainty or if you want the protection afforded
to you that hedging your bets can offer. As with all the risk management
strategies throughout this book, this one is not designed for everyone. In
fact, not every strategy is designed for every situation.
The straddle works best when it meets at least one of these three
criteria:
1. The market has been moving sideways for sometime

2. There is a news, earnings, or government announcement
3. Analysts have talked up the figures of a potential announcement
excessively
For those who are new to trading, the last criteria may be a little difficult to understand. Those who have trading experience will comprehend
this quickly. Prior to any earnings decision or governmental announcement, analysts will do their best to predict the announcement. They will
make estimates weeks in advance of the actual announcement. This has
the affect of making the market move. Whether it's right or wrong is secondary to the market's activity.
Once the actual numbers are released, the market has one of two ways
to react. It will proceed in the direction of what the analysts predicted or
it will show signs of fatigue, because the analysts were in line with what
was expected; profit taking will ensue and the market will suddenly move
in the opposite direction of what the news portends.
If the news was bullish, but the analyst had already predicted that,
and the market had already made gains up until the announcement, then
we could see a quick selloff. The identical behavior occurs if the news is
bearish. The difficulty occurs in determining when the market will move
counter to the news and when the news will simply add to the momentum
of the market's direction.
The straddle protects you from what you don't know, or what you can't
know as a trader. This is a big feat to accomplish in such a simple package. Yet for all of its positive benefits, the straddle comes with a significant
drawback: price. The most effective straddle is accomplished when you are
able to purchase a put and call option "at-the-money." Since at-the-money
options typically follow the underlying asset practically one-for-one, they
can be the most expensive to purchase. This also means that once the
market decides on a direction, the losing option begins to erode in value
quickly.

72

BASIC STRATEGI ES

In Figure 4.1 we take a close-up daily snapshot of the market. Leading
up to the February 27th, 2008, Federal Reserve Board's rate announcement
the market is in a fairly sideways motion.
On February 25th, after two days of a weak market, a decision is made
to put on a straddle. The consensus is that the Fed wants to lower interest
rates to stimulate the economy. The debate is more on how much they will
lower it, not whether they will lower it. If rates aren't lowered enough the
market will react with weakness; if they're lowered too much, the question
is how much inflationary pressure will be put on the dollar in the long run.
The cost of putting on the straddle is (every $1 move in a gold futures
contract is worth $100):

940 Call: 18.30 = $1,830 (Delta, .483)
940 Put: 19.50 = $1,950 (Delta, .514)
Total value = $3, 780

The numbers in this chapte r and others are approximations of option prices and
delta values at the time of these examples. There are many sources for options
data and they may differ slightly from source to source.

GC-067: GoldComeitiPII)Cadjllq (DaIlY".")
02J16J2OOS-S53.a(..aAI
100M

Straddle
February 25th, 2008

990.0

"'.0

....0

.9M

870.0.

Gold Febru"", 25th. 2QOB 51_Ie

FIGURE 4.1

Gold Straddle

Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved .

Holding the Bull and the Bear by the Tails

73

Throughout the rest of this chapter we follow how the gold market
could have been traded around this time frame with a straddle or a strangle.

Strangle
Strangles have all the same benefits of straddles. Strangles work best when
the market has been moving sideways, when there is an announcement,
and if analysts have talked up or down a position for too long prior to the
announcement.
There are three key differences between strangles and straddles. First,
strangles are executed using out-of-the-money options, so they are typically less expensive than their straddle counterparts. Second, since the
purchased options are out-of-the-money, you expose yourself to the risk
of the market not moving at all. That means that you could lose money
on both your call and put solely through time erosion. Finally, delta plays
a greater role with strangles when making your decision to purchase the
proper call and put. You simply do not want to pay too much for an option
that moves less than the underlying asset.
Strangles have more flexibility than straddles. Depending on your
desired trading time frame, you can purchase out-of-the-money options
to either day trade, position, or swing trade with little worry of being
forced into a snap decision because of time constraints. This is important if you wish to see a trade slowly evolve past its initial move after the
announcement.
Figure 4.2 is the same gold chart we saw in the straddle example. This
time we take a longer view of gold's sideways action. We identify support
and resistance lines and purchase the corresponding put and call option.
The cost of putting on the strangle is:
960 Call: 8.20 = $820 (Delta, .315)
890 Put: 5.30 = $530 (Delta, .188)
Total value = $1,350
The difference of putting on a straddle and a strangle is a savings of:
$3,780 - $1 ,350 = $2,430
Even with such a big difference in price there are some serious drawbacks. The options themselves are anywhere from $10 to $50 out-of-themoney, which means that the market must move substantially in either direction before you begin to see the results of the strangle. In the meantime,
the loss in value of the option can be significant while the gains are modest

74

BASIC STRATEGIES

GC-067: Gold Comex (Pit) Cadj LIq (Daily b...)
~ · I010.0

1000.0

Strangle
February 25th, 2008

....
99<).'

-

910 ,0

8u)' "out·of·the·moMy" P\Jt

A

87M

.....
850.0

- 84M

_=~m~-;;-;otl""""'
";C;;;-------"01,",
/29IIl8
=""~1l>'-------;:"""J'2=----IOO
_ _---,,, '3'"

"
i TnII""o.",.",,",,
,
'

Gold F_.oy ZSth. 2<)08 Strangi<

FIGURE 4.2 Gold Strangle
Source: Trade Navigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.
