
99 percent of all publicly traded companies.
Conversely, a ranking of 1 means that the company’s earnings per share growth outperformed
just 1 percent of all publicly traded companies.
Look for companies with EPS rankings of 80 or
more, which allows you to home in on the top 20
percent of the securities in the market. If you’re
looking for securities with falling stock prices
that you’d like to short, then focus on stocks
with EPS rankings of 20 or less. These stocks
are the scum of the market, so to speak, and are
likely to see poor share-price performance.
If push comes to shove and you find yourself
uninterested in analyzing companies from a
fundamental level, then at the very least use the
EPS ranking. This single number conveys a lot
of useful information about a company and can
help guide you in your trades. Just don’t think of
it as a silver bullet.
An innate disadvantage of EPS ranking compared to more in-depth analysis methods is that
it naturally favors growth-oriented securities
over value-oriented securities. It says a lot
about how well a company has grown its earnings relative to the entire market but not much
about whether the shares of that company are
under- or overvalued.
EPS ranking also ignores some key financial
measures that are important to determining
whether shares of a company are worth buying
or avoiding. For example, a company’s return on
equity (an important statistic that says how
effective management is, which I cover
in Chapter 8) isn’t directly reflected in an
EPS ranking.

Determining a Company’s
Financial Stability
A financially stable company generates cash from its operations, which it can
use to fund its own growth. This type of company has little or no debt on its
balance sheet and pays little interest to creditors. Without the burden of debt

187

188 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
on its shoulders, a fiscally sound company can seize investment opportunities more readily than a company dealing with massive debt.
But if you’re looking for companies that depreciate in value, financial instability is your ticket. Such companies struggle to meet interest payments on debt
and may only make in profits a few times what their interest expense is for
the period. For example, Struggling Inc. may have such a major debt burden
that the interest on its debt is 25 or 50 percent of its total profits. If it makes
$5 million, it may pay out $2.5 million in interest on debt. This is the type of
company most likely to fail if business turns sour.
Whether you’re looking for long or short ideas, financial stability plays an
important role in selecting candidates. In the next few sections, I break down
the three ratios that can give you a quick feel for whether a company is
financially stable.

Current ratio
The current ratio compares short-term assets to short-term debts and measures how well a company can meet its near-term liabilities with its near-term
assets. This commonly used ratio helps answer the question, “Will this company have any difficulty surviving over the next 12 months?” Just because a
company has more near-term liabilities than near-term assets doesn’t mean it
has to file for bankruptcy. It can instead take out a long-term loan to meet its
near-term obligations, for example.
Financially sound companies have current ratios of 1.5 or higher. You can’t
draw any significance from a very large number, say 5 or 6. But when swing
trading on the long side, home in on current ratios above 1.5. On the short
side, consider companies with current ratios below that, because these
companies may be facing near-term pressures.

Debt to shareholders’ equity ratio
The debt to shareholders’ equity ratio (or debt to equity ratio for short) gives
you insight on how a company finances assets via equity and debt — referred
to as capital structure. The higher the debt to equity ratio, the more leveraged the company is. Two firms generating identical profits have different
efficiency ratios (such as return on equity, covered in Chapter 8) if they use
different amounts of debt.
Think of the matter this way: Two traders, Salma and Allen, begin the year
with a $50,000 swing-trading account. Salma trades throughout the year and
earns a 20 percent return on her account to end the year with $60,000. Allen,
on the other hand, decides to use a margin account, borrowing $50,000 from

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock
his broker. He too earns 20 percent on his account. However, he ends the
year at $70,000 rather than $60,000. A 20 percent return on $100,000 yields
him $10,000 more than Salma’s 20 percent return on her $50,000 account.
Such a benefit can turn into heartache because leverage, the amount of debt
a company uses, can distort financial ratios. When all’s well, one company
may look more efficient than another. But when the situation turns sour, your
sunshine-filled day can turn cloudy fast. Had that 20 percent return in the preceding example been a 20 percent loss, Salma would be at $40,000 at year-end.
Allen, on the other hand, would be staring at a $30,000 account, a $20,000 loss
from his initial investment.
When you swing trade on the long side, look for companies that aren’t highly
leveraged. I prefer to see a debt to equity ratio no higher than 30 percent.
Some swing traders disagree with my viewpoint; they see highly leveraged
companies as having high profit potential. Although that may be true, such
traders are also exposing themselves to bigger potential losers.
Whichever view you take, realize that restricting yourself to low-leverage
companies may exclude some industries from investment. For example,
homebuilders are typically highly leveraged. I personally forgo such industries so I can sleep better at night.
Conversely, look for highly leveraged companies when you want to swing
trade short. Losses can multiply for such companies when business turns
down. I view a company as being highly leveraged when it has a debt to equity
ratio above 50 percent.

Interest coverage ratio
The interest coverage ratio measures how well a company covers the interest
payments on its outstanding debt. The quickest way to bankruptcy is to
stop meeting the terms of your outstanding debts, and the interest coverage
ratio tells you whether a company is in danger of falling behind on its interest
payments by comparing two figures:
 A company’s earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT)
 A company’s interest expense
You compare EBIT because interest expense is viewed as part of the cost of
doing business. Hence, a company can use pretax money to make interest
payments. Check out the formula for the interest coverage ratio:

Interest Coverage Ratio =

Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (EBIT)
Interest Expense

189

190 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Financially healthy companies should have an interest coverage ratio of 5 or
higher, depending on the industry. Again, the exact “healthy” figure depends
on the industry. But requiring a high ratio (when you’re trading the long side)
protects you if conditions turn sour. Financially unhealthy companies have
an interest coverage ratio of 2 or less.
You can pull both items in the interest coverage ratio from a company’s
income statement, but more often than not, you can obtain the ratio for free
from a Web site. I recommend the finance section of Reuters for a summary of
key ratios on thousands of publicly traded stocks (see www.reuters.com/
finance). This site also compares the financial ratios of one company to
its industry’s ratios to help you determine whether a company’s interest
coverage or debt levels are in line with its industry.
Want an example of how you can use the interest coverage ratio? As you
can see in Figure 9-2, Toll Brothers, a homebuilder, has an interest coverage
ratio of 3.55, below my threshold of 5. Notice also that Toll Brothers’s interest coverage ratio is well below its industry and sector. These factors reinforce the view that the company is experiencing near-term difficulties. If you
were looking to swing trade Toll Brothers on the long side, this chart should
convince you to consider other companies. Alternatively, this chart may be
a sign that Toll Brothers is worth pursuing if you’re looking for a short
candidate.

Figure 9-2:
A low
interest
coverage
ratio is a red
flag for Toll
Brothers.
Source: Reuters Finance

Looking Back at Historical
Earnings and Sales Growth
You’ve heard it a dozen times: Past performance isn’t indicative of future
results. But don’t tell that to Patrick Henry, the American revolutionary
remembered for crying, “Give me liberty or give me death!” As far as I know,
Patrick Henry wasn’t a swing trader. But he did say something that can apply
to analyzing companies’ fundamentals: “I have no way of judging the future
but by the past.”

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock
Analyzing a company’s historical sales and earnings is the third part of the
Six Step Dance. You must look at a company’s historical record in order to
determine a trend. If a company is losing market share or suffering from competition, that weakness shows up in sales and/or earnings. If a company is
gaining market share and ramping up production, that also appears in sales.
Here’s how to conduct a good analysis of historical earnings and sales growth:
1. Examine a company’s sales and earnings growth over the last several
years.
2. Get a feel for whether the company is mature (growing sales and
earnings at a low rate) or growing (increasing both sales and earnings
at double digits).
3. Compare growth rates across the industry so you know whether
the company deserves to be awarded a higher multiple than its
competition.
Avoid companies with negative sales or earnings growth if you’re going
long. Steer clear of companies with positive sales or earnings growth if
you’re going short.
Fortunately, this analysis can be done visually (after all, a picture’s worth a
thousand words) or quantitatively. Relax, you don’t have to acquaint yourself
with another formula on what constitutes good or poor results. Regardless of
the direction of growth, a company may be over- or undervalued depending
on what market multiple it trades at or what cash flow it generates.
If a company’s experiencing growth, you need to figure out whether that
growth is accelerating, slowing down, or holding steady. A company undergoing accelerated growth is often awarded a market multiple above its
industry — as long as that growth outpaces the industry average. On the other
hand, a company facing declining earnings or sales — at a time when the
industry is growing — is often awarded a market multiple below its industry.
Be sure to review at least three years’ worth of sales and earnings growth.
William J. O’Neil of Investor’s Business Daily recommends looking for companies with an earnings growth rate of at least 25 percent in the previous two
quarters (when compared to the year-ago periods) and an annual earnings
growth rate of 25 percent throughout the last three years.
I certainly like to see such growth in the companies I’m looking to swing
trade on the long side. But I don’t exclude a company solely because it
doesn’t have that minimum 25 percent earnings growth rate. My yardstick is
to find companies growing earnings at a faster pace than the industry.
Earnings growth can’t continue indefinitely if sales remain constant. The
type of sales growth I look for depends on a company’s size. The larger the
company, the more I allow for lower levels of sales growth. Growing sales 25
percent when total sales are $10 million is much easier to do than growing
sales 25 percent when total sales are $10 billion.

191

192 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
On the short side, you want to see deterioration in both sales and earnings.
A company losing market share is often reluctant to admit its position until
after everyone knows. Accelerating weakness is especially bearish because
the extent of the decline is unknown until it flattens out. And even then,
there’s no guarantee it’ll rise again.
Examining both sales and earnings pays off. Consider the income statement
of Vonage (symbol: VG) from 2002 through 2006. During that period, Vonage
grew sales from $1 million to $607 million — now that’s remarkable growth!
So surely Vonage was a steal to buy, right? Not when you look at the bottom
line: net income. During that same period, Vonage’s losses increased from
$13 million to $339 million, and the company’s stock price fell from $17 per
share when the stock was issued in 2006 to $2 per share by the end of 2007,
as shown in Figure 9-3.

Figure 9-3:
Snapshot of
VG’s income
statement
from 2002
through
2006.
Source: Reuters Finance

Understanding Earnings
and Sales Expectations
Wall Street values companies based on future income projections, not past
income results. So another critical step in your stock analysis is examining
what a company is likely to earn in the future.

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock
The good news is that a “right” figure for future growth simply doesn’t exist.
A company can report an earnings growth rate of 100 percent during a
quarter versus the year-ago period and still see its stock price tumble like
there’s no tomorrow — if Wall Street expected 150 percent earnings growth.
For better or worse, Wall Street analysts estimate a company’s future earnings
and sales by meeting with management, talking to competitors, building
elaborate models only they can understand, and flipping a coin. (I’m only half
joking.) Analysts often estimate earnings in the same range to avoid the
embarrassment that comes if an estimate’s far off the market. After all, if
they’re wrong together, they have an excuse. But if one analyst is way off and
everyone else is on target, that analyst may have some explaining to do. But
you don’t have to go through all that trouble. Instead, you can let the analysts
do the heavy lifting to give you a ballpark figure from which you can work.
Talk about a home run!
Whenever you use analysts’ estimates, you want to know whether they can
give you an idea of a company’s sales or earnings trend. (Is it rising or falling?
Is it increasing or decreasing?) That’s why I recommend using these so-called
expert estimates in conjunction with the history of a company’s earnings
surprises.
The earnings surprise history helps you determine whether the analysts overanchored their analysis. Anchoring is a behavioral finance term that refers to
an individual’s tendency to anchor beliefs on some reference point. For example, analyst Martha may believe that Dell is the undisputed PC seller in the
world. But when Dell announces a lousy quarter and Hewlett-Packard — a
chief rival to Dell — reports an excellent one, analyst Martha may be tempted
to retain her old belief that Dell is still the leader and may have just stumbled
temporarily. It may take three or four quarters of results before analyst
Martha finally catches onto the trend and adjusts her models to reflect the
new reality — perhaps just before the trend changes again!
An earnings surprise history table compares a firm’s actual reported earnings
to the consensus (or average) estimate of Wall Street. A company that reports
earnings of $1.10 per share when Wall Street expected earnings of $1.00 per
share surprises Wall Street by 10 cents per share, or 10 percent. Some Web
sites (like the finance section of Reuters) report the absolute difference
between the actual results and the estimates, whereas others (like Yahoo!
Finance) report the actual and percentage difference.
Earnings surprise histories are extremely important in swing trading.
Because earnings estimates represent Wall Street’s consensus estimates
on sales and earnings going forward, the consistent over- or underestimating
of sales or earnings is very telling. An inconsistent pattern has little
significance.
When analyzing Wall Street’s estimates of earnings and sales, practice the
following:

193

194 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
1. Determine the trend and the slope of the trend.
For example, is the slope increasing or decreasing?
2. Examine the earnings surprise history.
You want to see whether analysts are consistently underestimating
(positive surprises) or overestimating (negative surprises) a company’s
sales and earnings.
Although seeing increasing or decreasing surprises (depending on
whether you want to go long or short) is great, don’t place that requirement on the earnings surprise history, because doing so is somewhat
burdensome.
Figure 9-4 shows the earnings and sales surprise history of Merck Company
(symbol: MRK) over five quarters: September 2006 through September 2007.
Notice how analysts consistently underestimated sales (and earnings, to a
lesser extent) throughout the five quarters. This consistent underestimation
is a clue that shares of Merck are probably mispriced. Shares of Merck
returned more than 32 percent in 2007.

Figure 9-4:
A quarterly
earnings
and sales
surprise history of MRK.
Source: Reuters Finance

Checking Out the Competition
No company is an island. It competes with other firms in its industry.
Understanding who the other players are and their fundamentals gives you
insight on whether shares you’re trading are cheap or dear. That’s why
you always want to examine a company’s competitors and understand how
they differ from it.
Companies in the same industry tend to benefit and suffer together, because
the forces that affect all firms in an industry are usually the same. The key is
understanding how the firms within the industry differ.

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock
This essential part of the Six Step Dance is all about classifying the way in
which the company you’re swing trading is distinguishing itself. You can
generally sort a company’s stand-out-from-the-pack strategy into one of
these four bins:
 Cost-leadership strategy: The cost-leadership company strives to be the
lowest-cost producer in the industry. Often, it achieves this status by
employing economies of scale or by being large enough to spread costs
across a broad number of items in order to lower prices. Of course, the
cost leader’s products must be similar to higher-priced products in the
market. No cost leader can simply offer cheap items that are clearly inferior to what consumers can purchase elsewhere. Good examples of cost
leaders are Wal-Mart and Southwest Airlines.
 Differentiator strategy: A differentiator strives to offer a better product
than others in its industry and usually charges a premium price for that
product. Tiffany & Co. is a classic differentiator company.
 Cost-focus strategy: A company pursuing a cost-focus strategy tries to
offer the lowest prices on a narrow part of the industry. A company that
manufactures cheap memory for PCs, for example, practices cost focus.
 Differentiator-focus strategy: A company pursuing a differentiator focus
attempts to offer a superior product in some aspect of quality for a
narrow subset of the market. NVIDIA, a premium graphics chip maker,
employs the differentiator-focus strategy by offering graphics cards
aimed at gamers and graphic designers.
You can sometimes tell which strategy a company is pursuing by examining
three key profit margins: gross profit margins, operating margins, and net
profit margins. If a company can charge a premium price for its products, it
tends to earn higher margins (on all three measures) than its competitors.
(Flip to Chapter 7 for a refresher on profit margins.)
Figure 9-5 shows a competitor analysis of four companies in the computer
industry: Apple Inc. (symbol: AAPL), Dell Computer (symbol: DELL), HewlettPackard (symbol: HPQ), and Microsoft (symbol: MSFT). Because Microsoft
isn’t a computer manufacturer, its comparisons aren’t as meaningful as the
other three companies. But I’m going to take a look at the following anyway
to determine which strategy each company is following:
 Gross margins: Apple and Microsoft have the highest gross margins of
the lot at 33.97 percent and 78.41 percent, respectively. Microsoft is a
software firm with lower production costs, which is why its gross
margin is so much higher than the rest of the companies in this analysis.
But you can immediately tell that both Apple and Microsoft are charging
more for their products than Dell or Hewlett-Packard. This move is
consistent with a differentiator strategy.

195

196 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
 Operating margins: Apple and Microsoft also have higher operating
margins than the other competitors at 18.37 percent and 37.87 percent,
respectively.
 Net profit margins: This table doesn’t explicitly list the net profit
margins of the four companies, but it does provide sufficient data to
calculate these margins. (Remember: Net profit margins are equal
to net income divided by sales. Of the three margins listed here, net
profit margins are the most important.) If you calculate the net profit
margins for the four companies, you find that Apple and Microsoft
have the highest of the bunch at 14.58 percent and 27.52 percent,
respectively.
Pay close attention to profit margins, especially relative profit margins. The
Motley Fool Web site (www.fool.com) recommends buying stocks of companies with net profit margins of 10 percent or more. I agree with this rule as a
generality, but you should recognize that different industries have different
forces that may inhibit a company from realizing such high margins.

Figure 9-5:
Snapshot of
the fundamentals for
AAPL, DELL,
HPQ, and
MSFT.
Source: Yahoo! Finance

Chapter 9: Six Tried-and-True Steps for Analyzing a Company’s Stock

Valuing a Company’s Shares
Valuing a company’s shares may be the single most important part of the
Six Step Dance. Although you can value a company in several extensive
ways, this step focuses on relative valuation models, which are the poor
man’s valuation choice (perhaps that’s a poor choice of words — oops! that
too). A relative model doesn’t answer the question, “How much is this
company worth to the penny?” Instead, it answers the question, “Relative to
its competitors, are shares of this company properly valued?”
So to end your stock analysis dance with high marks (and a wealth of knowledge to make the right decision for your swing trading), here’s what to do:
1. Gauge whether shares of the company you want to swing trade are
