
Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions
The stochastics indicator generates two main signals (which I explain further
in the following sections):
 Positive and negative divergences between stochastics and the security’s
price pattern
 Crossovers of %K and %D from above the overbought level or below the
oversold level

Positive and negative divergences
A positive divergence in stochastics forms when a security’s price falls to
a new low while the stochastics indicator traces a higher trough, signaling
that sellers are exhausted and buyers are preparing to turn prices around. A
negative divergence in stochastics can be seen when prices reach a new high
while the stochastics indicator traces a lower high, signaling that buyers are
exhausted and sellers are preparing to turn prices lower.
Figure 5-11 illustrates how a divergence, in this case between the price of
Best Buy (symbol: BBY) common stock and the stochastics indicator, can
flash an important signal about an imminent change in a security’s price
direction. While shares of Best Buy rallied to the $51 to $52 level twice in
December 2007, the stochastics indicator formed a lower peak on the second
rally. This movement signaled that buyers were exhausted and sellers were
gaining the upper hand. Shortly thereafter, shares of Best Buy fell 15 percent
in two weeks.

Figure 5-11:
This chart
illustrates
the effectiveness of
divergence
as an
important
signal of
impending
change.

109

110 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Follow these steps to use stochastics in your trading program:
1. Confirm whether a trading range exists by using ADX or the eyeball
approach.
2. If a trading range exists, buy or short after stochastics forms a positive
or negative divergence, respectively.
Enter the position on the long side only when %K turns up over %D. Enter
the position on the short side only when %K turns down under %D.

Crossovers from overbought and oversold levels
The more popular use of stochastics trading signals occurs when the %K
plot crosses over the %D plot and exits an overbought or oversold territory.
Charting programs peg overbought and oversold territories as 80 and 20,
respectively. This measurement simply means that when prices move to an
extreme, within 20 percent of the upper or lower boundaries of a historical
price range, you can expect a reversal of the extreme.
Amateur swing traders often buy a security in a trading range simply because
stochastics is overbought or oversold. This move is a recipe for whipsaws
galore. Instead, wait for stochastics to enter the overbought or oversold territory. After it has, consider your rifle aimed, but don’t pull the trigger just yet.
Wait for stochastics to exit the overbought or oversold area. By being patient,
you save yourself the heartache that can come when an overbought or oversold security decides to exit its range and enter a trend. When that occurs,
stochastics remains overbought or oversold for several days or weeks.
Figure 5-12 demonstrates several profitable trades of ImClone Systems (symbol:
IMCL) shares that could’ve been achieved by using the overbought and oversold
ranges in the stochastics indicator. With ADX below 20, shares of ImClone were
clearly in a trading range. In this type of scenario, you’d wait for stochastics
to enter the overbought territory (represented by the upper horizontal line)
and short when %K crosses below %D and below the overbought zone of 80.
Alternatively, you’d wait for stochastics to enter the oversold territory and buy
when %K crosses above %D and above the oversold zone of 20.
To trade using stochastics and the overbought and oversold levels, follow
these steps:
1. Identify whether a trading range exists by using ADX (preferably
below 20) or the eyeball approach.
2. Wait for %K to enter the overbought or oversold territory.
Short the security when %K crosses down through %D and below the
overbought zone. Buy the security when %K crosses up through %D and
above the oversold zone.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions

Figure 5-12:
This chart
shows how
observing
overbought
and oversold levels
can help
you profit
from shortterm swings
in a trading
range.

3. Exit after stochastics reaches the opposite zone.
Alternatively, you can exit after a return target is achieved or a certain
number of days have passed.

Relative Strength Index (RSI): A
comparison of apples and oranges
The Relative Strength Index (RSI) is an underused non-trending oscillator that
compares a security to itself. Not only does it tell you when a security’s price
is overbought or oversold, but it can also form chart patterns that are useful
for determining the likely direction of a breakout.
RSI isn’t relative strength in the traditional sense of the term. Relative
strength, as explained in Chapter 6, usually refers to comparing the strength
of one security to another. For example, shares of Microsoft may be advancing while the market is falling — a classic sign of relative strength.
RSI actually examines the price history of a security over a certain number of
days (14 is the standard setting, which I recommend). It compares the average
gain achieved on up days with the average loss realized on down days. An average of the gains on up days and the losses on down days is computed, and the
ratio between the two (average gains over average losses) yields the indicator.
Like most oscillators, the RSI is range-bound between 0 and 100. Unlike stochastics (covered in the previous section), a reading below 30 indicates an
oversold level, whereas a reading above 70 indicates an overbought region.
RSI is particularly helpful, because chart patterns like the head-and-shoulders

111

112 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
or cup-and-handle patterns (explained in Chapter 4) form from time to
time. These chart patterns can be interpreted in the same way as if they’d
occurred in the price chart.
The next few sections cover the three major ways of using the RSI indicator
to trade by using
 Positive and negative divergences
 Chart patterns that develop in the RSI
 The indicator’s turn down from an overbought region or turn up from an
oversold territory

Making use of positive and negative divergences in RSI
A positive or negative divergence develops when RSI fails to confirm a new
high or new low in a security’s price. You should trade divergences only after
RSI turns down (if the divergence is negative) or turns up (if the divergence is
positive). And of course, always use stop losses to protect your capital.
Follow these steps to trade divergences in the Relative Strength Index:
1. Determine whether a trading range exists by using ADX or the eyeball
approach.
2. Identify a divergence when the security makes a new high or new low
while the RSI fails to confirm the new peak or trough.
3. Wait for the RSI to turn up (in the case of positive divergences) or turn
down (in the case of negative divergences) before entering a position.
4. Keep a tight stop loss above a recent peak if you’re shorting or below
a recent trough if you’re buying.
You want to take this step in case the divergence fails or the security
traces multiple divergences.
Figure 5-13 shows a chart of Regeneron Pharmaceuticals (symbol: REGN) that
demonstrates a negative divergence in RSI. Shares of REGN rally to new highs
while RSI traces lower troughs — a warning of underlying weakness.

Observing RSI chart patterns
Seeing chart patterns in RSI is uncommon. Yet these patterns are more reliable than trading based off of overbought or oversold zones. RSI chart patterns may form at the same time as a chart pattern in the actual price of the
security.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions

Figure 5-13:
This chart
demonstrates a
negative
divergence
in RSI.

Figure 5-14 demonstrates a classic head-and-shoulders chart pattern occurring in
the RSI indicator in shares of BioMimetic Therapeutics (symbol: BMTI). Despite
prices rallying to the $18 range, RSI signaled that an underlying weakness was
brewing when it formed a lower peak in early January 2008. The actual signal to
short didn’t occur until the head-and-shoulders pattern was completed by the
breakdown of RSI through the neckline. In a situation like this, you should short
on the breakdown of RSI through the right shoulder, also known as its turn down
from the overbought region (above 70).

Figure 5-14:
This chart
shows a
formed
head-andshoulders
pattern in
the RSI
indicator.

113

114 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Trading the RSI indicator’s overbought and oversold zones
The process of trading the RSI indicator’s turn up from the oversold region
and turn down from the overbought region is nearly identical to the process
of trading overbought and oversold regions using stochastics, covered earlier in this chapter. Here’s how you do it:
1. Figure out whether a trading range exists by using ADX (preferably
below 20) or the eyeball approach.
2. Wait for the RSI indicator to enter the overbought or oversold territory (above 70 or below 30 on most charting programs).
Short the security when RSI turns down from an overbought reading and
through the overbought zone. Buy when RSI turns up from an oversold
reading and through the oversold zone.
3. Exit after RSI reaches the opposite zone.
Alternatively, you can exit after a return target is achieved or a certain
number of days have passed.

Combining Technical Indicators
with Chart Patterns
Using technical indicators with chart patterns helps you increase your swing
trading accuracy. To combine the two, you need to evaluate trades based on
what the chart is saying and what the technical indicators are saying, and
only take those trades where both chart and indicators communicate the
same message. Perhaps the chart pattern is a cup-and-handle formation or a
potential breakaway gap to the upside — both positive developments. If your
technical indicator — say the DMI indicator — flashes a buy at that same
time, you may have good reason to believe a buy is profitable.
Figure 5-15 demonstrates this point beautifully. Shares of ManTech International
(symbol: MANT) develop what appears to be a classic cup-and-handle formation.
Cup-and-handle formations are bullish, and swing traders normally buy a security
after it crosses above its handle, as ManTech International did on December 19,
2007. However, the trade failed a few days later.
To spot the brewing trouble in a case like this, you can’t use chart patterns
alone. You need to use the RSI indicator in conjunction with a chart pattern
to avoid a loss on your trade. In this example, the RSI flagged a troubling
divergence forming during the cup-and-handle pattern. While prices of
ManTech International moved to new highs, the RSI failed to confirm that
strength.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions

Figure 5-15:
A chart
of MANT
shows the
value of
combining chart
pattern
observations with
technical
indicators.

Using Technical Indicators to Determine
Net Long or Net Short Positioning
One of the key questions you face as a swing trader is whether to be net long
or net short at any given time (net long simply means the value of your portfolio’s long positions is higher than the value of your portfolio’s short positions; net short means the opposite).
When markets are roaring higher, you want the majority of your positions
to be on the long side. Any short positions you hold are likely to result in
losses or small profits, and it’s tough to fight the trend. When the markets
are falling, being net short is the way to go. Markets fall faster than they rise
because fear is a stronger emotion than greed. Long positions held in a bear
market are likely to result in losses.
Technical indicators are useful tools to assist you in determining whether to
be net long or net short. You may apply an indicator to a market index and
go net long or net short based on the signals you receive from that indicator.
But if you choose this route, make sure your indicator provides few and accurate signals. You don’t want to be changing your net exposure weekly — or
worse, daily.
Your indicator or mechanism for determining when to be net long or net short
should respond quickly enough when a trend turns down. Test your indicator
on past market cycles to determine whether it caught downturns quickly or
slowly. Also make sure your indicator doesn’t generate so many signals that
whipsaws abound. Always strive for balance.

115

116 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
I recommend using the nine-week moving average. When the slope of the
nine-week moving average is negative, expect more trading opportunities to
be on the short side of the market. When the slope of the nine-week moving
average is positive, expect more trading opportunities to be on the long side
of the market. Figure 5-16 shows a chart of the S&P 500 Index with a nineweek moving average.

Figure 5-16:
The S&P 500
Index with a
nine-week
moving
average.

You may rely on basic chart analysis to signal the changes between being net
long or net short. Remember that the long-term trend in the equity markets is
up, and therefore you’re likely to be net long far more often than you are net
short. This rule of thumb also holds true if you trade international stocks.

Chapter 6

Analyzing Charts to Trade
Trends, Ranges, or Both
In This Chapter
 Understanding the differences between trading trends and ranges
 Making the most of a strong trend
 Working with an identified trading range
 Conducting intermarket and relative strength analysis

M

ost swing traders make their money in one of three ways: trading strong
trends, trading ranges, or both. A trend is the persistent up or down
movement of a security’s price. Trends can last anywhere from a few days to
a few years, but generally, a security must rise to new highs or fall to new lows
every few weeks to be considered trending (for a swing trader, that is; long-term
investors define trends in a different time frame). If you choose to accept trading
trends, your job is to find the strongest trends — up or down — and ride them
until you exit for a profit or are forced out for a loss (a small one, hopefully!).
Many markets and securities are neither trending upward nor downward,
though. Instead, they’re oscillating up and down between clearly defined
price levels called ranges. As with trends, trading ranges can occur over
short periods or long periods. The longer a trading range has been in place,
the more likely it is to continue. For example, if Dummies Corporation stock
has been trading between $50 and $60 for the last three months, it’s safe to
assume that the stock is in a trading range. Your job is to buy near $50 and
sell near $60.
But just what makes a trend strong or weak? And how do you know whether
to trade trends or ranges (or a mixture of both)? I help you figure out your
answers to these questions in this chapter. Please note, though, that in order
to fully understand the guidance in this chapter, you need to have a solid
understanding of chart patterns and technical indicators, which I cover in
Chapters 4 and 5 — head to those chapters first if you need a refresher.

118 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Trading Trends versus Trading
Ranges: A Quick Rundown
Most swing traders focus primarily on trading trends simply because the
profits tend to be bigger than when trading ranges. The added beauty of
trends is that they require little or no work on your part to manage. In an
uptrend, the security’s price rises consistently and doesn’t fall much from its
highs — say 5 percent to 10 percent at the most. Entering a trend early (in
the first few days of the start of a new trend) allows you to enter when the
risk is lowest. Entering a trend that has been in place for several weeks or
(gulp!) months raises the chance that you’re getting on just when you should
be getting off.
The difficulty in riding trends arises from identifying when a trend has begun
and exiting quickly when it’s clear the trend is over. The latter problem is the
biggest concern for you as a swing trader. Trends aren’t difficult to find and
enter, but when a security moves counter to its trend, you have to decide
whether that move is simply a normal part of the trend development or something more sinister (the end of that trend).
Although trading ranges isn’t as popular among swing traders as trading
trends, don’t be fooled by the ranges’ small profits. Swing traders tend to
have a higher win ratio when trading ranges than when trading trends. In
other words, you may make smaller profits per trade if you trade ranges, but
you’ll also tend to be right more often than if you were trading trends.
One of the advantages of trading ranges versus trading trends is that with
ranges your profit and risk objectives are easily identified. Your profit objective is simply the other side of the range; for example, if you’re shorting a
stock at $60 per share, your goal is to cover that short near $50 per share.
Similarly, your risk is clearly defined: If you buy near $50 per share, you’re
going to exit your trade if the stock trades below $49 or $48. Such a move outside the established trading range likely signals the beginning of a new trend.
When trading ranges, the biggest risk you face is a security beginning a new
trend. Because your trade depends on the continuation of the range, you’re
unlikely to be on the right side of the trade should a trend develop. For example, you could lose a bundle on a stock if you short shares near $60 (with a
range between $50 and $60) and the stock proceeds to break out above its
upper trading range of $60 per share and run to $70 or higher. If the stock
falls from $60 to $40, you miss the move from $50 to $40 because your profit
objective calls for exiting at the lower bound of the range. Therefore, you’re
unlikely to ever be on the right side of a trend if you focus on trading ranges.
So should you trade trends, ranges, or both?

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
Unfortunately, as with many aspects of swing trading, you won’t find a onesize-fits-all answer. Some traders are looking for those big moves — that 10
percent or 20 percent move that will happen over a few days. They’re willing
to tolerate being wrong some (or even most) of the time in their quest for
home runs. Such swing traders should focus on trends. Other traders are
patient and are content with hitting singles and doubles each inning. They’re
fine with 3 percent or 5 percent returns on each trade. They’re right 50 percent or more of the time, and they cut losses fast. Such swing traders are
best suited for trading ranges. If you’re not sure which method fits your personality, read about the methods outlined in this chapter and pick the one
you feel most comfortable with.

A brief explanation of the conception of ranges
Trends occur for obvious reasons: A security is
either undervalued or overvalued and begins to
trend when investors take notice and correct
that mispricing. But just why do trading ranges
exist? Understanding the psychology should
help you with trading ranges.
As with all technical analysis, trading ranges
represent the psychology of market participants.
Generally, investors — if given perfect information — can assess the true value of company
within a 5 percent to 10 percent range. No two
investors will assess the value of a company at
exactly the same price, but they’ll have values
that are close to one another.
A trading range develops when investors arrive
at the correct value of a company. The lower
part of the trading range represents the consensus low estimate of the company’s value,
and the upper part of the trading range represents the consensus high estimate of the company’s value.
 When shares fall to the lower part of the
range, market participants buy shares
because they perceive that value to be too
low for the company. When this occurs en
masse, shares form a lower support level

that represents the cheapest level investors
believe shares are worth at that time.
 When shares rise to the upper part of the
range, investors holding that security begin
to sell because they believe this to be a
best-case scenario value of the company.
Meanwhile, investors buying at the upper
range are likely to sell at the same level to
break even should shares decline.
Trading ranges are likely to continue until some
new piece of news or event serves as a catalyst to propel shares higher or lower from their
ranges. In other words, securities break trading
ranges when investors watching and/or holding those securities realize that the underlying
value has changed. This change often marks
the beginning of a trend that lasts until a new
trading range develops where market participants peg the value of a company between two
extremes.
If you understand how ranges work, you’re
more likely to recognize a range that represents
true consensus and not simply a small pause in
a security’s move upward or downward. Also,
you’re attuned to how news or events may
affect a security breaking out of its range.

119

120 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Advanced traders may use both methods to take advantage of both ranges
and trends. That’s because the overall market may determine whether range
trading or trend trading is easier at any given moment. A zooming bull market
pushes the majority of stocks higher, and trading ranges is difficult. A tough
bear market pushes the majority of stocks down, regardless of their fundamentals, and trends are few and far between when a market is gridlocked in a
trading range.

Trading on Trends
Trend trading is swinging for that home run and occasional grand slam.
Swing traders focusing on trends are looking for big returns in short periods.
They’re looking to enter a trend that has clearly established itself. Because
trends move fast and furious, they have to keep stop loss orders tight to exit
on a moment’s notice if the wave they’re riding crests.
So first things first: How exactly do you find strong enough trends to trade?
And when you find a strong trend, how do you know whether the time is right
to enter on that trend?

Finding a strong trend
You can find trending securities in multiple ways. You can do a bottom-up
search, where you’re looking up close at individual stocks, or you can do a
top-down search, where you’re scoping out industry groups and then narrowing your view to individual stocks. You then can determine trend strength
through a variety of ways. One way is the eyeball approach, in which you
size up a chart by simply looking at it. Or you can use technical indicators
that tell you — with little interpretation — whether the security you want to
trade is trending and whether that trend is up or down. The ADX indicator is
often used to measure whether a security is trending or non-trending without
regard to whether the trend is upward or downward. Most popular charting
programs include the ADX or include it as part of the DMI indicator. You can
find out more about ADX and DMI indicators in Chapter 5.
An ADX reading above 20 signals a trend. The higher above 20 the ADX reading is, the stronger the trend. But excessive values (for example, readings
above 40) may indicate an overheated trend that’s about to reverse.
Here’s a quick look at how you can use both search methods:
 Bottom-up search: Trending stocks can be found daily in popular
newspapers like The Wall Street Journal or Investor’s Business Daily. For
