
 Table 8.7 Average Annual Returns, 1974–2013 

 GEM’s low-risk profile makes it less likely that investors will make emotionally based exit decisions at inopportune times when other equity investors are rushing toward the sidelines. GEM investors still need to exercise patience during bull markets when GEM may just as often underperform as outperform market benchmarks. Investors need to remember that much of the outperformance of GEM occurs in bear market environments. 
 COMPARATIVE DRAWDOWNS 
 Table 8.8 shows the amounts, lengths, and recovery times of the five largest GEM and ACWI drawdowns. 
 Table 8.8 Five Largest GEM and ACWI Drawdowns, 1974–2013 

 Figures 8.9 through 8.12 offer different views of GEM drawdowns and returns compared to those of ACWI and other benchmarks. 

 Figure 8.9 Maximum Drawdowns, 1974–2013 

 Figure 8.10 ACWI Bear Market Returns, 1974–2013 

 Figure 8.11 ACWI Drawdown Years, 1974–2013 

 Figure 8.12 GEM and ACWI Rolling Five-Year Maximum Drawdown, 1979–2013 
 Figure 8.13 shows GEM quarterly returns plotted against corresponding ACWI quarterly returns rolling forward through the data one month at a time. We see in the lower left quadrant of the chart how the use of absolute momentum in GEM truncates much of the drawdown that shows up in ACWI. On the other hand, the upward sloping linear relationship in the upper-right quadrant of the chart shows that most positive ACWI returns pass through unaltered to GEM. 

 Figure 8.13 Quarterly Returns GEM versus ACWI, 1974–2013 
 Figure 8.14 is a box plot g iving a reward-to-risk view based on rolling 12-month returns. Box plots give a simultaneous view of each strategy’s reward and variability characteristics. The long vertical lines are the ranges of returns (excluding extreme outliers), while the rectangular boxes show interquartile ranges bounding 75% of the returns. Each model’s median 12-month return is the horizontal line that splits its box into different colors. 

 Figure 8.14 Box Plot of Rolling 12-Month Returns, 1974–2013 
 FACTOR MODEL RESULTS 
 Using multiple regression factor models as described in Chapter 3 , Table 8.9 shows GEM returns regressed against the Fama-French-Carhart four-factor market, size, value, and momentum risk factors as per the Kenneth French website data library. 8 Since the GEM model is in bonds around 30% of the time, we also show a five-factor model that adds the excess return of the Barclays Aggregate Bond index as an additional factor. In addition, we show a simple three-factor model using only stock market, bond market, and momentum risk factors. 
 Table 8.9 Factor Pricing Models, 1974–2013 

 Under all three of these factor models, GEM provides economically and statistically significant risk-adjusted excess returns (alpha). Since GEM is long only, we naturally see highly significant coefficients on the stock and bond market factors. GEM also has a highly significant loading on stock momentum, showing that relative strength momentum plays a significant role in the strong performance of GEM. 
 SIMPLE AND EFFECTIVE 
 GEM is not only effective in providing high and significant risk-adjusted returns, but it is also parsimonious. This is a word used by economists to make them look smart. It means simple and straightforward. Einstein once said, “Everything should be kept as simple as possible, but no simpler.” In the words of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, “Perfection is achieved not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is nothing left to take away,” and in the words of Mr. Rogers, “Deep and simple is far more essential than shallow and complex.” 
 Highly optimized methods are often complex, fragile, and prone to failure. GEM, on the other hand, is simple and robust. It uses only U.S. equities, non-U.S. equities, and aggregate bonds. Its only parameter is a 12-month look-back period validated in hundreds of in- and out-of-sample momentum studies across many diverse markets and over two centuries of market data. These in- and out-of-sample results and the simplicity and robustness of GEM minimize any data mining and overfitting bias, the usual banes of model construction. 
 HOW TO USE IT 
 GEM is simple to implement using exchange-traded funds (ETFs), which have lower operating expenses, more trading liquidity, more transparency, and more efficient tax structures than mutual funds. 9 One can easily determine GEM rebalancing signals using an online charting program. I suggest PerfCharts by StockCharts.com , 10 because it uses total returns, whereas most other free charting programs use only price changes in their chart construction. You need to enter and save three ETF symbols, one each for U.S. stocks, non-U.S. stocks, and U.S. Treasury bills. Each month you plot the performance of these three ETFs over the past 252 trading days (one calendar year). If one of the two equity ETFs shows the highest return over the past year, then that is your selection for the coming month. If U.S. Treasury bills show the highest return, this means the stock market trend has been down, and you hold an aggregate bond ETF instead. 
 The costs associated with implementing and managing GEM should be extremely low. There are commission-free ETFs at four different brokerage firms one can use to implement the GEM strategy: Vanguard, Charles Schwab, TD Ameritrade, and Fidelity Investments. The average annual expense ratio of Vanguard’s S&P 500, FTSE All-World ex-U.S., and U.S. Total Bond ETFs is only 10 basis points. 11 GEM is also relatively tax efficient. Dual momentum usually sells losing positions, creating short-term capital losses while holding onto winning positions for long-term capital gains. Can there be any reason not to use GEM? 
 ACCOMMODATING DIFFERENT RISK PREFERENCES 
 We will see in the next chapter that there is little or nothing gained from adding complexity to GEM. Being so simple, one might wonder if there is any way for GEM to match the varying risk profiles of different investors. 
 To answer that, we use the Markowitz-Tobin fund separation theorem, which separates the decision of what assets to hold from the decision of how much risk to assume. 12 More specifically, this says that investors should hold the singular portfolio of assets having the highest Sharpe ratio, but those wanting a lower-risk profile should combine that optimal portfolio with a risk-free (or low-risk) alternative asset. Conversely, aggressive investors wanting higher returns can borrow in order to leverage the optimal portfolio. 
 Figure 8.15 shows the separation theorems tangency portfolio, where a straight line (the capital market line) originating from the risk-free rate just touches the efficient frontier of risky portfolios. Risk-averse investors will have a better reward-to-risk ratio and will be better off investing along this line rather than on the efficient frontier itself. 

 Figure 8.15 Capital Market Line and the Efficient Portfolio Set 
 Table 8.10 and Figure 8.16 show GEM leveraged 30% to suit aggressive investors who choose to borrow at the federal funds rate plus 25 basis points. It also shows GEM combined with a 30% permanent weighting to aggregate bonds in order to create a more conservative portfolio for more risk-averse investors. GEM can, in this way, be a program for all seasons and for many different investors. 
 Table 8.10 Global Equities Momentum, Leveraged and Deleveraged 

 Figure 8.16 Leveraged/Deleveraged GEM, 1974–2013

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 9 
 MO’ BETTER MOMENTUM 
          Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication. 
 — Leonardo da Vinci 
 W E SAW IN THE LAST chapter how dual momentum gives us higher expected returns with lower expected risk. Chapters 5 and 6 looked at other investment approaches and reinforced why dual momentum is what we should focus on. We saw, in particular, that the propensity to overdiversify is counterproductive to those who understand and are smart enough to implement dual momentum strategies. What we want to look at now are some possible ways to enhance dual momentum and some additional ways we might use it. 
 DANGERS IN TRYING TO ENHANCE MOMENTUM 
 Dual momentum is simple and direct, based as it is on straightforward relative and absolute performance. Its only parameter is the look-back period. Cowles and Jones first discovered abnormal profits from relative strength momentum in the U.S. stock market with a 12-month look-back using data from 1920 through 1935. Many other researchers have confirmed this approach in other markets and with additional data up to the present and all the way back to 1903 with absolute momentum and 1801 with relative momentum. With so many years of out-of-sample validation, we should not have to worry about data-snooping bias. The fact that a 12-month look-back works well with both forms of momentum serves as a cross-validation of 12 months as a good length for our look-back period. 
 With so much going for dual momentum, if you try to replace or modify this proven approach with something new, you face several potential problems. First is the multiple-comparisons hazard that comes from data mining when it becomes data snooping. If you look at enough different strategies, almost certainly a few of them will look attractive. However, this simply can be due to chance or luck. If you measure statistical significance at the 5% level, for example, and you test 20 or more strategies, you will likely end up with one that appears significant when it is not, since it can still occur 1 in 20 times by chance alone. One does not need to experiment extensively to get into trouble this way. In an aptly named study called “Pseudo-Mathematics and Financial Charlatanism: The Effects of Backtest Overfitting on Out-of-Sample Performance,” Bailey et al. (2014) state, “high performance is easily achievable after backtesting a relatively small number of alternative strategy configurations … . [I]nvestors can be easily misled into allocating capital to strategies that appear to be mathematically sound. 
 There are some infamous examples of what can happen when you rely only on data snooping to develop an explanatory model. Around 20 years ago, two researchers found they could explain 99% of the return on the S&P 500 Index using a multiple regression on butter production in Bangladesh, cheese production in the United States, and the number of sheep in the United States and Bangladesh. Those researchers still get inquiries asking where one can find data on Bangladesh butter production! There have been other studies linking stock market returns to the number of nine-year-old children in the United States, the length of women’s dress hemlines, and whether or not an American graces the cover of the annual Sports Illustrated swimsuit edition. 1 
 The same data-snooping problem exists after you choose a model and have to determine its parameters. With momentum, there is only one parameter: the look-back period. By now, researchers have validated it every which way from Sunday. However, most models are not so simple, and there is always the risk of model overfitting and overspecification. 
 By adding complexity to a model, you may make it too rigid by molding it perfectly to “predict” the past. It may then be ineffective at forecasting the future. According to López de Prado (2013), because financial data exhibits memories of various sorts, overfitting does not just lead to noise (randomness). It often leads to systematic out-of-sample losses due to mean reversion. The better the backtested results, the worse the subsequent real-time results. 
 There is also the problem of using the data twice, once to optimize a strategy and its parameters, and then again to judge how well the strategy predicts future returns. One needs to penalize complex or highly optimized models and to evaluate performance on fresh data not used for model development. López de Prado goes on to show that standard statistical techniques designed to prevent overfitting, such as splitting data into a development set for testing and a holdout set for cross-validation, can still be inaccurate when used for backtesting purposes. There are a number of reasons for this, the main ones being that the holdout method does not account for the number of attempted trials, and researchers may already know what happens in the second half of the data. As Nobel laureate physicist Richard Feynman pointed out, “if the process of computing the consequences is indefinite, then with a little skill any experimental result can be made to look like the expected consequences.” 2 
 Besides multiple comparison hazards and overfitting biases, data mining can also suffer from a paucity of data. Some practitioners use only around 15 years of data to design and backtest their trading models, since that is when a number of ETFs started trading. These results are suspect, given the amount of noise there is in financial data. Return distribution parameters are time varying and regime dependent. Relatively short data samples are usually not representative of the whole, and they often do not give repeatable backtest results. The property in which every sequence or sample of data is equally representative of the whole is called ergodicity. Financial markets are most definitely nonergodic. Some stock market regimes may never repeat, while others repeat with considerably different characteristics. The following is one way to see this. 
 Let us define the variance ratio (VR) as the ratio of the k -period return to k times the variance of the 1-period return. When returns are uncorrelated over time, the numerator and denominator will be the same, so the VR will be 1. In a mean-reverting market, returns are negatively correlated, and the VR will be less than 1. In a trending market, returns will be positively correlated, and the VR will be greater than 1. If we calculate the VR over various k periods, we will be able to tell if the market has been trending or mean reverting over those periods. 
 Tony Cooper provided the charts for Figure 9.1 . 3 Figure 9.1 a shows the S&P 500 identified by 15-year time intervals. Figure 9.1 b shows the VR associated with each of these 15-year intervals. We see that for the 1999–2013 interval (the lowest line on the VR chart), the market was mean-reverting over all the k periods. For other 15-year intervals, the VR values are mostly higher than 1, indicating trending markets. The diverging VR chart patterns show us that backtests performed on only 15 years of data are unlikely to give reliable forward-looking predictions. One of the most frequent mistakes I see others make is using only a limited amount of data, such as 15 years, to develop a model and then expect it to give reliable results going forward in time.The prominent researcher Kenneth French (Fama and French, 2007) once said that 78 years of data in the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database might not be enough to separate out noise from one’s results. 4 We saw in Chapter 6 that respected researchers determined there was a significant value premium based on 28 years of data. Now that substantially more data is available, we see that the value premium, like the size premium before it, might be suspect. 

 Figure 9.1 Variance Ratios: 15-Year Periods, 1954–2013 
 Source: Tony Cooper 
 In contrast to this, significant and consistent risk-adjusted profits from absolute momentum go back to 1903. With relative momentum, results extend even farther back, to 1801. As far as I know, there is no other backtesting in financial markets that is based on this much data. 
 Having plenty of data lets you see how consistent and stable your results are across a wide range of market conditions, and whether or not they depend on just a few periods of short-term outperformance. Worst-case scenarios, in particular, are highly dependent on the amount of past data that is available. The statistician W. Edwards Deming once said, “In God we trust; all others bring data.” With these caveats in mind, let us look at some alternative ways of determining price trends that are in keeping with the principles underlying absolute momentum. We will also examine some possible enhancements to relative strength momentum. 
 ABSOLUTE MOMENTUM REVISITED 
 There have been many attempts by practitioners over the years to engage in market timing and determine price trends. Before the decade of the 2000s, there was common agreement among most academics that market timing does not work. The statement of Malkiel (1995) was typical at the time: “Technical analysis is anathema to the academic world. We love to pick on it.” Just the words “market timing” would shut down most academic’s and many practitioner’s brain synapses. 
 After publication of the paper “Simple Technical Trading Rules and the Stochastic Properties of Stock Returns,” by Brock et al. in 1992, academic attitudes toward technical analysis and trend-following methods slowly started to change. Brock et al. applied 26 technical trading rules to the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) from 1897 through 1986. Their results reduced data-snooping bias by reporting all possible results, using a very long data set, and looking for robustness across various subperiods. They were also among the first to extend standard statistical tests using bootstrap techniques. Overall, their results supported the use of technical trading strategies. On the other side of the issue, Fang, Jacobsen, and Qin (2013) found poor out-of-sample performance when they retested the exact same 26 Brock et al. trading rules on 25 years of new data. In their paper “What Do We Know About the Profitability of Technical Analysis?” Park and Irwin (2007) gave a summary of the mixed state of trend-following results. The authors found that among 95 modern studies of technical trading strategies from 1988 through 2004, there were 56 with positive results, 29 with negative results, and 19 with mixed results. The authors concluded that most empirical studies were subject to problems in their testing procedures related to data snooping, ex-post selection of rules, and not accounting properly for risks and transaction costs. 
 More recently, Bajgrowicz and Scaillet (2012) applied 7,846 trading rules to the daily Dow Jones Industrial Average from 1897 through 2011. Using an up-to-date correction for data-snooping bias, the false discovery rate (FDR), the authors found that investors would never have been able to select the best performance rules ahead of time. 5 Introducing transaction costs would have eliminated whatever profits did exist. 
 Along the same lines, Fang, Qin, and Jacobson (2014) examined the profitability of 93 market indicators (50 market sentiment and 43 market strength indicators) applied to S&P 500 data averaging 54 years in length. After accounting for transaction costs, none of the indicators outperformed buying and holding the S&P 500 on a risk-adjusted basis, and there was no evidence that they showed predictability with respect to future stock returns. 
 We see that data mining for new trading rules is a perilous undertaking. Although bootstrapping can help establish confidence levels, especially when dealing with modest amounts of data, it may depend on assumptions about how the markets function that may not be realistic. More specifically, accurate time-series bootstrapping and simulation results/depend on data ergodicity and stationarity. Since financial markets are nonstationary and nonergodic with possible price jumps and nonfinite variances, bootstrap simulations may have their own potential problems. 
 The simplicity and robustness of absolute momentum gives it an edge over unproven and uncertain alternative trend-following methods. With that in mind, let us look cautiously at a few other trend-following approaches that are in keeping with what we know about absolute momentum. 
 Baltas and Kosowski (2012) came up with an alternative method for determining absolute momentum trends using a broad data set of 75 futures contracts from December 1975 through February 2013. They compared the usual method of determining absolute momentum that looks at the direction of preceding 12-month returns to an alternative method based on the t-statistic of the slope found by fitting a trend line to daily prices over the past 12 months. Their method reduced the transaction costs of absolute momentum by about two-thirds. The authors found that the Sharpe ratios of the two methods were virtually the same before transaction costs, but that commodity and fixed-income contracts came out ahead under their alternative method once transaction costs were included. 
 TREND FOLLOWING WITH MOVING AVERAGES 
 Moving averages have been one of the most popular and longstanding methods among practitioners for determining price trends. Gartley (1935) wrote about moving averages in the 1930s. William Gordon (1968) helped popularize the 200-day moving average. Using data from 1897 through 1967, Gordon showed that buying stocks when the DJIA was above its 200-day moving average produced seven times the return as when the DJIA was below its 200-day moving average. 
 Once a whipping boy for academic researchers, moving averages for market timing has in recent years gained some acceptance and support. Since 2002, Jeremy Siegel of Wharton has presented the 200-day moving average as a volatility-reducing filter in his popular book Stocks for the Long Run . Faber (2007) converted the 200-day moving average into an equivalent 10-month moving average, whereby one holds a long position when the price is above its 10-month moving average and exits the position when the price falls below the 10-month moving average. This cuts down on the number of trades and whipsaw losses that occur when using a daily moving average. 
 Whether we are talking about a 10-month average or 200-day one, the moving average length does raise some data mining concerns. Brock et al. (1992), Siegel (2014), and Faber (2007) all acknowledge that that the 10-month/200-day moving average length has historically been the most popular one among practitioners. Prior to these studies, practitioners likely tested many moving average lengths to arrive at this particular one. 
 Faber’s paper “A Quantitative Approach to Tactical Asset Allocation” attracted considerable attention to the 10-month moving average rule. His paper has received the highest number of downloads in its category on the Social Science Research Network (SSRN). It inspired other research papers and a subsequent book by Faber and Richardson (2009). A number of practitioners have adopted this popularized 10-month moving average approach. 
 We can easily compare the 10-month moving average to our absolute momentum strategy. Table 9.1 shows the results of applying a 10-month moving average, a 12-month moving average (used by other practitioners), and 12-month absolute momentum to the S&P 500 Index from 1974 through 2013. When not invested in stocks, all three strategies are in U.S. aggregate bonds. 
 Table 9.1 S&P 500 Absolute Momentum and Moving Averages, 1974–2013 
