
book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Coming Clean

Page 97

97

HARVEY: That’s funny, but it still avoids the question. Did you steal time?
Did you trade while at work?
ME: Yes. I did. But—
HARVEY: That’s stealing time unless you do it on your break. Did you trade
only during your breaks?
ME: No. Not only during my breaks. I did it on the clock.
HARVEY: Anything else?
ME: Well, when you talk about it like this, I’ve been stealing time from the
law firm for a long time. For ten years. I probably stole an hour a day for
ten years. At least that much.
HARVEY: How?
ME: By taking an extra few moments on a break here and there. By taking my time as I walked around. Walking the long way to get to a partner’s office. Filing something twice so that it would double the time it
took to do one thing, so I didn’t have to get on with the next big project. Gosh, now that I think of it, I wasn’t honest at work at all.
HARVEY: How about your wife?
ME: Yes. I have lied to her. Yes.
HARVEY: Anyone else?
ME: Probably yes. Well, definitely yes. Sure. I haven’t been very honest in
the past few weeks. I lied to Valerie at your front desk. I lied my way
onto the trading floor.
HARVEY: It’s good that you are admitting all of this. Now I want you to go
outside the door here and apologize to Valerie. I will be here when you
get back.

MAKING AMENDS
Apologize to Valerie? What was that all about? How was that going to make
me a better trader? I hoped that he didn’t intend for me to show up at
Wakeman and find Herb Johnson, just so I could pull mini-Napoleon out of
a partner meeting so that he could listen to me offer a lame apology that I
didn’t even truly want to give.
But when I apologized to Valerie, her face brightened. “Really?” she
said.
“Really. I mean it.” And I did. The saying of the apology created some
of the sincerity. The speaking of the words also cleansed me a bit. I stood a
bit taller and felt a bit happier. When I returned to Harvey, I said so.
“That’s no surprise. That’s good. You don’t need the burden of an angry
young lady who works the reception area. She would give you problems

book_c11.qxd

98

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 98

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

forever. You have to cast all that aside, all the negativity you have stored
up inside.”
I did not ask him about apologies that I would owe to my former employer. That was something I didn’t want to do and I am sure I would not
get the words out of my mouth before I was escorted out of the building.
But apologizing to my wife? That was something I would do as soon as I
got home. I needed all the help I could get, and I couldn’t expect to have
her help if I could not be honest with her.
“Now,” he said, “you’ve earned your first lesson about why I am taking
a trade. Remember you were asking about my reasons for wanting to sell
the EUR after it rose upward?”
“Of course. I actually wanted to put on the same trade—when I found
out you and Hank were planning to sell the Euro, I decided that I wanted to
be part of it. I did not want to miss out on the opportunity to make money.”
“No one wants to miss out on money. It’s a huge problem for many new
traders—they cannot resist following the idea of another person because
they don’t want to miss out. But you should know that I don’t actually have
that Euro trade that you’re talking about. I don’t necessarily want to sell
the EUR/USD at 1.2200. It’s not something that I am going to do for sure.
This is the danger in jumping in on a trade because you hear about someone else taking it. You take it, but in the end, that other person might not,
and then what do you have? A trade with no backup, no planning, no rationale other than you didn’t want to miss out.”
I gulped. That was not good. I was now planning to place an order to
take a trade that I thought had substantial backup. But I was on my own.
No Harvey, no U.S. National Bank standing behind the order. Suddenly, I
felt dumber than ever. I was going to lose my trading account any moment
now with plans like this. I could feel it. All the money I put in there was
going to go up in flames. I needed to stop trading.
“But Craig said—”
“Craig was looking at his order screen and saw Hank Doorecker test the
waters. An order 200 pips above the current market price is way too far off
to leave out there. We do actually want to sell in the near future, but we
wanted to see how much enthusiasm was out there for it. It’s not like someone else was going to trade that far out of the market.”
“So really, why did you do it?”
“We want to sell. We do. That is for sure. But we want to only sell after
it’s gone up a bit. Hank has a theory that he has tested for many years that
if he puts an order out there, way out there, that it will tempt people to bid.
I don’t agree. It is so far away that it is really just showing them our cards.
I like to hold my ideas closer than that.”
“How so?” I was now feeling better. At least Harvey really did want to
make a trade on the Euro. I just didn’t know where. So the idea wasn’t so

book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

Coming Clean

2:16 PM

Page 99

99

far-fetched, after all. And I might still be able to piggyback on the trade.
That is, if I could now find out what the trade would actually be.
“I want to see the price rise, then I’ll make up my mind. I don’t have to
do anything sudden or immediate.”
“You sound really uninterested in trading. Like, if you do or you don’t,
it doesn’t matter. If you don’t trade, you won’t make any money.”
He grinned. “I was hoping you would get around to that.” He leaned
closer to me but did not lower his voice: “Harry, if you do trade, you won’t
make any money.”
This hurt. But he did not back off.
“Are you upset about that? I can see that you are. It’s natural. I used to
work with a lot more traders. The one thing that everyone asks me is, how
are they supposed to make any money when I am telling them to be patient
and not trade, or to be patient and look at the long-term charts? They say
that if they don’t trade, they can’t make any pips and if they can’t make any
pips, they don’t make any money. But the reality is that until that point, all
they have proven is that if they do trade, they lose money.”
I could not dispute it. He wasn’t telling me this because he hated me.
He was telling me this because he wanted to help me. And he was right.
“I agree that you’re right. I have proven that when I trade, I lose
money.”
“Yes you have. One thousand dollars in the toilet on one trade. That
was a huge amount of your account. You will learn more about money
management over time, but the basic premise is this: you have to understand that taking more trades does not mean you will be making more
money. Especially for a new trader.”
“How do you know about my trade?”
He smiled. “Your forex dealer? The guy who started it?”
“Yes? What about him?”
He smiled again, this time much wider.
“You know him?” I asked. Then I said it again, this time more sure:
“You know him. You probably worked with him five hundred years ago
when you were trading the Florentine Peso against the German Potato.”
“Not quite. But yes. I did work with him years ago. He’s an old friend. I
haven’t seen your account statements but he did tell me about the loss.”
So this is how Harvey knew so much about me. He knew everyone in
the business.
“Back to business, Harry,” he told me. “Does it make sense that if you
make more trades right now, you don’t necessarily make more money?”
“That makes sense.”
“Why? Explain to me why it makes sense. I want to hear it from you.”
I stopped and thought about it for a moment. Just thinking about this,
I could sense that what he was teaching me was true. “You’re saying, if I

book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

100

2:16 PM

Page 100

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

understand you correctly, that a beginning trader has no idea why he is taking trades. He is making trades to, well . . . just to make trades. It’s terrible
to realize this, you know. I am feeling pretty stupid now.”
“Tell me why you feel stupid.”
“I feel dumb because I just wanted to be like Craig. I thought that if I
traded the short-term charts, that is where the action would be. That is
where all the movement would be, right after a major economic report.
And I sort of just assumed that, because it was moving a lot, I could capture a bunch of it. But I have no idea how to do that. I was using software,
or hearing rumors about trades that other people take. I wasn’t basing my
trades on any kind of analysis.”
“And?”
“And what?”
“Harry,” he started. “That’s an excellent start, but there is more to it.
You’re correct that new traders have no idea why they are buying or selling. They are usually buying because they bought software that teaches
them that they don’t have to think for themselves, or because price is
shooting upward, or because they heard a rumor that someone else was
doing it. The rumor trades are the worst because you can’t even confirm
that it is true, and you have no idea if the rumored trade is actually for real.
And you can’t talk to the trader to find out if he actually takes the trade you
heard about. But there is more than that.
“When you said that you are not basing your trades on any kind of
analysis, what did you mean?”
I told him that I didn’t really know what I meant. But I knew it was
true.
“A solid, honest answer. But it’s no good,” he replied. “You gotta do better than that.”
I thought for a moment. “I meant to say that I’ve now started to assume
that a good trader is going to have to do some type of his own analysis before he takes a trade. Some kind of a plan. Some kind of a checklist of
things to look for.”
“Excellent!” Harvey cried out. No one paid any attention or turned to
look at us. Apparently, he was known to scream like this.
“A checklist,” I continued, “would guide me through the process of
making sure that I am following something that works. So if I took a trade,
and I am just making this up, but it is sounding really good, that means that
I am implementing a system.”
“Right! Right again!” he exclaimed. “That means you are implementing a system. And if you have a system that you are following, it doesn’t
really matter if the trade is a winner or a loser, as long as you understand
that over time the system is going to return profits. The goal is to make
money, right?”

book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

Coming Clean

2:16 PM

Page 101

101

“Right!”
“The goal is not to make trades. Can you see the confusion with people? They want to make trades, just like a gambler wants to pull on the
slots, or a dope head wants to get high. They are doing it for the sake of getting the rush. They are not serious about making money. Can you imagine
if a brand-new lawyer at Wakeman wanted to step into the courtroom and
represent the largest corporation in the world, on his first day on the job?”
“Yes, I can imagine exactly what Herb Johnson would say.”
“He would throw him out onto the street. A new attorney doesn’t earn
the right to step into a role that important until he proves that he can be
trusted with that much authority. And a new trader is no different. Until
you can prove that you don’t have to trade, you are not going to ever do
this successfully.”
“Prove that I don’t have to trade. It makes sense now, but it’s nearly
melting my brain to think like this.”
“It’s melting your brain because you are thinking about two things at
once. You are thinking about supporting your family. And you are thinking
about making good trades. If you combine those two concepts, you get a
zero equity balance in your trading account. Why?”
“You’re asking me?”
“Yep. Why is that true? Why is it the case that a trader who is trying to
pay the bills is going to be far more likely to lose his account?”
This didn’t make sense to me. Wasn’t it good to be hungry for profits?
Couldn’t a need to make money drive a trader to do better, not worse? I
told him this.
“You are defending the concept because you are living in this very situation,” he told me.
That could be true. I didn’t argue with it. He continued.
“You want to believe that a new forex trader who needs to support his
family is going to be driven to be the best. But that’s an image you’ve conjured up in your head. A new forex trader is more likely, because he has to
feed his family or pay his electric bill, to make a bunch of dumb trades.”
“Because he’s got to make money, and how else is he going to make
money unless he trades?”
“Right! Right again!”
“That makes sense now. And a new trader, like me, has maybe seen
other people do this on television, or someone like Craig. And we think
that trading profitably is just the act of pushing some buttons. We expect it
to be easier or simple or . . .”
“Or what?”
“I don’t know. I guess we expect it to be less like a job.”
“Bingo. You’ve got it. You understand it perfectly now. Trading is just a
job, like filing stuff away at some windbag Midtown law firm founded by

book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

102

2:16 PM

Page 102

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Thomas Jefferson or something. And traders don’t want to hear that trading is going to be like a job. They want it to be sexy. They want to imagine
that they can just sit down at the computer at any time of day, and the
forex market will be there ready to offer them golden pips served by a butler. They don’t work for it. They think all they have to do is want it.”
“Saying it is like a job makes it sound awful.”
“You’re right. It does burst the image. Does it change your mind about
whether you want to do it?”
I shook my head. “Of course not! I want to do it more than ever. It’s
okay if it’s like a job. I am fine with that. It still seems like a better job at
least. Better because I don’t have to have people yelling at me. Better because I can set my own hours. Better because it will pay more over time.
Better because I can see my family more often.”
“Harry! Harry!” He reached out and grabbed me by the cheeks. “You
don’t understand! You are about to try to be successful at one of the most
difficult jobs on the planet. You want to be a trader! You know how many
people can do this and make money at it? Hardly anyone! And you know
what? The people who do well at this don’t necessarily get to see their family more often. They might have people yelling at them. They might have
horrible hours. And at the start, it pays worse than picking up garbage.”
He was now staring down at me and didn’t look happy.
“Yes?”
“I thought we were making progress. But we’ll have to talk again tomorrow.”
I was devastated. Where had I gone wrong? If trading was going to be
more difficult, give me less family time, not make me any money right now
(because I wasn’t going to be trading), and would involve people yelling at
me with longer hours, then what in the world was I thinking? Why not just
back out now? I had gone from superhappy and on top of the world, to depressed that I could never succeed at doing this for a living, and even if I
could, I wouldn’t like it anyway!
Harvey broke me out of my thoughts. “Stop sulking, kiddo. You’re not
out of the woods yet. I got more bad news for you. And we’re going to get
the bad news tomorrow. I want to get it all out of the way.”
I straightened up. “All right,” I agreed. “I am ready for whatever you
want to teach me. I am a bit confused, but I can take it. I want to do this.”
“Despite what I just told you?”
“Yes, despite the fact that you just burst the bubble and made trading
sound like a job as a filing manager.”
“Good. That is good, Banes,” he replied. “This conversation has done a
good job over the years at busting through the myths. But it usually takes
longer. And usually creates way more depression. So we’re going to speed
things up, like I said. We’re going to get the bad news out of the way.”

book_c11.qxd

12/20/06

Coming Clean

2:16 PM

Page 103

103

“What’s the bad news?”
“I am going to take you to a hedge fund tomorrow. It’s a firm that is
running two billion dollars in other people’s money.”
This didn’t sound bad at all. It sounded downright fantastic!
“You might think it’s going to be fantastic,” he said to me, reading my
mind. “But you’re going to see that it’s pretty dumpy.”

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Page 104

CHAPTER 12

Looks Can
Be Deceiving

n a plain-looking 25-story building, in a so-so looking part of no-man’s
land, on the border between Midtown and Chinatown, we stood at a
receptionist’s desk that appeared to be just a door set on top of two
sawhorses. The receptionist had a computer, but it was running so badly
that I could hear it clanking around. And instead of a fancy flat-screen
monitor, he had a huge clunky monstrosity that looked like it belonged in
a dump. There wasn’t any sign or notice of where we were. Either this
was a superprivate hedge fund or it was doing so badly that it didn’t want
any attention.
What kind of hedge fund was this? While we waited in the reception
area I thought I’d find out what kind of fly-by-night operation had dumpy
computers and ratty carpet.
“What kind of place is this, Harvey?” I spoke in a low voice so I wouldn’t
embarrass him or myself. We were waiting for the chief trader or something
and I didn’t want to be caught talking trash about his trashy office.
“You’ll find out in a moment.”
And that’s when the owner of the place, or the chief trader, or whatever, walked into the room. He was looking dumpier than everyone and
everything else in the place. He wore a suit that was at least 700 years old,
and his shirt was frayed at the cuffs. His hair stuck up straight in the back,
where he had fallen at his desk or something. Although he had a bright
smile, I kind of felt sorry for him. He held out his hand and I wondered if it
was clean enough to shake. I did anyway.

I

104

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Looks Can Be Deceiving

Page 105

105

“Harry Banes, meet George Sisler,” Harvey said. I winced. The man had
a strong handshake and wasn’t afraid to use it.
“Thanks for meeting with me,” I offered. I hoped we could get this over
with quickly and then we could go see the $2 billion hedge fund that Harvey had talked about.
We walked through a (not surprisingly) old door and out onto what
was apparently George’s trading floor. It was a scattered group of more old
doors sitting on top of sawhorses, sitting on top of old carpet. The computer screens looked newer, but the 20 or so traders were all wearing
either older suits (even the young guys) or casual clothes. The other thing
that looked remarkably different was that there were an equal number of
men and women here or perhaps even more women than men. All the
traders that I saw had the same things on their screen: an Excel spreadsheet up with a bunch of columns stretching into eternity, a set of prices
flashing quotes for several currencies, and charts. The place wasn’t quiet,
but it wasn’t a playground either. I could tell that I was standing in the
midst of a focused crowd.
I figured that we would sit down inside George’s office for a chat, but
what I didn’t understand at first was that the entire room had no private office. It was just one room, sitting high enough that we had an excellent
view out the windows of a Chinese restaurant, an overflowing dumpster,
and a parking lot with cars stacked on top of each other Manhattan style.
Inside the room, beside the desks, there was a broken 30-inch television
and a watercooler. This was one classy place!
Because George had no office, we sat down at his desk, which was in
no way distinguishable from any of the other desks. It wasn’t bigger; it
didn’t have more screens; it was not in a prominent place (like the center)
of the room. But it was spotless. There wasn’t one piece of paper floating
anywhere. Nothing out of place. It felt very strange to be sitting down for a
meeting about this guy’s business, while everyone else was easily within
hearing range.
Despite all my impressions of the place, Harvey seemed delighted to
be here. This appeared to be something of a reunion between him and a
former student (who apparently needed some help). From the moment we
had entered the office, Harvey was scanning the room, grinning and happy
and altogether way too jolly about everything he saw. Walking in between
desks, he was shaking hands with people he knew, bending down to look
at their screens, asking about trades, and basically acting like he was the
Mayor of Piptown.
“Harry,” he told me as he finally came over to sit down next to us, “isn’t
this a great place? Now, Harry, this is how to run two billion dollars.”
I was speechless. George wasn’t. He said: “Three billion.”

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Page 106

106

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Harvey lighted up. “Howdy do! Wow! Fantastic, George. Not a surprise.
Are you up 50 percent for the year?”
“Yes. We are. We have really been hitting it good for the past four
months.”
It was possible that Harvey would now explode into shards of happiness. I imagine his head flying off his body, but still smiling and still commenting about how cool this place was. At the same time, I was having
trouble keeping my own head attached to my body. Had I heard right? Was
this George Sisler guy really managing three billion dollars? Could he not
afford some nicer stuff? This was nothing like what I saw at Ernest
Wellington, or other major banks, or on business television.
I could tell that there was going to be a lesson here for me and that,
like everything else Harvey had told me so far, it would overturn some mistaken assumptions about the business of trading.
Harvey spoke and broke me out of my daze: “Still hitting singles?”
George nodded. “Yep. Still hitting them.”
And then Harvey looked at me. “It’s time for you to ask questions,
Harry. Ask George anything you want.”
I had lots of questions. But most of them I thought would be insulting
or at least inappropriate.
“Go ahead,” Harvey said, responding to my thoughts. “Ask him anything. George already knows you’re wondering why his office looks like
a dump.”

I INTERVIEW GEORGE
George didn’t have much time for me. But in the time we talked, I learned a
ton about how a hedge fund works, and about what I was going to need to
do to be successful.
ME: Harvey was right. I am wondering about your office.
GEORGE: It’s not that spiffy, I know. But we do get the job done.
ME: If you are managing so much money for other people, why not upgrade just a bit? For clients?
GEORGE: You can imagine that you’re not the first person to ask. But the
answer is that I am no longer impressed by wealth, or really a show of
wealth. I have come to believe in the obvious truth that showing off
wealth is not the same thing as being wealthy. Material possessions are
to be used in the process of building wealth. But showing off wealth or
trying to look better than other hedge fund managers—that’s not what
this place is all about.
ME: What is this place all about?
