a bearish divergence. It shows that bullish leadership is weakening even though
the broad market is higher. Bearish divergences often mark the ends of uptrends,
but pay attention to the height of the second peak. If it is only slightly above zero,
in the low hundreds, then a big reversal is probably at hand and it’s time to go
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

34. THE NEW HIGH–NEW LOW INDEX

137

short. If, on other hand, the latest peak is in the high hundreds, it shows that the
upside leadership is strong enough to prevent the market from collapsing.
2. If the market declines to a new low, but NH-NL traces a shallower bottom than
its previous decline, it creates a bullish divergence. It shows that bearish leadership is shrinking. If the latest low of NH-NL is shallow, in the low hundreds,
it shows that the bearish leadership is exhausted and a major upside reversal is
near. If the latest low sinks deep, then bears still have some strength, and the
downtrend may pause but not reverse. Keep in mind that bullish divergences at
stock market bottoms tend to develop faster than bearish divergences at market
tops: buy fast and sell slowly.

NH-NL in Multiple Timeframes and
Look-Back Periods
Markets move simultaneously in different timeframes. My original work on the NHNL focused on the daily charts with a one-year look-back period—counting stocks
that have reached a new high or a new low for their latest 52-week range. I have since
added several dimensions for a deeper understanding of this key indicator.
Weekly NH-NL

The weekly NH-NL helps confirm major stock market trends and identify major
reversals. I build it from the daily data of barchart.com, mentioned above, by running a five-day moving total. I plot the result underneath a weekly chart of the
S&P 500.
The weekly NH-NL gives its most important signals when it reaches extreme
levels and also by divergences. To understand its logic, keep in mind how the weekly
NH-NL is constructed. For example, if the weekly NH-NL rises to a +1,500 level, it
means that in each of the past five trading days there were on average 300 more New
Highs than New Lows. It takes a period of sustainable bullishness or bearishness to
push the weekly NH-NL to an extreme.
These are the most important signals of weekly NH-NL:
■■

■■
■■

When it drops below minus 4,000 and then rallies above that level, it delivers
major buy signals.
When the weekly NH-NL rises above plus 2,500, it confirms bull markets.
When the tops or bottoms of weekly NH-NL diverge from price patterns, they
signal important reversals.

A drop below −4,000 reflects an unsustainable market panic. To fall that low, the
market has to deliver an average of 800 more daily New Lows than New Highs for
five days in a row. Such massive panic is not going to last. When the weekly NH-NL
rises above −4,000, it flashes a buy signal I call a Spike. It’s so powerful and effective
in both bull and bear markets that I named our SpikeTrade group after it. This signal
misfired only once in several decades, as you’ll see on the chart in Figure 34.2.

138

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

FIGURE 34.2â•… S&P 500 weekly, 26-week EMA, NH-NL weekly. Green line at +2,500, purple line at
−4,000. (Chart by TradeStation)

NH-NL—Weekly Chart
When the weekly NH-NL falls below −4,000 and then rises above that level, it nails important bottoms, marked here with vertical green arrows. This chart covers 11 years—the
signal works in bull and bear markets. There was only one exception—in October and
November 2008, during the worst bear market of a century (marked by a purple oval). Let
this serve as a reminder that no market signal works 100% of the time, making risk management essential for survival and success.
Red diagonal arrows mark major bearish divergences. Weekly NH-NL touching the
+2,500 level confirms bull markets and calls for higher prices ahead, even if interrupted by
a correction.

When the weekly NH-NL rises to the +2,500 level, it confirms bull markets. This
indicator never rises this high during bear market rallies. When you see it above that
level, you know you’re in a bull market, with higher prices likely ahead.
The 65-day and 20-day NH-NL

One of the great innovations in the New High–New Low analysis in recent years
was the addition of two new look-back windows: a 20-day and a 65-day. While the
regular daily NH-NL compares each day’s high and low to the high-low range for
the preceding year, a 20-day NH-NL compares it only to the preceding month and
a 65-day NH-NL to the preceding quarter. These shorter-term views of the NH-NL
are useful for short-term timing.
These two new time windows deliver more sensitive signals than the standard
year-long NH-NL.The logic is simple: before a stock reaches a new high for the year,
it must first make a new high for the month and then for the quarter. If a stock has
been in a downtrend, it may take a long time to recover and reach a new yearly high,
but it can reach monthly and quarterly highs much sooner.
In addition to the usual signals, such as trends and divergences, a very sharp shortterm buy signal occurs when the 20-day NH-NL drops below minus 500 and then
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

35. STOCKS ABOVE 50-DAY MA

139

rallies above that level. It shows that the market has touched and rejected a shortterm bearish extreme, and afterwards it usually launches a short-term rally. We call
this a “Spike bounce” signal (see Chapter 54).
Tracking market leaders with the help of NH-NL helps improve timing. There are
two ways to utilize the New High–New Low signals. First, since individual stocks
largely depend on broad market trends, we can use NH-NL signals to decide when
to buy or sell our stocks. Furthermore, we can use NH-NL signals to trade vehicles
that track the broad market, such as the S&P e-mini futures.

■■35. Stocks above 50-Day MA
This broad stock market indicator is based on the key concepts regarding prices and
moving averages (Figure 35.1). Each price represents a momentary consensus of value
among market participants, while a moving average represents an average consensus
of value during its time window. This means that when a stock trades above its MA,
the current consensus of value is above average—bullish. When a stock trades below
its MA, the current consensus of value is below average—bearish.
When the market is trending higher, the percentage of stocks above their moving
averages keeps growing. In a broad downtrend, the number of stocks above their
MAs keeps shrinking.

FIGURE 35.1â•… S&P 500 weekly and 26-week MA; Stocks above 50 MA with reference lines at 75% and
25%. (Chart by TradeStation)

Stocks above 50-Day MA
When the “stocks above their 50-day MA” indicator reaches an extreme—above 75% or
below 25% and then moves away from that level, it shows that the intermediate-term trend
has reached a likely turning point. A reversal of this indicator flashes a signal for the entire
market: buy when it turns up and sell when it turns down. In the latter part of 2013, as the
market started going up with almost no pullbacks, buy signals from upside reversals began
to occur at levels higher than 25%. These signals don’t mark every reversal—no indicator
does—but when it flashes its signal, we had better pay attention.

140

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

This indicator tracks all stocks traded on the NewYork Stock Exchange, American
Exchange, and NASDAQ and calculates how many of them trade above their moving
averages. It plots that percentage as a line that fluctuates between 0% and 100%. We
can use the pattern of this line to confirm market trends and anticipate reversals.
The indicator for tracking the number of stocks above their 50-day MAs is included in many software packages. I like to view it on a weekly chart, where it helps
catch intermediate reversals—market turns that augur in trends that last anywhere
from several weeks to several months.You don’t need to look at this indicator daily,
but it can be an important part of weekend homework.
In theory, the highest possible reading of this indicator would be 100%, if all stocks
rallied above their MAs. Its lowest possible reading of 0% would occur if all stocks
were to fall below their MAs. In practice, only exceptional market moves swing it
near the 90% or 10% extremes. Normally, this indicator tends to top out near 75%
and bottom out near 25%. I draw two reference lines on its chart at 75% and 25% and
start looking for the market turn as this indicator approaches those levels.
The percentage of stocks above their 50-day MA gives its trading signals not by
reaching any certain levels but rather by reversing near those levels. It signals the
completion of a top by rising to or above the upper reference line and then sinking
below that line. It signals that a bottom has been formed when it falls below or even
near the lower reference line and then turns up.
Notice that the tops of this indicator tend to be broad, while its bottoms are
sharper. Tops are formed by greed, which is a happier, longer-lasting emotion. Bottoms are formed by fear—a more intense and shorter-lived emotion.
While some of this indicator’s signals are right on time in catching reversals,
others mark only temporary pauses in major trends. Let this serve as a reminder
never to rely on a single indicator for trading decisions. Use multiple tools: when
they confirm each other’s signals, they reinforce one another.

■■36. Other Stock Market Indicators
Only a handful of general market indicators have stood the harsh test of time. Many
that used to be popular in previous decades have been swept away by the flood of
new trading vehicles. The New High–New Low Index and Stocks Above 50-day MA,
reviewed above, continue to work because of their clear logic. Several other indicators are listed below. Whatever tools you choose, be sure to understand how they
work and what exactly they measure. Select a few and track them on a regular basis,
until you come to trust their signals.

Advance/Decline
The Advance/Decline line (the A/D line) tracks the degree of mass participation in
rallies and declines. Each day it adds up the number of stocks that closed higher and
subtracts the number of stocks that closed lower.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

141

36. OTHER STOCK MARKET INDICATORS

While the Dow Jones Industrials track the behavior of the generals and the New
High–New Low Index focuses on the officers, the A/D line shows whether soldiers
are following their leaders. A rally is more likely to persist when the A/D line rises
to a new high, while a decline is likely to deepen if A/D falls to a new low in step
with the Dow.
The A/D line is based on the day’s closing prices for each stock at any exchange:
take the number of advancing stocks, subtract the number of declining stocks, and
ignore unchanged stocks. The result will be positive or negative, depending on
whether more stocks advanced or declined during the day. For example, if 4,000
stocks were traded, 2,600 advanced, 900 declined, and 500 were unchanged, then
Advance/Decline equals +1,700 (2,600−900). Add each day’s Advance/Decline figures to the previous day’s total to create a cumulative A/D line (Figure 36.1).

B
A

C

FIGURE 36.1â•… S&P 500 daily and the Advance/Decline line. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Advance/Decline Line
The turns of this indicator usually coincide with price turns, but occasionally precede them.
This ability to give early warnings makes A/D line worth following. In area A, prices are
scratching the bottom and make a new low, while the uptrend of the A/D line calls for a
rally. In area B, the opposite occurs—prices press higher, while a downturn of the A/D line
calls for a decline. In area C, prices continue to decline, while the A/D line turns up and
calls for a rally. Those warnings don’t occur at every turning point.

142

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

Traders should watch for new peaks and valleys in the A/D line rather than its
absolute levels, which depend on its starting date. If a new high in the stock market
is accompanied by a new high of the A/D line, it shows that the rally has broad support and is likely to continue. Broadly based rallies and declines have greater staying
power. If the stock market reaches a new peak, but the A/D line reaches a lower peak
than during the previous rally, it shows that fewer stocks are participating, and the
rally may be near its end. When the market falls to a new low but the A/D line traces
a shallower bottom than during the previous decline, it shows that the decline is
narrowing down and the bear move is nearing an end. These signals tend to precede
reversals by weeks if not months.
The Most Active Stocks indicator (MAS) is an Advance/Decline line of the
15 most active stocks on the New York Stock Exchange. It used to be listed daily in
many newspapers. Stocks appeared on this list when they caught the public’s eye.
MAS was a big money indicator—it showed whether big money was bullish or bearish. When the trend of MAS diverged from the price trends, the market was especially likely to reverse.
Hardly anyone today uses an indicator called TRIN, which was important enough
to have its own chapter in the original Trading for a Living. Very few people track another formerly popular indicator called TICK. Old stock market books are full of
fascinating indicators, but you have to be very careful using them today. Changes in
the market over the years have killed many indicators.
Indicators based on the volume of low-priced stocks lost their usefulness when
the average volume of the U.S. stock market soared and the Dow rose tenfold. The
Member Short Sale Ratio and the Specialist Short Sale Ratio stopped working after options became popular. Member and specialist short sales are now tied
up in the intermarket arbitrage. Odd-lot statistics lost value when conservative
odd-lotters bought mutual funds. The Odd-lot Short Sale Ratio stopped working
when gamblers discovered puts.

■■37. Consensus and Commitment

Indicators

Most private traders keep their opinions to themselves, but financial journalists, letter writers, and bloggers spew them forth like open hydrants. Some writers may be
very bright, but the financial press as a whole has a poor record of market timing.
Financial journalists and letter writers tend to overstay trends and miss turning points. When these groups become intensely bullish or bearish, it pays to trade
against them.
It’s “monkey see, monkey do” in the publishing business, where a journalist’s or
an advisor’s job may be endangered by expressing an opinion that differs too sharply
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

37. CONSENSUS AND COMMITMENT INDICATORS

143

from his group. Standing alone feels scary, and most of us like to huddle.When financial journalists and letter writers reach a high degree of bullish or bearish consensus,
it’s a sign that the trend has been going on for so long that a reversal is near.
Consensus indicators, also called contrary opinion indicators, are not suitable for
precision timing, but they draw attention to the fact that a trend is near its exhaustion level. When you see that message, switch to technical indicators for more precise timing of a trend reversal.
A trend can continue as long as bulls and bears remain in conflict. A high degree
of consensus precedes reversals. When the crowd becomes highly bullish, get ready
to sell, and when it becomes strongly bearish, get ready to buy. This is the contrary
opinion theory, whose foundations were laid by Charles Mackay, a Scottish barrister. His classic book, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (1841)
describes the infamous Dutch Tulip Mania and the South Seas Bubble in England.
Humphrey B. Neill in the United States applied the theory of contrary opinion to
stocks and other financial markets. In his book, The Art of Contrary Thinking, he made
it clear why the majority must be wrong at the market’s turning points: prices are established by crowds, and by the time the majority turns bullish, there aren’t enough
new buyers to support a bull market.
Abraham W. Cohen, an old NewYork lawyer whom I met in the early 1980s, came
up with the idea of polling market advisors and using their responses as a proxy for
the entire body of traders. Cohen was a skeptic who spent many years on Wall Street
and saw that advisors as a group performed no better than the market crowd. In
1963, he established a service called Investors Intelligence for tracking letter writers.
When the majority of them became bearish, Cohen identified a buying opportunity. Selling opportunities were marked by strong bullishness among letter writers.
Another writer, James H. Sibbet, applied this theory to commodities, setting up an
advisory service called MarketVane.

Tracking Advisory Opinion
Letter writers follow trends out of fear of losing subscribers by missing major moves.
In addition, bullishness helps sell subscriptions, while bearish comments turn off
subscribers. Even in a bear market, we rarely see more bears than bulls among advisors for more than a few weeks at a time.
The longer a trend continues, the louder the letter writers proclaim it. They are
most bullish at market tops and most bearish at market bottoms. When the mass of
letter writers turns strongly bullish or bearish, it’s a good idea to look for trades in
the opposite direction.
Some advisors are very skilled at doubletalk. The man who speaks from both sides
of his mouth can claim that he was right regardless of what the market did, but editors of tracking services have plenty of experience pinning down such lizards.
When the original Trading for a Living came out, only two services tracked advisory opinions: Investors Intelligence and Market Vane. In recent years, there has been an
explosion of interest in behavioral economics, and today many services track

144

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

advisors. My favorite resource is SentimenTrader.com, whose slogan is “Make emotion work for you instead of against you.” Jason Goepfert, its publisher, does a solid
job of tracking mass market sentiment.

Signals from the Press
To understand any group of people, you must know what its members crave and what
they fear. Financial journalists want to appear serious, intelligent, and informed;
they are afraid of appearing ignorant or flaky. That’s why it’s normal for them to
straddle the fence and present several sides of every issue. A journalist is safe as long
as he writes something like “monetary policy is about to push the market up, unless
unforeseen factors push it down.”
Internal contradiction is the normal state of affairs in financial journalism2. Most
financial editors are even more cowardly than their writers.They print contradictory
articles and call this “presenting a balanced picture.”
For example, an issue of a major business magazine had an article headlined “The
Winds of Inflation Are Blowing a Little Harder” on page 19. Another article on page
32 of the same issue was headlined “Why the Inflation Scare Is Just That.” It takes a
powerful and lasting trend to lure journalists and editors down from their fences.
This happens only when a tide of optimism or pessimism sweeps up the market near
the end of a major trend. When journalists start expressing strongly bullish or bearish
views, the trend is ripe for a reversal.
This is why the front covers of major business magazines serve as contrarian indicators. When a leading business magazine puts a bull on its cover, it’s usually a good
time to take profits on long positions, and when a bear graces the front cover, a bottom cannot be too far away.

Signals from Advertisers
A group of three or more ads touting the same “opportunity” in a major newspaper
or magazine warns of an imminent top. This is because only a well-established uptrend can break through the inertia of several brokerage firms. By the time all of
them recognize a trend, come up with trading recommendations, produce ads, and
place them in a newspaper, that trend is very old indeed.
The ads on the commodities page of The Wall Street Journal appeal to the bullish
appetites of the least-informed traders. Those ads almost never recommend selling;
it is hard to get amateurs excited about going short. You’ll never see an ad for an
investment when its price is low. When three or more ads on the same day tout gold
or silver, it is time to look at technical indicators for shorting signals.

And not only journalism: in 2013 three academicians shared a Nobel Prize in economics. The work of
one of them showed that the market was efficient and couldn’t be timed; the work of another showed
that the market was irrational and could be timed. Take your pick and wait for next year’s prize.

2

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

37. CONSENSUS AND COMMITMENT INDICATORS

145

FIGURE 37.1â•… Monthly total dollar value of OTC stocks. (Courtesy SentimenTrader.com)

Money pours into penny stocks when the market is up, dries up when it is down. This is
reflected in the monthly reports of penny stock volume at the NASDAQ. After markets
have hit new highs and the news is good, volume often spikes up for these “lottery ticket”
stocks. When the stock market hits the skids, their volume dries up.

A more malignant breed of promoters appeared on the scene in the past decade:
thanks to the Internet, “pump and dump” operators have migrated online. The scammers touting penny stocks know that they need to wait for an uptrend to hook their
victims. Whenever a higher than usual number of promo pitches starts showing up
in my spam filter, the top can’t be too far away (Figure 37.1).

Commitments of Futures Traders
Government agencies and exchanges collect data on buying and selling by various
groups of traders and publish summary reports of their positions. It pays to trade
with the groups that have a track record of success and against those with track records of persistent failure.
For example, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) reports
long and short positions of hedgers and big speculators. Hedgers—the commercial

146

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

producers and consumers of commodities—are the most successful market participants. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports purchases and sales
by corporate insiders. Officers of publicly traded companies know when to buy or
sell their shares.
Positions of large futures traders, including hedge funds, are reported to the CFTC
when their sizes reach the so-called reporting levels. At the time of this writing,
if you are long or short 250 contracts of corn or 200 contracts of gold, the CFTC
classifies you as a big speculator. Brokers report those positions to the CFTC, which
compiles the data and releases summaries on Fridays.
The CFTC also sets up the maximum number of contracts a speculator is allowed
to hold in any given market— these are called position limits. Those limits are set
to prevent very large speculators from accumulating positions that are big enough to
bully the markets.
The CFTC divides all market participants into three groups: commercials, large
speculators, and small speculators. Commercials, also known as hedgers, are
firms or individuals who deal in actual commodities in the normal course of their
business. In theory, they trade futures to hedge business risks. For example, a bank
trades interest rate futures to hedge its loan portfolio, while a food processing company trades wheat futures to offset the risks of buying grain. Hedgers post smaller
margins and are exempt from speculative position limits.
Large speculators are those whose positions have reached reporting levels. The
CFTC reports buying and selling by commercials and large speculators. To find the
positions of small traders, you need to take the open interest and subtract from it
the holdings of the first two groups.
The divisions between hedgers, big speculators, and small speculators are
somewhat artificial. Smart small traders grow into big traders, dumb big traders
become small traders, and many hedgers speculate. Some market participants play
games that distort the CFTC reports. For example, an acquaintance who owns
a brokerage firm sometimes registers his wealthy speculator clients as hedgers,
claiming they trade stock index and bond futures to hedge their stock and bond
portfolios.
The commercials can legally speculate in the futures markets using inside information. Some of them are big enough to play futures markets against cash markets.
For example, an oil firm may buy crude oil futures, divert several tankers, and hold
them offshore in order to tighten supplies and push up futures prices. They can take
profits on long positions, go short, and then deliver several tankers at once to refiners in order to push crude futures down a bit and cover shorts. Such manipulation is
illegal, and most firms hotly deny that it takes place.
As a group, commercials have the best track record in the futures markets. They
have inside information and are well-capitalized. It pays to follow them because they
are successful in the long run. Big speculators used to be successful wealthy individuals who took careful risks with their own money. That has changed, and today most
big traders are commodity funds. These trend-following behemoths do poorly as
a group. The masses of small traders are the proverbial “wrong-way Corrigans” of
the markets.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com
