line. The next breakout, flagged by the dashed arrow, developed with the
sharp rise in 2000 that turned out to be a whipsaw. The reason was the dra-
matic first quarter run up in the technology sector that temporarily domi-

Chart 18-19 Russell, 2000/1000 Ratio, 1988-2001, and long-term KST. (From
www.pring.com.)

mi ussell 2000/1000 Ratio

os+
os

O75

06+
160 +

Tse [isso [i991 ise2 |ises [i984 i995 |is96 [ior [ise [i999 a

351

Price: The Major Averages

1 the case of a declining trend), this is usually’ sign
erhustion andi foldwed by a trend revere:

nated the Russell 2000. Later, if one were prepared to ignore this whipsaw,
it was possible to observe the breakout from the extended base at the end
of 2000.

Summary

* No perfect index or average exists that consistently and truly represents
“the market.”

* There are basically two methods of calculating market averages, those that
use capitalization and those incorporating an unweighted formula.

* The technical indicators described elsewhere in this book can be applied
to the market averages.

* Most of the time, market indexes move in gear with each other. It is when
discrepancies develop and are confirmed that reversals in trend are
signaled.



19

Price: Group
Rotation

Chapter 2 discussed the relationship between the three key financial mar-
kets—debt, equity, and commodities—and the business cycle. It was estab-
lished that there are certain periods when they move in concert, but more
often their trends diverge. The combination depends on the maturity of the
business cycle. The most important point to remember is that deflationary
forces predominate during the early stages of the cycle, whereas inflation-
ary pressures come to the fore as the recovery matures. No business cycle
ever repeats itself exactly, and the leads and lags between the peaks and
troughs of the various financial markets differ from cycle to cycle. In spite
of this drawback, the concept of the chronological development of the debt,
equity, and commodity cycles works quite well in practice.

Industry Groups and
the Business Cycle

This chapter takes the concept of chronological development of these cycles
one step further by pointing out that specific industry groups are sensitive
to different types of economic conditions. In effect, it categorizes them
according to their sensitivity to deflationary or inflationary forces—that is,
leading or lagging characteristics. Since the cycle itself is continually switch
ing between a deflationary and inflationary environment, it follows that the
various industry groups also undergo a rotation.

Unfortunately, this categorization is far from an exact process. First
many industries do not conveniently fall into an inflationary or a defla-

352

Price: Group Rotation 353

tionary category. Second, equities rise and fall in reaction to the outlook for
profits and also, what is more important, in response to investor attitudes
to those profits. Because interest rates are a significant, but not necessarily
dominant, influence on the profits of interest-sensitive stocks, it follows that
the price performance of certain interest-sensitive issues may, from time to
time, become unlatched from, or independent of, the price movements in
the debt markets. For example, savings and loan stocks declined in 1989
because of a financial crisis in the industry. Normally, they would have been
expected to rise because interest rates fell during most of that year.

In spite of such drawbacks, the theory of group rotation serves two use-
ful functions. First, it can provide a framework within which to assess the
maturity of a primary trend. For example, there may be technical evidence
that the stock market is deeply oversold and other factors that suggest that
the primary trend is reversing from bearish to bullish. At such times it would
be useful to know that some of the groups that normally lead market turns
have failed to confirm new lows made by the market averages or have estab-
lished an uptrend in relative strength.

On the other hand, in a situation in which the technical picture is indi-
cating the possibility of a market top, it would be helpful to know that indus-
try groups that typically lead the averages up and down had made their highs
some weeks or months earlier, and that stronger relative performance was
concentrated in industry groups that typically lag the stock market cycle.

Second, the group rotation theory is helpful in determining which
groups, and therefore which stocks, should be purchased or pared back.
This aspect is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 31.

The comments in this chapter refer to the U.S. stock market, but the con-
cept of group rotation can be extended in principle to other stock markets.
Every country experiences business cycles, and Italian or Japanese utilities

. Tespond to changes in interest rates just as U.S. utilities do. Indeed, it is pos-

sible to take this concept one step further by saying that markets heavily
Weighted to the resource area, such as Canada, Australia, and South Africa,
Ought to perform best at the tail end of the global economic cycle, and in
Most cases they do.

inciple A bull market is an extended period,

‘Most Stocks move up most of the time. A bear market is an extended

riod, usually lasting somewhere between 9 months and 2 years, in
which most stocks.decline most of the time. :



354 Part I: Market Structure

The Concept of Group Rotation

Since the majority of stocks are rallying most of the time during a bull mar-
ket, it follows that most record their bear market lows about the same time
as the averages. When utilities are described here as a leading group and
steels as a lagging group, the implication is not necessarily that utilities reach
their lows ahead of the low in the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA),
although they do in most instances. What is more likely to happen is that
utilities, being interest-sensitive, will put on their best performance relative
to the market on either side of the bear market low. Similarly, steels might
advance with the averages during the early stages of the bull market, but
their best relative performance has a tendency to occur during the Jater
stages of a bull market or the early phases of a bear market. Notice that I
have emphasized the word “tendency” because that is really what we are talk-
ing about—tendencies and probabilities, never certainties.

The sine curve in Fig. 19-1 represents growth and contraction of the econ-
omy during a typical business cycle. The dashed line reflects intermediate
rallies and reactions of the stock market. The idealized peaks and troughs
of the other financial markets are also shown (the letter G is for gold price).
Bond prices typically make their lows (that is, interest rates reach their cycli-
cal peaks) after the recession has been under way for some months. The
stock market, which essentially discounts profits, makes its low about 3 to 6
months before the low in economic activity, whereas the commodity mar-
ket usually comes to life only several months after the recovery has set in.
Because the leads and lags vary in each cycle, this approach should be used as a frame-
work, not a mechanical extrapolation.

The overall market consists of many stock groups that are a reflection of
the companies making up the various segments of the economy. The econ-
omy, as defined by an aggregate measure, such as gross national product
(GNP), is either rising or falling at any one time. However, there are very
few periods in which all segments advance or decline simultaneously. This
is because the economy is not one homogeneous unit, but is an aggregate
of a number of different parts. Some industries respond better to defla-
tionary conditions and the early stages of the productive cycle; others are
more prosperous under inflationary conditions that predominate at the tail
end of the business cycle. .

Economic recoveries are typically led by consumer spending, which is
spearheaded by the housing industry. As interest rates fall during a rece>
sion, demand for housing gradually picks up. Hence, homebuilding and
some building and construction stocks can be considered leading groups

Because they anticipate a consumer spending improvement, retail stores,
restaurants, Cosmetics, tobacco, and so forth also show leading tendencies,
as do certain interest-sensitive areas such as telephone and electric utilities

355

Price: Group Rotation

Equilibrium \

i Recession
8 8 s
s

om

$s
wane Economic activity

-~-— Stock market prices

Figure 19-1 Economic activity and stock prices. (B = Bonds; $ = Stocks; G = Gold)

insurance, savings and loans, and consumer finance companies. As the recov
ery continues, inventories that were cut dramatically during the recession
become depleted. Manufacturing industry groups that might be classified
as coincident respond by improving in price or relative strength (RS).
Finally, as manufacturing productive capacity is used up during the last stages
of the recovery, stock groups associated with capital spending, such as steels,
some chemicals, and mines, have a tendency to emerge as market leaders.
Confidence is another influence on the group rotation cycle. During the
initial stage of a bull market, emphasis is placed on prudence, because
investors have lost a considerable amount of money and the news is usually
bad. Stocks with good balance sheets and high yields begin a period of supe-
Tior RS. As the cycle progresses, stock prices rise, the news gets better, and
confidence improves. Eventually, the rotation turns to more speculative
issues of little intrinsic value. Even though the peak in speculative issues usu-
ally leads that of the major averages, their most rapid and volatile period of
advance typically occurs in the final or third leg of a bull market. ;
Some groups are not readily classifiable in terms of the productive
Process, Air transport, which goes through sharp cyclical swings, is a case in
Point. This industry average either coincides with or Jags slightly at bear mar-
ket lows, but is almost always one of the first groups to turn down before a
Peak. This could be because these companies are sensitive to interest rates
~ and energy prices, both of which have a tendency to rise at the end of the
business cycle. Drug stocks as a group, on the other hand, have a distinct
‘ tendency to present their best relative performance at the tail end of the
bull market and in this respect should be regarded as a lagging group. They
~ are likely also to lag (in terms of RS) at market bottoms, although this ten-
: dency is far less pronounced than that at market tops.



356 Part II: Market Structure

It is also worth noting that the group rotation process has a tendency to
work during intermediate-term rallies and reactions as well as cyclical ones,

Splitting the Cycle
into Inflationary and
Deflationary Parts

Putting the group rotation theory into practice is not an easy matter because
the character of each cycle is different. In a rough sense, the business cycle
can be split into a deflationary part and an inflationary part. A useful starting
point is to obtain an inflation/deflation indicator in order to determine that
a falling trend in this indicator is deflationary and a rising one is inflationary.

One way would be to compare the price of a specific deflation-sensitive
stock, such as a utility, with an inflation-sensitive one, such as a mining com-
pany. The problem with this approach is that one of the stocks may be
affected by internal conditions totally unrelated to the business cycle. The
same drawback might be true of a comparison of two industry groups, such
as utilities versus gold. For instance, the utility group could be suffering from
aggressive government regulation, whereas the gold group may be unduly
stimulated because of a mining strike in South Africa, a major gold pro-
ducer. Neither event would be associated with the business cycle, but both
would strongly influence the trend and level of an inflation/deflation ratio.

A better solution is obtained by constructing an inflation indicator from
several inflation-sensitive groups and a deflation indicator from deflation-
sensitive industry indexes. Thus, if one particular industry is influenced by
noncyclical forces, it will not unduly distort the total result.

These indicators are shown in Chart 19-1. The Inflation Group Index was
constructed from a simple average of the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Gold,
Miscellaneous Metals Domestic Oil, and Aluminum, and the Deflation
Group Index from Electric Utilities, Savings and Loans, and Property and
Casualty Companies indexes.

The series in the top panel is a ratio of the inflation/deflation indexes.
Reversals in the trend of this indicator reflect the market’s view of whether
the cycle is in its inflationary or its deflationary stage. When the line is 1
ing, it indicates that the rotational phase has moved to the inflationary side,
and vice versa. :

Chart 19-2 takes this a step further by comparing trends in the infla-
tion/deflation ratio to those of bond yields and industrial commodity
prices. These series do not move in exactly the same direction all the time
but definitely correlate. The solid vertical lines on the chart show those pet
ods when the 18-month rate of change (ROC) of the ration in the bottom

Price: Group Rotation 357

Chart 19-1 Inflation- versus deflation-sensitive groups, 1950-2001. The ratio of the two is
shown in the top panel and the two components underneath. When they are ina rising mode,
inflation-sensitive equities outperform their deflation-sensitive counterparts, and vice versa.
{From www.pring.com.)

5 . .
Inflation/defiation ratio

500
Deflation Group Index

Chart 19-2  Inflation/deflation ratio, bond yields, and commodity prices, 1966-2001,
Bottoms. (From www.pring.com.}

TI

304 CRB Spot Raw Materials Ind

;

200 4

too}

1004

804 18-month roe /\ AN. ;

It "—Theeo



358
Part If: Market Structure

panel reverses direction from below its oversold level. I i

. In most in: i
corresponds Teasonably closely with the commodity low. Since bond vel
lag commodity prices, they bottom some time after the ROC has started te
rise. Chart 19-3 shows the exact same data, but this time the vertical lines

flag the overbought crossovers. Th i
. These signals work out i
government bond yield series. * ourbetier for ropsin the

Relative Paths of Leading
and Lagging Groups Are
Usually Diverging

Chart 19-4 features some smoothed momentum calculated from the RS lines
of the S&P Energy and Financial Indexes. It is also possible to substitute
groups calculated from other organizations such as Dow Jones, Investors
Business Daily, and so forth. The principles remain the same. The striking
\ ing is that for most of the time both series are moving in opposite direc-
ons, indicating that they are at opposing ends of the group rotation
process. Thus, one might consider emphasizing interest-sensitive and other
issues with leading tendencies when the Financial Index RS momentum bot
toms. A switch to inflation-sensitive areas would be made when the Ene
Index bottoms and the Financial Index peaks. "

Chart 19-3 _inflation/deflation ratio, bond yields, and commodity prices, 1966-2001, tops.

(From www.pring.com.)

87 inftation/deftation rai Lo kt

184 i

go, Goveent bond yields Pi
300.| CRB Spot rey rae RN TON

NT fs

Price: Group Rotation

359

Chart 19-4 Financial versus energy relative momentum, 1985-2001. (From

yww.pring.com.)

S&P financial realtive momentum
--+ S&P energy relative momentum {

/

200-4

2604

a

It is, of course, important to make sure that the RS momentum of the
groups being purchased or liquidated is consistent with the pattern estab-
lished by the Energy Index and the Financial Index. For example, it would

make no sense to buy gold shares if ener;

gy RS was bottoming and gold RS

was overbought and peaking. Remember that the momentum series shown
in Chart 19-4 are indicators of RS. Rises and declines in these indicators indi-
cate improving or deteriorating relative strength. They say nothing about the
absolute price performance, although in most cases it is moving in the same

direction as the relative trend.

Chart 19-5 shows a similar arrangement, but this time the financial
progress is being compared to technology. Some people believe that tech-

nology is a leading sector. However,

this chart shows that this is not the case

because the dashed technology RS momentum has a tendency to lag, as both
series diverge in their trajectories. Thus, each is offering different oppor-

tunities at different times.

versus Lagging Group

_. Using the Ratio of a Leading

Most people would find it quite tedious to update the inflation/ deflation
_ indicator described earlier, although it is possible in the real-time version



360 Part Ii: Market Structure

Chart 19-5 Financial
www. pring.com.) versus computer relative momentum, 1980-2001. {From

600 4
4804 S&P financial relative momentum
400-4 +--+ S&P computers relative momentum

=| Br fb? Tes 4 BS _es_B7 68 fe po Bi pi ps ba bs pe by pe bs mo bl

of MetaStock with my companion CD.! A useful shortcut is to calculate a
ratio of the S&P Aluminum (lagging) and Banking (leading) Indexes
(shown in Chart 19-6). The trajectory of this series is not identical to that
of the Inflation/Deflation Ratio, but it does experience the same broad infla-
tionary and deflationary swings. For a large amount of time, it moves sym-
pathetically with trend changes in the thick line that represents the
Commodity Research Board (CRB) Spot Raw Industrial Material Index.
Underneath is a know sure thing (KST) of this relationship.

It is possible, of course, to substitute a different smoothed measure of
momentum such as a price oscillator, variation of a moving average con-
vergence divergence (MACD), stochastics, and so forth. Moving average
(MA) crossovers by the KST can be used for signaling when a major rota-
tional change is getting under way. For example, the two latest signals on
the chart, in 1998 and 2000, at A and B, indicate a reversal to an inflation-
ary and then deflationary environment, respectively.

Chart 19-7 shows the exact same spots for the S&P Oil and Gas Drilling
group. It is fairly evident that the group rallied around the time of the infla-

‘Martin Pring’s How to Select Stocks MetaStock Comparison.

" price: Group Rotation 361

© Chart 19-6 Aluminum/Bank ratio, 1972-2001. (From www.pring.com.)

34 Aluminum/Banks

CRB Spot Raw

Material Index
Inflationary

Deflationary

Long-term KST

7 V

‘
\

Q

J Waa:
et oop

tionary signal in late 1998. The deflationary crossover was not as timely
because the energy sector as a whole put in a strong performance during
the deflationary part of the cycle. This demonstrates the fact that specific
industry fundamentals can occasionally distort the performance of individ-
ual groups from their normal business cycle experience. This means that it
is important not to blindly follow a ratio reflecting a rotational change, but to exam-
ine the technical position of the individual groups before taking any action.

Chart 19-8 shows the same time periods, but this time for a leading group,
the Tobaccos. This time both signals are quite timely.

Leading, Middle, and Lagging

Groups Categorized ;

Table 19-1 offers a rough approximation of where a particular industry
group falls within the cycle. It is important to bear in mind that not all
groups fit neatly into these categories. .



362

Part I: Market Structure

Chart 19-7 S&P Drillers, 1996-2001, and relative strength. (From www.pring.com.)

4500

6600 4
S000 F

S&P Dritle B i

Chart 19-8 S&P Tobaccos, 1996-2001 and relative strength. (From www.pring.com.)
$000 S&P Tobacco
12600 4

Po A ANW DOW.-wpell Peper

gros r oppo
: BaF Tess To gag TT a 7 Boot |

Price: Group Rotation

Leading (Liquidity Driven)
Utilities
Electric
Telephone
Natural Gas
Financials
Brokers
Banks
Insurance Cos
S&Ls
Reits
Homebuilders
Containers and Packaging
Consumer Nondurables
Beverages
Household Goods and Housewares
Tobacco
Personal Care
Foods
Restaurants
Footware
Textile Manufacturers
Transports
Airlines
Truckers
Railroads
Air Freight

Summary

selection.

363

Table 19-1 Industry Group Categories

Middle Groups

Retailers

Manufacturers

Health Care

Consumer Durables
Autos and Parts
Furniture and Appliances
Building Materials
Containers Metal and Glass
Leisure and Entertainment
Hotels
Waste Management

Lagging Leaders (Earnings Driven)
Mining
Oil
Coal
Oil Drillers
Basic Industry
Papers
Chemicals
Steels
Heavy Machinery
Most Technology
Computer Manufacturers
Electronics
Semiconductors

* The stock market cycle experiences a distinct pattern of industry group
rotation because of the chronological nature of the business cycle. Interest-
sensitive groups have a tendency to lead at peaks and troughs, whereas
corporations with profits that are enhanced by increases in capital spend-
ing or commodity price inflation generally lag in the overall market.
Sometimes significant changes in the fundamentals of an industry cause
a group to be uncharacteristically strong or weak during a specific cycle.
It is therefore better to monitor a spectrum of groups rather than a spe-
cific one as a proxy for the rotation process.

* An understanding of the industry group rotation cycle is helpful both in
assessing the maturity of a primary trend and for the purpose of stock


20

Time: Longer-Term
Cycles

The Importance of Time

i no pon ce the ream e axis of most technical charts. It is nor-
1 s junction wii rice, vol I three
dimensions of psychology sin as he el beteceiie con:
stock market. These are measured

assessed independently through the analysis of cycles.

. Discussions of the importance of time have
Pe that = significance of a reversal in trend d
me needed for the completion of distributi
; istributio i
longer the period, the greater the magnitude ani mR rh maar

5 : d duration of the next move
rita - Removing the speculative excesses of a trend requires a com-
Y large corrective movement, just as the discipline of a long

Se ie Provides a sound base from which a substantial and
y advance can take place. The very long (8-year) bull market betwee?

so far, been limited to the
lepends upon the length of

364

] Time: Longer-Term Cycles 7

1921 and 1929 was interrupted by corrective reactions, but the substantial
