idea of what the market is going to do in the short term. Always start with the larger time frames and drill down to the smaller.
24. If you are hesitating to get into a position when you have a clear signal, that indicates that you don’t trust yourself, and that deep inside, you feel that you may let
this trade get away from you. Just get into the position and set your parameters. Traders lose money in positions every day. Keep them small. The confidence
you need is not in whether or not you are right; the confidence you need comes from knowing that you execute your setups the same way each and every time and
do not deviate from your plan. The more you stick to your parameters, the more confidence you will have as a trader.
25. Averaging down on a position is like a sinking ship deliberately taking on more water. This is ridiculous and stupid. Don’t be ridiculous and stupid.
26. Try to enter in full size right away. If you pick up a half position first, don’t add to it and create a full-sized position unless the trade is going your way.
27. Ring the register and scale out of your position. Have modest, mechanical targets for the first half of your position. Give the second half more room to run.
28. Adrenaline is a sign that your ego and your emotions have reached a point where they are clouding your judgment. If you are not in a trade, do not enter a new trade
when you are in this state of mind. If you are in a trade, stick to your parameters and walk away. If you are in a losing trade that has gone through your stop, exit
your trade immediately and walk away from the markets.
29. You want to own the stock before it breaks out, then sell it to the momentum players after it breaks out. If you buy breakouts, realize that professional traders are
handing off their positions to you in order to test the strength of the trend. They will typically buy them back below the breakout point—which is typically
where you will set your stop when you buy a breakout. Use this information to make money off of amateur traders who buy breakouts.
30. Embracing your opinion leads to financial ruin. When you find yourself rationalizing or justifying a decline by saying things like, “They are just shaking out weak
hands here,” or, “The market makers are just dropping the bid here,” then you are embracing your opinion. Don’t hang on to a loser. You can always get back in.
31. Unfortunately, you will not learn discipline until you have wiped out a trading account. Until you have wiped out an account, you typically think that it cannot
happen to you. It is precisely that attitude that makes you hold on to losers and rationalize them all the way into the ground. If you find yourself saying things
like, “M y stock in EXDS is still a good investment,” then it is time to rethink your trading career.
32. Siphon off your trading profits each month and stick them into a money market account. This action helps you to focus your attitude and reminds you that this is
a business, not a place to seek thrills. If you want thrills, go to Disneyland.
33. Professional traders risk a small amount of their equity on one trade. Amateurs typically risk a large amount of equity on one trade. This type of situation creates
emotions that ruin amateurs’ accounts.
34. Professional traders focus on limiting their risk and protecting their capital. Amateur traders focus on how much money they can make on each trade. Professionals
always take money away from amateurs.
35. In the financial markets, heroes get crushed. Averaging down on a losing position is a “heroic move” that is akin to Superman taking a spoonful of Kryptonite to
prove his manhood. The stock market is not about blind courage. Nobody hands out any awards to traders who picked the dead high or the dead low. Wait for a
setup. This is about finesse. Don’t be a hero.
36. Traders never believe that they will blow out their account. Always realize that you will become a candidate for this if you don’t stick to your trading rules.
37. The market reinforces bad habits. If early on you held on to a loser that went against you by 20 percent, but you were able to get out at breakeven, you are
doomed. The market has reinforced a bad habit. The next time you let a stock go against you by 20 percent, you will hang on because you have been taught that
you can get out at breakeven if you are patient and hang on long enough.

502

38. The true mark of an amateur trader who is never going to make it in this business is continually blaming everything but himself for the outcome of a bad trade. This
includes, but is not limited to, saying things like:
• The analysts are crooks.
• The market makers were fishing for stops.
• I was on the phone, and it collapsed on me.
• M y neighbor gave me a bad tip.
• The message boards caused this one to pump and dump.
• The specialists are playing games.
The mark of a professional, however, sounds like this:
• It is my fault. I traded this position too large for my account size.
• It is my fault. I didn’t stick to my own risk parameters.
• It is my fault. I allowed my emotions to dictate my trades.
• It is my fault. I was not disciplined in my trades.
• It is my fault. I knew there was a risk in holding this trade into earnings, but I didn’t fully comprehend it when I took the trade.

The obvious difference here is accountability. For amateurs, everything having to do with the market is “outside their control.” That is not reasonable thinking and
really just points to individuals who have, probably for the first time, had to confront their “real self” as opposed to the perfect self or idealized self that they
have constructed in their mind. This is also known as “living in a fog.” People can drift through life in their own private world, where they are pretty special and
can do no wrong. Unfortunately, trading rips off this mask, because you cannot dispute what has happened to your account. This is also known as “confronting
reality.” For many people, when they start trading, they are suddenly confronting reality for the first time in their lives. Just to see the world as it really is
requires a lifetime of training, and for many people, trading the stock market is their first real step on this journey. Some people say that traders are born, not
made. Not so. If you choose to see the world as it is, then you can start trading successfully tomorrow.

39. Amateur traders always think, “How much money can I make on this trade?” Professional traders always think, “How much money can I lose on this trade?”
Traders who control their risk take money from the traders who are thinking about the red BM W they are going to buy.
40. At some point traders realize that no one can tell them exactly what is going to happen next in the market, and that they can never know how much they are going
to make on a trade. Thus the only thing left to do is to determine how much risk they are willing to take in order to find out if they are right or not. The key to
trading success is to focus on how much money is at risk, not on how much you can make.
The longer I do this, the more protective I get of my trading capital, and the more surprised I am when things actually work out exactly as planned. And that is what
keeps it so interesting each and every day.

Surviving the Trader’s Journey
Strategies fail because traders have to have only a couple of losing trades in a row before they throw out the whole system and go back to relying on their gut. Once
traders are in this situation, they head into a downward spiral very quickly. Human emotions get people in at the dead highs, and then human emotions get people out
at the dead lows, as they continually buy at the top out of greed and then sell the lows out of fear. Or, in the case of shorts, they sell at the lows out of greed and cover
at the highs because of fear. And this is a cycle that happens over and over and over again. And it’s never going to stop.
The financial markets naturally take advantage of and prey upon human nature, especially when it comes to greed, hope, and fear. The key is to remember that the
biggest movements in the markets do not occur when traders in general “feel like buying.” They occur because groups of traders are all getting skewered at the same
time and are being forced out of a position. In reality, traders are not trading stocks, futures, or options. They are trading other traders. The profitable traders learn to
be aware of the psychology and emotions behind the person who is taking the opposite side of their trade. Average traders understand only their side of the trade.
Superior traders understand what’s happening on both sides of a trade and know how to take advantage of situations that will hurt most traders. They know how to
take advantage of human weakness, and, therefore, they are able to grind most traders into the ground like so much raw meat. In essence, winning traders steal money
from losing traders.
M y partners and I jokingly refer to the financial markets as the “Goddess of Temptation.” The goal, of course, is for traders to develop a professional trading
mindset that prevents them from succumbing to these temptations. Instead of being the cause of the ebbs and flows of the markets, traders need to jump the chasm
that allows them to ride out these ebbs and flows on a course toward profitability.
Good skiers rarely worry about a route. They just go, confident that they’ll react to changes in the trail as they come upon them. It’s the same thing in trading:
traders have to have confidence in their technique. That is the beauty of mustering the right mindset before a trader starts the day—it enables the trader to feel like a
good skier, nice and relaxed for the next unexpected turn.

503

Before He Trades
In some marriages, a wife might get upset when her husband stumbles home drunk at 4 in the morning after going to a rock concert with another woman. M y marriage
would qualify as falling into that category. Although this mishap can partly be blamed on the false sense of energy and confidence one gets from combining too much
Tito’s Vodka with Red Bull, I did have what I thought was a valid trading-related excuse for this behavior. The excuse: “I want to help other traders.” I’ll discuss this
knowingly dubious statement in more detail shortly. M ore pressing is the question, “Why in the world am I sharing this story?” After all, there is a reason it’s called a
personal life—it’s personal.
Traders live hectic lives, with outside influences jerking their senses around on a daily basis. These external forces can drive traders to distraction, and once that
happens, the traders start adding to losing positions and start pulling stops. This takes a trader down the dark path where she sets herself up for a catastrophic loss.
There are few guarantees in life, but I guarantee this: if traders allow outside circumstances to influence their level of discipline, they will get whacked with a
catastrophic loss. M aybe not today and maybe not next week, but it only has to happen once. And it will occur much more quickly with leveraged instruments such as
futures and options, where gun-slinging traders can rack up a monster loss in the time it takes them to return from the bathroom. Once this disaster hits a trader’s
account, a new reality emerges that is even more horrible to imagine—having to go out and get a job.

Block Out Distractions
To succeed as a trader, the daily distractions have to be managed. Life marches on, despite a trader’s need for quiet and solitude. To be able to make a consistent living
at this incredible occupation, a trader must maintain discipline no matter what is going on around him. And that’s why I’m sharing this story.
Today is the first trading day after my 4-in-the-morning escapade. I did have the weekend to recover, so I’m feeling semi-human again. On this day, with figurative
plates being thrown against the wall, I still have to focus on my setups. I have been doing this long enough to know that a catastrophic loss can happen to anyone. The
market could not care less that I wrote a book on trading—it’s certainly not going to show me any courtesy (or mercy, for that matter). Since I truly do not want to go
out and get a real job, I take a deep breath and start the “hurry-up-and-wait” process that I have done thousands of times before, where I kill time waiting for a specific
setup to take shape. This is despite my strong inclination this morning to just throw on a trade to give my mind something else to occupy itself with.
While I’m lingering, I do have a few song lyrics to rewrite, so I work on that while waiting for one of my alerts to fire off. Yes, I did say song lyrics, and that’s part
of the reason I was out so late.

Trading the Squeeze
The S&P futures were down more than 20 points yesterday, and this morning they are trading in a volatile, yet narrow range. On the 377-tick chart I’m watching (see
Figure 26.1), I see that a squeeze sets up at point 1, but the C wave at this point was wishy-washy, with part of it still below zero. I pass on the trade, though I really
want to pull the trigger. Half an hour later, another squeeze sets up at point 2. This time the C wave is clearly above zero, and I take a long trade. I get in at 1193.50.
For this small a time frame, I’m willing to risk no more than 10 ticks, so I set my stop at 1191.00. Once I’m up 8 ticks (at point 4), I sell half my position, and move
my stop to my entry level at 1193.50. Now I’ll just wait for the TTM trend to turn black two bars in a row, or I’ll get stopped out. The ES pushes as high as 1198.50.
By the time the bars turn black at point 5 and I’m able to sell, I’m out at 1196.50.

504

Figure 26.1

The Subtleties
Trading truly is an art form, with the canvas being not the screen but the profit and loss (P&L). The art of trading comes into play once a predefined setup has
occurred. At this point, it is time to finesse an entry. And once that entry is finessed, it is then time to manage the position in such a way as to continually reduce
one’s risk while allowing the trade, if it so desires, to stretch its legs and run. Surprisingly, trailing stops on a full position are some of the worst ways to do this. With
this style, traders set themselves up for getting stopped out of the entire position on a wiggle, while the market then resumes its original move.
For a finessed entry, my main goal is to avoid going into a position using a market order. That opens the door to too many bad habits; I prefer to keep that door
closed. In looking at Figure 26.1, I see that the ES pulled back into moving average support at point 3, just as the squeeze had started to form. I placed a bid at 1191.50
to try to pick up any additional slight weakness. I couldn’t get filled. Once the TTM trend turned back to gray and popped back up above its moving averages (also at
point 3), I got more aggressive and moved my bid to 1193.50. This time the market eased back and I got filled, and a few moments later the squeeze fired off long and
we were off and running.
This is where the rubber meets the road—any trader can get into a position, and frankly entries are a dime a dozen. It’s the exits that make or break a trader, and this
is where one has to stay focused and not do anything stupid. I’m not going to add to this position and load the boat because the market looks like it is going to take off.
Part of me is thinking, “M aybe I should make a big trade, generate some quick cash, and buy something for my wife to make her happy.” That thought passes quickly
—I am lucky enough to have already experienced how brainless a trading idea that would be.

Keep Those Stops in Place
I’m also not going to hold on to this position without a stop in place. That’s the tough part about outside distractions—in a normal situation, professional traders
don’t worry about getting stopped out of a trade. Small losses are simply a part of the trading lifestyle. However, if there are crazy events swirling around a trader’s
life, getting stopped out can be frustrating and can instigate foolish behavior—such as removing the stop so as not to have to deal with the annoyance of getting
stopped out. All traders have done it, and its makes as much sense as not going to the hospital after getting a gunshot wound to the abdomen so as not to increase one’s
insurance premiums.
In this case, I start with an initial stop at 2.5 ES points (10 ticks). If and when the trade goes my way, I like to start reducing risk as soon as possible. Once I’m up 2
505

full ES points (8 ticks), I cover one-half of my position and move my stop from 2.5 points to breakeven. M y next target is essentially “open,” and I’m willing to hang
on as long as the TTM trend stays in my direction. This could mean that it runs out of gas quickly and I get stopped out at my new breakeven stop, or it could mean
that economic data are released, the market rallies 15 handles, and I catch every point. You just never know what is going to happen next.
Once I see the two black bars, it’s the signal for me to close out the rest of the position. I do this and net 3.00 points on the last half of the trade.
The whole idea of this exit strategy is to reduce risk on the trade to the point where a trader has a breakeven stop, and then to be patient and sit on one’s hands for a
potential runner. When I’m sitting on my last half, I do not trail my stop—I just wait for an exit signal. I’m either going to get stopped at breakeven on my last half or
get a runner. For the ES, typical runners are 2 to 5 points, with an occasional 10-point (or more) run thrown into the mix. In other markets, such as soybeans, oil, and
gold, typical runners can be much more sustained. Soybeans can easily run 15 to 20 cents, which P&L-wise is identical to 15 to 20 ES points or $750 to $1,000 per
contract.

The Other Woman
We are now at a logical place to revisit my 4-in-the-morning juvenile adventure, and how that event unfolded. To make a long story short, I had been trying to think of
an entertaining way to remind traders of the critical importance of following their trading plans. It is just so crucial to follow the basic rules of trading each and every
day and on each and every trade. Deviation is not an option—not even for one trade. And for some reason I thought, “Why not a music video?”
Carrie Underwood’s song “Before He Cheats” kept playing in my mind. It’s a song about a guy who is cheating on his girlfriend. The girlfriend finds out and
proceeds to destroy his car with a baseball bat. I thought, “Why not rewrite the song? Have a girl who gave her man all her money to trade. He, of course, doesn’t
follow the trading rules and loses all her money. She finds out and proceeds to destroy his computers and monitors with a baseball bat. And I could call it ‘Before He
Trades.’” (In case you are wondering, it’s considered a parody and is 100 percent legal.)
Of course, if one writes a song, one has to have a singer. I found one—a gospel singer. We agreed to meet up at a M y Chemical Romance concert at Stubb’s Barbecue
in Austin, Texas. I had to hear her sing, and I needed to see if she would be right for the video. (For the record, I did invite my wife along, but at the last minute she
declined because she had a cold.)
If you have never seen M y Chemical Romance live, it is a great band with a ton of energy and presence. M any Tito’s with Red Bull later, we followed the crowd out
to Sixth Street, drifted into a bar, and before I knew it, the hours flew by, and— bam!—I got home late. I was in B-I-G trouble. (Any readers who have been to Sixth
Street in Austin might understand how that could happen.)
In the end, my wife saw that I really did just want to shoot a music video—I wasn’t going through a midlife crisis or anything. She got enthusiastic about the project
and even helped me rewrite some of the lyrics. We interviewed a couple of production companies and felt that Ray Schlogel at Underground Planet would be a good fit.
The singer, Gloria Cadena, recorded the song. I played the trader in the video, of course. Schlogel shot and edited the footage, and presto, I had a music video.

You Just Never Know …
The longer I trade, the more I have come to understand that no matter what a trader does—no matter how many indicators or time frames she meticulously studies— a
trader can never, never, never predict with 100 percent certainty what the market is going to do next. As someone who trades during the day and who is also involved
in running other trading-related businesses, I realize that this is a statement some people would call blasphemous. Surely, through all my years of trading, I have found
a way to wait patiently for the perfect setup that works nearly all the time. But really one never knows what’s going to happen—that’s the plain and simple truth.
Once I realized that, a funny thing happened to me during the trading day. I stopped getting stressed out. Instead of being tired and exhausted at the end of the day, I
was relaxed enough to enjoy time with my kids and generally hang out. This is in contrast to the stressed-out days when I would painstakingly watch every tick,
willing the market to go my way. Afterwards, I was so tired that I had to grab a few beers and look for escape in movies and one-person shooter games to unwind.
The market is going to do what it damn well pleases, regardless of any hopes and dreams the trader has pinned to a particular trade, and completely regardless of
how much confirmation a trader has on a particular trade that may normally have a high probability of working out.
The only thing a trader can do is control his risk—on each and every trade. Stay disciplined. Be patient. Remind yourself of this before every trade. If there is a
secret to trading, it is this: take the next trade not to make money, but to improve one’s skills as a trader. This is how a trader is able to make a living at the game. This
is how a trader is able to avoid a catastrophic loss.
And did I learn any additional lessons about the trading lifestyle while shooting the video? Yes—the next time I’m out until 4 a.m. with another woman, I’m taking
my wife along. To see the video, go to www.youtube.com/user/tradethemarkets and click play.
