
Too late or not, Snow and McIntosh had to spend the evening drafting a second press release to try to explain
things. That same night, Strauss and Gutfreund called Corrigan to respond in some fashion to the Sternlight
“cocked gun” letter, which the firm had received that morning. Realizing that he was on a speakerphone,
Corrigan assumed that a room full of undisclosed lawyers was listening to everything he said. The
conversation started out with Corrigan being told that the firm had done an investigation and that “industry
practice” of other firms was to pad their bids for new issuances of municipals and agency securities to get a
bigger share. Corrigan viewed this opener as “a diversion, or worse.” It had nothing to do with the squeeze,
nor with the more serious issue of phony bids—in fact, nothing to do with the Treasury market. His Irish
temper ignited. He yelled into the phone at Strauss and Gutfreund: “I’m sure you’ve got a room full of
[bleeping] lawyers. This is your last chance. Is there anything else you have to tell me?” They began to
describe the other violations.
Corrigan meant to put an end to the obfuscations and rationalizations. “Well, goddammit,” he said, “get
yourselves together and release all of this information to the public immediately. I don’t want to hear
anything else from you, just get that goddamn press release out.”45
Late that evening, the lawyers met with senior management to go over the press release. Gutfreund and
Strauss arrived. McIntosh said there needed to be heads on a plate. This idea was quickly dismissed, but other
people, including a board member, Gedale Horowitz, and Steve Bell, who ran Salomon’s Washington office,
pressed for fuller disclosure. Nobody could get hold of Buffett, but they reached Munger on the phone, who
said, Look, you can’t put this second press release out without names. Gutfreund’s name went in
automatically. Everyone knew that Strauss was not in charge and had not made any of these decisions; he
had simply been present in the room. But he had gone along with his boss. His name went in. Feuerstein had
tried to get Gutfreund to report it. Munger said that his name should stay out.
Meriwether was known as a brilliant, careful manager who was unusually close to his team and rarely left the
desk. He had reported the matter exactly as he should.46 On the other hand, he had vouched for Mozer,
pleaded his cause, then left Mozer’s responsibilities unchanged. When Munger said Meriwether’s name
should go in, says McIntosh, Meriwether, listening and seeing the lawyers write down his name, said, “Oh,
my God, I’m doomed.”47
The next day, Wednesday, August 14, a telephone meeting took place in which the board heard some of the
story that was given to Corrigan the night before. Two board members called in from Europe, one from
Alaska, Buffett from Omaha, and Munger from Minnesota to hear the first “orderly and halfway complete
description” of the Mozer affair. Inside Salomon, a palace coup was well under way, with senior managers
talking to one another on the assumption that Gutfreund and Strauss would have to resign.48 The arbs wanted
Meriwether as CEO, which was clearly unacceptable to many people given that he was Mozer’s boss; the
arbs then floated the idea that Deryck Maughan might serve as co-CEO with Meriwether. Meanwhile, no one
on the board conference call said anything about management changes; they merely debated the wording of
the new press release, which contained three pages of details and added the two additional violations that had
been discovered by the investigators.
The draft release admitted that management had known about the February bids as far back as April but said
that “the press of business” kept Salomon from reporting Mozer’s actions to the authorities. Buffett called
this ridiculous, and as the board debated, Munger became incensed. Eventually, the press release was
rewritten to say that the failure occurred due to “lack of sufficient attention to the matter,” leaving the
impression that the names in the press release were the people who were not paying attention. Arrangements
were made to put out the release that night.
As the meeting concluded, the board thought it had the full story. A number of things had not been
mentioned, however. One was the “cocked gun” letter just received from Peter Sternlight at the Fed. Another
was the June meeting with Bob Glauber at the Treasury Department, at which Gutfreund had failed to
mention Mozer’s earlier activities.

That afternoon, Salomon held another all-hands-on-deck meeting in the auditorium. Bill McIntosh, who ran
the daily sales meeting, stood at the front as usual and had the unenviable job of reading the new press
release to the employees. With Gutfreund and Strauss in the front row, directly opposite him, McIntosh said,
This is what happened. If customers call and want to know what’s going on, just tell them. Make no excuses
for senior management, don’t apologize for them, they did what they did.
Afterward, the salespeople piled into McIntosh’s office. What are we supposed to say? they begged. Don’t
make excuses for senior management, McIntosh repeated. In my view they’re not going to last very long;
they’re gone; they’re yesterday’s news; we’ve got to keep this place together so we can survive and play
another day. Focus on that.49
That evening the government-bond department showed up on the terrace of McIntosh’s duplex overlooking
the Hudson River in the West Village for a previously scheduled barbecue. Eerily, Tom Strauss dropped
by—and the temperature on the deck fell several degrees.50 Instead of hanging around until ten or eleven
swigging beer as usual, everyone cleared out by eight o’clock.
The morning after the press release appeared, Thursday, August 15, rumors floated that the long knives were
out and McIntosh was a goner. He stayed on the floor all day, figuring that Gutfreund and Strauss wouldn’t
fire him for insubordination in front of the whole trading floor. Meanwhile, market confidence in Salomon
cracked. The stock, which had been sinking all week from the previous Thursday’s close of almost $37,
slumped to $27. It was trading down because shareholders were beginning to suspect a bigger problem than
Mozer’s misdeeds: a “run on the bank.” And, indeed, one was beginning to take place.

Photo Insert Three

Image 48
Chuck Rickershauser, the lawyer who said around 1976 of the convoluted business created by Buffett:
“There’s got to be an indictment in here somewhere.”

Image 49
Tooting a trumpet in his bathrobe. Ever since his boyhood fiasco at Rosehill Elementary, Buffett refuses
to play the “echo.”

Image 50
Charlie Munger reading with his grandchildren.

Image 51
Buffett partnered with Sharon Osberg at his first bridge tournament, the 1994 world championships in
Albuquerque, NM. They qualified for the finals but then withdrew because Warren was too exhausted to
continue. The World Bridge Federation was appalled.

Image 52
Buffett and Bill Gates at their first meeting, in July 1991, at the Gates family compound on Washington’s
Hood Canal.

Image 53
In 1993, Buffett places his hand on a computer mouse for the first time. He was “fearless,” says Sharon
Osberg.

Image 54
Buffett and “Mr. Coca-Cola” Don Keough sit surrounded by Buffett’s favorite beverage (and Berkshire’s
largest stock holding).

Image 55
With son Howie and daughter-in-law Devon. They were married in 1982.

Image 56
Buffett’s longtime friend Bill Ruane, who died in 2005.

Image 57
On Easter Sunday 1993, Bill Gates diverted his plane to Omaha and fooled Melinda French into a
surprise meeting with Warren and Astrid at Borsheim’s to choose her engagement ring.

Image 58
Warren and Astrid attend the May 1996 wedding of Peter Buffett and Jennifer Heil.

Image 59
Buffett takes the wheel of a golf cart in Sun Valley, and Susie and Kay Graham take their lives in their
hands.

Image 60
Munger and Buffett answer reporters’ questions during the Berkshire Hathaway sharehold meeting
weekend.

Image 61
Buffett at Sun Valley with friends Diane von Furstenberg, Herbert Allen, and Barry Diller.

Image 62

Right to left, Coca-Cola CEO Roberto Goizueta, Bill Gates, and Warren Buffett on the 1997 panel
moderated by Don Keough at which Gates offended Goizueta by paraphrasing Buffett’s view that
Coca-Cola was easier to run than a technology company.

Image 63
Susie Jr. points out her father’s unobtrusive baseball jersey number—1/16 because stocks were once
priced in “teenies”—1/16ths of a dollar.

Image 64
Warren and his sisters, Roberta Buffett Bialek (left) and Doris Buffett.

Image 65
Totally focused on bridge while playing for the Corporate America bridge team against the U.S. Congress
team in 1989.

Image 66
With Kay Graham at her home on Martha’s Vineyard.

Image 67
Improvising a toast at Bill and Melinda Gates’s wedding reception in 1994.

Image 68
While on vacation with the Gateses during the Long-Term Capital Management crisis in 1998, Buffett
tries to get satellite phone reception in the Grand Canyon.

Image 69
Reunion of the original Graham Group in 1995. From the left: Buffett, Tom Knapp, Munger, Roy Tolles,
Sandy Gottesman, Bill Scott, Marshall Weinberg, Walter Schloss, Ed Anderson, Bill Ruane.

Image 70
Warren and Susie as Mickey and Minnie Mouse at an ABC-Cap Cities Event, 1997.

Image 71
Buffett rides a camel in China during a 1995 trip with Bill and Melinda Gates.

The pyramided nature of the balance sheet of any investment bank was well understood by investors.
Salomon was almost uniquely large, bigger than the biggest life insurer, second only to Citicorp in assets. As a
major firm, Salomon’s debt desk had always acted as a broker to buy and sell the firm’s own medium-term
notes. Suddenly, on Thursday, a long queue of sellers and no buyers appeared. In order to honor the sell
orders, the traders had to buy the notes with Salomon’s own cash. Since nobody else wanted to buy the notes,
they now amounted to merely pieces of paper that said that Salomon would pay Salomon in the future from
Salomon’s own vault. But as the vault emptied, the notes were going to be worthless unless something
changed. To conserve cash, the traders began to deter sellers by offering a lower price.51 Sellers quickly
figured out what was going on. The line of sellers wanting to sell notes grew longer and longer.
By the end of the day, Salomon’s traders had reluctantly bought $700 million of the firm’s own notes. Then
they put up the “closed for business” sign, like a Depression bank snapping shut the teller’s window.52 No
other firm would buy Solly’s debt either. And with that, Salomon was teetering precariously close to the edge
of bankruptcy.
The next morning, Friday, August 16, the New York Times front page ran a photograph of Gutfreund with the
headline “Wall Street Sees a Serious Threat to Salomon Bros.—ILLEGAL BIDDING FALLOUT
—High-Level Resignations and Client Defections Feared—Firm’s Stock Drops.”53 The story featured
prominent photographs of Gutfreund and Strauss. The two of them and Marty Lipton called Corrigan’s office
in New York and were patched through to Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan’s office in
Washington, where Corrigan and Greenspan had been on a conference call with Treasury Secretary Nick
Brady since dawn “trying to figure out who the hell we’re going to get to come in and run the firm.”54
Strauss, a longtime friend, knew they were in trouble when Corrigan greeted him as “Mr. Strauss.”55 The
irate Federal Reserve Bank president, assuming that the board knew about the Sternlight death-threat letter,
had been shocked by the latest press release they had issued. He interpreted their failure to take any
action—such as firing senior management—as a sign that Salomon’s board was defying him.56
Gutfreund said that he was going to resign. “What about Strauss?” asked Corrigan. With this, it became clear
that, as far as the New York Federal Reserve was concerned, resigning was not optional, it was mandatory.57
Gutfreund then called Buffett. It was six forty-five a.m. Omaha time and Buffett was still asleep when the
phone rang. But he came to consciousness rapidly as Gutfreund, with Marty Lipton and Tom Strauss on the
line, laid out the problem. “I just read my own obituary,” Gutfreund said, referring to the New York Times.
His picture on the front page had done what the sequence of events—until then—had not. A freighted pause

ensued, as Buffett understood what they were really asking him. He told them that he would consider taking
over the job of chairman on an interim basis but needed to see the Times story first. He wanted a few minutes
to think but was pretty sure he needed to go to New York. He told them that he would be there as soon as he
could that afternoon. Marty Lipton said that it was unthinkable for Meriwether not to be fired immediately.
Buffett insisted that they do nothing until he could at least talk to Meriwether.
He hung up, called Gladys Kaiser at home, and told her to cancel a lunch with the president of Grinnell. Then
he said, Call George Gillespie in Martha’s Vineyard. Cancel my trip for the weekend and put the pilot on
alert that we may be going to New York.
By the time he arrived less than an hour later at the office, still empty of staff, to read the “obituary” on the
fax machine, he had made up his mind.
Meanwhile, Gutfreund and Strauss had told Corrigan that Buffett was considering becoming interim
chairman. “As far as I was concerned, they were both being less than candid with me,” Corrigan says. “I
want to talk directly to Warren Buffett immediately,” he told them.58 “I didn’t know him personally, but I
certainly knew his reputation.”
Buffett for his part needed to find out how Jerry Corrigan would feel if he did take the job. It took some time
to track down Corrigan in Washington. He did not call Buffett back until after eight-thirty a.m. CST, after the
market had opened. Salomon’s stock did not open for trading, which told investors that major news was
pending.
When Corrigan talked to Buffett, he said something about his willingness to be a little more lenient about the
“ten-day schedule” if Buffett took the job. Though Buffett did not grasp what Corrigan meant, he gathered
that the Federal Reserve must have been asking for information about something. Corrigan sounded angry.
He said that he would make no promises about anything if Buffett did take the job, and insisted that Buffett
see him personally to talk about the role of interim chairman in New York that very night.
At Salomon, all that the trading floor knew was that Buffett was supposedly flying in to rescue the firm and
that Salomon’s stock was not trading. People speculated that he was considering Meriwether as a possible
replacement for Gutfreund. The arb boys were crying, “We can’t lose John.” J.M. himself was nowhere to be
seen. The trading floor stewed and seethed, but the stock was unable to open for trading because Buffett had
told them to hold the press release, which announced that Gutfreund was prepared to resign and that Buffett
was temporarily taking over as chairman, until after he arrived. With the stock hanging in limbo, news stories
poured out on television that itemized Salomon’s problems and speculated what would come next.
By early afternoon, Buffett had appeared. Once in the opulent executive suite on the forty-fifth floor, he hit
the button on the press release, and the traders opened Salomon’s stock.59 It traded furiously for the final
part of the day, closing up a dollar to almost $28.
After the market closed, Buffett went down to the amphitheater for a meeting with the managing directors.
Gutfreund and Strauss took the stage and Gutfreund said that they were prepared to resign.60 His face
remained impassive, as usual. Strauss, noted Buffett, seemed shaken. Afterward, the senior management
retired to the enormous conference room on the executive floor. Eric Rosenfeld and Larry Hilibrand, the key
members of Meriwether’s team, bullied their way into the meeting.61 There, next to the wall of glass
overlooking the two-story football-field-size trading floor where the trouble had begun, the top brass of
Salomon began to thrash out what to do next.
People holding different viewpoints started kicking Meriwether around like a soccer ball. Nobody disputed
that he had done the right thing by reporting Mozer’s actions. The debate was whether he should have done
more. Some people felt, as McIntosh articulated, that he was simply too close to the flame.62 Meriwether had
a reputation as a tight manager; in his areas, as one said, “no sparrow fell that Meriwether didn’t see it.”
Meriwether had not been involved in the false bids, but how could Salomon expect clemency while keeping
him on? It seemed obvious to them that the government would treat the firm more harshly if he stayed.

Although Strauss and Gutfreund were not present, they, too, had told Buffett that they thought Meriwether
should resign along with them.63
With uncanny timing, Meriwether himself arrived and leaned silently against a wall, watching as most of his
peers demanded his head. Buffett had told Marty Lipton earlier that day that, unlike Strauss and Gutfreund,
Meriwether must not be forced to resign (unless he chose to do so voluntarily). Buffett wanted time to
deliberate. He did not agree with those who thought Meriwether had to go. Meriwether had not sucked his
thumb; he had reported Mozer to Gutfreund and Strauss. It was not so much that they thought Meriwether
had done anything wrong, Buffett decided. Rather, they were panicked. Their lives were simply going to be
so much easier the next morning if Meriwether was gone. The consequences of putting his name in the press
release now loomed large to Buffett.
After the meeting, he climbed into a waiting black Town Car with Gutfreund and Strauss and they wove their
way through downtown rush-hour traffic to Corrigan’s office.
Corrigan had felt it necessary to maintain his previous schedule in the interest of secrecy. He arrived directly
from playing in the Federal Reserve’s annual officers-versus-employees softball game, his tall frame clad in
jeans, sneakers, and a Liberty Street Blues T-shirt.64 But the chill in the air was such that “he could have
been wearing black tie and I wouldn’t have noticed, given my state of mind,” Tom Strauss later said. Buffett
opened disarmingly: “Look, the only thing I owe personally is $70,000 on a second home I have in California
because the interest rate is cheap.” He promised complete cooperation with the regulators. Corrigan refused
to be charmed. Interim chairmanships usually didn’t work very well, he said. Buffett had better not seek help
for Salomon from his “Washington friends.”
Corrigan demanded a thorough housecleaning. Buffett agreed to all sorts of fundamental changes to
strengthen Salomon’s policies, controls, and documentation. “His verbal commitment to me was absolute,”
says Corrigan, “and I trusted him.”
Nevertheless, Corrigan made no promises. Giving Buffett a steely look, he said, “Prepare for all
eventualities.”
“It was a Dutch-uncle type of talk. It was cordial enough, but the Dutch-uncle aspect was there. We owed
more money than virtually anybody in the country, and we owed it on very short terms. I tried once or twice
to suggest how worried I was about the funding problem, hoping he might figuratively put his arm around
me a little bit, but he didn’t do it. Prepare for all eventualities—that was something I didn’t know quite how
to do. I certainly thought of strychnine or something of the sort.”
Then Corrigan sent Buffett out of the room so he could talk to Gutfreund and Strauss. “You have a problem
with an employee in your firm,” he said, “that’s his problem. You’ve got a problem with an employee in your
firm and you fail to do something about it, that’s your problem.”65 Then, with tears in his eyes, he told them
how much he regretted ending their careers.
On the way out, while “Tom was in much more of a state of shock,” Gutfreund again seemed “quite
composed.”66 He seemed to be blaming Corrigan for forcing him to resign. “I’ll be damned if I’m going to
grant him absolution,” Gutfreund said.67 They rode back across downtown to Salomon, then went off to have
a steak in a back room at Joe & Rose’s steak house on 49th Street. Strauss and Gutfreund insisted again that
Meriwether had to go.68 They talked about the candidates for chief operating officer. Close to midnight,
Buffett stumbled back to Katharine Graham’s apartment at the UN Plaza, and tried to sleep.
Later, many people wrote many things about why Buffett took the job. Some said it was his $700 million, and
some said it was his duty to the other shareholders. “Somebody had to take the job,” he said. “I was the
logical person.” Other than the people who were resigning, no one had more at stake. But it was not just the
money, it was what he cared about just as much: his reputation. When he invested in Salomon and gave John
Gutfreund his imprimatur, it was like nailing that reputation to Salomon’s door like a shield.

Buffett had told his children, “It takes a lifetime to build a reputation and five minutes to ruin it.” He thought
of that risk primarily in terms of his own actions. Yet the people he had endorsed had put his reputation at
risk. If he had made a mistake, it was to invest in Wall Street yet distance himself from it by relying on
someone else; his judgment about Gutfreund’s ability to oversee the runaway culture of Salomon was flawed.
By this time Buffett was the second richest man in the United States.69 Berkshire’s per-share book value had
grown by more than twenty-three percent a year for twenty-six years. His first group of partners had an
incredible $3 million for each $1,000 they had put in. Berkshire Hathaway was trading at $8,000 per share.
Buffett had a net worth of $3.8 billion. He was one of the most respected businessmen in the world.
At some point during that long, horrible Friday, he recognized with a sickening jolt that investing in Salomon,
a business with problems over which he had essentially no control, had from the beginning put all that at risk.
He did not want to become interim chairman of Salomon. That way lay greater peril. If Salomon went down
afterward, he would be even more closely associated with shame and disaster. But if there was anybody who
could get himself and the other shareholders out of this mess, he was that person.
To do so he would have to extend the umbrella of his reputation, already at risk, even further to protect the
firm. There was no way to avoid this challenge. Deryck Maughan and John Meriwether could not do it. He
could not send somebody from Munger, Tolles, or Charlie Munger, or Tom Murphy, or Bill Ruane. He could
not solve it by passing an idea along to Carol Loomis for an incisive article in Fortune. Even Big Susie could
not solve this. For once, nobody could be his proxy. Only he could save Salomon. And if he walked away, the
odds were high that Salomon would implode.
There is an old saying in the military: To advance, a general must expose his flanks. Buffett could be a hero
or he could fail. But he could not hide and he could not duck.
At eight o’clock on Saturday morning, August 17, he arrived to a surreal scene at Wachtell, Lipton’s offices.
Gutfreund was not there; despite miserable weather he had decided to fly up to his Nantucket house, where
Susan was staying. All the warlords—theoretically, candidates for CEO—had begun to gather outside an
“interview room.” Only a few of them made sense or actually wanted the job, but he had to interview every
one. Meanwhile, a pair of “plenty smart,” tough investigative lawyers from Munger, Tolles—Larry Pedowitz
and Allen Martin—gave “a masterful presentation” to Buffett and Munger, who had flown in to participate in
person. For the first time—to their outrage—they learned that the Treasury Department had investigated
Mozer’s earlier trades.70
Next, Buffett had to make what he considered the most important hire of his life: to decide who would lead
the firm. If he made a mistake, he could not reverse the decision later. Before starting the fifteen-minute
interviews, he told the group, “J.M. is not coming back.”71
With that, he began to interview the candidates one by one. He asked them all the same question: Who
should be the next CEO of Salomon?
“I was going into a foxhole with this guy, and he had to be the right choice. The question was, who would
have all the qualities that would provide leadership to the firm, cause me not to worry for a second about
whether anything was going on that was going to subsequently embarrass the firm or even put us out of
business? As I talked to these people, what was really going through my mind was essentially the same
questions that would go through your mind if you were deciding who you wanted to be a trustee under your
will, or who you wanted to have marry your daughter, or anything of this sort. I wanted the kind of person
who was going to be able to make decisions as to what should get to me and what could get solved below the
line—who would tell me all the bad news, because good news always takes care of itself in business. I
wanted to hear every bit of bad news as soon as it happened, so we could do something about it. I wanted
someone who was ethical, who wouldn’t stick a gun to my head later on knowing that I couldn’t fire him.”72
Buffett found that all but one of the other candidates thought it should be Deryck Maughan, who had
