
owner down to $150,000,52 and when Roy Tolles called to tell Warren, he said, “I have bad news. You
bought it.”

35
The Sun
Omaha • 1971–1973

Susie set to work decorating the place in Emerald Bay with casual rattan furniture. She installed a separate
telephone line for Warren, who spent most of the time when he was in California watching business news on
television and talking on the phone.
The “personal concerns” and Joe Rosenfield were drawing her husband in the opposite direction from
California—toward Washington, and electoral politics. The Buffetts hosted a dinner in Omaha for Senator
George McGovern, the 1972 Democratic candidate for President. And Warren had given money to Allard
Lowenstein, a former Congressman known as the “pied piper” of liberals, who resembled Gene McCarthy in
his power to galvanize young people into activism over civil rights. He had also backed John Tunney, the
“Kennedyesque” son of heavyweight boxer Gene Tunney, in his successful Senate run in California;1
Tunney’s golden-boy political career became inspiration for the movie The Candidate, about a charismatic
politician who is “too young, too handsome, too liberal, too perfect” to win, so can afford to tweak the
Establishment. “The Candidate” was the kind of politician for whom Buffett consistently fell—men with the
ineffable magnetism of Hollywood stars, men whose presence stirred voters’ emotions—except that he
wanted his candidates to win.
He had an idea that he thought would be helpful to politicians, about what he called the “discomfort
index”—the inflation rate plus the unemployment rate—which he passed on to Harold Hughes of Iowa, to
whom Rosenfield had introduced him.2
“Hughes had been a truck driver and a drunk. He was big physically, had a big voice, and was one of the
most significant orators in decades. He looked a lot like Johnny Cash and had that kind of voice. He arose
sort of from nowhere as a truck driver to become governor of Iowa and prominent in the Democratic Party.
Joe was a good friend of his, and he had become a big force in the Senate. So we were helping him and
gave modest amounts of money to a presidential exploratory effort. The war was his big issue; he was very
anti-Vietnam, very eloquent.”
A college dropout, messianic Christian, and reformed alcoholic who was sometimes described as the “Iowa
Populist,” Hughes would skip a scheduled meeting at the drop of an empty vodka bottle to help someone with
a drinking problem through a crisis. Several times he had successfully saved colleagues from suicide, and
once—to his deep regret—he had failed. With a magnetic personality, he was considered both a dark horse
and a rising star, the kind of candidate who would attract the young, the blue-collar voters, and the insurgent
liberals who had voted for McCarthy; in other words, he was the great hope for a populist resurgence among
a field of uninspiring candidates. At the time, no other Democratic candidate was attracting significant
support. McGovern, the leader of the pack, was getting only five points in national opinion polls.3
In the spring of 1971, Hughes summoned “six of his closest advisers and aides,” including Buffett and Joe
Rosenfield, and directed them to present every possible argument why he should or should not seek the
nomination.4
“At the end of May 1971, we had this meeting in a hotel in Washington. They were ready to go ahead on a

big scale, although it was one of those meetings where it’s already predetermined what you’re going to do,
but you have to hold it to get organized and feel good, rally the troops.
“About a month before this meeting, Hughes had been on Meet the Press. At the very end of the show Larry
Spivak said, ‘Senator, there has been some talk about your interest in extrasensory perception and the
occult. Would you clarify your beliefs on this?’ Hughes had just started to answer, and then the program
got cut off.5
“So when the Washington meeting was just about done I said, ‘Senator, I watched that program about a
week ago. If you ever get asked a question like that again, I would suggest that initially, before you even
answer, point out to the questioner that there’s a significant difference between ESP and the occult. Don’t
let the questioner, by linking those two things, nail you, so that by answering, six months from now they’ll
say you talked about the occult when you were really talking about ESP.’
“The floodgates opened. Hughes said, ‘Ten years ago, I woke up in a bathtub in a fine hotel. I didn’t know
where I was. Didn’t know where my family was. I didn’t know how I’d gotten there, and I was of no use to
anybody. Then on this earth, at that moment, I became aware, and that’s what made me want to feed the
hungry.’ Then he said, ‘That experience came from visions that I have.’
“He went on, ‘I believe in precognition. My daughter had a vision of the spots on these kittens before they
were born, and she described them to me. And they were born that way. And somebody else had seen a
remote vision of a fire that was happening.’
“I said, ‘Now, Senator, if I’m Larry Spivak, the next question I’m going to ask you is this. If your daughter
tells you she has a vision of Soviets preparing to launch ICBM missiles at the United States, are you going
to order a preemptive strike against the Soviet Union?’
“And he said, ‘I would have to give that serious consideration.’
“I said, ‘Now, Senator, I’m Larry Spivak, and you’re sitting there at that table, and you’ve got that glass of
water in front of you, and I say, “Do you believe somebody can make that glass of water move across the
desk through the powers of their mind standing some feet away?”’ And he said, ‘Yes, I believe that can be
done.’
“There were these people around the room—some of them who had their whole careers invested in the guy,
like his chief of staff—and they saw themselves in the White House. And they started denying what they
were hearing. They were waving their hands and saying it didn’t mean what it meant. As I kept going, they
were just dying. They were bursting in and saying, ‘That isn’t what he’s saying,’ and, ‘Don’t worry about
this; it can be taken care of,’ and that Abraham Lincoln had believed some of the same things. Obviously
they knew some of this already. The whole thing was going down the tubes. I have never seen anything like
it. It was just fascinating because of the years of preparation and these guys who had been dreaming of
working for a U.S. President.
“Finally, at one point, Joe said, ‘Senator, tell Warren if he asks another question like that, you’re going to
make him disappear.’
“So, I said, ‘Senator, lookit. There are all kinds of phonies in American politics. You know, they profess to
believe in God, and they say they go to church every Sunday and everything. They don’t believe a damn
word of it, you know. But it works. You, on the other hand, believe something very sincerely, and you’ve got
your reasons for it, you know, but I will promise you that there’s ten percent of the normal Democratic vote
or some significant percentage of the votes that you can’t have, just because of something you honestly
believe, whereas the other guy is getting the vote because of something he doesn’t believe. That’s just a
reality.’ Meanwhile, all these guys are saying ‘Don’t pay any attention. What does he know?’ But Hughes
said that he would go away and when he came back, he would do something that would end his candidacy.”6
And so it came to pass that ten days later Hughes gave an interview to the Des Moines Register in which he

said that he had recently spent an hour talking to his dead brother through a medium.7 Thus ended the
presidential ambitions of Senator Harold Hughes.8
***
The episode with Harold Hughes would prove to be the peak, the nadir, and—thanks in part to Richard
Nixon’s eventual reelection—for many years the end of Buffett as would-be kingmaker. But throughout it,
Buffett paid careful attention to the overwhelming influence of media in politics; he wanted some of that. A
childhood throwing newspapers, his friendship with Fortune reporter Carol Loomis, the purchase of the Sun,
a search for other newspapers to buy, and his investment in the Washington Monthly—Buffett’s interest in
publishing had grown and compounded. He had seen the overwhelming power of television to capture
attention throughout the tumultuous 1960s, from the JFK assassination to the Vietnam War to the civil-rights
movement. Now, as the profitability of television became apparent, he wanted a piece of that business too.
Then Bill Ruane set him up at a dinner in New York with an acquaintance, Tom Murphy, who ran Capital
Cities Communications, a company that owned broadcasting stations.
Murphy, the son of a Brooklyn judge, had grown up in the spicy chowder of New York politics before joining
the Harvard Business School class of ’49. Jowly, balding, easygoing, Murphy had started by managing a
bankrupt TV station in Albany so frugally that he painted only the sides of the building that faced the road.
Then he started to buy broadcasters, cable companies, and publishers, creating a media empire. Before long
he moved to New York and recruited another HBS classmate, Dan Burke, brother of Johnson & Johnson
CEO Jim Burke.
After their dinner, Murphy strategized with Ruane about how to get Buffett on his board of directors. Ruane
said the way to Buffett’s heart was to visit him in Omaha. Murphy promptly made the pilgrimage. Buffett
plied him with a steak dinner, then drove him home to meet Susie. She must have known by now what to
expect: Her husband had met another new object of infatuation. Buffett liked to show new people his totems:
the office, Susie, and sometimes the train set. After the tour he and Murphy played a couple of games of
racquetball in the Buffetts’ basement court, Murphy running around in his oxford dress shoes. Buffett saw
where he was headed before Murphy could pop the question. “You know, Tom,” he said, “I couldn’t become
a director because I’d have to have a major position in your company, and your stock is too high.”9 Even
though the rest of the market was stumbling downhill, investors were excited about television stocks. Cable
television was new, and local franchises were consolidating into newly visible public companies, whipping up
investors’ excitement about the medium. “Lookit,” he said, “you can have me for nothing, you don’t need
me on the board.”10
So Murphy started calling Buffett every time he made a deal. Buffett, just over forty, was flattered and made
unlimited time for Murphy, then in his mid-to late forties, even though he thought, “This guy is old.” But “he
understands the whole world,” and “I was in awe of Murph,” Buffett says. “I thought he was the ultimate
businessman.” One evening, Murphy phoned him at home and offered him first shot at a Fort Worth TV
station that was for sale.11 Buffett was interested but, for reasons he doesn’t recall, turned Murphy
down—which he later called one of his greater business mistakes.12
What Buffett really wanted was to be a publisher. In fact, he thought he had a hot scoop, but when he gave
the editors at the Washington Monthly the idea, they pooh-poohed it. “I’m just sure in my heart,” says
Charles Peters, the Monthly’s publisher, “that the editors were offended at the idea of having an investor call
them up and tell them to do a story.” They told Peters it was “no real story for the Monthly” and Peters did
not push back. Then Buffett turned to the Omaha Sun, which might not have a national platform but was
better than no newspaper at all. As matters turned out, says Peters, “I could have shot everybody on my
staff.”
What Buffett had heard was that Boys Town, one of Omaha’s sacred cows, had turned into a hog. A refuge

for homeless boys, Boys Town was founded in an old mansion near downtown in 1917 by Father Edward
Flanagan, an Irish priest who wanted to save orphans and rejected children from wasted lives as drifters,
criminals, or addicts. “Father Flanagan was famous around town for getting five bucks at a time,” says
Buffett, “and as soon as he got it, he spent it on a kid. Then he got ninety dollars and he put twenty-five kids
in a house.”13 In its early years, Boys Town had always struggled financially, but it grew nonetheless. By
1934 it occupied a 160-acre campus ten miles west of Omaha complete with a school, dormitories, a chapel,
a dining hall, and athletic facilities. With help from Howard Buffett, Boys Town set up its own post office in
1934 to assist in fund-raising.14 It became an incorporated village in 1936. Then a 1938 Oscar-winning film
starring Spencer Tracy and Mickey Rooney brought it national fame.
When Ted Miller, a professional fund-raiser, saw the movie, he recognized how to transform Boys Town’s
fund-raising appeals into a huge national campaign. Every year at Christmas time, Boys Town, which now
called itself “The City of Little Men,” sent out millions of letters that began, “There will be no joyous
Christmas season this year for many homeless and forgotten boys….” and bore the picture the movie made
famous of a street urchin carrying a tot with the legend “He ain’t heavy, Father…He’s m’brother.”
People sent in as little as a dollar, but even small amounts coming from a tiny percentage of the tens of
millions of letters that had been sent out added up to a lot of money.15 Boys Town, then awash in
contributions, expanded to a 1,300-acre campus with a stadium, a souvenir shop, a farm where the boys
worked as hired hands, and vocational training facilities. Father Flanagan died in 1948, but the money kept
rolling in under his successor, Monsignor Nicholas Wegner. It was now a virtual shrine that was the state’s
biggest tourist attraction.
“I used to hear these stories about how the U.S. National Bank put on extra people for weeks and weeks
before Christmas just to handle the Boys Town money that was coming in. Meanwhile, of course, I saw the
boy count coming down.”
In its early years, Flanagan had searched court records and taken in a certain number of hard-core
delinquents, even a few murderers. But by 1971, the home screened out the emotionally disturbed, mentally
retarded, and serious juvenile offenders; it tried to limit its occupants to “homeless” boys who had no other
significant problems.16 Built to house a thousand, Boys Town now employed some six hundred people to
care for its six hundred and sixty-five boys.17 However, its gigantic institutional approach of housing boys in
a same-sex facility, isolated from the surrounding community, with a custodial, even prisonlike atmosphere,
had begun to seem out of date.18 The boys moved to the signal of bells: They prayed at the first bell in the
giant “chow hall,” sat down to the second, ate at the third, put down their forks at the fourth whether they
were finished or not, stood and prayed at the fifth, and dashed out of the chow hall at the sixth. Their mail
was censored and they were allowed only one visitor a month, chosen by the staff, not themselves. They
worked at menial jobs and had little recreation and no contact with girls. Boys Town emphasized low-grade
vocational training: picking beans and making birdhouses.
So one evening in July 1971, at a meeting at the Buffetts’ house, Warren and Sun editor Paul Williams
discussed the Boys Town rumors and decided to commission a story on how the institution raised and spent
its money. The Sun had already made a couple of runs at this story and was told by Boys Town, “We don’t
discuss our finances.”19 Now Williams took three city reporters, Wes Iverson, Doug Smith, and Mick Rood,
and set them to work on the confidential “Project B,” planning an elaborate investigative reporting project. 20
Having noticed that the Boys Town marketing material said it got no money from any church or from the
state or federal government, reporter Mick Rood pawed through records at the Nebraska state capitol in
Lincoln and found out that this was false.21 That made them suspicious of Boys Town’s other claims.
Through other basic reporting, they got the institution’s property-tax records, educational records, and
articles of incorporation. They found out that Boys Town had a history of strained relations with the state
welfare department; Monsignor Wegner, who currently ran Boys Town, had refused to participate in program
reviews by outside agencies despite the advice of his own staff.22 Williams used a Congressional source to
get a report on the Boys Town post office and learned that it sent between thirty-four and fifty million pieces

of fund-raising mail a year. This was a staggering number; fund-raisers for other organizations told them that,
based on such numbers, Boys Town must be taking in at least $10 million a year. Using his financial
knowledge, Buffett figured out that its operating costs could be no more than half of that.23 Boys Town was
accumulating money faster than it could possibly spend it. It had undergone a major expansion in 1948.
Assuming it had piled up $5 million a year ever since, Buffett thought it must have at least $100 million in
excess funds. But so far, there was no proof.
Buffett had joined the board of the local Urban League, and from that connection knew Dr. Claude Organ, a
local surgeon, the only black man on the Boys Town board. Buffett thought the doctor was a decent guy.
“We had breakfast over at the Blackstone Hotel right across the street. And I talked and talked and I tried
to get him to tell me. He wouldn’t give me details, but he also told me I wasn’t wrong. He did even better
than that. He let me know there was a story there, although I couldn’t get any numbers from him.”
Dr. Organ began quietly steering the reporting team, helping them stay on track without disclosing
confidential information.24 The reporters had started talking to people around town but were not getting
anywhere; most of the Boys Town employees were too afraid to talk. Buffett, playing newshound, roamed
Omaha in his beat-up old tennis shoes, moth-eaten sweater, and pants covered with streaks of chalk.25 “It
was a high,” he says. “Whatever was the male equivalent of Brenda Starr, Girl Reporter, well, that was
me.” By now Warren had also adopted Susie’s friend Stan Lipsey, who remained the Sun’s publisher, as one
of his new people, going jogging with him and playing racquetball in the Buffetts’ basement.
Then Warren had a brainstorm. He knew that Congress had passed a law that, among other things, required
nonprofit organizations to file a tax return with the IRS.
“I was sitting there in the family room doing the Form 990 for the Buffett Foundation, and it just hit me—if
I had to file a return, maybe they did too.”26
The reporters tracked down the Form 990 to the IRS in Philadelphia and waited impatiently for twenty days
for the IRS to dig it out of its files.27
Two days later, the package arrived in Omaha. Paul Williams had hired Randy Brown, a new assistant
managing editor, in part to help coordinate the Boys Town story, bringing the team to four reporters. “My
first day at work, this 990 plopped down on my desk,” says Brown.28 Buffett, who had just bought See’s and
was still mailing out boxes of candy to friends all over North America, nonetheless was so enthralled by Boys
Town that he threw himself into helping Brown figure it out. Sure enough, Boys Town had a net worth of
$209 million, which was rising at the rate of about $18 million a year, four times faster than the amount it
spent to fund its operations. Buffett was elated. All his life, he had been waiting for a nun to commit a crime
so he could expose the culprit by whipping out her fingerprints. Now he had used a tax return to nab a
monsignor red-handed.
They moved desks, file cabinets, and three phones into Williams’s basement recreation room. In the end, “we
tracked everything,” says Lipsey, “except, I think, two accounts in Switzerland. We couldn’t break through
those.” The Sun’s reporters were stunned to find that Boys Town had an endowment three times the size of
the University of Notre Dame. Conservatively stated, it was worth more than $200,000 per boy. Mick Rood
took to calling it the “City of Little Men with a Large Portfolio.”29 The money machine was bringing in $25
million a year and could easily cover its costs out of investment income without raising another nickel.30 As
the story came together, the reporting team held a meeting in a room at the Blackstone Hotel, across the
street from Buffett’s office. Coincidentally, the Boys Town board was meeting at the same time in a room
down the hallway. The reporters tiptoed in and out, hoping they weren’t seen.31 The intrigue heightened as
they worked on the obvious questions: What was Boys Town going to do with all that money? Why did it
need to keep raising more? The last phase of the investigation meant to find that out.
As administrator of Boys Town, seventy-four-year-old Reverend Monsignor Nicholas H. Wegner was in

charge of fund-raising. The monsignor knew by then that the Sun was asking questions; Boys Town had
already started putting together a hasty program of reforms. But the reporters were confident that as yet he
had no idea they had obtained Boys Town’s tax return. Their fear was losing the story to the Omaha WorldHerald, which might swoop down with its greater resources once it realized that a juicy bit of news was
waiting to be served up to the readership. An even greater risk was that Boys Town might work cooperatively
and exclusively with the World-Herald to launch a preemptive strike with a friendlier story.32
The reporters plotted how to get to Wegner and to Archbishop Sheehan, his superior in the archdiocese.
Rood, a thirtyish badass with shoulder-length wavy hair and a handlebar mustache, went to see Wegner. His
first reaction was pity for Wegner, whose bald, wrinkled skull craned from his cassock like the head of an
ancient tortoise. The monsignor was obviously frail, the survivor of fifteen surgeries, some of them major. As
the interview proceeded, however, he rambled on incautiously and also denied receiving state funds. Asked
to justify the exhaustive fund-raising, he said, “We’re so deep in debt all the time.” Knowing that nothing of
the sort was true, Rood went straight back to Williams’s basement with the tape of the interview. After it was
transcribed, Williams put it in a safe-deposit box.
While Rood was interviewing Wegner, Williams was trying to nail the archbishop. They had tried to schedule
his interview simultaneously with Wegner’s but were unable to get both on the same day. Sheehan—possibly
cued in at that point—confirmed statements Wegner had made but declined to add anything more. With
confirmation in hand, however, the team, accompanied by photographers, showed up at the fund-raising
office, which was a separate operation located in an Omaha building marked “Wells Fargo” rather than in
Boys Town. They walked in the door uninvited and snapped photos of long rows of women typing solicitation
letters and thank-you notes to donors. They also managed to talk to some of the fund-raisers, who said,
“Please don’t mention the fund-raising operation in your article. It’s easy for the public to get the wrong idea.
People will think we’re rich,” and “We want people to think the boys send out the letters.”33
Meanwhile, the other reporters descended on the board of directors. It was made up mostly of people with
little incentive to tip over the sacred cow. They included the banker who ran the Boys Town investment
portfolio, the son of the architect who built the place and who ran the firm that stood in line to do any current
building work, the retailer who supplied all the boys’ clothing, and the lawyer who handled Boys Town’s
legal affairs. Apart from the financial interests many of them had in it, all the directors enjoyed the prestige of
sitting on the board of Nebraska’s most respected institution while doing very little work on its behalf.
Wegner considered them a nuisance and had told Rood, “They’ve never been of much help,” and “They
don’t know anything about social welfare…they don’t know anything about education.”34 According to
Williams, whatever they may have actually known, the board’s reactions to the reporters’ questions ranged
from “dismay to innocence or downright ignorance.”35 Another Boys Town official would later put it this
way with hindsight: “The board has not been all that good in serving Father Wegner…. The board could have
advised him about slowing down on the fund-raising.”36
And that was indeed the irony. It was Boys Town’s background of Depression-era poverty that had probably
led Wegner to accumulate money as if the “wolf was at the door,” as Randy Brown put it.37 This same
background had very likely lulled the board into overseeing Wegner’s activities without questioning whether
they made sense. But Warren Buffett, a product of the very same environment, who had the very same
impulses, was going to bust them for it. The crime, in his eyes, was not just accumulating the money. It was
piling it up mindlessly without a plan to use it. Boys Town didn’t even have a budget.38 The sin to Buffett
was an abdication of fiduciary responsibility, the failure to manage money responsibly on others’ behalf.
The reporters worked feverishly on the story all weekend, Buffett and Lipsey reading copy as it progressed.
“We were this little nothing weekly paper,” says Buffett, but they intended to meet the journalistic standard
of a top national daily. Finally they all trooped over to Paul Williams’s living room, spread everything out on
the floor, and tried to figure out headlines and captions. The story’s banner lead asked: “Boys Town:
America’s Wealthiest City?” An eight-page special section with sidebars, it led off with a kicker in the form
of a Bible verse, Luke 16:2—“Give an account of thy stewardship.”
