
Evaluating Your Trading Plan
After you compute your account’s return and compare it to some benchmark
(see the preceding section for more info on how to do just that), you can
work on improving your trading plan (assuming it needs to be improved). If
your returns exceed the appropriate benchmark, great job! But that doesn’t
mean you shouldn’t review your trades and look for ways to refine your plan.
At least monthly, examine your trading journal and review all closed trades
(those that you’ve exited) to determine whether you need to make any
adjustments to your strategy. If your plan yields subpar returns when compared to the appropriate benchmark, perhaps you can spot a common thread
among the losing positions and add a trading rule to avoid similar losses.
Conversely, if you’re consistently beating the benchmark, maybe you can
identify a common thread among your winning positions and add a trading
rule to increase the chances of finding those gainers.
Don’t change your plan too often. Only change it when you’re sure that a
tangible benefit exists and that you can address a problem you spot in several
trades. If you change your trading plan frequently, you’ll never know whether
you have a well-functioning plan because you can’t judge a plan on the basis of
a few weeks of data (unless you lose half or all your money, in which case
you’re probably not following the risk management techniques I outline in
Chapter 10). Wal-Mart and Best Buy don’t change their corporate strategies
weekly, or even yearly. They plan for the long term. Even though you’re swing
trading, your trading plan must have a long-term perspective in the sense that
it should do well across changing markets and over time.
You’ll never achieve 100 percent success in your trades. A great trading plan
may well result in a success rate of 50 percent if the profits from your winners
are multiple times larger than the losses from your losers.

Part V

The Part of Tens

W

In this part . . .

hat For Dummies book is complete without the
Part of Tens? In these two chapters, you receive
the inside scoop on ten simple guidelines to achieving
swing trading success and ten mistakes you don’t want to
make . . . unless of course you enjoy seeing your cash
wash down the drain. Some of these do’s and don’ts may
seem logical based on your current investment knowledge, whereas others (like the concept of actually having
fun with your trading!) may surprise you.

Chapter 14

Ten Simple Rules
for Swing Trading
In This Chapter
 Taking prudent steps to become a successful swing trader
 Controlling your emotions (but still having fun)

S

wing trading can and should be enjoyable. You can actually look forward
to “working” each day! But swing trading is still a business, so you must
stick to certain rules designed to keep you in the game. After all, if you have
no capital, you can’t trade. So the most important rule is the rule of survival.
Surviving means not only managing risk but also following your own plan and
your own rules. If you’re not careful, swing trading can quickly go from being
a business about making profits to being an outlet for your emotions.
The rules in this chapter aren’t novel or complex. Instead, they’re simple and
straightforward. In fact, they’re downright boring. But they’ll keep you in the game
and (ideally) help you make money. Stray from these rules at your own risk.

Trade Your Plan
A cliché that I hear over and over again is, “Plan your trade, then trade your
plan.” I hate to regurgitate that here, but I can’t phrase it any better.
Your trading plan is your road map. It answers the following questions:
 What is your time horizon?
 What do you trade?
 When do you trade (going long versus going short)?
 How much capital do you allocate to your positions?

280 Part V: The Part of Tens
 What are your entry signals?
 When do you exit a position for a profit?
 When do you exit a position for a loss?
Trading plans must be carefully thought through and then written down. I prefer
to keep a copy of my trading plan nearby, or a digital version of the plan accessible on my computer. One tool I use to make sure I follow my trading plan is a
questionnaire I developed that I always complete before I enter a position. I provide a sample questionnaire in Figure 14-1 to help get you started on following
your trading plan.
Your trading questionnaire may be more or less complex than the sample
in Figure 14-1. Either way, having such a questionnaire forces you to think
through the important issues you may overlook when you’re making decisions on the fly. Stick to a trading questionnaire, as silly as you may think
it sounds, and you’ll find the success of your trades increasing. The more
errors you avoid, the more likely your trades will turn out profitable.

Trader Joe’s Sample Trading Questionnaire
Date:
Symbol:
1. Was this security identified in an industry group ranking in the top 20% of
the market (in the case of long positions) or in the bottom 20% of the market
(in the case of short positions)? Yes / No
2. Was this security identified after breaking out of a base lasting three
months or longer?
Yes / No
3. Has volume increased in recent days in the direction of the trade? Yes / No

Figure 14-1:
A trading
questionnaire is a
useful tool
that helps
you stick
to your
trading plan.

4. Is the overall market trending in the same direction as the direction
of the trade?
Yes / No
5. Has the MACD given a buy signal in the last three days?

Yes / No

6. Is the company slated to report earnings in the next two weeks? Yes / No
7. Has the position size been determined based on the stop loss order
placement?
Yes / No

Chapter 14: Ten Simple Rules for Swing Trading

Follow the Lead of Industry Groups
as Well as the Overall Market
If you’re trading stocks, you want the wind at your back, meaning your trades
should be in the direction of the overall market. If the market is in a strong
bull, then the majority of your trades should be long positions. And if the
market is in bear mode, the majority of your trades should be short positions. Markets may also be stuck in trading ranges, in which case your long
and short trades will depend on whether the market is rallying within the
trading range or falling within that range.
But trading with the overall market is only part of the story. The skilled swing
trader recognizes that industry groups make a difference in a security’s
returns. When an industry group is in the top of the pack (as identified in
High Growth Stock Investor software or Investor’s Business Daily), the stocks
in that group are likely to follow suit. Conversely, when an industry group
is in the bottom of the bottom of the pack, the stocks in that group are likely
to follow suit. When the homebuilder industry group was out of favor in 2007,
you could’ve shorted practically any homebuilder and made money (see the
examples in Figure 14-2).
The industry group in which you trade is more important to your success or
failure than which company you pick in that industry group. So as a swing
trader, always trade stocks on the long side in industry groups that are rising,
and always trade stocks on the short side in industry groups that are falling.
You don’t need to complicate what rising or falling means. One simple rule is
to only trade stocks on the long side that are part of industry groups that are
above a rising 20-day moving average.

Figure 14-2:
Most
securities
in the
homebuilder
industry
group
bottomed
out in
January
2008.

281

282 Part V: The Part of Tens
Don’t Let Emotions Control Your Trading!
Emotions are the biggest enemy of trading. In a sense, you’re your own worst
enemy. Traders who lose billions of dollars at major banks often start out
losing a small amount and then try to break even or prove themselves right.
Their ultimate failing lies not in their analysis or their market knowledge but
in their inability to control their emotions.
The markets aren’t personal. When you lose money, it’s not because you made
money last time. Your losses and profits are a function of your trading ability
and the markets in which you trade. The true, professional trader is a master
of his or her emotions. Profits don’t lead to extreme joy, and losses don’t lead
to extreme pessimism. If you sat across the table from a professional trader,
you wouldn’t be able to tell whether he or she were up $50,000 or down
$100,000. Professional traders are calm and don’t let their emotions take over
their cognitive functions.
Another factor in controlling your emotions is keeping tabs on your trades.
Don’t brag to others about your profits. Don’t tell others about any trades
you’re in at the moment. Do so and you become married to your positions. If
you tell your best friends that you hold shares of Oracle and you believe the
share price is going to skyrocket, you’ll be less likely to exit if the trade turns
down. “Oh no!” you may say to yourself. “Everyone knows I hold Oracle. I
can’t bail now. I’ve got to hold to prove I was right.”
Controlling your emotions isn’t something that just happens one day and you
never have to worry about it again. Rather, it’s an ongoing battle. The two
strongest emotions you’re going to face are greed and fear. When markets are
roaring in one direction and you’re riding that wave, you’ll want to hold positions longer than you need to as you amass more profits. And when markets
roar in the opposite direction and your profits evaporate, you’ll want to take
more risks to make up for those losses.
You can’t battle these emotions in any scientific way (that I know of, at least).
I’ve always imagined that a Spock-like character who’s always rational and
never lets emotions interfere with his trading would make a wonderful trader.
Unfortunately, Star Trek is a fictional story, and Vulcans don’t exist. So as a
trader, you need to review your trades carefully and practice being calm as
much as possible. Be disciplined enough to force yourself to stop trading if
you detect your emotions are affecting your trading.

Chapter 14: Ten Simple Rules for Swing Trading

Diversify!
As a swing trader, you must hold a diversified portfolio of positions. You
should have at least ten different positions, and they should be in different sectors. And if you can, incorporate other asset classes in your swing trading. For
example, include real estate investment trusts (REITs), exchange traded funds
that track international markets, or commodities such as streetTRACKS Gold.
All these positions represent different ways to diversify your portfolio. Holding
more than one position reduces idiosyncratic risk (a fancy way of saying the
risk attributable to an individual company). Having long and short positions
reduces your market direction risk. And diversification allows your portfolio
to withstand market volatility — the gains from a few positions can offset the
losses from others.

Set Your Risk Level
Setting your risk level goes hand in hand with setting a stop loss level, which
I discuss later in this chapter. Entering a stop loss level is an order entry
step, but setting a risk level is an analytical part of the process. Your stop
loss order will often be at the risk level you identify in this step.
Your risk level represents the price that, if reached, forces you to acknowledge that your original thesis for trading the security is wrong. You can set
your risk level based on some automatic percent level from your entry order,
but I don’t recommend this because it forces a reality on the market where
one may not exist. For example, say you automatically exit a position when a
security declines or appreciates (depending on whether you’re long or short)
by 5 percent. But why should that security stay within this 5 percent range?
What if the security’s daily volatility is 3 percent? It may hit your risk level in
a day or two just based on normal volatility.
For this reason, I recommend that you set your risk level based on support or
resistance levels. If a stock finds support at $20 frequently, set your risk level
at $19.73, for example. Don’t use a whole number for the risk level, or you may
place your stop loss order at the same price that hundreds of others place
their orders. Instead, for instance, use something like $67.37 rather than $68 if
you’re going long.
Your stop loss level should be set at your risk level. But formulating your
risk level depends on what your trading plan calls for. If you don’t want to
use some obvious support level, then use a moving average, but be prepared to constantly adjust your stop loss level because the moving average
is constantly changing. The wider your risk level is (that is, the farther your

283

284 Part V: The Part of Tens
risk level is from your entry price), the smaller your position size. This rule of
thumb ensures you aren’t risking more than 1 to 2 percent of your total
capital because you may be entering a security that’s extended.
Swing traders who focus on trading ranges have an easier job of identifying
their risk levels. They’re looking for a continuation of an existing trading
range. Hence, a breakout above or below a resistance or support level would
signal the end of the trading range. That resistance or support level is the
most obvious risk level for the swing trader.
To sum up, always specify your risk level and make its placement logical (that
is, near a support or resistance level). And don’t exit based on some percentage
decline — like selling a position when it declines 5 or 7 percent.

Set a Profit Target or Technical Exit
I stress risk management a lot in this book. The reason is simple: You can’t
last long without it. But when it comes to profits, you must set your profit
target or technical exit.
Your profit target is often based on a previous support or resistance level.
Some swing traders set predefined profit targets of selling 50 percent of a
position after it achieves a 5 percent gain from entry and selling the other
50 percent after it reaches a 10 percent gain. When trading based on a trading pattern like a head-and-shoulders pattern, your profit target may be
determined by the projection price implied in the chart pattern.
My preference in taking profits is to rely on a signal from a technical indicator rather than a preexisting support or resistance level. Some securities
trend longer and farther than anticipated, and they can be very profitable.
Hence, I prefer to exit after a security breaks below an indicator, such as
a moving average, or on a sell signal from a trending indicator. Chapter 5
covers how you can exit positions based on moving averages.

Use Limit Orders
When entering a trade, you should enter on a limit order rather than a market
order. A limit order ensures that your execution occurs at the price you specify,
whereas a market order can be filled at any price. Rarely will you encounter such
urgency to get into a trade that you’ll need to enter a market order. Moreover,
you’re unlikely to buy at the bottom of the day or sell at the top of the day. So
be patient and you may get a better price than you originally thought.

Chapter 14: Ten Simple Rules for Swing Trading
Another reason to use limit orders is to help you avoid the cost of market
impact. The larger your order size is relative to the average volume that
trades in the security on a typical day, the more likely your buy or sell order
will move a security’s price higher or lower. A market order in a thinly traded
stock may leave you with an execution that’s 2 to 5 percent above the price
the security was when you entered the order.
You can place a limit order at a price level near where shares have traded.
The intention isn’t to get lucky on some downturn in shares but to control
the average cost per share. Place a limit order slightly below recent trades
(when you’re buying) or slightly above recent trades (when you’re shorting).
Recognize that there’s always the possibility your order may not get filled. But
remember that your job is to be patient and execute your trade only when the
timing and price are right.

Use Stop Loss Orders
You may think that stop loss orders are nothing more than training wheels.
“I’m an adult. I don’t need these pesky stop loss orders. I can exit when I see
weakness.” Unfortunately, that kind of thinking may get you killed (financially
speaking, of course). Financial markets aren’t playgrounds or appropriate
places to find out who you are. Leave that to your local sports club.
Stop loss orders are necessary for several reasons — even if you watch the
market 24 hours a day, 7 days a week:
 They help you deal with fast-moving markets. If you swing trade ten
different positions, it’s quite possible that many of them may start acting
up on the same day. And they can move fast and furious if negative news
is in the air. Because of the speed at which markets move, you need a
stop loss to save you if you’re unable to act.
 They limit your downside. Without a stop loss order, your downside
may be all of your capital (or worse, if you’re shorting). Stop loss orders
act as protection, because they place some upper limit on the losses you
may suffer. Of course, a security could gap through your stop loss order,
but your loss would be realized then regardless of whether a stop loss
order existed.
 They help take your emotions out of the game. When you place mental
stop loss orders, you may start to arbitrarily move your imaginary stop
loss as the markets move against you. So you plan to exit at $49.50, but
when the security trades through that price down to $49, you tell yourself
that $47.50 is a more reasonable exit point given recent market action.
You justify your change and you hold on. And your losses mount.

285

286 Part V: The Part of Tens
 They give you time to take your eye off the ball. If you travel or are unable
to watch the markets on a day when you’re sick, stop loss orders ensure
that your portfolio value is preserved. If you didn’t have stop loss orders,
you’d probably fear ever being out of touch with your computer and the
markets. One or two lousy positions can quickly change a top-performing
account into a poor performer.
For these reasons, stop loss orders are essential. You’ll sleep better at night
if you know that someone is watching your positions, ready to take action if
they start acting up.

Keep a Trading Journal
Trading journals organize your thoughts and the reasons behind your decisions. They should be updated after every trade you execute. If you delay
entering a trade into your journal, the trades may eventually pile up and
overwhelm you, and you may decide not to update the journal anymore.
A trading journal is your coach. By recording the reasons you enter a position,
you can review whether your assumptions are correct, and you can find
out whether your trading plan needs adjustment. For instance, perhaps you
always enter positions prematurely and need to incorporate some indicator
to prevent you from trading too soon. Or perhaps you have a tendency to
buy stocks in weak industry groups. A trading journal reveals such habits and
patterns, and you can adjust accordingly. The fun part of keeping a journal is
reviewing the major winners and major losers. I often learn more from reviewing my losers than I do my winners. I look to replicate the winning trades in
the future and avoid the circumstances surrounding the losing trades.
Chapter 3 provides more details on what to put in your journal — the more
detailed, the better. Of course, the more detailed your journal is, the more
time you’re going to spend updating it (especially if you have trades). Sometimes
using a screen capture program can cut down on the time. Screen capture
programs allow you to capture a window on your computer and store it as an
image that can be transferred to a Word document or Excel spreadsheet. You
can take snapshots of the security’s chart and its industry group with small
amounts of written text indicating how the security was found and what triggered the entry. That can be sufficient for a trading journal.

Chapter 14: Ten Simple Rules for Swing Trading

Have Fun!
This last rule may strike you as a bit off kilter. After all, earlier in this chapter
I recommended fighting your emotions and the joy or pain that comes from
gains or losses.
Yes, yes — I did say that. But this final rule goes to the heart of whether you
can be a full-time swing trader. You have to like the business. You have to
enjoy spending hours on the computer looking for candidates to buy or short.
You have to find pleasure in reading books about swing trading (especially this
one, of course).
If you have to force yourself to research positions, then swing trading may
not be for you. If logging onto your brokerage account is a painful exercise
you prefer not to do because you feel ashamed, swing trading may not be
for you. Even when you’re down, you have to be optimistic that your profits
will come soon. And that optimism helps make those profits a reality.
So enjoy swing trading and all it entails. You’ll find it can be a rewarding
experience — financially and otherwise.

287

288 Part V: The Part of Tens

Chapter 15

Ten Deadly Sins of Swing Trading
In This Chapter
 Making sure you have enough money to start investing
 Remembering that too much investment in one industry or too much trading can

hurt you
 Appreciating the value of modesty and sticking to your plans

T

o excel in swing trading, you must not only follow the rules but also
avoid harming yourself. After all, just because you speed to work every
morning without getting caught doesn’t mean you’ll get away with it today.
The same principle applies to swing trading: Committing one or more of the
sins in this chapter won’t, necessarily, bring about immediate punishment
(and by that I mean loss of account value). But you’ll eventually be called to
account for repeated infractions.
I’ve relied on my swing trading experience to develop these sins. I admit
that I’ve committed some, if not all, of them at one point in my life. But I
always regretted the actions later on. In swing trading, you are your own
worst enemy. Here, I give you the tools you need to arm yourself against the
common pitfalls of the swing trading game.

Starting with Too Little Capital
Swing trading requires a minimum level of capital to execute efficiently —
assuming you’re swing trading for a living. If you swing trade for fun, then
you may be content making an average of $500 per month. But even then,
you’re going to be facing an uphill battle if you have too little capital. Either
way, swing trading requires an investment on your part for several reasons:
 Diversification: Spreading a small amount of capital, say $5,000, into
ten trades is tough. That means your average trade size is $500. You
may not be able to buy but five or ten shares of some securities with
such a small trade size. As a result, you may try to fix the problem by
decreasing your number of positions, but doing so increases your risk.
