
Se 18 eo

Models and the Real World

The accuracy of values generated by a theoretical pricing model rests on two points: the
accuracy of the assumptions upon which the model is based, and the accuracy of the
inputs into the model. Thus far, we have tended to focus on the second area, the
accuracy of the inputs. Through attention to the sensitivities of an option position (delta,
gamma, theta, vega, and rho), a trader can identify those inputs which represent the
greatest risk to his position, and thereby prepare to take protective action if things go
wrong. While all the inputs into the model representa risk to the trader, we have placed
special emphasis on volatility, since it is the one input which cannot be directly observed
in the marketplace.

However, the active option trader cannot afford to ignore the first area, the
possibility that the assumptions which form the foundation of the model are themselves
inaccurate or unrealistic. Some of these assumptions pertain to the way business is
transacted in the marketplace, while others pertain to the mathematics of option pricing.

To begin, we might list the most important assumptions built into a traditional
pricing madel:!

1. Markets are frictionless
a. The underlying contract can be freely bought or sold, without restriction
b. There are no tax consequences associated with trading

c. Everyone can borrow and lend money freely, and one interest rate applies
to all transactions

d. There are no transaction casts
2. Interest rates are constant over the life of an option
3. Volatility is constant over the life of an option

4. Trading is continuous with no gaps in the price changes of an underlying
instrument

5. Volatility is independent of the price of the underlying contract

6. Over short periods of time the percent price changes in an underlying contract
are normally distributed, resulting in a lognormal distribution of underlying
prices at expiration

1. By “traditional pricing model” we mean those that are mast commonly used: the Black-Scholes model
and {ts variations, the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, or the Whaley model.

385


386 Chapter 18

The reader may already have an opinion about the accuracy of these assumptions, but
let’s consider them one by one.

MARKETS ARE FRICTIONLESS

In Chapter 5 we came to the obvious conclusion that markets are not frictionless, The
underlying contract cannot always be freely bought or sold; there are sometimes tax
consequences; a trader cannot always borrow and lend money freely, nor at the same
rate; there are always transaction costs.

In the futures markets the underlying cannot always be freely bought or sold
because exchanges sometimes set daily price limits beyond which a futures contract
may not trade. When that limit is reached, trading is halted until the market comes off
its limit. If it doesn’t come off limit, trading does not resume until the next business day.

The consequences of a locked futures market are usually not severe, and there are
several ways for a trader to circumvent the problem. Instead of trading in the futures
market, a trader might be able to trade in the cash market. Or the trader might be able
to trade the underlying market by trading a futures spread where one side of the spread
is not locked. For example, suppose a trader wants to buy a June futures contract which
is up limit. If a March futures contract is still trading because it is not up its limit, the
trader can buy a June/March spread (buy June, sell March], and then go back into the
market and buy the March futures contract. This leaves him long a June futures
contract, which is what he wanted. Finally, if the underlying futures market is locked,
but the option market is not locked, a trader can trade synthetic long or short futures
contracts.

In the stock market, there may be prohibitions against the sale of stock not actually
owned. Or if short sales are allowed, there may be restrictions on when such sales can
be made. Ifa trader cannot freely sell stock, put prices become inflated compared to call
prices, and all the conversions and reversals appear to be mispriced with respect to their
theoretical values. If short sales are not freely permitted, many stock option traders try
to carry some long stock so they will always be in a position to sell stock if the need
arises. Also, we saw in Chapter 5 in the discussion of time spreads, and in Chapter 12
in the discussion of boxes, that tender offers for a stock can distort the value of these
positions. In the case of time spreads, traders may be forced to exercise call options with
some time value remaining because no stock can be borrowed to carry a short position.
A box may be trading at greater than its theoretical value if a partial tender offer ts made
and early exercise is a possibility.

While there are occasionally tax considerations, for most market participants these
are usually minor. When considering a strategy, a trader is unlikely to ask himself, “If
this trade makes or loses money, what will be the tax consequences?” Nor should most
traders ask such a question. Differences in tax consequences, or changing tax conse-
quences, rarely make one strategy better than another.?

2.  Thisis not to say that tax consequences are always insignificant. Tax considerations can sometimes play
a role in portfolio management. They can also play arole in stock option strategies involving dividends,
when the dividends are subject to different tax rules than the gains or losses from stock or options.


Models and the Real World 387

The assumption that a trader can always borrow or lend money freely is a more
serious weakness in pricing models. Even if a trader has sufficient funds to initiate a
trade, he may find at some later date that he is required to come up with additional
funds in the form of increased margin requirements? If money were freely available
margin would never be a problem. A trader could always borrow margin money and
deposit the money with the clearing house. Since the borrowing and lending rate are
assumed to be the same, and since the clearing house in theory pays interest on the
margin deposit, there would never be a problem obtaining margin money, nor would
there ever be a cost associated it.

In the real world traders do not have unlimited borrowing capacity. If a trader
cannot meet a margin requirement he may be forced to liquidate a position prior to
expiration. Since all models, even those which allow for early exercise, assume that a
trader will always have the choice of holding a position to expiration, the inability to
meet margin requirements, and therefore maintain the position, can make the values
generated by the theoretical pricing model less reliable. Experienced traders learn to
consider the risk of a position not only from the standpoint of how much the position
might lose if things go wrong, but how much margin might be required to maintain the
position over the life of the options. A trader should always have sufficient margin
money available ta meet this latter requirement.

Even if a trader had unlimited borrowing capacity, the fact that for most traders
borrowing and lending rates are not the same can also cause problems with strategies
based on model generated values. A trader who borrows margin money at one rate will
almost certainly receive a lower rate when he deposits this money with the clearing
house. The difference between these rates, which will result in a loss to the trader, is
something of which the model is unaware. And the greater the difference between
borrowing and lending rates, the less reliable will be the values generated by the model.

The most serious flaw in the frictionless markets hypothesis is the assumption that
there are no transaction costs. While a strategy might or might not be affected by tax or
interest rate considerations, there are always transaction costs. These costs can come in
the form of brokerage fees, clearing fees, or an exchange membership. For many market
participants, transaction costs may be so great that a strategy which looks sensible based
on model-generated values may not be worth doing when transaction costs are also
taken into consideration. Moreover, transaction costs can accrue not only when the
strategy is initiated or liquidated, but also every time an adjustment is made. Ifa strategy
will require many adjustments because it has a high gamma and the trader intends to
Stay delta neutral, the transaction costs can have an especially great impact on model-
generated values.

3. The possibility that a trader in a futures option market may also have to come up with additional
varlation money, as opposed to margin money, subsequent to establishing an option position Is
incorporated into most models. This is why a conversion or reversal in a futures option market may not
be delta neutral.


388 Chapter 18

INTEREST RATES ARE CONSTANT
OVER THE LIFE OF AN OPTION

The interest rate component assumed in a theoretical pricing model is the riskless rate
over the life of an option. Any credits or debits associated with an option strategy will
be subject to an interest rate identical to the least risky rate corresponding to the term
of the option. In most markets the least risky rate is the rate associated with government
issued securities. A trader in a U.S. option market who sells straddles consisting of
three-month calls and puts is assumed by the model to have invested the resulting credit
in three-month government treasury bills. If both the option position and the treasury
bills are held to expiration, this effectively locks in one interest rate (that associated with
three-month treasury bills) over the life of the options.

In reality few traders actually take the proceeds from an option trade and invest it
in government securities. More often, a trader will put the proceeds in a trading
account, where it is subject to a variable interest rate. Moreover, while a trader can lend
money to the government by purchasing government securities, he cannot do the
reverse and borrow money from the government at the same rate. If he wants to borrow,
he may have to go to a bank where the cost of borrowing could be subject to a variable
interest rate. Given the realities of the marketplace, most traders’ transactions are not
subject to a fixed and riskless rate, as the model assumes, but to a constantly changing
interest rate. Is this a cause for worry?

While a changing interest rate will cause the value of a trader’s option position to
change, interest rates usually do not change in a way which will have a significant
impact on an option’s value, at least in the short run. Since the effect of changing interest
rates is a function of time to expiration, and since most listed options have terms of less
than nine months, interest rates would have to change violently to have an impact on
any but the most deeply in-the-money options. Changing interest rates become even less
of a concern when one considers how much more sensitive option values are to changes
in the price of the underlying instrument or to changes in volatility.

This is not to say that a trader should completely ignore the possibility of changing
interest rates. As we saw in Chapter 8, changing interest rates can have an impact on
time spreads in the stock option market. But even then, interest rates would have to
change several percentage points over a short period of time to have a significant impact
(see Figure 8-15).

With the introduction of long-term equity options, known as LEAPS, the conse-
quences of changing interest rates may well become more of a concern. Using the
Black-Scholes model, we can see in Figure 18-1 that the values of two-year stock options
changes significantly with only small changes in interest rates (delta values are in
parentheses}. Note particularly how quickly the 120 put drops below its parity value of
20.00. In a high interest rate environment, a long-term in-the-money American put will
quickly become an early exercise candidate. Everyone will prefer to exercise the put in
order to earn a high rate of interest on the proceeds from the sale of the stock.


389

(le-) o2'9
(69) 00°91
(e1-) 802
(28) 0S'92
(e-) ec"
(26) 8°6e
Spl

(9e-) se"8
(p9) 96°e1
(91-) sz’
(be) 60'be
(p-) ib
(96) pS'ze
Eb

(Zp-) 62'01
(8S) SO'ZL
(oz-) 69"
(08) 2212
(s-) 49°
(6) Z1'Se
%OL

(8b-) bS'cI
(Z$) 82’0L

(bz-) £9"
(92) Zb'6L
(2) 6"
(e6) 22°2e
%B

0 = puspinid

(€S-) OF'St
(Zy) 00°6

(62-) 68°S
(LZ) O@ Zh
(6-) 62't
(16) ve'0&
a)

‘WOe = Aner

(65-) 00°81
(bb) 22

(be-) 68°Z
(99) 80'S

(LI) SZ
(6g) 06°22
eb

(b9-) babe
(98) $6"

(6€-) Z1'6
(19) OEE

(pL-) pe?
(98) eb'sz
rd

‘seek Z = uolendxe 0} owt!

ind oz

(9 OZ

ind oo

19 OOF

nd og

19 08

s@]eYy }Ses8] Uy]

‘00} = eoud yOo}S
i-eb eunBi4

Models and the Real Worid


390 Chapter 18

VOLATILITY IS CONSTANT
OVER THE LIFE OF THE OPTION

When a trader feeds a volatility into a theoretical pricing model, he is telling the model
the magnitude of price changes which will occur over the life of the option. Given the
characteristics of a normal distribution, the model uses the volatility to extrapolate a
certain number of one, two, three, or more standard deviation price changes. Moreover,
the model assumes that occurrences of each particular magnitude will be evenly
distributed over the life of the option. Two standard deviation price changes will be
evenly distributed among the one standard deviation price changes; three standard
deviation price changes will be evenly distributed among the one and two standard
deviation price changes; and so on.

Look at Figures 18-2a and 18-2b, daily bar charts of an underlying contract over
the life of a certain option. Both bar charts exhibit exactly the same volatility over the
period in question, 16.7%. Yet it is obvious that the order in which the volatility occurs
is completely different. In Figure 18-2a all the large price changes occur during the early
part of the option’s life, while in Figure 18-2b all the large price changes occur during
the latter part of the option’s life. This is often how price changes actually occur in the
real world, rather than the even distribution which the model assumes. A trader
typically encounters periods of high volatility where all the two and three standard
deviation price changes seem to be bunched together. Or he encounters periods of low
volatility where all the one standard deviation price changes seem to be bunched
together. A graph of historical volatility is never a straight line. (For a good example of
this, the reader should look again at Figure 14-2.) But the theoretical pricing model
cannot differentiate between our two volatility scenarios. The model simply sees a
volatility of 16.7% and assumes that all price changes are evenly distributed, and
consistent with this volatility, over the life of the option.

Suppose a trader were to buy a 105 straddle and assumed, correctly, a volatility of
16.7%. If he bought and sold underlying contracts in order to remain delta neutral over
the life of the option, the model tells him, because it assumes a constant volatility of
16.7%, that the profit or loss to the trader will be identical in either of our scenarios. Is
this likely to be the case?

Notice that the underlying market is moving through 105 both at the beginning
and at the end of the options’ life. We can therefore consider the 105 call and put as
being at-the-money during these periods. Since at-the-money options have the highest
gamma, the 105 straddle will be a relatively high gamma position both early and late in
the spread’s life. Short-term at-the-money options always have greater gammas than
long-term at-the-money options, so any increase in volatility which occurs during the
latter part of the option’s life, as it does in Figure 18-2b, will have a much greater impact
on the position than volatility which occurs during the early part of the option’s life, as
it does in Figure 18-2a.

Because the gamma of a position determines both the magnitude and frequency of
the adjustment process, the 105 straddle will be much more valuable under the
movement represented in Figure 18-2b. The movement back and forth through the


391

Models and the Real World

BES ee ee eee eee eee eee eee eee eens cee

sé

FOOL

LSOL

TOLL

Sit

ez-sb eunbig



392

Doe ersr eer r eri tiit ett tL ELie EPP Pt LiL iL Pi tis sip pip peta ip ity)

$6

-OOL

SOL

rOLb

SIL

qz-8t aunbiy



Models and the Real World 393

exercise price late in the option’s life will require larger and larger adjustments, each of
which is favorable to the holder of the 105 straddle. The scenario in Figure 18-2a will
also require adjustments. But the adjustments now will be relatively small because the
movement in the underlying contract is much less dramatic.

Through experience most traders have come to the conclusion that the order in
which volatility occurs does matter. It matters especially for at-the money options,
because they have the greatest gammas. Any period of high volatility which occurs near
expiration will have a greater impact on an at-the-money option than the same high
volatility which occurs when the option has a great deal of time remaining to expiration.
Consequently, even if one knows the actual volatility over the life of an option, a model
will tend to undervalue at-the-money options in a rising volatility market, and overvalue
at-the-money options in a falling volatility market.

We have only considered one alternative volatility scenario, where volatility is
either increasing or decreasing. But there are an infinite number of paths which volatility
might follow over the life of an option. A trader might even assume that volatility is itself
random, and that predicting volatility with any degree of accuracy is not possible.
Models which assume stochastic volatility do exist and might, under some conditions,
be more suitable than a traditional pricing model. At the same time, such models add
another dimension of complexity to a trader’s life, and for this reason are not widely
used.

Some contracts, by their very nature, are known to change their volatility charac-
teristics over time. Interest rate products, in particular, fall into this category. As a bond
approaches maturity, the price of the bond moves inexorably towards par. At maturity,
regardless of interest rates, the bond will have a fixed and known value. Clearly, one
cannot assume that the price of the bond follows a random walk through time. Even if
one assumes that interest rates move randomly, and that the volatility of interest rates
is constant, interest rate instruments will change their volatility over time because
instruments of different maturities have different sensitivities to changes in interest
rates. If we take into consideration the fact that interest rates also vary for different
maturities, a traditional Black-Scholes type model is obviously inadequate for the
evaluation of such products. This has led to the development of special models to
evaluate interest rate instruments.>

4. For amore detailed discussion see:
Hull, John and White, Alan, “The Pricing of Options with Stochastic Volatilities,” Journal of Finance,
Vol. 42, No. 2, June 1987, pages 281-300,
Scott, Louis D., “Option Pricing when Variance Changes Randomly: Theory, Estimation, and Application,”
Journal of Finance and Quantitative Analysis, No. 22, December 1987, pages 419-438,
Wiggins, J.B., “Option Values under Stochastic Volatility: Theory and Empirical Results,” Journal of
Financial Economics, No. 19, December 1987, pages 351-372.

5. See for example:
Ho, Thomas, T.S.Y. and Lee, Sang-Bin, “Term Structure Movements and the Pricing of Interest Rate
Contingent Claims,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 41, No. 5, December 1986, pages 1011-1029.
Heath, David; Jarrow, Robert; and Morton, Andrew, “Bond Pricing and the Term Structure of Interest
Rates: A New Methodology,” Econometrica, Vol. 60, 1992, pages 77-105.


394 Chapter 18

TRADING IS CONTINUOUS

A theoretician trying to develop a realistic price distribution for use in a theoretical
pricing model might first ask how the prices of an underlying contract change over time.
Perhaps not all contracts change prices in the same way. Price changes might, for
example, follow a diffusion process {see Figure 18-3). In a diffusion process there are
smooth and continuous changes from one price to the next, with no gaps between
consecutive prices. Moreover, the longer the period of time between price readings, the
greater the dispersion in prices. An example of a typical diffusion process might be the
temperature readings in a specific location. While the temperature can change very
quickly, there will never be any gaps. If the temperature at one moment is 15° but ata
later time is 18°, then at some intermediate time, even if only very briefly, the
temperature must have also been 16° and 17°. And there is likely to be a greater
temperature change over six weeks than over six days.

Prices might also follow a jump process. In a strict jump process, the price of a
contract remains constant for a period of time, then instantaneously jumps to a new
price, where it again remains constant for some period of time. The way in which central
banks set interest rates is typical of a jump process. In the United States, when the
Federal Reserve sets the discount rate, it remains there until it is fixed at a new rate. It
remains at this new rate until the Federal Reserve again announces a change in the
discount rate. A jump process is a combination of fixed prices and instantaneous jumps.

Most theoretical pricing models assume that trading in the underlying contract
follows a diffusion process. Trading is assumed to be continuous, proceeding 24 hours
per day, seven days per week, without interruption. There can be no gaps in the price
of the underlying contract. If a contract trades at 46.05, and at some later time trades
at 46.08, then at some intermediate time it must have also traded, even if only briefly,
at 46.06 and 46.07. If one were to draw a graph of price changes under a diffusion
process, one would never lift the pencil from the paper.

A diffusion process is a convenient, but clearly inexact, approximation of how
prices change in the real world. Exchange-traded contracts cannot follow a pure
diffusion process because exchanges are not open 24 hours per day. At the end of the
trading day a contract often closes at one price, and then opens the next day at a different
price. This causes a price gap, something which a diffusion process does not permit.
Even during normal trading hours prices may not follow a diffusion process. If major
news hits the market, the impact can be almost instantaneous, causing prices to gap up
or down.
