
R iding the Elliott Wave
Related to Fibonacci methodology, Elliott Wave Theory is named
after Ralph Nelson Elliott, who asserted that price movement is
predictable and can be classified into a series of identifiable waves.
The basic wave structure is a series of five waves comprising the
primary trend movement with three waves comprising the corrective movement. Several rules and guidelines accompany this basic
structure that makes Elliott Wave Theory a complete philosophy of
trading. See Exhibit 3.23.
This trading philosophy is immensely popular with countless global adherents. Included among these adherents are some of the most
competent traders and analysts in the world. Although some detractors may deem Elliott Wave analysis as too subjective to be consistently effective, the fact that scores of successful traders have long

98

c03.indd 98

1/13/09 9:59:17 AM

Getting to the Point & Figure

EXHIBIT 3.23

Elliott Wave
Elliott Wave Theory
A
5
4

B

C

3
2
1

abided by the tenets of this theory makes this a trading methodology
that should not be ignored by foreign exchange traders. The Elliott
Wave trading methodology will be described further in Chapter 5.

G etting to the Point & Figure
Point & figure (p&f ) charting is an older, but still popular, form of
technical analysis that constitutes an entire trading methodology
unto itself. Some may characterize p&f charting as trading based
upon pure price action. This is because only price, which is undeniably the most important aspect of technical analysis, is customarily
included on this type of chart (in the form of Xs and Os). Other
data that can readily be found on bar and candlestick charts, like
time and period opens/closes, are generally excluded on p&f charts.
This leaves only the uncluttered purity of price action. See Exhibit
3.24 for a typical forex point & figure chart.
The primary advantage of using p&f charting methodology over
other types of charts (like bars and candlesticks) lies in the clearer

99

c03.indd 99

1/13/09 9:59:17 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.24

Point & Figure Chart

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

and more simplified representation of trend, support/resistance, and
breakouts. Generally, much of the up-and-down price “noise” that is
so common in the foreign exchange markets is filtered out by p&f
charts, leaving just the clarity of trend movement and direction. As
will be described in Chapter 5, point & figure charting consists primarily of watching for price level breakouts.

C hapter Summar y
Most foreign exchange traders use at least some form of technical analysis in their currency trading.The many tools of technical analysis begin
with the basic chart, of which there are a couple of primary types.

100

c03.indd 100

1/13/09 9:59:17 AM

Chapter Summary

Bar charts and candlestick charts are, by far, the most prevalent types
of charts. From there, we move onto charting timeframes, of which
there are many. Extremely short-term traders may use minute charts
(where each bar/candlestick is worth a minute of price action), while
longer-term traders may use hourly, daily, or weekly charts, among a
myriad of other timeframes.
The real essentials of technical analysis lie partly in the twin
phenomena of support and resistance, where price seems to be
attracted to and repelled by these oft-visited levels. These levels are
usually denoted with horizontal lines across the chart. Going a step
further, trend lines and trend channels are sloped lines that point out
dynamic support and resistance with respect to a directional trend.
Moving averages also excel at outlining the general trend, as well as
showing dynamic support and resistance levels.
Patterns are very common on currency charts. There are several
different types of patterns that are prevalent. Japanese candlestick
patterns that consist of single or multiple candles are, by definition,
found only on candlestick charts. These include dojis, hammers,
engulfing patterns, and so on. Larger, Western-style patterns like
triangles, head-and-shoulders, flags, and pennants can be found on
both bar and candlestick charts. All of these patterns paint a revealing picture to the experienced technical analyst.
Chart indicators also reveal information to technical traders. This
information is primarily in the form of momentum readings and
overbought/oversold levels. Mostly used to confirm trading signals
from other technical analysis tools, indicators and oscillators are usually either overlaid right on top of the price bars/candlesticks, or
separated in an area vertically above or below price.

101

c03.indd 101

1/13/09 9:59:17 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

Some other specialized technical analysis methods have also
gained many adherents in the trading world. Often, comprehensive trading strategies have evolved around these techniques. These
include pivot points, Fibonacci, and Elliott Wave, among others.
Entire books can and have been written about each of these topics. It is in the best interests of every well-rounded foreign exchange
trader to have at least a passing familiarity with these useful analytical methods.
Finally, although point & figure charts will perhaps never be able
to surpass the widespread use of bar and candlestick charts, all serious technical analysts should be familiar with this granddaddy of
charting types. Analysis on point & figure charts is significantly different from analysis performed on bar or candlestick charts. But the
unique insights provided by point & figure charts, especially with
respect to trend, support/resistance, and breakouts, can be extremely
valuable to technical traders in the foreign exchange markets.

102

c03.indd 102

1/13/09 9:59:18 AM

CHAPTER 4

Fundamental
Analysis—What
Drives the Foreign
Exchange Markets
After reading this chapter, you will be
able to:
●

Recognize what really makes the foreign exchange
markets move, and how best to take advantage of this
knowledge.

●

Appreciate how interest rates, inflation, economic
growth, and other fundamental factors contribute to
currency valuation.

●

Identify the economic indicators that are essential for successful foreign exchange traders to know and understand.

●

Apply the fundamental concepts of carry trading and
news trading to your own market strategies.

103

c04.indd 103

1/13/09 10:01:40 AM

Fundamental Analysis

I ntroduction to Fundamental Analysis — Basic
Economics
Like technical analysis, fundamental analysis is another major aspect of
financial analysis used for trading the foreign exchange markets.Whereas
technical analysis is concerned primarily with interpreting price action,
fundamental analysis concentrates on such topics as economic data, government policy, sociopolitical conditions, global news, and the business
cycle. These topics include an array of different variables, most notable
of which include macroeconomic factors like interest rates, inflation,
central bank policy, economic growth, housing, employment, industrial
and commercial production, and the list goes on and on.
Whereas technical analysis excels at providing logical trade entries
and exits, fundamental analysis can provide a framework for formulating a longer-term opinion on the global currency markets. Because
of this, with the notable exception of news trading and carry trading
(which will both be discussed later in this chapter and in Chapter 5),
there is a lack of practical and concrete trading methodologies for
retail forex traders that utilize fundamental analysis exclusively. In
other words, an individual foreign exchange trader could certainly
try to place trades based solely on a fundamental understanding
of economic and political factors. But in doing so, the placement of
trade entries and exits could be considered essentially an arbitrary act
without the precise entry/exit methods of technical analysis.
That being said, however, fundamental analysis is an extremely
vital and indispensable aspect of successful foreign exchange trading.
Fundamental factors, or the market’s perceptions of these factors, are
essentially what make the currency markets move.

104

c04.indd 104

1/13/09 10:01:40 AM

A Healthy Interest in Global Bank Rates

Technicals without the fundamentals makes for just as incomplete a trader as fundamentals alone. These two aspects of foreign
exchange market analysis complement each other extremely well,
and are two of the key ingredients to approaching foreign exchange
trading in an intelligent, well-rounded manner. Even those technical
purists who refuse to heed fundamental information, insisting that
all of this information is already reflected in the price charts, would
be well served to pay attention at least to how central bank policy,
economic data announcements, and major sociopolitical events may
affect price.
While all of these concepts are integral elements of the fundamental approach, the main crux of fundamental analysis clearly lies
in the framework of basic economics. Currencies appreciate and
depreciate in value because of simple economic supply and demand
factors. If there is a progressively higher demand for and/or lower
supply of a certain country’s currency, its value should increase.
Conversely, if there is a progressively lower demand for and/or
higher supply of a currency, its value should decrease. It is the foreign exchange speculator’s job to determine in which direction the
shifting of supply and demand is most likely to occur.
There are many factors that can contribute to this shifting of
supply/demand for the world’s currencies. One of the most important of these factors is interest rates, which will be discussed next.

A Healthy Interest in Global Bank Rates
Global interest rates are one of the primary drivers of currency
exchange rates. Generally speaking, when all other variables are

105

c04.indd 105

1/13/09 10:01:41 AM

Fundamental Analysis

kept equal, rising interest rates (central bank tightening) have a tendency to contribute to an appreciation in a currency. This is because
higher-yielding currencies attract more demand from large institutional investors, who are consistently in search of ways to earn more
on their money. If, on the other hand, there is a lowering of interest
rates (central bank easing), the tendency is towards a depreciation
of the currency. This is due to decreasing demand by the institutional investors, who generally tend to move their money away
from lower-yielding assets. Although this may constitute a simplistic
assumption regarding international capital flows, as so many other
factors contribute to exchange rate movement, interest rates generally tend to exert their influence in this manner.
It should be kept in mind, from a foreign exchange trading perspective, that the appreciation or depreciation in an exchange rate
is less a product of the absolute value of the interest rate than the
direction of change in the interest rate. In other words, although
the current interest rate for a country’s currency is important in
helping the market to determine its exchange value, the direction
of interest rate change is even more important. Just because a currency carries a high-yield does not ensure an appreciation in the
exchange rate. But if the currency’s central bank continues to raise
interest rates and indicates an intention to keep doing so, this can
have a considerable impact on appreciation in the currency.
Changes in interest rates are initiated by central bank policy. In
the United States, this central bank is the Federal Reserve (informally
called the “Fed”). Other major central banks include the European
Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England (BOE), the Bank of
Japan (BOJ), the Bank of Canada (BOC), and the Reserve Bank

106

c04.indd 106

1/13/09 10:01:41 AM

A Healthy Interest in Global Bank Rates

of Australia (RBA). These institutions make decisions that help determine the direction of interest rates.
In adjusting interest rates, central banks seek to achieve a delicate balance between attaining a significant level of economic growth
while staving off excessive inflation. A certain controlled level of inflation is necessary for economic growth, as a country without inflation
is a sign of a stagnant economy. At the same time, however, excessive
inflation can be enormously disadvantageous to an economy and its
consumers. Therefore, each central bank must take both goals of economic growth and inflation control into serious consideration when
setting monetary policy.
In view of these goals, there are a couple of primary reasons
why a central bank would seek to change interest rates. These are
by no means the only reasons, but they are usually among the most
compelling ones for central banks. Generally speaking, central banks
will look to increase interest rates (tighten) in order to help stave off
excessive inflation. Conversely, central banks will look to decrease
interest rates (ease) in order to help stimulate economic growth.
Either way, central banks have the power to impact the foreign
exchange markets enormously by making changes in interest rate
policy.
Often, an actual change in rate policy is not even needed to affect
a currency’s value. Merely a comment hinting at potential policy
intention within a speech by the Fed chairman, for example, is often
sufficient to trigger drastic price moves. This highlights the fact that it
is not as much the actual fundamentals that move currency exchange
rates. Rather, it is more the traders’ collective perceptions and expectations of the fundamentals that truly drive these markets.

107

c04.indd 107

1/13/09 10:01:41 AM

Fundamental Analysis

C arried Away with Trading
Within the context of trading foreign exchange based on fundamental factors, one of the primary trading/investment models
utilized both by institutional and retail traders is the carry trade.
Further information on carry trading will be discussed in Chapter 5,
but the general concept will be described here.
The carry trade is primarily a longer-term fundamental investment strategy used by foreign exchange participants to exploit interest rate differentials between currencies. Used in conjunction with
the high leverage ratios commonly offered in foreign exchange trading, this strategy can produce exceptionally magnified returns while
also carrying a significant degree of risk.
The basic idea behind carry trading is to buy a currency with
a high interest rate while simultaneously selling another currency
with a low interest rate. The net effect is that the trader earns a positive yield based on the differential between the two interest rates.
For example, suppose a foreign exchange trader buys AUD/
JPY, which is a frequently carry-traded pair due to the traditionally wide interest rate differential between the Australian dollar
and the Japanese yen. Buying, or being long, the AUD/JPY is the
same as buying AUD while simultaneously selling JPY. Another
way to look at a long position in AUD/JPY is the concept of borrowing the yen (low interest rate) in order to buy the aussie (high
interest rate). Either way it is viewed, the result is the same—the
trader earns the high rate while paying the low rate, or the trader
earns the differential between the rates (minus the inevitable interest
rate spread).

108

c04.indd 108

1/13/09 10:01:41 AM

C a r r i e d A w a y w i t h Tr a d i n g

If trading with one of the major retail foreign exchange brokers, the carry trader earns daily interest profits for all open positions whose interest rate differential is positive, as in the case of a
long position in AUD/JPY. Based on the size of the trader’s open
position and the amount of leverage used, this positive yield is converted into a monetary amount that is actually paid directly into the
trader’s account each day when the foreign exchange broker “rolls
over” open positions.
As mentioned earlier, because of the highly leveraged nature
of foreign exchange trading, this amount can be substantial. But it
should be kept in mind that interest rates can also work against traders in an equally substantial manner if positions that carry a negative
differential are kept open. To use AUD/JPY once again as an example, it could get very expensive from an interest rate perspective to
hold a short position open in this pair. Short AUD/JPY is the same
as being short aussie (high interest rate) while simultaneously being
long yen (low interest rate), or borrowing at the high interest rate to
buy at the low interest rate. The net result in terms of the rate differential is negative, which means the trader is required to pay a daily
interest amount for the open position based on the negative differential, the size of the trade, and the amount of leverage used.
It is therefore imperative that foreign exchange traders pay close
attention to interest rate differentials on all trades initiated, especially those that will likely remain as open positions for more than a
day. Whether positive or negative, interest rate differentials can have
an extremely significant impact on the daily balance in a foreign
exchange trading account. More on how traders may take advantage
of the positive interest rate differentials so eagerly sought-after by

109

c04.indd 109

1/13/09 10:01:41 AM

Fundamental Analysis

carry traders (while mitigating the inherent exchange rate risks) will
be discussed in Chapter 5.

I ndication of Things to Come — Economic
Indicators
Aside from interest rates and central bank policy, one of the most
vitally important fundamental factors to foreign exchange traders is
economic data. Even technical traders who eschew the use of fundamental analysis should at least know when data are being released (by
referring to any online economic data calendar), but should preferably go even a step further by understanding the ramifications of each
release. Economic data and news announcements help drive both
short-term and long-term movements in currency exchange rates, so
it behooves all foreign exchange traders to know at least what every
major data point means, if not the underlying nuances of each.
On the opposite extreme from the technical-trading purists, a
whole legion of short-term foreign exchange traders actually live
and die by fundamental data and news announcements. During
news time, many of these traders simply sit at their computers—
trigger finger on the buy/sell button and live news feed blasting—
waiting for economic data to be released publicly so a trade can be
entered. In order to profit with a few pips, news traders who trade
foreign exchange in this manner must be quick to make a splitsecond assessment of the news or data, and then place a corresponding trade within milliseconds. The trade must then be closed for
either a profit or a loss, often only seconds after the trade was entered.
This is not an easy method of trading, and it most certainly is not for

110

c04.indd 110

1/13/09 10:01:41 AM

Indication of Things to Come—Economic Indicators

everyone. But many of those who can make it work claim to reap
consistent success with this method. Further details on news trading
will be discussed later in this chapter and in Chapter 5.
When economic data are released, currency pairs relating
to the specific release often react in extreme ways. For news traders,
the best possible reaction is for price to initiate a one-way run without looking back. Often, however, extreme nondirectional volatility
is the order of the day, where price just seems to jump up and down,
whipsawing every position in sight. This is every foreign exchange
trader’s nightmare. In any event, the major, market-moving economic data indicators need to be identified and studied in order for
a trader to have any chance of trading currencies successfully during
and after data releases.
Following are the key economic indicators relevant to the U.S.
dollar. These indicators constitute the major economic data reports
released periodically to the public by government agencies and private entities. Of course, there are many other indicators that come
out every day affecting the many non-U.S. currencies. But since the
vast majority of trading volume in the foreign exchange markets is
centered primarily on U.S. dollar-based currency pairs (more than
90%), the following is an excellent representative sampling of the
fundamental indicators that help drive the global currency markets.
Within this list, the relative importance and market-moving potential of each indicator may change from month-to-month and yearto-year, so the indicators are listed in no particular order:
• Gross Domestic Product (GDP)—GDP is perhaps the most consistently followed and studied economic indicator for foreign

111

c04.indd 111

1/13/09 10:01:42 AM

Fundamental Analysis

exchange traders. This is because it is virtually an all-encompassing
measure of economic growth and output. Released quarterly
and quoted on an annualized basis, the GDP is the total market
value of all goods and services produced by the economy within
a given period of time. Real GDP, which is GDP adjusted for
inflation, takes into account price level changes, and so is considered a more accurate reflection of production than the original GDP percentage. When the real GDP report is released on a
quarterly basis, foreign exchange markets often move in a substantial manner. This is due to the fact that real GDP is perhaps the
best single assessment of an economy’s health available to market
participants. Therefore, if there is one economic indicator that all
foreign exchange traders should be aware of, it is the real GDP
statistic.
• Employment situation—The Employment Situation Report is
put out monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and includes
two vitally important surveys that summarize the nation’s labor
situation: the Household Survey, and the Establishment Survey.
Within these surveys are some figures that have been known
in the past several years to move the foreign exchange markets
significantly. Most notable of these figures is the Non-Farm
Payrolls (NFP) data (within the Establishment Survey), which
has been one of the most anticipated and traded benchmark statistics by foreign exchange traders in recent years. At the height
of its popularity, legions of foreign exchange traders have been
known to sit eagerly at their trading stations on the first Friday
of every month, waiting nervously for the NFP numbers to be
released. Like these NFP numbers, the unemployment rate data
