
328
t

I

Prescription

Exchange Rates
Exchange rate misalignments have become a major source of disruption for the world economy. They make it unsafe to make longterm investments, they endanger the value of investments already
made, and they are at the root of protectionist sentiment in the
United States. The market mechanism fails to bring currencies
back into alignment. On the contrary, speculation tends to exaggerate currency moves. As we have seen, the system of freely
floating currencies is cumulatively destabilizing.
The question is: what can be done about it? A number of arrangements are possible. Target zones, either tacit or explicit, constitute the least radical and therefore the most often mentioned
alternative. We could also return to a system of fixed exchange
rates, with or without relying on gold as the standard of value.
Or, most daring of all, we could establish an international currency.
Whichever arrangement is chosen, a number of problems need
to be resolved. First and foremost is the problem of international
capital movements. The transfer of capital across national frontiers is highly desirable and ought to be encouraged; but speculative capital movements, as we have seen, are cumulatively
destabilizing. We need a system that renders speculation unprofitable. Ideally, currency fluctuations ought to be kept within the
confines of interest rate differentials; but that would entail a system of more or less fixed exchange rates.
Target zones are unlikely to discourage speculation. On the
contrary, they may constitute an invitation to speculate against
the authorities with limited risk. By endorsing a set of target
zones, the authorities would expose themselves to speculative
attack at a time and place chosen by the speculators. History
shows that under these conditions the speculators usually win. It
could be argued that an explicit target zone system constitutes the
worst of all possible worlds because it would reward speculation
within the system as well as encouragino speculative attacks
against the system.
Unannounced target zones have a somewhat better chance of
success. They would pit the authorities against speculators in an
intricate cat and mouse game that the authorities have a chance
of winning, provided they act in unison and mobilize larger re-

Toward an International Central Bank

329

sources than speculatqrs. Since they control the ultimate weapon
-the printing press-their task is not impossible. A strong currency can always be prevented from appreciating futher provided
the central bank is willing to supply it in unlimited quantities.
The curious fact is tha! central banks have rarely had the nerve to
do so.
If the authorities sljcceeded in stablizing exchange rates, hot
money would eventually cool off and find its way into long-term
investment-an essential prerequisite for a sounder world economy. But stabilizing the relative values of the major currencies is
not enough: the value of all the currencies taken together must
also be kept stable if ~e are to avoid inflationary and deflationary
excesses on a worldwide scale. Gold has served as a stabilizer
throughout history and it may play that role again in one form or
another, although it has one great drawback at the present time:
the bulk of fresh supplies is produced by two prison administrations-namely, South Africa and the Soviet Union. In any case,
the problem is not only one of finding a suitable monetary base;
given the reflexivity of credit, the credit structure that is erected
on that base also needs to be regulated. What is needed is an
institution that coordinates the growth of credit on a worldwide
scale: an international central bank.
At this point in the argument, the other major problem areas,
namely, international debt and commodity prices with special
reference to oil, also need to be considered.
rYir

International Debt
The burden of accumulated debt continues to weigh heavily on
lenders and borrowers alike. It was hoped that they could grow
their way out of the problem, but calculations failed to take into
account the erosion of collateral values that occurs when debts
are liquidated. In the case of balance-of-payments loans, the collateral consists of exports. Less developed countries export
mainly commodities that face inelastic demand: as they try to
increase their exports, commodity prices come under pressure.
Some of the major debtor countries managed to enter what I
have called Phase 3 of the adjustment process but others seem
permanently mired in a deficit position. Raising the production
of traditional export commodities has become a dead end. Other

330
I

I

Prescription

avenues of growth need to be pursued. Exporting more sophisticated products is one possibility, but it is running into the road
block of protectionism. That leaves domestic growth in less developed countries as the main route to recovery. Politically, it is
highly desirable, because the United States may be more willing
to absorb imports if exports showed some signs of picking up;
moreover, public opinion in debtor countries is increasingly insistent on domestic growth.
The Baker Plan was designed to bring relief to heavily indebted
countries by increasing the flow of new lending. The funds would
come partly from international institutions, notably the World
Bank and the inter-American Development Bank, and partly from
commercial banks. Commercial banks were asked to pledge $20
billion over three years. The loans would have cross-default
claims, which would make them more secure than purely commercial loans. When the resources of the World Bank are exhausted, the administration would go to Congress to ask for a
capital increase.
The plan is a step in the right direction, but it leaves two problems unresolved: one is the accumulation of additional debt by
the borrowing countries at a time when they cannot meet their
already existing obligations; the other is the accumulation of
doubtful loans on the books of the commercial banks at a time
when they already have too many such loans. The plan would
mitigate the second problem because a large portion of new loans
would come from government institutions, but it would not eliminate it altogether. On the other hand, it lays itself open to the
accusation that it constitutes a bailout for the banks. This will
make it difficult to get Congress to approve an increase in the
World Bank's capital.
It is clear that the plan does not go far enough. It fails to deal
with the legacy of past excesses. In the absence of government
intervention the accumulated debt would have been liquidated in
catastrophic fashion. If a policy of intervention is to succeed, it
must reduce the accumulated debt in an orderly manner.
The experience of the last few years shows that, once the weight
of accumulated debt passes a certain critical point, it cannot be
reduced by a normal process of adjustment. In most Latin American countries, adjustment has been pushed to the limits of endurance and negative resource transfers have reached and already
passed their maximum. Nevertheless, external debt has continued

Toward an International Central Bank

331

to accumulate and debt ratios have showed little, if any, improvement. Moreover, internal debt has been rising at an alarming rate.
In every advanced economy, special legal procedures have been
established to deal with excessive indebtedness. Bankruptcy law
serves to assure the orgerly liquidation of bad debt without undue
economic disruption. We are badly in need of some kind of bankruptcy procedure for ipternational debt.
The principles of a bankruptcy reorganization are simple. The
clock is stopped at a certain point in time. All existing assets and
obligations are thrown into a pot, to be sorted out in lengthy
litigation. In the meantime, the entity is allowed to function, if it
is viable, free of the burdens of the past. The obligations of the
ongoing entity take precedence over the obligations of its predecessor. It is this principle that allows the bankrupt entity to continue functioning.
,
International lending knows no equivalent procedure for settling bad debt. There have been many precedents where debts
have not been paid in,full. Usually, nonpayment has resulted in
total default and the situation was normalized only several decades later, when the lenders were happy to settle for a few cents
on the dollar. The most comprehensive attempts at debt reorganization without total default were the Dawes and Young plans for
Germany in 1924 and 1929, respectively, and they did not have a
happy outcome.
The example of domestic bankruptcy procedure$Ts not directly
applicable to the present situation because the amounts involved
are so large that, if payments were suspended even temporarily,
the lenders would also go bust; but the principle of drawing a line
under the past is the correct one.
At present, all market participants are aware of an unresolved
problem. Foreign lenders seek to keep their commitments to the
minimum and domestic capital seeks shelter abroad. The economies of the heavily indebted countries continue to languish and
political pressures intensify. These trends need to be reversed.
We are dealing with a reflexive process. A reversal of trend requires a climactic event whose impact is sufficient to alter the
prevailing bias. Only a comprehensive scheme of reorganization
would constitute such an event.
I am not in a position to put forward a concrete plan of action.
Such a plan would require a great deal of preparation and negotiation. All I can do here is to provide a rough sketch of what it

332
I

I

Prescription

may look like. It will have to deal with at least five major topics:
(1) the treatment of preexisting debt; (2) the provision of new
credit; (3) the preservation of the banking system; (4) economic
policies in the debtor countries; and (5) the repatriation of flight
capital and the attraction of foreign investment. Senator Bradley
proposed a plan in June 1986 that touches on all of these p0ints.l
Henry Kaufman outlined a plan very similar to my own on December 4, 1986.2These contributions are moving the discussion
in the right direction.
The preexisting debt could be consolidated into long-term negotiable bonds with concessionary interest rates. The bonds
would sell at a fraction of their par value and the banks holding
the bonds would suffer substantial losses. To protect them, banks
would be allowed to write down their bonds to the market value
gradually over a period of years. During that time the bonds could
be used at their gradually depreciating official value as collateral
for borrowing at the discount window of the central bank. This
would prevent a run on those banks whose financial positions
had been impaired by the reorganization: they would be allowed
to earn their way out of a hole.
To reorganize preexisting debt is not enough; a continuing flow
of new credit must be secured to enable the heavily indebted
countries to recover. Commercial banks cannot be counted on.
They should not have provided credit for balance-of-payments
purposes in the first place; they have learned their lesson and
would be unwilling to lend even if they did not suffer any losses
on their existing commitments. Balance-of-payments lending
ought to be the province of an international lending institution
that has the clout to insist that borrowing countries follow appropriate economic policies.
At present, the major internal problem in the heavily indebted
countries is inflation. As long as the servicing of foreign debt
generates a large budget deficit there is little hope of curbing it.
But once the debt burden is reduced, domestic reforms would
have a better chance of succeeding. With less inflation real interest rates would rise, flight capital would be encouraged to return,
and perhaps even foreign capital could be attracted once again.
To provide an adequate flow of new credit, the World Bank (or
a new institution designed for the purpose) would need a large
amount of capital. At present, the political will to make the necessary capital available is missing: any enlargement of interna-

Toward an International Central Bank

333

tional financial institutions would be perceived as a bailout for
the banks or for the debtor countries or for both. A comprehensive
scheme that would require both creditors and debtors to contribute to the limits of their abilities ought to be able to overcome
these objections. The new loans would not go to service existing
debt; they would serve to stimulate the world economy at a time
when the liquidation of bad debts is having a depressing effect
and stimulation is badiy needed.

Oil
There is a painless way in which the capital needed by the World
Bank could be obtained. It involves a grand design that combines
an oil stabilization scheme with a solution to the international
debt problem. I first thought of it in 1982. I outlined it in an article
that was rejected with scathing comments and never published. It
was considered too far-fetched then and it will probably be considered the same today. The interesting point about the article is
that the problem that prompted its writing has not gone away.
The article is just as timely now as it was when it was written.
The reader can judge for himself because I shall reproduce it more
or less verbatim.
4-

AN INTERNATIONAL BUFFER STOCK SCHEME FOR OIL *

This article will outline what could be achieved by international cooperation if the willingness to cooperate were present.
There are many possibilities: I shall focus on the optimum that
could be achieved. The point in doing so is to show that a workable solution is conceivable. This may help generate the will to
put it into effect.
The optimum solution would require an agreement between the
major oil-importing and oil-exporting countries. It would replace
OPEC with an organization that would combine the essential features of a cartel-price fixing and production quotas-with those
of an international buffer stock scheme.
It is not necessary or even desirable that all the consuming and
producing countries should participate. Cooperation of the industrialized countries and the "moderate" members of OPEC is indis-

* Written in 1982.

334
t

Prescription
pensable, but the scheme could work without including
producers like Iran, Libya, or Algeria.
The scheme would work as follows. Production and consumption quotas would be established. The aggregate amount of the
quotas would be in excess of the present level of consumption.
The excess would go into a buffer stock. Since it is expensive to
store oil, the buffer stock would exist mainly on paper: the oil
would be kept in the ground.
Payment would be made not directly to the producing country
but into a blocked account at a special facility of the IMF. The
funds would be held in favor of the producing countries whose
production quotas were not filled by actual sales. The oil would
be paid for by those consuming countries that did not fill their
consumption quotas with actual purchases. It would be held on
the books of the buffer stock authority at the disposal of the country that paid for it. The buffer stock authority, in turn, would hold
the oil in the ground of the producing country until needed. Obviously, the buffer stock authority would have to be satisfied that
the oil in the ground is secure.
The consuming countries would impose a levy on imported oil.
They would rebate a portion of the oil levy to those producing
countries that participate in the scheme. Nonparticipating producers would not be entitled to a rebate to penalize them for not
participating. The rebates would also be deposited into the
blocked accounts at the special facility of the IMF. The blocked
accounts would bear interest at a very low rate, say 1%.
Producers with large outstanding debts, such as Mexico, Venezuela, Nigeria, and Indonesia, could use their blocked accounts
to repay their debt; countries with surpluses, such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, would build up credit balances.
Less developed countries would be exernpted from having to
participate in the buffer stock scheme. They would then have the
advantage of being able to buy oil at a cheaper price than the
industrialized countries. Their absence would not endanger the
scheme.
For purposes of illustration, let us assume that the benchmark
price were kept at $34; the levy would be quite large, say, $17,
half of which, $8.50, would be rebated to producers. Quotas
would be fixed quite high so that the buffer stock started accumulating at a daily rate of say 3 million barrels. If the industrialized countries were importing oil at a rate of only 15 million
barrels a day, and 80% of the oil came from participating producers, they would realize $55.8 billion a year from the levy and pay
out $28 billion for buffer stock purchases. The rest would contrib-

Toward an International Central Bank
ute to a reduction of budget deficits putting the industrialized
countries in a favorable position to provide the necessary equity
capital to an enlarged World Bank. The IMF special facility would
receive $65 billion a year, all for the credit of producing countries:
$37.2 billion from the producers' share of the oil levy and $28
billion from the buffbr stock. By comparison, the net increase of
international lending was about $60 billion at its peak in 1980
I
and 1981.
What would happen to the market price of oil? Since the
blocked account pays only 1% interest, there is an inducement to
make physical sales rather than sales to the buffer stock. The price
paid by the buffer stock would therefore serve as a ceiling: the
free market price would settle somewhere below the benchmark
price, less the unrebated portion of the levy, that is, $25.50. For
consumers and producers in the industrialized countries, the
price would of course include the levy. Should the price rise
above the benchmark it would be an indication that demand is
strong and it would be time to raise production quotas.
How to adjust quotas and prices presents a gamut of tough
problems. Most atterhpts at market regulation flounder because a
suitable adjustment mechanism is lacking. This is true even of
the international monetary system: the Bretton Woods arrangement broke down because of the inflexibility of the price of gold.
The more the scheme relies on price as the adjustment mechanism, the better its chances of survival. Recognizing this principle, the buffer stock should be used only to give the price
mechanism time to do its work. That means that afterthe initial
buildup of a buffer stock, whenever it is beginning to be drawn
upon there would be an upward adjustment, first in production
quotas and then in prices. When the buffer stock is beginning to
build up again, there would be a reduction in production quotas
down to the minimum established at the outset.
The allocation of production quotas is one of the thorniest problems. Initial quotas would be based on the irreducible financial
needs of the countries involved; as the global amount of production is increased the allocation of the increased amounts would
have to be guided more by considerations of unused production
capacity, size of reserves, and rate of increase or decrease of reserves. The Saudi quota, for instance, would have to rise more
than the Algerian or Venezuelan. Even if some formula could be
developed, there would be a large element of discretionary judgment involved.
Eventually, as production capacity is more fully utilized, the
unwillingness of individual producers to increase their quota

Prescription
could serve as the trigger mechanism for increasing prices. Again
there would be an element of judgment involved.
The allocation of consumption quotas would be quite simple
by comparison: estimates using actual consumption figures could
serve as the basis.
To exercise discretionary powers, authority is required. How
such an authority would be constituted and the voting rights divided presents the most difficult question of all. It can be settled
only by hard bargaining;the outcome would reflect the bargaining
power and bargaining skills of the parties involved.
Undoubtedly, there would be a major shift of power from the
oil-producing to the industrialized countries. That is only appropriate when OPEC is being saved from collapse. It is my contention that the collapse of OPEC would have such calamitous
consequences that it would have to be prevented one way or
another. One of the major arguments in favor of embarking on the
comprehensive scheme outlined here is that the industrialized
countries might as well gain the maximum benefit from a development that they would have to acquiesce in anyhow. How much
they can gain depends on the skill, courage, and cohesion they
demonstrate. The scheme outlined here would be much more
advantageous than patching up OPEC.
The ultimate merit of the scheme would depend on how the
funds accumulating at the IMF special facility would be used.
The amounts involved are very large: larger than the accumulation of international debt at its peak; they would remain very large
even when the buffer stock stopped growing. The funds should
be sufficient to finance a global reorganization plan for sovereign
debt.
The blocked funds held by the IMF would be lent to the World
Bank to provide credit to hecsrily indebted countries; they could
also be used to buy up their outstanding debt at a discount. The
cash income earned on these loans could, in turn, be used to
unblock the blocked accounts at the IMF.
How would the various parties to the scheme fare? That would
depend largely on the terms arrived at by negotiations. Nevertheless, the broad outlines are clear.
The industrialized countries would give up the benefits of a
lower oil price in the near term in exchange for long-range price
stability, the accumulation of a buffer stock, a solution for the
international debt problem, and a significant contribution to government revenues. They would also have the benefit of protecting
their domestic energy and oil sewice industries, if any.
Producing countries that participated would be assured of a

Toward an International Central Bank

337

market for their oil production at a volume substantially higher
than at present. The price they receive would be less than at
present, but higher than it would be if OPEC collapsed. They
would have two powerful inducements to participate: the rebate
on the oil levy and the ability to sell to the buffer stock. It is true
that both would be palid into blocked accounts at the IMF, but oilproducing countries *with debts would have access to the accounts for debt repayinent purposes; those with surpluses would
have their funds unblocked only after a long delay.
The less developed non-oil-producing countries would obtain
substantial relief from being able to buy oil at a cheaper price
than industrialized countries. Both producing and consuming
countries would behefit from the global debt reorganization
scheme.
This article does not deal with the problem of how such a
comprehensive scheme could be brought into existence-how
one could get from here to there. Probably it would require a
worse crisis than is currently visible to bring the various parties
together.
