
…it is important to
understand that in
trading, as in real life,
risk is an integral part of
the process and one that
deserves great respect. To
earn a considerable
return, one must take a
comparable risk. It is
essential, therefore, to
have accurate measures
of both risk and reward.
Alejandro Knoepffler
Cipher Investment Management

Life shrinks or expands
in proportion to one’s
courage.
Anais Nin

274

“The computer model tells
us when to get in and
when to get out,” he says.
“The computer
understands what the
price is telling us about
the trend of the market.”
What does the software
look at, exactly?
“Volatility, price behavior.
How much does it change
every day? We’re trying to
use as much data as we
can get to interpret
potential future price.”
Successful positions
remain in place for about
six months; Ken Tropin’s
programs bail out of
unsuccessful trades after
a month. “All of the
systems are designed to
risk modest amounts of
capital and to stay with
winners as long as
possible.”
Ken Tropin: Programmed to Succeed
Institutional Investor; June 2003

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

for just another 30 days, we would have been forced to take
a huge profit. We both vowed never to calculate how many
millions we left on the table.”42
If I critique how Melamed traded from a trend following point of
view, I can see why his 1979 silver trade was his “worst trade.” To
begin with, he had no predefined entry criteria. He never gives a
reason why he and his partner were bullish on silver in 1978, nor
does he explain why he entered the silver market other than
because it was trading at such a low price ($5.00). When the price
of silver started to increase, he attempted to find out how high it
would go, which, as all trend followers know, is impossible.
However, because he had no clearly defined exit rationale, he was
uncertain when to get out, unlike trend followers, who know how
they will handle their profits before they ever enter a trade. Without
a strategy, Melamed fell back on conventional trading wisdom that
buying higher highs is wrong. Melamed used fundamentals to
determine that the price of silver would not continue to increase
and set a profit target to get out of the trade. By having a profit
target, instead of an exit plan, Melamed lost out on millions of
dollars of potential profit.
What is a lesson learned? Rob Romaine, a long-time trend
follower, notes:
“The value of a disciplined trading [systems] approach is
that it allows you to design your strategy during
nonstressful times. Then, when the markets are tough, you
need only to execute your plan rather than being forced to
face difficult decisions under pressure when you are most
likely to make mistakes.”

Key Points
• Trend followers are right for the trend and wrong at each end.
• Seykota: “A system should support and reflect the attitude of a
trader.”
• Seykota: “There is no best system any more than there is a
best car. There might however be a best car for you.”
• Seykota: “If you can’t afford to lose, you can’t afford to trade.”
• Money is only a means of keeping score.

Chapter 10 • Trading Systems

• Taking losses should be easy. You should have them quantified
before ever entering the market.
• Trust your trade. If you can’t trust it, don’t trade.
• The exact turning point, the top or bottom, can’t be known
until it is over and a matter of record.
• After you take your signals and enter, trading becomes a
waiting game.
• The more volatile the market, the less you risk. The less
volatile the market, the more you risk.

275

This page intentionally left blank

11

The Game
“Trends come and go. Trend followers do too.
Some stay longer than others.”
—Ed Seykota1

In the book Absolute Returns, Alexander Ineichen stresses that
trading is a “game.” He sees no rules for the game except the
constant of change, but more importantly, he reminds us that it is
crucial to avoid becoming the “game.” There are three types of
players in the game:
• Those who know they are in the game.
• Those who don’t know they are in the game.
• Those who don’t know they are in the game and have become
the game.2
If, within a half of an hour of playing poker (or trading for that
matter), you don’t know who the patsy is, you’re the patsy, or as
Ineichen calls it “the game.” I have introduced those traders who
didn’t know they were in the game and therefore became the game
in the big events of the Long Term Capital Management hedge fund
implosion, the Barings Bank collapse, and the October 2008 market
crash. I introduced those traders and investors who did not know
277

Larry Hite described his
conversation with a friend
who couldn’t understand
his absolute adherence to a
mechanical trading
system. His friend asked,
“Larry, how can you trade
the way you do? Isn’t it
boring?” Larry replied, “I
don’t trade for excitement;
I trade to win.”

278

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

they were in the game pursuing Holy Grails that never panned out.
And I introduced trend followers who knew they were in a game and
brought an edge to the table every time they played. If you know
trading is a game and you want to be a part of it, these are stark
choices.

Slow Acceptance
Many turtles claim the
biggest reason they no
longer tolerate immense
drawdowns or strive for
colossal returns is
because customers want
a more conservative
approach. Most say
striving to meet this
request has been the
biggest change.4

…a CTA [trend following]
investment is an
investment like any
other investment. Periods
of above-average
performance are
alternated with periods of
below-average
performance. As soon as
the inevitable, less
attractive market
environment commences,
investors with wrong
expectations are likely to
become disgruntled. They
will start complaining
and with good reason:
They will not understand
why they lose money.
Harold M. de Boer, director of
research, Transtrend B.V.
AIMA Journal, December 2003

In case you’re concerned that my writing will create a whole
new generation of trend followers and their impact in the markets
will negatively affect the frequency, direction, and intensity of
trends (as well as an ability to make money), take note of wisdom
from long-time trend follower Keith Campbell:
“We are trend followers, not trend generators. At the
beginning or end of a major trend, we may provide a little
bump or a minor goose, but it will be an extremely
superficial, temporary effect …”3
Campbell is correct. Trend followers don’t generate trends. In
Chapter 3, “Performance Data,” recall professor Larry Harris’ point:
Traders play zero-sum games for many reasons. Not all play to win.
However, trend followers do play the zero-sum game to win. And
let’s face it, this attitude can cause people to feel intimidated or
defensive. At the end of the day, for trend following trading to lose
its effectiveness, intimidated, defensive-minded investors would
have to make dramatic changes in behavior, including the following:
• People would no longer buy and hold: Those believing in
fundamental analysis (the vast majority of market participants)
would have to switch how they trade. They would need to
cease buy-and-hold long-only approaches and start trading as
trend followers. Do they change now even after 2008?
Doubtful.
• People would start trading long and short: Most do not sell
“short” because of fear, ignorance, or confusion. They trade
long only. That changes when?
• People would dump mutual funds: That will be hard to do
with retirement programs literally mandating the average Joe
be 100 percent invested in mutual funds.

279

Chapter 11 • The Game

• People would embrace money management: Most traders don’t
think about how much to buy or how much to sell. They only
worry about when to buy and rarely think about when to sell.
The “how much” question is not even on the table.
• People would disengage their emotions and egos from
trading: As long as there are human beings involved in the
trading process, there will be excessive reactions and trends to
exploit.
Let’s be honest, the majority of investors are more comfortable
with the status quo—even if that means losing their life savings.
Sustaining the focus, self-discipline, and recognition of the reality
that almost all of their market knowledge is faulty is overwhelming.
Millions would rather simply watch CNBC and Cramer or chat
online than learn how to trade correctly for profit.

The broad application of
these principles globally
in markets all around the
world, Chinese porcelain,
gold, silver, markets that
exist, that don’t exist
today, markets that
others are making lots of
money in that we’re not
trading. We will
eventually start
broadening out and
realizing that trend
following is a great way
to trade. What other way
can you trade and get a
handle on risk?
Jerry Parker5

Blame Game
Not surprisingly, trend followers are sometimes accused of
throwing the markets into disarray. Whenever a stock tanks, a
bubble bursts, or a scandal hits, winning traders catch blame. The
blame is never affixed to the little old lady in Omaha, who thought
that some dotcom-invented web site would replace Walmart, and
consequently lost her life savings gambling on dotcom stocks. The
blame is never placed on the masses who were gambling that the
Dow would go up forever only to see it crater in October/November
2008. No one wants to take responsibility for their losses, and who
better to target than the winners when the mob is feeling uneasy
and panicky. Here are some of my favorite misconceptions that
purportedly make trend followers the bad guys:
• They trade futures: The vast majority of trend following traders
trade on regulated exchanges. We can all trade there. If we can
all trade there, why are trend followers singled out?
• They use leverage: Great traders use the tools at their disposal,
one of which is leverage. The key is not to overdo it like so
many on Wall Street did.
• They cause worldwide panics: Trend followers do not generate
trends or cause worldwide panics; they react to unexpected
events. They have no crystal ball.

Future shock [is] the
shattering stress and
disorientation that we
induce in individuals by
subjecting them to too
much change in too short
a time.
Alvin Toffler

280

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

• They don’t invest, they just trade: Reality? The markets are for
trading, not for investing. The markets reward winners, not
losers. We can all choose, so if we choose wrong, it’s time to
look in the mirror.
• Long Term Capital Management (LTCM): The LTCM hedge
fund (like the many more that failed in the 10 years after its
death) proved that bad traders with bad strategy fail. Trend
following has not failed.6
Trend followers have also been condemned for making money
on the downside:
“[Traders] have always been an easy target for the press
whenever the public is looking for someone to blame for
volatile markets, [and] … the press have singled out ‘the
short sellers’… Perception or reality, many will now picture
[traders] as bad boys, or ‘boys having a bit of fun’… Making
money in downside markets is portrayed as obscene and to
blame for additional turbulence. The industry is not about
‘bad boys’ manipulating the market and gambling; it is
about specific trading skills practiced by highly
experienced [traders] who are rewarded on performance
alone.”7
Most battles are won
before they are ever
fought.
General George S. Patton

The attitude that “making money in down markets” is
“obscene” is in itself obscene. The market has rules. You can go
long or you can go short. All serious players trying to make a dollar
should know the rules and if you don’t know the rules, whose fault
is that?

Understand the Game
Whether you want to trade for yourself, place money with a
trend follower, manage money for clients, or whether you are an
established trend follower with clients, trading for other people
presents challenges both trader and client must deal with. Original
turtle trader Jerry Parker, for one, thinks trend followers could do
better at explaining their skill set:
“I think another mistake we made was defining ourselves as
managed futures, where we immediately limit our universe.
Is our expertise in that, or is our expertise in systematic

Chapter 11 • The Game

trend following or model development. So maybe we trend
follow with Chinese porcelain. Maybe we trend follow with
gold and silver, or stock futures, or whatever the client
needs. We need to look at the investment world globally and
communicate our expertise of systematic trading…People
look at systematic and computerized trading with too much
skepticism. But a day will come when people will see that
systematic trend following is one of the best ways to limit
risk and create a portfolio that has some reasonable
expectation of making money…I think we’ve miscommunicated to our clients what our expertise really is.”8
In an unpredictable world, trend following is one of the best
tools to manage risk and, ultimately, uncertainty. Although that is
true, it doesn’t make it easy to teach. Richard Dennis, for example,
had some difficult times during his career and, as a result, is often
blamed for perceived failures of trend following. However, to
dismiss trend following based on Dennis’ managed money attempts
alone discounts the performance data of David Harding, Bill Dunn,
Jerry Parker, Keith Campbell, and other trend followers such as
Christian Baha, Bernard Drury, Michael Clarke, TransTrend,
Sunrise Capital, and Larry Hite over the past 30 years. That said,
Dennis was honest about his lesson learned about clients:
“I certainly learned customers have a lower appetite for risk
than I might … and that is probably incorporated into my
risk appetite today. It’s easier to trade for one’s self than it
is to trade for other people.”9

Decrease Leverage; Decrease Return
Richard Dennis’ Turtle students (see my second book, The
Complete TurtleTrader) were originally instructed to make as much
money as possible. They had no restrictions except to shoot for
home runs. They were absolute return traders while under Dennis’
guidance. However, later on, when they went out on their own to
manage money for clients, some changed how they traded. Many of
them accepted clients who demanded less leverage and ultimately
less return. As a result, their performance records have sometimes
been far less impressive than the old pro trend followers.

281

The Sharpe ratio appears
at first blush to reward
returns (good) and
penalize risks (bad).
Upon closer inspection,
things are not so simple.
The standard deviation
takes into account the
distance of each return
from the mean, positive
or negative. By this token,
large positive returns
increase the perception of
risk as though they could
as easily be negative,
which for a dynamic
investment strategy may
not be the case. Large
positive returns are
penalized and therefore
the removal of the highest
returns from the
distribution can increase
the Sharpe ratio: a case of
“reductio ad absurdum”
for Sharpe ratio as a
universal measure of
quality.
David Harding, Winton Capital,
www.hedgefundsreview.com

282

