Suppose another week passes and the value of the asset has fallen to 99.07. Using
the new market conditions, the 100 call would now have a delta of 46. In order to
replicate the call position, the hedger must now sell off 16% of the asset, so that he owns
only 46% of his original holding.

Notice what the hedger is doing. He is periodically rehedging his original holding
to create a position with the same delta characteristics as the call. If he continues to do
this over the ten-week period, he has, in effect, created a ten-week call at an exercise
price of 100.

The reader may have already realized that we are simply repeating the example in
Figure 5-1, but in a slightly different form. In that example, we purchased an under-
priced call and replicated the sale of the same call through a continuous rehedging
process. In our current example we are also replicating the call through a continuous
rehedging process. But here we want to purchase the call rather than sell it. All our
adjustments are therefore the opposite of those in Figure 5-1. Note also that at week ten
(expiration), instead of liquidating the position, as we did in Figure 5-1, we plan to buy
in the remainder of the asset. It was always our intention to retain our entire holding of
the asset at expiration. The replicated position in our current example is shown in Figure
13-8.

In order to replicate the call, the hedger will have to buy back some of the asset
when the market rises and sell some of the asset when the market falls. The unfavorable
adjustments (buying high, selling low) suggests that there will be a cost associated with
this rehedging process. What will the cost be? If the replication process offers the same
protection as owning a 100 put, then one might expect the cost of the replication
Process to be the same as the theoretical value of the ten week 100 put. This ts indeed
the case. Using the previously listed inputs, the Black-Scholes model yields a theoretical
value for the 100 put of 2.55. This is identical to the cost of the replication process
described in Figure 13-8.

The rehedging process is an attempt to replicate the automatic rehedging charac-
teristics of the option. As a hedge against an underlying position, an option has the very
desirable characteristic of offering greater protection as the market moves adversely, and
less protection as the market moves favorably. In effect, the option automatically
rehedges itself to fit the required amount of protection. This is the influence of the
gamma on the option’s delta. When a hedger attempts to replicate the characteristics of
an option by continuously rehedging the underlying position himself, he is simply trying
to replicate the automatic rehedging (gamma) characteristics of the option. The cost of
the option, or the cost of the rehedging process, is the price the hedger pays for the
option’s gamma characteristics.

Since we need to continuously compute the delta to replicate an option through a
rehedging process, this method of replication requires us to use a theoretical pricing
model. We are therefore likely to encounter many of the same problems which we
encounter anytime we use a theoretical pricing model to evaluate an option. Is the
model itself correct? Do we have the right inputs? Leaving aside the question of the


Hedging with Options 271

Figure 13-8
% of Asset
Asset Delta of Needed for Required
Week Value 100 call Replication Adjustment
0 1014.35 57 57% sell 43%
4 102.26 62 62% buy 5%
2 99.07 46 46% sell 16%
3 400.39 53 53% buy 7%
4 400.76 56 56% buy 3%
5 103.59 74 74% buy 18%
6 99,26 45 45% sell 29%
7 98.28 35 38% sell 10%
8 99.98 50 50% buy 15%
9 103,78 93 93% buy 43%
10 102.54 100 100% buy 7%

model’s correctness, anyone wishing to use this method will have to come up with a
reasonable volatility estimate. If the volatility estimate turns out to be too high or too
low, the cost of replicating the option will be more or less than originally expected. But
notice that the cost of replication will always be the right cost. If the market is more
volatile than expected, the cost will be greater in terms of required adjustments. But the
value of the option would also have been greater. Higher volatility means a higher
theoretical value. In the same way, if the market is less volatile than expected, the cost
will be less in terms of required adjustments. The value of the option would also have
been less. Lower volatility means a lower theoretical value.

This process of continuously rehed ging an underlying position to replicate an option
position is often referred to as portfolio insurance. The method can be used to protect
any long or short position against adverse movement, but it is most commonly used by
fund managers who wish to insure the value of the securities in a portfolio against a
drop in value. For example, suppose a manager has a portfolio of securities currently
valued at $100 million. If he wants to insure the value of the portfolio against a drop in
value below $90 million, he can either buy a $90 million put, or he can replicate the
characteristics of a $90 million call, If he is unable to find someone willing to sell him
a $90 million put, he can evaluate the characteristics of the $90 million call and
continuously buy or sell the portion of his portfolio required to replicate the call position.
In effect, he has created his own put.

Unfortunately, the costs of buying and selling a large number of securities in odd
amounts may be quite high. While the concept of portfolio insurance may be attractive
from a theoretical perspective, the transaction costs may make the process too expensive
to be of practical value. Is there any way a fund manager can use portfolio insurance
while keeping transaction costs within acceptable bounds? One common method
involves using futures contracts as a substitute for the portfolio holding. If the mix of
Securities in a portfolio approximates an index, and futures contracts are available on
that index, the manager can approximate the results of portfolio insurance by purchas-
ing or selling futures contracts to increase or decrease the holdings in his portfolio. In


272 Chapter 13

the United States several index futures are available, the most popular being the futures
contract on the S&P 500 index traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Many fund
Managers use S&P 500 futures to insure their portfolios against adverse movement in
the stock market. This method is not without risk, since the S&P 500 index is unlikely
to exactly duplicate the holdings of any one portfolio. Still, the risk may be acceptable
given the reduced transaction costs.

Even if options are available on an underlying asset, a hedger may still choose to
effect a portfolio insurance strategy himself rather then purchasing the option in the
marketplace. For one thing, he may consider the option too expensive. If he believes
the option is theoretically overpriced, in the long run it will be cheaper to continuously
rehedge the portfolio. Or he may find insufficient liquidity in the option market to absorb
the number of option contracts he needs to hedge his position. Finally, the expiration
of options which are available may not exactly correspond to the period over which he
wants to protect his position. If an option is available, but expires earlier than desired,
the hedger might still choose to purchase options in the marketplace, and then pursue
a portfolio insurance strategy over the period following the option’s expiration. For all
these reasons, portfolio insurance has become an increasingly popular method of
protecting a position in an underlying asset.


a 14 %

Volatility Revisited

While there are many ways in which traders interpret volatility, in theory the value of
an option depends on only one volatility, the volatility of the underlying contract which
will occur over the life of the option. Of course, this volatility is unknown to a trader
since it will occur in the future. Nevertheless, if a trader wants to use a theoretical
pricing model, he will be required to make some prediction about the volatility of the
underlying contract over the life of the option.

Making an intelligent volatility forecast can be a difficult and frustrating exercise,
especially for a new option trader. The forecasting of directional price movements
through technical analysis is a commonly studied area in trading, and there are many
sources to which a trader can turn for information on this subject. Unfortunately,
volatility is a much newer concept, and there is relatively little to guide a trader. In spite
of this difficulty, an option trader must make some effort to come up with a reasonable
volatility input if he is going to rely on a theoretical pricing model to make intelligent
trading decisions.

SOME VOLATILITY CHARACTERISTICS

The first step in making a sensible volatility forecast is to understand some of the basic
characteristics of volatility. First, let’s compare two graphs. Figure 14-1 shows Deutsche-
mark prices from 1982 to 1991. Figure 14-2 shows the 50-day volatility of Deutsche-
marks over the same period. Are there any generalizations one can make from these
graphs? Obviously both prices and volatility sometimes rise and sometimes fall. But
unlike the prices of an underlying instrument, which appear to move freely in either
direction, there seems to be an equilibrium number to which the volatility always
returns. Over a period of three years, from early 1985 to late 1987, the price of
Deutschemarks rose from a low of 29 to a high of 63. While prices fluctuated after 1987,
they never reached the lows of the early 1980s. Someday, economic forces may cause
Deutschemarks to rise or fall dramatically, never again returning to prices in the 50s or
60s. In other words, prices of an underlying contract are open-ended. There is no reason
Why they have to return to some previous level.

Such does not appear to be the case with volatility. The 50-day volatility of
Deutschemarks over the 10-year period in question fluctuated from a low of 5% to a
high of 20%. Yet no matter how much it fluctuated, at some point volatility always
Teversed itself and retraced almost all of its previous rise or fall. Indeed, we might try to
find an equilibrium volatility such that there are equal fluctuations above and below this

273


274

1661

; O661

I 6861

j 8861

; 2861

; 9861

S861 ve6l e86l ce6l
4 1 J 1

SZ

Wa Jed syuay

+09

-S9

OL
1661-Z861 S0o}ig YABWIEYISINDG :}-p1 anbi4



Volatility Revisited 275

number. In the case of Deutschemarks, this equilibrium volatility seems to be about 11%
to 12%. Volatility may rise well above 12%, or fall well below 11%, but eventually it
always seems to return to this area.

If we were to generalize about volatility characteristics from the Deutschemark
volatility in Figure 14-2, we might surmise that an underlying contract is likely to have
a typical long-term average, or mean volatility. Moreover, the volatility of the underlying
contract appears to be mean reverting. When volatility rises above the mean, one can
be fairly certain that it will eventually fall back to its mean; when volatility falls below
the mean, one can be fairly certain that it will eventually rise to its mean. There is a
constant gyration back and forth through this mean.

This mean reverting characteristic of volatility can also be seen in Figure 143,
which shows the distribution of Deutschemark volatility from 1982 to 1991. Beginning
at the extreme left on the x-axis (the amount of time remaining to expiration), we can
see that over any two-week period during the 10 years in question, there was a 20%
chance that volatility would be either less than 6.0% or greater than 17.3% (the 10th
and 90th percentiles}. There was a 50% chance that volatility would be either less than
7.6% or greater than 13.0% (the 25th and 75th percentiles]. The mean volatility for any
two week period was 9.7%. Moving to the extreme right on the x-axis, we can see that
over any 50 week period there was a 20% chance that volatility would be either less
than 9.8% or greater than 14%. There was a 50% chance that volatility would be either
less than 10.6% and greater than 12.7%. The mean volatility for any 50-week period
was about 11.5%.

Figure 14-3 has an easily identifiable structure. As one moves further out in time
the percentile lines tend to converge towards the mean, and the mean becomes stable.
This reinforces the assumption that volatility is indeed mean reverting, This type of
volatility graph, sometimes referred to as a volatility cone, is an effective method of
presenting the volatility characteristics of an underlying instrument.!

What else can we say about volatility? Looking at the more detailed Deutschemark
volatility chart in Figure 14-4, we might surmise that volatility has some trending
characteristics. From July 1989 through June 1990 there was a downward trend in
volatility. From July 1990 to April 1991 there was an upward trend. And from April
1991 to October 1991 there was again a downward trend. Moreover, within these
major trends there were minor trends as volatility rose and fell for short periods of time.
In this respect volatility charts seem to display some of the same characteristics as price
charts, and it would not be unreasonable to apply some of the same principles used in
technical analysis to volatility analysis. It is important to remember, however, that while
price changes and volatility are related, they are not the same thing. If a trader tries to
apply exactly the same rules of technical analysis to volatility analysis, he is likely to find
that in some cases the rules have no relevance, and that in other cases the rules must
be modified to take into account the unique characteristics of volatility. Since the author

1. For amare detailed discussion of volatility cones, see:
Burghardt, Galen and Lane, Morton; “How to Tell if Options are Cheap”; The Journal of Portfolio
Management, Winter 1990, pages 72-78.


276

166}

_ 0661

_ 6861

_ 8861

2861
n

; 9861 _ 9861 _ v86l ; e86l _ c86t

-Ol

Lob

(%) AUIBEIOA

LS

ce
1661-286) AWNeloA yAewUeydsyneq Aeqg-os :2-r} esnbi4



277

Volatility Revisited

uolesdxy 0} SyaapA
os Lb Ott Lv ge GE ce 62 92 €2 O24 At tl LL g S tA

1 L L 1 1 1 1 L L i i 1 i

ainueded OL

aiquadied YSZ

ueipay

a[NUBdIBd UIGL

FH
8tU9d419q YIO6

oh

Tbh

gt

1661-2861 UoNNiAsig AyNejOA yseWeYyosyneq :¢-pL enbiy

(%) AUneIOA



Chapter 14

278

e6-uer

L6-des

be-une

16-a4

96290

o6:inr

O6-1R. «6 -AON 68-Bny 68-1dy 6aver
1 i

N
(%) AUjyeloA

SI

1661-6861 Anejo, yAeWeYyosjneq Aeg-0S *r-rl einbly



Volatility Revisited 279

claims no particular expertise in the area of technical analysis, the reader is left to his
own devices in this regard.

VOLATILITY FORECASTING

Given the volatility characteristics that we have identified, how might we go about
making a volatility forecast? First we need some volatility data. Suppose we have the
following historical volatility data on a certain underlying instrument;

last 30 days 24%
last 60 days 20%
last 120 days 18%
last 250 days 18%

Certainly, we would like as much volatility data as possible. But if this is the only data
available, how might we use it to make a forecast? One method might be to simply take
the average volatility over the periods which we have:

(24% + 20% + 18% + 18%) / 4 = 20%

Using this method, each piece of data is given identical weight. Might it not be
reasonable to assume that some data is more important than other data? A trader might
assume, for example, that the more current the data, the greater its importance. Since
the 24% volatility over the last 30 days is clearly more current than the other volatility
data, perhaps 24% should play a greater role in our volatility forecast. We might, for
example, give twice as much weight to the 30-day data as to the other data:

(40% x 24%} + (20% x 20%) + (20% x 18%) + (20% x 18%) = 20.8%

Our forecast has gone up slightly because of the extra weight given to the more recent
data.

Of course, if it is true that the more recent volatility over the last 30 days is more
important than the other data, it follows that the volatility over the last 60 days ought
to be more important than the volatility over the last 120 days and 250 days. It also
follows that the volatility over the last 120 days must be more important than the
volatility over the last 250 days. We can factor this into our forecast by using a regressive
weighting, giving more distant volatility data progressively less weight in our forecast.
For example, we might calculate:

(40% x 24%) + (30% x 20%} + (20% x 18%) + (10% x 18%} = 21.0%

Here we have given the 30-day volatility 40% of the weight, the 60-day volatility 30%
of the weight, the 120-day volatility 20% of the weight, and the 250-day volatility 10%
of the weight.

We have made the assumption that the more recent the data, the greater its
importance. Is this always true? If we are interested in evaluating short-term options, it
may be true that data which covers short periods of time is the most important. But
Suppose we are interested in evaluating very long-term options. Over long periods of


280 Chapter 14

time the mean reverting characteristic of volatility is likely to reduce the importance of
any short-term fluctuations in volatility. In fact, over very long periods of time the most
reasonable volatility forecast is simply the long-term mean volatility of the instrument.
Therefore the relative weight we give to the different volatility data will depend on the
amount of time remaining to expiration for the options in which we are interested.

Ina sense, all the historical volatility data we have at our disposal are current data;
they simply cover different periods of time. How do we know which data is the most
important? In addition to the mean reverting characteristic, volatility also tends to
exhibit serial correlatton. The volatility over any given period is likely to depend on, or
correlate with, the volatility over the previous period, assuming that both periods cover
the same amount of time. If the volatility of a contract over the last four weeks was 15%,
the volatility over the next four weeks is more likely to be close to 15% than far away
from 15%. We can again use the weather analogy from Chapter 4. If the high
temperature yesterday was 25°, and we had to guess what the high temperature today
would be, a guess of 30° would make more sense than a guess of 50°. Once we realize
this, we might logically choose to give the greatest weight to the volatility data covering
a time period closest to the life of the options in which we are interested. That is, if we
are trading very long-term options, the long-term data should get the most weight. If we
are trading very short-term options, the short-term data should get the most weight. And
if we are trading intermediate-term options, the intermediate-term data should get the
most weight.

Suppose we are interested in evaluating six-month options. How should we weight
our data? Since 120 (trading) days is closest to six months, we can give the 120-day data
the greatest weight, and give other data correspondingly lesser weight:

(15% x 24%} + (25% x 20%) + (35% x 18%} + (25% x 18%} = 19.4%

Alternatively, if we are interested in 10-week options, we can give the greatest
weight to the 60-day volatility data:

(25% x 24%) + (35% x 20%) + (25% x 18%) + (15% x 18%] = 20.2%

In the foregoing examples we used only four historical volatilities, but the more
volatility data which is available, the more accurate any volatility forecast is likely to be.
Not only will more data, covering different periods of time, give a better overview of
the volatility characteristics of an underlying instrument, but it will enable a trader to
more closely match historical volatilities to options with different amounts of time to
expiration. In our example we used historical volatilities over the last 60 days and 120
days as approximations to forecast volatilities for six-month and 10-week options.
Ideally, we would like historical data covering exactly a six-month period and exactly a
10-week period.

The method we have described is one which many traders intuitively use to
forecast volatility. It depends on identifying the typical characteristics of volatility, and
then projecting a volatility over the forecasting period. Theoreticians have recently tried
to take essentially the same approach to volatility forecasting, and this has led to the
development of autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) and generalized


Volatility Revisited 281

autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) volatility models. A detailed
discussion of such models is beyond the scope of this text, since they can be mathemati-
cally complex and are not widely used amang traders. Nevertheless, an option trader
should be aware that these models do exist, and that they are simply an attempt to apply
the mean reverting and serial correlation characteristics of volatility to volatility forecast-
ing.”
Thus far we have focused only on the historical volatility characteristics of the
underlying instrument in trying to forecast a volatility. Is there any other information
which might be useful? No individual trader can hope to know everything affecting
price changes in an underlying contract. Perhaps there are factors which could affect
the future volatility, but about which the trader is unaware. If one believes that such
information is likely to be reflected in the prices of the contracts being traded, one way
to ferret out additional volatility information is to look at the prices of options. In other
words, a trader will want to look at the implied volatility in the marketplace to find the
consensus volatility. Once he has done this, he will want to use this information in any
volatility forecast he intends to make.

How much weight should a trader give the implied volatility? Some traders
subscribe to the efficient market principle, and believe that the implied volatility is
always the best volatility forecast since it reflects all available information. Most traders
believe, however, that while the implied volatility is important, it isn’t the whole story.
Typically, a trader might give the implied volatility a weighting somewhere between
25% and 75% in making a volatility forecast. How much depends on the trader’s
confidence in forecasting a volatility based on historical volatility data? If a trader feels
very confident about his forecast, he might give the implied volatility as little as a 25%
weight; if he feels uncertain about his forecast, he might give the implied volatility as
much as a 75% weight. Of course, his confidence level will depend on his experience,
as well as how conclusive the historical data is.
