
61
The Seventh Fire
New York City, Sun Valley, Cody • March–July 2004

Buffett had spent twenty-six weekends in San Francisco. He and Susie had watched almost a hundred
episodes of Frasier together. The family remained protective. She still saw almost no one else.
She was starting to eat fresh food. Her friend Tom Newman, a caterer and chef, tried to interest her in
something healthier than ice cream and chocolate malteds, and made her pureed carrots, creamed spinach,

mashed potatoes, egg salad, and “anything where I could get her some proper nutrition.”1
In March, she went for her first MRI scan since the surgery. Buffett knew the stakes associated with this
event. Susie had said she would have no more surgery.
“She won’t go back into the hospital. She won’t. I think the odds are reasonably good, but…”
The MRI came back clean. Buffett was overjoyed; he said that Susie’s doctors told her that this meant she
had the same odds of a recurrence as if she had never had cancer. Susie may have put it this way to Warren
because she thought that this was what he needed to believe, but what Dr. Schmidt had actually told her was
that she could probably count on one good year. After that, the future was uncertain.2
Months of being trapped inside by illness, just as in her childhood, affected Susie predictably. As weak as she
was, her pent-up urge to live her life again exploded. “I’m going to see my family,” she said. “I want to see
everybody. I’m going to do everything I want to do until Dr. Schmidt tells me not to.”3
The first thing she wanted to do was go to the Laguna house and have the grandchildren come visit. For
Warren’s sake, she wanted to attend the Berkshire shareholder meeting. She wanted to be strong enough to
attend the premiere of Peter’s multimedia show, Spirit—The Seventh Fire, which was to take place in Omaha
in July. She had a long list of other goals as well.
Susie’s hair, which had been light-colored for the last few years, was close-cropped now; her youthful face
looked a little slimmer but otherwise no different than before. She spoke with a slight lisp, but it was easy to
forget what had happened and not notice how little energy she had.
Buffett’s preoccupation was whether she would be able to attend the shareholder meeting in May. The
meeting had taken on such symbolism to him that a measure of how much people cared about him was their
willingness to travel to Omaha for this event. Susie’s presence reassured him; she was not a spectator but part
of the show. If she could not attend, it was as though his leading lady would be missing from the stage.
***
The Buffetts had triangulated the shareholder weekend so that Astrid (who considered the whole thing a bore
and was pleased to be excused) accompanied Warren only to the backstage social events, just as she did in
real life, while Susie attended the “official” public social events in the role of “wife.” She sat in the directors’
section at the meeting and sang onstage with Al Oehrle’s band in the mall at Borsheim’s on Sunday
afternoon. Buffett’s supporting cast of loyal Daisy Maes had grown larger over time, and he cared very much
that they attend as well. From time to time throughout the weekend, a clanking sound heralded the approach
of Carol Loomis wearing her bracelet hung with a collection of twenty-seven matchbook-size gold and
enamel charms, facsimiles of the Berkshire Hathaway annual reports—one for each year she had edited
Buffett’s words. Sharon Osberg became part of the show by taking on any shareholder who wanted to play
bridge with a champion on Sunday afternoon in the big white tent outside Borsheim’s. Buffett had not yet
figured out a way to put his latest Daisy Mae, Devon Spurgeon, to work. Spurgeon, the former Wall Street
Journal reporter who had covered Berkshire for a while, was starting law school in the fall. Buffett had made
Spurgeon one of his new people, a great rarity that now occurred only at intervals of years. Buffett had
actually suggested that she get married at the meeting, where he would walk her down the long, long center
aisle to the front and give her away as a bride. “Imagine how many gifts you would get from Borsheim’s,” he
said. Genuinely touched by his offer—but warily envisioning news stories portraying her nuptials as the
Berkshire version of a Moonie wedding—Spurgeon and her fiancé Kevin Helliker decided to get married in
Italy instead. Buffett had granted her a seat with the managers in their reserved section;4 Osberg and Loomis,
who were de facto family, sat in the section reserved for family and directors.
Everyone else had to scramble to avoid a place in the rafters. This year, so many requests for passes had

come in that almost twenty thousand people were expected.
A black market of scalpers had sprung up on eBay, selling meeting credentials for as much as $250 for four
passes. Buffett was mildly awestruck. Who ever heard of tickets scalped to a shareholder meeting? The eBay
listing said: “Possibly meet in person Warren Buffett or ask him a question at the meeting…. Winning bidder
also receives the visitor’s guide. The pass also allows you employee pricing at Nebraska Furniture Mart and
Borsheim’s Jewelry Store…. BBQ party…Cocktail party at Borsheim’s…Shareholder party at Buffett’s
favorite steak house…View displays from many of the Berkshire companies.”
As much as the P. T. Buffett loved it, Howard Buffett’s son wanted the scalping stopped. He couldn’t allow
people to be gouged by scalpers just to attend the shareholder meeting. The man who, a year or two earlier,
had professed (for good reason) ignorance of technology set up his own e-tailer on eBay, hawking meeting
credentials at $5 a pair. People e-mailed anxiously. Would these credentials be “real,” or would they look
different, stigmatizing the buyer as not a “real” shareholder? The question implied that this would be awful,
labeling them as not a member of the “club.”
But, no, the credentials would be real, however obtained. And with that, Berkshire Hathaway—once a cozy
club made up of rich partners whom Buffett considered friends—suddenly became a fan club. Buffett had
opened up the tent and invited everybody in.
***
Omaha’s brand-new Qwest Center rose like a great silver circus tent near the Missouri River. Its facade
reflected like a mirror on the grimy old Civic Auditorium across town, scene of the last four meetings. Kelly
Muchemore strode around the floor for days ahead of time with her walkie-talkie, overseeing forklifts filled
with bales of hay and crates of flowers, lampposts, and tons of mulch that would be landscaped into garden
and seating areas in the exhibition hall. Construction crews built neighborhoods of booths to display awnings,
air compressors, blocks of knives, encyclopedias, vacuum cleaners, and picture frames. Workers installed
signage marking the “Berkyville” streets and avenues that snaked in between the furniture showroom, the
kitchenware store, the Western boot–fitting area, the Bookworm book shop, the candy store, the insurance
sales counter, and the women’s shoe store. Upstairs in the arena, the stage crew set up the white-covered
table with microphones backed by oversize screens where Buffett and Munger would sit, while the lighting
crew tested the panel that created the orchestrated light show that would open the event. A “star” private
dressing room was outfitted backstage so that Susie would have a place to rest. An armored truck pulled in
with a $250,000 pair of jeweled cowboy boots destined for the Justin exhibit. A movie projector and screen
and giant pillows waited in a casbah party room, where the hundreds of exhausted Berkshire Hathaway
employees who would be working free of charge could drag themselves to collapse after the event.
Buffett bounced around the office like a teenager. Visitors, including a group of college students, dropped in
to see him. His voice grew hoarser as the week wore on and the number of visitors kept increasing. Everyone
nagged at him to save his voice for the presentations, but he ignored them, sprayed his throat, and kept
talking anyway. Requests for more than a thousand tickets had come from Texas, two thousand from
California, and another fifteen hundred from outside the United States. A group of seventy-seven people had
chartered a plane to fly from Australia.
By Friday Buffett’s voice sounded like someone recovering from a bad cold. Still, he refused to stop talking.
But Buffett never had stopped talking, never once in his life. Since he was a little boy and astonished his
parents’ friends with his precocity; since he gave his high school teachers advice on stocks; since the Alpha
Sigs gathered around to hear him lecture at fraternity parties; since he and Ben Graham held a duet around
the conference table at Columbia; since he had sold GEICO as a prescriptionist; since he’d first picked up a
stick of chalk and taught investing at night; since he’d bewitched people at cocktail parties in Omaha and
dinner parties in New York; from the first meeting of the partners to the last; from the day he answered
Conrad Taff’s questions at the original Berkshire shareholder meeting in Seabury Stanton’s old loft to the
latest group of students who had shown up at his door—as long as he could be teaching something to

somebody, Buffett had never ceased talking.
On Friday night, he spoke to a small group at a dress rehearsal,5 then headed to a private dinner hosted by
Charlie Munger. Before dawn the next morning, caterers arrived with food for the press box, the backstage
area, and the vendors’ Beehive Café. People dressed in sport coats and polo shirts and T-shirts and shorts and
big yellow foam hats were already lined up in a scene resembling Macy’s the morning after Thanksgiving.
When the doors opened at seven a.m., they ran for the arena and marked out the best seats. By eight-thirty,
every seat was filled. When the lights dimmed, talking ceased instantly. Nobody whispered, nobody straggled
in late. The audience was waiting, rapt. The music began and the movie rolled.
The filming of the introductory movie for this year’s meeting had consumed a large portion of Buffett’s
energy in the spring, in between trips to San Francisco and long phone calls about the problems of Coca-Cola.
For the first time, it had involved real Hollywood scripting, professional studio camerawork, and—to
Buffett’s almost orgasmic delight—the use of a body double. His very own doppelganger! He had been
watching it over and over in the office, anticipating the audience’s reaction.
The new governor of California’s face appeared on the screen. Arnold Schwarzenegger was wearing drillsergeant gear and sitting behind an elaborate desk in a fully stocked workout room. The movie rolled through
a parody of An Officer and a Gentleman, in which Arnold, in the Lou Gossett Jr. role, browbeat Bufffett’s
body double through a torturous workout, as punishment for having talked indiscriminately to the Wall Street
Journal about California’s bizarre, inequitable property tax laws during the gubernatorial election. Buffett
had feuded with the Journal over its selective use of his words, and won an apparently resounding victory in
readers’ minds by writing a letter to the editor about his viewpoint and posting it on the Berkshire Web site.
Since then, he had been simultaneously playing the incident up and trying to live it down.
“You want to quit! Say it! Say you want to quit!” roared Arnold.
“No sir! You can’t make me say it! No sir! I’ve got nowhere else to go!” shouted Buffett. But then he started
cruising through the workout as easily as if he were sitting in his chair at home, reading the Journal.
The scene dissolved to the governor’s office, Arnold sleeping, head on his desk.
Aide: “Mr. Governor.”
Arnold: “I got nowhere else to go!…Huh?”
Aide: “Power-nap time is over, sir. Time to get to work on some more propositions to fix this mess we’re in.”
Arnold: “What? Oh, okay. Wow. I just had the strangest dream….”
He picked up a magazine on his desk and his face twisted. On the cover of Muscle & Fitness was Buffett’s
smirking face superimposed on the bulked-up, posing, Pumping Iron Schwarzenegger body. Arnold reared
back, his expression a strangled mask of fear.6
Here it was, Buffett’s delirium dream. To pull it off had taken hanging out with the world’s best bodybuilder
and a little camera magic, but he had finally done it. He had made it into the modern-day equivalent of the
Big Arms book. Pudgy Stockton would be so impressed.
The audience roared. Then the movie rolled on, featuring Warren and Charlie, but especially Warren as a
superhero, in any number of guises. Most of the skits and cartoons emphasized Buffett and Munger as
cheapskates.
Afterward, the auditorium went dark for a moment. Then while the stage lights rose, Susie, in a pink sweater
and skirt, looking a few pounds lighter, walked briskly out onto the floor toward the directors’ section
immediately in front of the stage and sat down. Next, Buffett and Munger entered like a couple of graying
talk-show hosts and sat down at a white-cloth-covered table. Enormous screens displaying them had been

positioned all around the arena, so everybody got a close-up look. Buffett was staring out at a dark arena
filled with flashing lights and as many people as would show up in Nebraska to see the Rolling Stones.
Before taking questions, Buffett kicked off the meeting with rapid efficiency to cover a normally perfunctory
five-minute business agenda of electing directors, ratifying auditors, and the like. This year, almost
immediately, one of the shareholders stood up at a microphone and said in a timid voice that he was
withholding his vote; he offered a motion from the floor. He asked that Buffett consider using some of the
CEOs of his companies as directors because they were better qualified than Susie and Howie Buffett.
An audible ripple shuddered across the auditorium. The motion, even though presented in a respectful tone,
fell like a big wet blot to mar the smooth, engraved surface of the shareholder meeting agenda. Most of the
audience was shocked. Berkshire was now the fourteenth-largest business in the United States, with over
172,000 employees, $64 billion in revenues, and profits of $8 billion a year. But it remained at heart a family
corporation; as the largest shareholder, Buffett had the votes to elect a couple of board seats for family
members if he wanted. He saw his family’s role in Berkshire as similar to the Walton family’s at Wal-Mart, a
nexus between the Buffett Foundation and the company. Unquestionably, the way he chose his board was
purely personal, although some board members happened to be successful businessmen.
“Thank you,” said Buffett. “Charlie, do you have any thoughts on that?”
This punting to Munger—no quick comeback or pithy comment—was a measure of Buffett’s complete
discomfiture. However, it also put Munger on the spot, since anything he said might imply that he had some
influence on how Buffett chose his board. He had none whatsoever, so Munger simply said, “I think we
should go on to the next item.”
Another motion came to the floor. Tom Strobhar, on behalf of Human Life International, one of the
organizations that had boycotted Berkshire Hathaway and successfully forced the company to end its
charitable-contributions program, gave a speech about abortion that was, as he later wrote, “ostensively
[sic]” disguised as a proposal that Berkshire publish a list of its political donations.7
Buffett merely said in response that Berkshire hadn’t made any political donations. The motion was voted
down.
The business section of the meeting had now consumed half an hour instead of its usual five minutes and for
the first time had borne a vaguely unpleasant resemblance to the Coca-Cola meeting. All this time,
shareholders holding written-out questions had been patiently lined up at the numbered platforms equipped
with microphones stationed all around the arena. Now Buffett opened the questioning by asking to hear from
“microphone number one.” As the questions began, his wheels churned on the issue that was bothering him.
He used a question on another topic as an opportunity to address the issue of his family as board members.
His wife and son, he said, were on the board as “guardians of the culture. They’re not there to profit
themselves.”
It was a remarkable moment. For the first time, he had to defend in public the way he ran his company.
Afterward, however, nobody else asked anything related to this topic. The shareholders of Berkshire
Hathaway were content with things as they were. Buffett had earned the license to run his company any way
he damn well pleased, as far as they were concerned; they were a happy lot. How was the investing climate?
they asked. Our capital is underutilized now, he said. It’s a painful condition to be in, but not as painful as
doing something stupid.
Somebody asked Buffett about ISS recommending a vote against him on the Coca-Cola board. The issue still
lingered. “I think it was Bertrand Russell,” he said, “who said that most men would rather die than think.
Many do.”
“The cause of reform is hurt, not helped,” Munger added in a tart voice, “when an activist makes an idiotic
suggestion like the one that having Warren on the board of the Coca-Cola Company is counter to the interest
of the Coca-Cola Company. Nutty activities do not help the cause for which the person speaks.”8

As happened every year, someone asked what Buffett was doing with all those warehouses of silver he had
bought a few years ago. He paused for a minute, then said he couldn’t comment. Munger made some
unintelligible noises in the background and the shareholder sat down, unenlightened. In fact, the silver had
been sold.
Buffett and Munger started eating peanut brittle, and people went downstairs to the basement exhibition hall,
where thirty-seven Berkshire Hathaway subsidiaries were selling products, and bought out all the peanut
brittle in the See’s Candies shop. When Buffett and Munger started eating Dairy Queen Dilly Bars, the Dilly
Bars sold out. Many people bought boxes of candy and took them back to the meeting upstairs, where they
sat listening to Buffett and bingeing on sweets.
In the course of answering the many repetitious questions he was asked in between the new and insightful
ones, Buffett managed to work many of the items he wanted to discuss into his responses. This year he used
the meeting to expound on his “Why I’m Down on the Dollar” theme. The U.S., he said, was like a family
that spent more than it earned. Americans were buying huge amounts of products from other countries and
didn’t have the income to pay for them, because we weren’t selling as much to other countries as they were
selling to us. To make up the difference, we were borrowing money. Those who were lending it to us might
be less willing to do so in the future.
Now, Buffett said, we were spending more than two percent of all our income just to pay the interest on our
national debt, and that meant the situation would be hard to turn around. Most likely, he thought, at some
point foreign investors would decide they liked our real estate and businesses and other “real assets” better
than our paper bonds. We would start selling off pieces of America, like office buildings and companies.
“We think that over time the U.S. dollar is likely to decline in value against some of the major currencies,” he
said. Therefore, the economy—which had been pretty wonderful over the past twenty years, with both low
interest rates and low inflation—could at some point reverse. Interest rates probably would be higher, as
would inflation, which would be an unhappy situation. As always when he made predictions, he couldn’t say
when. In the meantime, however, he had bought $12 billion of foreign currency to hedge Berkshire’s dollar
risks.
While Buffett and Munger were talking about the perils of debt, people rolled down the ramps and escalators
to the shoe department and waited in lines to pull out their credit cards. Fitters from Tony Lama and Justin
sold a pair of boots a minute: workaday plain Westerns to fancy lizard models. Over at Borsheim’s, on the
west side of town, more than a thousand watches and 187 engagement rings were being sold. The Furniture
Mart was doing a record $17 million of business.
The convention center had many of the elements of a carnival; a GEICO gecko waved at passersby next to a
NASCAR race car. A character dressed as a foam Acme brick hooked up with a foam ice-cream-cone
character. A rodeo clown stalked the floor on stilts among the air compressors and boat anchor winches. At
the south end of the exhibition hall, rising above the crowd, just as Buffett had pictured it, stood a full-size
Clayton Home, clad in beige siding with a tidy front porch, sand-colored shutters, and a real grass lawn and
brick foundation bedecked with shrubs. And just as he had foreseen, a queue snaked back and forth behind a
zigzag rope, as if it were Space Mountain at Disneyland.9
But it was the Fruit of the Loom booth that epitomized Berkshiredom. The Fruit of the Loom booth never
had to hand out key chains or free playing cards. People stood waiting in long lines to buy a five-dollar pack
of men’s briefs and have their picture taken with the guys wearing grape and apple suits. By the end of the
day, nearly every pack of underwear would be sold.
The black-and-white See’s Candies store, conveniently positioned in the middle of the exhibition hall, also
had jammed aisles—so jammed that it ran out of lollipops, salted nuts, and peanut brittle in less than three
hours. Many of the customers did not bother to pay. Those taking the five-finger discount hooked huge
amounts of candy as well as dozens of pairs of shoes from the shoe store, while, above their heads, Buffett
and Munger talked about honesty and the ethical way of life.

As yet unaware of the thievery taking place beneath their feet that might force them to consider installing a
Berkyville jail by the bookstore next year, Buffett and Munger ambled on, answering questions and
chomping on sweets as they talked their way through the entire six hours.
Any normal person would be exhausted after putting on a six-hour live, unscripted performance, but when
the meeting ended, Buffett and Munger went upstairs to a large room and parked themselves at a desk,
signing autographs so that shareholders who had come from foreign countries could get closer to them. This
was a recent idea of Buffett’s. Munger sat through it patiently, but he was getting tired and sometimes talked
with bemusement of this circus that Warren had created. He, too, enjoyed being worshipped, but never would
have gone to the trouble to stage-manage and encourage it, the way his partner did.
***
Susie had left to go lie down after the first couple hours of the meeting. She skipped the Sunday brunch, but
flew to New York with Warren on Monday. She stayed in bed in her hotel room until one in the afternoon,
mashing up pills in room-service ice cream. Susie Jr. watched over her to make sure she didn’t get trapped
into overextending herself. She wanted her mother to limit her outings to one thing a day—one visitor, one
shopping trip, one fifteen-minute visit to the hotel lobby.10
Susie did attend the traditional dinner party that Sandy and Ruth Gottesman held in their honor every year.
Since the mid-1990s, this had become the one time that many of the people in the Buffett Group could count
on seeing their old friends during the annual New York trip. Now Susie Jr. said to Ruth Gottesman, “She’s
going to try to do more than she should. She’s going to say she’s fine. She’s going to lie to you,” and she
asked for help in protecting her mother. Most of those who gathered at the Gottesmans’ had not seen Susie at
all during the past year, except perhaps at the shareholder meeting, and then only briefly. She sat in one room
and Warren in another, while people came in to greet them and chat. Many people would later recall the
event as emotional. Susie declared that she was glad she had gone. But afterward, she was exhausted.
Warren also wanted her to do an interview with public-television talk-show host Charlie Rose. Susie said
many sentimental and flattering things about her husband, and explained that she provided Warren with
“unconditional love.” She also discussed her move to San Francisco, saying she left, as she told Warren,
because “I would like to have a place where I can have a room of my own. It would be nice.” On Astrid,
“She took care of your man for you?” asked Rose. “She did, and she takes great care of him, and he
appreciates it and I appreciate it…she’s done me a great favor,” Susie said. Perhaps because of the set-up
question, this exchange made clear that Susie viewed Astrid as the tool through which she managed Warren
—something that Susie may not have intended to reveal quite so bluntly. Afterward, she said to Susie Jr.,
“Let’s go to Bergdorf’s.”11 There, she sat on a chair and looked at some things but soon said she was tired
and went back to the hotel.
A couple of days later, on Mother’s Day, her energy rebounded in time to accept an invitation to meet her
daughter’s friend Bono at the Tribeca Film Festival. Bono had been faxing her letters during her recovery,
which Susie Jr. would read to her. The letters, according to Susie Jr., “were sort of this giant thing to her.” By
May, after going to sleep every night listening to Bono sing, she had grown passionately interested in meeting
the messianic singer. The two had a brief encounter, and “I just can’t even explain to you how excited she
was,” says Susie Jr.
Susie went to bed and rested for two days. Then Bono, his wife, Ali, their daughters, and Bobby Shriver (the
brother of Arnold Schwarzenegger’s wife, Maria Shriver), who had cofounded the African-aid charity DATA
with Bono, came over to the Plaza Hotel to meet Susie for lunch in the dining room. For three hours, Susie
and Bono sat talking. Then he presented her with a portrait that he had painted from a photograph of her,
overwritten with some of the lyrics to the U2 song “One.” Susie was overcome. Bono invited her to visit him
in France with Susie Jr., who was coming for a meeting of his foundation board.
