
Even Good Traders Confuse Price
The trading histories of Julian Robertson and Louis Bacon,
two famous hedge fund managers, underscore the importance of
price for decision making.
A few years back, Julian Robertson shut his long running
hedge fund down. He was a global macro trader who relied on
fundamentals for decision making. He had a close relationship
with another global macro trader, Louis Bacon. Bacon is
extremely secretive to the extent that it’s nearly impossible to
find out his performance numbers unless you are a client. I do
know from the little bit of writing available on Bacon that he’s
pulled hundreds of millions, if not billions, of profit from the
marketplace. Although Bacon does not advertise himself as a
trend follower, the following excerpt leaves no doubt that he is
focused on price action just as much as a trend followers:
“If a stock goes from 100 to 90, an investor who looks at
fundamentals will think maybe it’s a better buy,” explains one
source. “But with Louis [Bacon], he will figure he must have
been wrong about something and get out.” Contrast that, say,
with [Julian] Robertson, who, even after shutting down his firm,
was doggedly holding on to massive positions in such stocks as
U.S. Airways Group and United Asset Management Corp…
[Bacon made the comment] in an investor letter that ‘those
traders with a futures background [trend trading] are more
sensitive to market action, whereas value-based equity traders
are trained to react less to the market and focus much more on
their assessment of a company’s or situation’s viability.’”32
Today, Louis Bacon is still trading and following price.

Trend followers know that attempting to pinpoint the beginning
of a trending market is futile. When trends begin, they often arise
from a flat market that doesn’t appear to be trending in any
direction. The idea is to take small bets early on in a market to see

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

21

if the trend does, indeed, mature and get big enough to make big
money. How do trend following strategies succeed? Michael Rulle of
Graham Capital Management offers:
“The ability of trend following strategies to succeed
depends on two obvious but important assumptions about
markets. First, it assumes that price trends occur regularly
in markets. Secondly, it assumes that trading systems can
be created to profit from these trends. The basic trading
strategy that all trend followers try to systematize is to ‘cut
losses’ and ‘let profits run.’”33
I asked Charles Faulkner, a modeler of top traders, to expand
upon what at first glance appears to be a simple idea:
“…the first rule of trading is to, ‘Cut your losses, and let
your profits run.’ And then, that it’s the hardest thing to do.
Seldom do any of them wonder why, and yet this is exactly
where the efficient market hypothesis breaks down, and
the psychological nature of the markets shows through.
When we lose or misplace something, we expect to find it
later. The cat comes back. We find our car keys. But we
know a dollar on the street will not be there with the next
person who passes by. So experience teaches us that losses
are unlikely and gains are hard. ‘A bird in the hand is worth
two in the bush.’ This is when I tell them that they earn
their trading profits by doing the hard thing—by going
against human nature. This is where the discipline comes
in, the psychological preparation, the months of system
testing that give the trader the confidence to actually trade
against his natural tendencies.”
If cutting losses and letting profits run is the trend follower’s
mantra, it is because harsh reality dictates that you can’t play the
game if you run out of money. Nor can you predict the trend
direction, as trend trader Christopher Cruden points out:
“I would prefer to finish with a certain currency forecast,
based upon my own fundamental reading of the market and
one that underpins my personal investment philosophy…
The only problem is I can’t tell you when this will happen
or which event will be first. On that basis alone, it seems
best to stay with our systematic approach.”35

In Patton, my favorite
scene is when U.S.
General George S. Patton
has just spent weeks
studying the writing of
his German adversary
Field Marshall Erwin
Rommel and is crushing
him in an epic tank battle
in Tunisia. Patton,
sensing victory as he
peers onto the battle field
from his command post,
growls, “Rommel, you
magnificent bastard. I
read your book!”
Paul Tudor Jones as quoted in the
Foreword to
The Alchemy of Finance

22

Are you a bull market
baby? Can you survive in
any situation?

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

A good example of not letting profits run can be seen in trading
strategies that take profits off the table before a trend is over. For
example, one broker told me that one of his strategies was to ride a
stock up for a 30 percent gain and then exit. That was his strategy.
Let it go up 30 percent and get out. Sounds reasonable. However, a
strategy that uses profit targets is problematic. The biggest problem
is that it goes against the math of getting rich, which is to let your
profits run. If you can’t predict the end or top of a trend, why get
out early and risk leaving profits on the table?
For example, you start with $50,000. The market takes off and
your account swells to $80,000. You could, at that point, quickly
pull your $30,000 profit off the table. Your misconception is that if
you don’t take those profits immediately, they will be gone.
Trend followers know that a $50,000 account may go to
$80,000, back to $55,000, back up to $90,000, and from there,
perhaps, all the way up to $200,000. The person who took profits at
$80,000 is not around to take the ride up to $200,000. Letting your
profits run is tough psychologically. But understand that in trying to
protect every penny of your profit, you actually prevent yourself
from making the big profits.

Loss
I began to realize that the
big money must
necessarily be in the big
swing.
Jesse Livermore

You are going to have ups and downs in your trading account.
Losses are a part of the trading game. You say you want no losses?
You want positive returns every month? Well, you could have had
your money with the Ponzi-scheme of Bernard Madoff, but we all
know how that turned out! Life equals having losses and you’re
going to have losses with trend following. “You can’t make money if
you are not willing to lose. It’s like breathing in, but not being
willing to breathe out.”36
If you don’t have losses, you are not taking risks. If you don’t
risk, you won’t ever win big. Losses aren’t the problem. It’s how you
deal with them. Ignore losses with no plan and they will come back
to haunt you and your account size. Consider:
“Theoretically, really big losses rarely befall a trend
follower because he eliminates or reverses his position as
soon as the market goes against him. A lot of little losses are

23

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

inevitable…The rationale for hanging in is that any price
move could be the beginning of a trend, and the occasional
big breakout justifies a string of small losses.”37

Conclusion
Ed Seykota once told me a story about being in Bermuda with
a new trader who wanted to learn the “secrets.” “Just give me the
quick-and-dirty version of your magical trading secrets,” the
neophyte said. Seykota took the new trader out to the beach. They
stood there watching the waves break against the shoreline. The
neophyte asked, “What’s your point?” Seykota said, “Go down to
the shoreline where the waves break. Now begin to time them. Run
out with the waves as they recede and run in as the waves come in.
Can you see how you could get into rhythm with the waves? You
follow the waves out and you follow them in. You just follow their
lead.”
In my search for the facts about trend following, it became clear
that its basic tenets, its philosophical underpinnings, are relevant
not only to trading, but to our lives in general, from business to
personal relationships. I also found in my conversations with the
old pro trend followers that trend following works best when
pursued with unbridled passion.
How important is passion? Author Brett Steenbarger puts
passion into perspective:
“Find your passion: the work that stimulates, fascinates,
and endlessly challenges you. Identify what you find
meaningful and rewarding, and pour yourself into it. If your
passion happens to be the markets, you will find the
fortitude to outlast your learning curve and to develop the
mastery needed to become a professional. If your passion is
not the markets, then invest your funds with someone who
possesses an objective track record and whose investment
aims match your own. Then go forth and pour yourself into
those facets of life that will keep you springing out of bed
each morning, eager to face each day.”38
While assembling Trend Following, it became clear that when
used within the context of passion, the term “trend following” could

Many people would
sooner die than think; in
fact, they do so.
Bertrand Russell

24

Among people who take
the trouble to understand
what the business is
about instead of
assuming it involves
speculating on live cattle,
it is readily understood.
Bruce Cleland,
Campbell and Co.40

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

also be substituted throughout for other activities in life. This
insight crystallized with me while rereading a passage from a 1938
book on creative writing by Brenda Ueland:
“Whenever I say writing in this book, I also mean anything
that you love and want to do or to make. It may be a six-act
tragedy in blank verse, it may be dressmaking or acrobatics,
or inventing a new system of double entry accounting…but
you must be sure that your imagination and love are behind
it, that you are not working just from grim resolution, i.e., to
impress people.”39
Trend followers I met don’t seem to trade with grim resolve or
with an intention to impress others. They are playing the game to
win and enjoying every moment of it. Like other high-level
performers, such as professional athletes and world-class musicians,
they understand how critical it is to maintain a winning attitude for
success. And as Larry Hite reminded, good trend traders ask themselves straightforward questions:
“The first question you have to ask yourself: ‘who are you?’
I’m not kidding. And don’t look at your driver’s license! But
what you got to say to yourself: ‘what am I comfortable
doing?’ Am I an arbitrager? Am I a short-term trader? …it
is really important that you understand who you are and
what you want to do. The next thing you have to ask
yourself, one of the real details, ‘what are you going to do?’
What are you going to do exactly? What has to be done? Is
it hard to you? Is it easy? Do you have the materials to do
it? One of the great things about the market is the markets
don’t care about you. The market doesn’t care what color
you are. The markets don’t care if you are short or tall.
They don’t care about anything. They don’t care whether
you leave or stay. The last question you have to ask
yourself: ‘what follows?’ You have to ask yourself, ‘if I do
this and it works, where am I? What have I got?’ Now what
I’ve said may really sound like it’s pretty simple and
common sense, [but think about the failed hedge fund Long
Term Capital Management]…those were some very, very
smart people [Nobel Prize winners] who did some pretty
stupid things. And they did it because they didn’t ask
themselves the basic questions.”

25

Chapter 1 • Trend Following

Key Points
• Seykota: “All profitable systems trade trends; the difference in
price necessary to create the profit implies a trend.”
• Trend following is based on simple universal laws we can all
learn.
• No one knows how high or how low a market will go. No one
knows when a market will move. You can’t undo the past, and
you can’t predict the future. Prices, not traders, predict the
future.
• Trend followers buy high and sell short low. This is
counterintuitive for most.
• Using “common sense” is not a good way to judge or trade
markets.
• Losses are a cost of doing business. No one can be right all the
time. No one can make money all the time. Trend followers
expect and handle losses with objectivity and detachment. If
you don’t have losses, you are not taking risks. If you don’t
risk, you won’t win.
• Price goes either up, down, or sideways. No advances in
technology, leaps of modern science, or radical shifts in
perception will alter this fact.
• What if they told you that the best way to get to point B,
without bumping into walls, would be to bump into the walls
and not worry about it? Don’t worry about getting to point B,
but just enjoy bumping into the walls.43
• “If you take emotion—would be, could be, should be—out of it,
and look at what is, and quantify it,” says John W. Henry,
reflecting from the owner’s box at Fenway Park, “I think you
have a big advantage over most human beings.”

If you take emotion—
would be, could be,
should be—out of it, and
look at what is, and
quantify it, I think you
have a big advantage
over most human beings.
John W. Henry41

A trend is a trend is a
trend, Gertrude Stein
would have said if she
were a trader…Once you
have a game plan, the
differences are pretty
idiosyncratic.
Richard Dennis42

This page intentionally left blank

Great Trend
Followers
“Most of us don’t have the discipline to stay focused on a single goal
for five, ten, or twenty years, giving up everything to bring it off, but
that’s what’s necessary to become an Olympic champion, a world class
surgeon, or a Kirov ballerina. Even then, of course, it may be all in vain.
You may make a single mistake that wipes out all the work. It may ruin
the sweet, lovable self you were at seventeen. That old adage is true: You
can do anything in life; you just can’t do everything. That’s what Bacon
meant when he said a wife and children were hostages to fortune. If you
put them first, you probably won’t run the three-and-a-half-minute-mile,
make your first $10 million, write the great American novel,
or go around the world on a motorcycle.
Such goals take complete dedication.”
—Jim Rogers1

The best way to understand trend following is not by only
reading rules that might make up a particular trend trading strategy,
but also by meeting the men and women who practice it. Unfortunately, investors today are reluctant to concede that they might do
better when it comes to their finances with mentoring or guidance.
Although they will sign up for a cooking course, they won’t take
advantage of wisdom from those who have made fortunes. They
prefer “reinventing the wheel” to modeling their behavior after
proven excellence. However, because I consider role modeling to be
critical to learning correct trading, this chapter profiles excellent
trend followers.
27

2

28

Technical trading is not
glamorous. It will rarely
tell that you bought at the
lows and sold at the
highs. But trading should
be a business, and a
systematic program is a
plan to profit over time,
rather than from a single
trade. High expectations
are essential to success,
but unrealistic ones just
waste time. Computers
do not tell the user how to
make profits in the
market; they can only
verify our own ideas. We
consider using a
computer to develop
trading programs to be a
sensible, conservative
approach.
Cognitrend GMBH

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

As an observer of trend following, I’ve come to realize that if
you take historical and current trend following performance data
seriously, you must make a choice. You can accept the data as fact,
make an honest assessment of yourself and your approach to
making money, and make a commitment to change. Or, you can
pretend the performance data of great trend traders doesn’t exist
and keep on buying and holding. If you think you’re likely to make
the latter choice, reconsider whether trend following is for you.
Trend followers are generalists when it comes to their trading
strategy. Tom Friedman, a great author in the field of international
relations, explained this important distinction:
“The great strategists of the past kept forests as well as trees
in views. They were generalists, and they operated from an
ecological perspective. They understood the world is a web,
in which adjustments made here are bound to have effects
over there—that everything is interconnected. Where
might one find generalists today? The dominant trend
within universities and the think tanks is toward evernarrower specialization: a higher premium is placed on
functioning deeply within a single field than broadly across
several. And yet, without some awareness of the whole—
without some sense of how means converge to accomplish
or to frustrate ends—there can be no strategy. And without
strategy, there is only drift.”2
The men profiled here see the whole. They see the connections.
They also know how to separate their emotions from their financial
decision making. One “market wizard,” Charles Faulkner,
explained how crucial it is to know who you are:
“Being able to trade your system instead of your psychology
means separating yourself from your trading. This can
begin with your language. ‘I’m in the trading business’ and
‘I work as a trader’ are very different from ‘I’m a trader’ or
‘I own a few stocks and bonds’ (from a major East Coast
speculator). The market wizards I’ve met seem to live by
William Blake’s phrase, ‘I must make my own system or be
enslaved by another’s.’ They have made their own
systems—in their trading and in their lives and in their
language. They don’t allow others to define them or their

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

terms. And they are sometimes considered abrupt, difficult,
iconoclastic, or full of themselves as a result. And they
know the greater truth—they are themselves and they
know what works for them.”
This chapter starts with a trend following trader not originally
profiled in my first edition of this book from 2004. David Harding,
Bernard Drury, Christian Baha, Michael Clarke and the trendtrading firm TransTrend have all established themselves as new
trend followers of great success. And the leader of a new breed of
trend followers is currently Harding. After introducing Harding, the
old pros of trend following are all still profiled; they provide great
insights and lessons to all aspiring trend following traders.

David Harding
David Harding has had tremendous success as a trend following
trader. Today, his trend following fund for clients exceeds $10
billion in assets, give or take a billion or two to the upside. He
typically makes 20 percent a year. How did he reach that pinnacle?
Born in London and reared in Oxfordshire, Harding had always
been interested in investing—a result of his father’s influence, a
horticulturalist who enjoyed betting on the markets. His mother by
comparison was a French teacher. As a young man, he had a natural
inclination for science and quickly found a way to put the talent to
use. Early in his career, he took a job at Sabre Fund Management
where he designed trading systems. Soon thereafter, he met Michael
Adam and Martin Lueck. The trio went on to launch Adam,
Harding, and Lueck (AHL), a trend following firm managing money
for clients. In two years, the Man Group bought AHL out and built
its trend following firm and systems into a monster with $21 billion
under management.3 Harding, while wealthy from the sale, knew
much of Man Group’s success was built around his trading systems.
But he wanted more than to rest on his buyout winnings and over
time built his new firm Winton Capital into a trend-trading
juggernaut. All of that success comes with a basic philosophical
underpinning. But, before jumping into his philosophies, consider
his performance, the main reason I am writing about him (see
Chart 2.1).

29

When I first got into
commodities, no one was
interested in a diversified
approach. There were
cocoa men, cotton men,
grain men—they were
worlds apart. I was
almost the first one who
decided to look at all
commodities together.
Nobody before had looked
at the whole picture and
had taken a diversified
position with the idea of
cutting losses short and
going with a trend.
Richard Donchian

30

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

CHART 2.1: Monthly Performance Data for Winton Futures Fund
Recent
Returns

Latest
Month

Last 3
Months

Last 6
Months

Last 12
Months

Last 2
Years

Last 3
Years

Last 4
Years

Last 5
Years

Last 7
Years

Last 10
Years

Manager

(3.10)

(2.91)

(2.61)

22.95

36.32

41.85

93.41

130.59 223.81

358.79

Benchmark

1.22

(8.39)

(3.06)

(12.48)

(1.05)

5.74

16.88

28.05

34.83

SEP

OCT

NOV

DEC

JAN

FEB

MAR

APR

MAY

JUN

2008

3.85

7.95

(0.66) (0.99)

1.99

5.06 (4.63)

(3.00) (0.41)

3.73

4.97

2.17 21.08

2007

3.86 (5.93) (3.95)

6.46

5.05

1.91 (1.18)

(0.88)

6.99

2.52

2.42

0.24 17.97

2006

4.20 (2.58)

4.01

5.66

(2.94) (1.17) (0.47)

4.54

(1.10)

1.48

3.24

2.14 17.84

2005

(5.38) 6.58

4.64

(4.21)

6.62

3.13 (1.85)

7.63

(6.17) (2.95) 7.32 (4.37) 9.73

2004

2.72 11.56

(0.80) (8.62)

0.28 (2.96) 1.33

3.09

5.14

4.03

2003

5.95 11.95 (10.80)

10.19 (5.20) (0.68)

0.62

0.26

4.72 (2.48) 10.27 27.76

2002

(10.13) (6.04) 12.62

4.71

6.04

7.63

(7.96) (0.69) 14.16 18.33

2.45

(3.76) (3.96) 7.95

JUL

AUG

13.86

Year

6.37 (0.19) 22.62

2001

4.38

0.56

7.09

(5.31) (2.61) (2.66) 0.66

0.56

4.64 13.75 (7.10) (5.15) 7.12

2000

(3.96) 1.72

(3.28)

2.06

(0.26) (1.27) (4.58)

3.23

(7.76)

1999

(1.38) 3.61

(3.98) 10.51

(8.39) 5.29 (2.01)

(3.47) (0.17) (6.20) 13.93

9.04 15.08

1998

1.50

7.38

8.53

10.99

(5.70) 1.15

9.50 52.17

(12.97) 9.96

8.14

1997

3.27

(1.63)

2.97

1.51

4.51

2.09

7.33 16.81 10.43

3.49

I have had the opportunity to interview Harding on two
occasions. Both times he came across as a down-to-earth, hard
worker, but also highly competitive. He wants to win. Did Harding
start out with that great trading performance? No silver spoon for
him. He worked. He practiced:
“I worked for a company [early on], and the people who ran
that took a very old-fashioned approach to trading. About
10 people and I spent the first half of every day drawing
about 400 charts by hand. It was very tedious. I did this for
about two years. The act of laboriously updating these
