
79

Determining Market Condition

discussed previously. Therefore, it is wise for a forex trader to learn how to
borrow information from the futures markets.

WHAT MAKES A SUCCESSFUL TRADER?
The key elements to making money are this: Successful traders interpret
correctly and act swiftly! Successful traders have the courage to act and act
promptly. I often ask what are the differences between successful traders
and not so successful traders are. I get all kinds of relatively good answers
of why traders fail, mainly due to the fact that folks share their own bad experiences with me. The reason I give for success is very simple: Generally,
a successful trader does not make a habit of consistently buying the high of
a given time period and riding the loss out until it “turns around.” Inversely,
successful traders do not make a habit of consistently selling the low of a
session and riding that loser out. Successful traders have a plan; they follow
the market and go with the flow. After all, that is where the saying, “The
trend is your friend,” came from. So we need to determine the trend. That
is where charts come in handy.
As Figure 2.1 shows, there are but three states the market is in: (1) bullish, or uptrend; (2) bearish, or downtrend; and (3) neutral, sideways, or

Uptrend

Downtrend

Sideways
FIGURE 2.1

80

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

what is known as a consolidation phase. We can see the current trend or
conditional state that the market is in. What we can’t see is when and by
how much that condition will change. That is one reason why many traders
lose—they anticipate or guess which direction the market will go; they
trade without a plan or set of rules to enter a trade. If you do believe that
the markets are an effective mechanism for reflecting the perceived value
on a given product at a given time, then you need to learn how to follow the
flow of the market. A chart shows the market in its current condition. Until
that condition changes, you need to go with the flow. So what signals
should you look for when conditions change? When the market is in an uptrend, a simple signal is once the market ceases to increase its assigned
value by establishing not only higher highs and higher lows but, most important, when a market stops making higher closing highs.
As for a market that is in a downtrend, when different events occur—
such as lower highs, lower lows, or, more important, lower closing lows—
then it is starting to change conditions. If a bearish market or a bullish
market changes conditions, it will most likely go into what is called a consolidation or congestion phase. Figure 2.2 shows the market moving from
an uptrend to a congestion phase, or sideways pattern. What we need to do
then is, first, learn how to anticipate or discover what forecasting tool
would help us determine what the potential top of that uptrend would be
and, second, understand what clues to look for once it establishes the top
to help signal us that the trend may resume or that a reversal of the trend
will occur.

Resumption or Reversal?

Congestion

Uptrend

FIGURE 2.2

Determining Market Condition

81

WHERE’S THE CATCH?
As the market starts to trade higher once, it enters a trend phase. Generally
speaking, the market will pause or consolidate before resuming the uptrend. However, there lies the catch and what substantiates the Random
Walk theory. Not at all times do markets resume an uptrend from the consolidation phase. False breakouts and reversals do occur. Most bullish
chart patterns, such as flags, pennants, rising wedges, and ascending triangles, are just an assortment of classical technical continuation patterns that
exist in trends. These work in bar charts and candle charts. The larger patterns tend to give a clue to the next move by forming in the direction of the
trend; the smaller corrective patterns, such as flags and triangles, lean away
from the trend. Sideways channels that form after a bullish trend have a
tendency to support off a past breakout point or an old high.
Figure 2.3 shows weekly chart of Apple Computer; it had an amazing
run after it went out of a period of congestion and blasted off to the upside.
Notice that after the bullish price direction resumed, prices do not make

FIGURE 2.3
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

82

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

lower closing lows until the second week in December. After that, as you
can see, it did move higher at the start of 2006; but the tweezer top formation (equal and opposite) contained the rally, and prices ended back where
they started.

FIND THE CLUES!
From a strict chart-reading perspective, finding the clues as to when a trend
is nearing completion is a matter of watching the relationship of the close
of the time period for which you are trading to past highs and lows. If you
study the chart in Figure 2.3, you will see the first leg or run-up in the market from September 2004 until the first lower closing low occurred in
March 2005. The market never made a lower closing low during that time
period. Once it did, the market entered a consolidation phase. That was the
first conditional change. The sequence of higher highs, higher lows, and
higher closing highs stopped; and a new conditional change occurred—the
market made a lower closing low and closed below the open twice in a row.
The chart in Figure 2.4 zooms in on that specific area to help highlight what
occurs when a trend pauses or exhausts itself.
As traders, we are searching for information that will give us clues to an
advantageous entry spot to go long, whether it is at the beginning stages of
a bottom or breaking out of a congestion phase or a sideways channel. Determining the market condition, whether it is bullish, bearish, or neutral, is
what will help us in our trading decisions. There are many forms of technical analysis studies to help us achieve that. The best form of trend analysis
is the simple trend-line approach; you start with the lowest low point and
then draw the line up until the next corrective low point. Figure 2.5 demonstrates the most common way to draw a supporting trend line. After a long
hard crash in IBM, a low was made on 4/17/2005 at 71.85 (the Weekly Pivot
Point S-1 targeted a low of 72.50). Drawing a line from that low and extending it out to the second reactionary low and extending forward illustrated a rising trend. As the market kept bouncing near that support line
(S-1), it advanced higher. Using this form of simple analysis will help you
identify the market’s condition and, therefore, develop a trading plan or
keep you focused to buy breaks.
As for determining a bearish or downward trend, you need to draw a
line from a peak, or top, in the market, as shown in Figure 2.6. You have a
series of lower highs to draw a resistance trend line. Start with the first
peak, extend the line downward to the next high, and then extend the line
forward. This will help you remain focused that the market is bearish, and
therefore you want to focus on selling opportunities.

FIGURE 2.4
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 2.5
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

83

84

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 2.6
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

As the trend line is drawn from the top and extended down to the next
high, notice that the highs are touching the newly drawn resistance line as
the market pushes away from the trend line. Also notice the sequence of
events that occur. It is the opposite of what we saw in a bull trend: Prices
are making lower highs and lower lows and closing below the opens (as indicated by the dark candles); but more important, prices continually close
below the prior time period’s low. In addition, the downtrend does not end
until late November, when prices reverse these negative conditions. The
conditional changes that occur on the way down reverse at that time with
higher highs, higher lows, higher closes than opens, and, once again, the
most important feature of all, higher closes than a prior period’s high.

BE ON GUARD FOR CHANGES
I must reiterate that no one, no matter what, can foresee the future. Therefore, you must be aware that changes can and do occur. You must under-

85

Determining Market Condition

stand what drives these changes as reflected on the chart patterns. Once
you can master identifying what drives price changes or trending market
conditions, then you need to learn how and when to execute a trade based
on those signals. Then the next phase is to manage the risks of the trade
and to learn how to exit the trade to harness the profits accrued in the
trade.
I will teach you how to spot these changes and what you can do to protect yourself from giving back profits by scaling out of trades, which will be
covered in Chapter 10. First, you need to be aware of the process that markets go through. Prices do go in trend mode as we have covered so far.
From a technical standpoint, there are certain clues that candle charts illustrate to show you the true condition of the market. Pivot point analysis
will also help guide you as to price targets, either the high or the low or
both of a given session. If you have the understanding that markets can either continue the original trend or reverse it on a dime, then you will be
able to filter out preconceived emotional opinions rather than “fight the
tape,” as it is called. You will read that the mind can, will, and does play
tricks on you when you are trading. So you need to focus on what the market is showing you at the current moment.
The graph in Figure 2.7 seems a bit harsh—that a market condition

Not all consolidations resume trend!

Consolidation

Uptrend
Reversal
FIGURE 2.7

86

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

could be so bullish and yet completely fall apart at the seam after a consolidation period. What can and usually does happen is that a trader gets a
preconceived notion that the value of a given market should continue to
move in one direction. Most traders will continuously buy breaks after a
consolidation period. Granted, that might be a correct notion; but it might
not be the correct move, especially when proven wrong by the markets’
conditional changes as highlighted by specific candle patterns.
As you can see in Figure 2.8, the 5-minute e-mini–Standard & Poor’s
(S&P) chart shows how a market moves from bullish (or an uptrend) to the
consolidation phase to a complete trend reversal. Drawing a simple trend
line would help you identify a breakdown of the support; but the one most
important element that signaled a trend reversal was the fact that once the
market traded below the consolidation sideways channel support—more
specifically, closed below that level and remained below the channel support level—you had sufficient evidence to identify that the market’s bullish
condition had changed.

FIGURE 2.8
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

Determining Market Condition

87

FOREX MARKETS FALL PREY TO REVERSALS
Let’s examine a market that is not correlated to stocks, such as the euro
currency, to see how this market phenomenon known as a trend reversal
occurs. Keep in mind that the markets are a reflection of the cumulative
total (or sum) of market participants’ perceived value of a given product at
a given time. We went over the fact of how massive the spot forex market’s
liquidity is; not a single entity can manipulate prices. Something or some
event must drive traders’ opinions of the markets. One such event is a news
or economic report, which can change people’s opinions on a given market’s value.
As we look at the euro currency chart in Figure 2.9, we see the market
develop into an uptrend, then consolidate, and then, bang, on the drop of a
dime, drastically reverse. This is the kind of trading environment in which
traders can and do make lots and lots of money. If you know what to look
for and if you understand once a market goes from trend to consolidation,
you should be aware that the next possible outcome might not be a trend
continuation but rather a complete trend reversal. Then you have a better
chance of not fighting against the current of the market, otherwise known
as the tape.

FIGURE 2.9
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

88

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

MOVING AVERAGES HELP!
The next method for identifying whether the market is bullish, bearish, or
in a consolidation phase is utilizing moving averages. The most familiar
one is the benchmark 200-day moving average. Most technicians and shortterm traders feel this is a worthless time period, with which I agree for
short- to intermediate-term trading.
Remember that the idea in using moving averages is to help determine
the true direction of the market. The longer the time period used in a moving average, the less effective it is for shorter-term trading. Keep in mind
that a 200-day moving average is over 28 weeks, more than half a year. The
Federal Reserve raised rates four times in 2005 in that same time period.
That leaves way too much time and, more important, distance between
prices and the moving average to generate buy or sell signals.
When using moving averages the general guideline is simple:
• If prices are above the moving average, look to buy pullbacks or to
take buy signals, as the market is in a bullish mode or in an uptrend.
• If prices are trading below the moving average, look to sell rallies or to
take sell signals, as the market is bearish or in a downtrend.
Another instance in which traders use moving averages in helping their
trading is determining what is called “regression to the mean.” This is a
term many traders hear but really do not understand. It refers to the condition when prices deviate too far from the mean or average. At that tme,
prices will regress, or return, to the average; or the market will pause or
consolidate until the average catches up to the price. You will notice what
I call a “gap band” signal. This is what will occur when the prices gap too far
away from the moving averages or bands and give a trader an opportunity
for a countertrend trade. Another way to describe this is that when a market deviates, or departs, too far from the moving average, it gives an opportunity for a speculator to take advantage of this condition, which
generally ends up with prices reaching an unsustainable extreme and then
returning back toward the moving averages for a short-term price swing.
The question is at what distance or price level do prices deviate, or move
too far away, from the moving average before market prices return to the
moving average or the market pauses in order for the moving average to
catch up to the prices.
As you can see in Figure 2.10, the market trends higher; but at times we
see reactions that shift values from one extreme to another. How do we use
moving averages effectively? More important, which time frames and
which set of conditional settings should we employ to give us a true sense
or value of the market? We will cover a different concept using a pivot

Determining Market Condition

89

FIGURE 2.10

point method later in the book. Right now, I want to set the foundation behind the principle of why we use moving averages to help determine bullish, bearish, or neutral market conditions and how to trade these
conditions. I try to figure out not why a market moved, but rather where the
market is now in relation to specific points of interest, such as past opens
highs, lows, and closes.

FILLING IN THE GAP
As you can see in Figure 2.10, the gaps that occur show that prices move
too far too fast in one direction, which is a condition known as overbought
or oversold. Those moves are unsustainable and thus form what we call
overvalued or undervalued in relation to the trend line or moving average.
Most market behavior as reflected by the human emotional state goes into
extremes. This is even the case in trending markets: They move either too
fast or too far in any one direction and then simply pause or correct back
above or below the various moving averages, as you will see. The chart in

90

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Figure 2.11 is the spot euro currency. This market has an inverse relationship with the U.S. dollar. As the dollar moved lower, the euro moved higher,
and vice versa. Notice that when it separates too far away from the longerterm moving average (M/A), it would return back to test the M/A as a support line or fill the gap, as it is known. Finally, as it breaks below the M/A
support in the middle of September, it declines too far too fast and returns
back up to test the line, which now acts as a resistance trend line.
In conclusion, trend lines and moving averages help us determine the
price direction of a given market at a given time. They can also help us discover when a market is overbought or oversold. In simple terms, when we
use moving averages, the more time periods we use, the slower or less sensitive moving averages are to price changes. Prices will trade and close
below a moving average in a bearish market condition, or a downtrend; and
prices will trade or, more important, close above a moving average in a bullish market condition, or uptrend. Introducing more than one moving average with two different calculated values, such as 10-period and 20-period
simple moving averages on a closing basis, will generate buy and sell signals as one value crosses above or below the other. We can compute and
change the variables we use as well, such as closes and volatility calcula-

FIGURE 2.11
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

Determining Market Condition

91

tions. Moving averages help in the development of trading strategies, as we
will see in later chapters. There are also variables other than just a simple
moving average based on a closing time period that you can use. I will introduce to you a pivot point moving average method in Chapter 6.
Forex, or currency, markets tend to establish longer-term trends, so
moving average studies are very popular with these markets. Also, moving
average systems can be back-tested; therefore, hypothetical results can be
produced for those looking to explore running a hedge fund.
In the next few chapters, we will introduce the pivot point system and
incorporate that as one of our moving average values. We will blend this
with a series of conditions and introduce various time frames to help us determine:
• Market condition and direction.
• Overbought or oversold conditions.
• Potential turning points or reversal areas.
• A moving average system to determine buy and sell signals.
If you are looking to improve your skills as a trader, then these next few
chapters will help. I hope I will inspire you to learn how to develop a predetermined game plan, to act on that plan, and to manage and maintain the
profits in the trade and to learn how and when to cut the trade when the
market signals to do so.
If you understand the three directions in which a market can go—up,
down, or sideways—then you will have an edge on learning how to “read
the tape,” which should enable you to cut losses and let your winners ride.

CHAPTER 3

How to Read
Oscillators to Spot
Overbought or
Oversold
Conditions

n a bullish market environment, prices break out of a previous range
and trade higher. Depending on the move, sometimes the market
reaches an unsustainable extreme, which we refer to as “overbought.”
After all, market prices can’t go up forever without a pause. The outcome
varies when markets reach overbought conditions. They can, as stated,
pause or consolidate, correct back down a bit, or completely reverse the
entire price advance. Understanding when a market is likely to reach an
overbought condition is vital to knowing when to take a profit in a long position, especially after a long uptrend, or when to profit from a countertrend
trade opportunity. This is also referred to as a “mean-reverting strategy” or
“trading against the trend.”
We can measure or profile a market price extreme several ways: One is
by looking at past price resistance levels; another is by looking at the
strength or weakness of the market’s move by using certain technical indicators that measure the current price, relative to previous highs and lows.
Some of my favorite tools that I use to compliment my trading method
include predictive analysis based on pivot point studies, as we will see in
the following chapters, with a strong emphasis on studying pure price action, as we discussed in Chapter 2, by identifying higher closing highs in an
uptrend and lower closing lows in a downtrend.
I look to identify certain chart patterns or a signal that shows a shift in
momentum; and then I look for a sequence of events, such as higher closing highs at predetermined support levels or lower closing lows at predetermined resistance levels determined by the aid of pivot points analysis,

I

93

94

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

into which I incorporate various time frames to help me pin down reversal
target levels. This method is great for short-term day trading to long-term
investing. This method also works when I am looking at a swing trade,
which is a trade that may last anywhere from one to three days. For longerterm trading, I use volume studies in the stock and futures markets to help
me confirm the strength or weakness of a trend or to gather a clue as to
when a major reversal is ready to occur. For spot foreign exchange (forex)
currency trading, volume figures are available to use from the futures markets; but because those figures are not available until the end of day, they
are not good day trading indicator tools. Therefore, the use of oscillators
and indicators help to confirm the condition of the market once I am in a
trade or about to make a trade based on an extreme price swing.
Some questions that are often asked when I am giving a seminar or a
presentation at a conference are: How many indicators do you suggest
using at one time? Do you get analysis paralysis from using too many? The
answer is that I use two indicators: stochastics and moving average convergence/divergence (MACD).
Since trending conditions exist for less than 30 to 40 percent of the
time, you can anticipate that after a nice trend directional move, the market
will move in a consolidation phase, or “whipsaw” as most people call it. In
choppy range-bound conditions, stochastics is your friend; in trending market conditions, MACD will give you solid signals.
The myth surrounding MACD is that one of the best indicators out
there is not necessarily true. So goes the old adage that there is no holy grail
for any single trading indicator or style. This is due to the fact that markets
change, as do market conditions and people’s perception on a product’s
given value or anticipated value in any given time. I believe that the stochastic indicator is a more useful tool than the MACD during certain market conditions and for determining various signals, such as divergences or
convergences. They both can be used for pinpointing reversals.
It is likely that one will give a faster signal than the other, and vice
versa. The one fact is that in trending markets, MACD can be your friend by
helping you to stay in a trade longer, thus milking a position for more than
you would imagine. This chapter will show several rules and techniques for
using both of these indicators.
