
is an example of a horoscope showing the 12 houses with the zodiacal signs in their
“natural” order; that is, Aries on the cusp of the first house, Taurus on the second house, and so
forth. In addition, there are four important points on angles: the Ascendant, Midheaven (MC),
the Descendant, and Immun Coeli (IC). The Ascendant is the sign and degree of the zodiac rising
over the eastern horizon at birth, indicating the time one is born or when a company’s stock
started to trade. The Ascendant signifies a person’s or company’s appearance to the public. The
Ascendant or “rising sign” can only be calculated with an exact birth time.
FIGURE 9.19
Example of a horoscope showing the 12 houses with the zodiacal signs in their natural order.

The Midheaven, or Medium Coeli, is the cusp of the tenth house in the chart. It reflects the
location of the Sun at midday of the time and place where one was born. It signifies career,
status, and public image. It is the second most powerful point following the Ascendant. Because
it is on an angle as one of the four cardinal points, any planet placed near it is extremely potent,
either favorably or unfavorably, depending on the nature of the planet and the aspects it makes
in the chart.
The Descendant, also referred to as the “setting sign,” represents our relationship to those
around us and those whom we attract into life. It may be defined in short as “relating to
others.”
The Immun Coeli, or IC, on the cusp of the fourth house, is most closely associated with
issues relating to home, the past, family, and domestic concerns.
There are many techniques for making predictions. However, in this discussion, we shall only
be using the transiting planets and their position in the sky at any given moment relative to the
natal planets. The term “transit” refers to the position and motion of the planets in the sky at

any given time.
The planets and the respective houses that they rule are most important in helping to
identify favorable trading periods. This information for both natal and financial astrology is
listed in the table that follows. The interpretations for the traditional house system and aspects
are listed in Appendixes 1 and 2. The common interpretations for the zodiac signs are listed in
Appendix 3. Some readers might need them later on because they constitute an important part
of astrology.
Although the Sun and the Moon are not planets as such, they are grouped together with the
eight other planets and the houses they rule.
Planet
House
Zodiac Sign
Sun

5th house of children and minors.
Sports and recreation, romance, hobbies and gambling, places of
entertainment.
Financial: Speculation/stock markets, stockbrokers, precious
metals.

Leo

Moon

4th house of family and property.
Retail, health care, household products, restaurants.
Financial: Trend-following, real estate, mining.

Cancer

Mercur
y

Co-ruler of 3rd and 6th houses.
Communication, media, short-distance travel.
Financial: Day-trading, stocks, agents, contracts, trucking,
telecommunications, transportation, footwear.

Gemini/Virgo

Venus

Co-ruler of 2nd and 7th house.
Apparel, cosmetics, fashion, recreation, retailers.
Financial: Bonds, investors, financial security.

Taurus/Libra

Mars

1st house of personality.
Appearance, self image, sports.
Financial: Hot stocks, deals, options, startups, contrarians, steel,
defense, industrial machinery, diamonds.

Aries

Jupiter

9th house of higher education, long-distance travel and
Sagittarius
communication.
Foreigners, foreign affairs, publishing, the media.
Financial: Investing for growth, speculation, bankers, brokers, legal
matters and courts.

Saturn

10th house of career and profession, public work.
Financial: Value investing, shorting, farms, real estate, mines,
utilities, and capital goods.

Capricorn

Uranus

11th house of projects, friends, astrology.
Financial: IPO’s, exploration and discoveries, telecommunications,
aerospace, computers and technology.

Aquarius

Neptun
e

12th house of institutions, entertainment, tobacco, alcoholic
beverages, and movie industry.
Financial: Story stocks, rumor plays, venture capital, chemicals,

Pisces

pharmaceuticals, natural gas, oil.
Pluto

8th house of birth, death, sexuality, inheritance, partner’s
monetary concerns, investments.
Financial: Big business and money, mergers and acquisitions,
turnaround candidates, insider trading, mineral resources,
biotechnology, insurance, nuclear power.

Scorpio

It should be noted that many industries share more than one planet and/or house. For
example, telecommunications is best described as Uranus (telecommunication) plus Mercury
(communication).
The astrological symbols for the planets and zodiacal signs are shown in
Figure 9.20
, together with astrological symbols for the main aspects. There are two harmonious aspects
and three inharmonious ones. The harmonious are the 60 degree (sextile) and the 120 degree
(trine) aspects, the second of which is the stronger. When the trine aspect is in effect, it often
facilitates a favorable outcome. The inharmonious aspects are the 45 degree (semi-square), the
major 90 degree (square), and the very strong 180 degree (opposition) aspects. Planets are in
conjunction (0 degrees) when they occupy the same or almost the same degree. The effect of
conjunction can be favorable or unfavorable depending upon the planets involved. More
information about the aspects and their interpretation is included in Appendix 2.
FIGURE 9.20
Astrological symbols.

The patterns change endlessly throughout life. The aspects forming between the planets
allow us to know in advance when there will be difficulties to overcome and when there is a
productive time to act.
For example, stressful aspects of planets in transit to the planets ruling the signs of the
“money” houses, that is, the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh houses, and/or planets
occupying those houses in one’s chart are nearly always a warning not to trade, or to at least
reduce trading. Traders will find that the most profitable times for trading are when the right
aspects align favorably with the position of their money planets. The aspects of transit planets

have been listed in
Table 9.1
.
Table 9.1
Favorable Aspects of Transit Planets

Checkin
g Order

Aspects of Transit Planets

Comments

1

Transiting Venus and Jupiter in sextile or
trine aspects to either natal Sun, Jupiter, or
Pluto.

Either one of these aspects may be
favorable and trading can be more
aggressive.

2

Transiting Sun conjunct Ascendant or natal
Jupiter or Pluto.

Can be favorable, but mostly for
day trading.

3

Mars trine natal Venus or Jupiter.

Favorable usually for day trading.

4

Transiting Uranus, Neptune, or Pluto in
favorable aspects to natal Venus or Jupiter.

Favorable and may enhance trading
results.

5

Transiting Jupiter in conjunction, sextile,
square, trine, quincunx, and opposition
aspect to Part of Fortune (POF) can be very
favorable. POF will be dealt with in more
detail at the end of this section.

Favorable. Even the square and
opposition aspects, which are
considered hard aspects, may
trigger beneficial developments.

Figure 9.21
is a native’s hypothetical birth chart, drawn up for the time and place he was born in China.
In interpreting the chart, note first that the Sun and the Moon are conjunct in the sign of
Scorpio in the second house of money. Next, take note of the Ascendant or rising sign, being
the most important point in the chart. In this case, it is in Libra, and provides clues as to the
personality of the native and how he may appear or project himself outwardly. Proceed to the
Midheaven, in Cancer, and note the key characteristics of that sign. Next, look at planets or
points that are close to one of the four main or cardinal angles, as any angular position always
has greater importance. In the chart shown, the point called Part of Fortune (POF), to be dealt
with in greater detail later, is almost exactly conjunct the Ascendant, reinforcing the influence
of this fortuitous point.
FIGURE 9.21
Natal chart of a trader who has made and lost several fortunes.

Next, note the heavy Eastern Hemisphere emphasis in the chart; that is, nearly all the planets
are to the left side of the chart, denoting a person who is more likely to exert control over his
life, or shape his own destiny. Planets on the Western Hemisphere side (right side) often
indicate a person who depends more on approval from others and who tends to go with the
flow.
There is a stellium (three or more planets conjunct) of planets in the second house of money,
underscoring an emphasis on acquiring wealth.
Finally, pay close attention to the aspects between the various planets in the chart. Note the
120 degree trine aspect between Jupiter in the tenth house of career to Venus in the second
house of money, which is very favorable for acquiring wealth. Jupiter, however, is also in
opposition to Mars, which in the author’s experience often signifies: can make a fortune, can
lose a fortune!
There is, of course, much more to delineating a chart. Some of the books listed in the
Bibliography deal extensively with the subject, and may be of further help.
On December 7, 2010, the transiting planets were in aspects with the planets in the chart
shown in
Figure 9.21
. The trader’s natal chart is displayed in the inner wheel, and the transiting planets are in the
outer wheel. The equal house system has been used to divide the chart into 12 even houses.
Other popular systems include Placidus, Koch, and Topocentric, to mention a few, but to start
with, it is recommended that readers use the equal house system. There are, in all, about 10
different systems, but the “angles” of the natal chart, such as the Ascendant and Midheaven,
are always the same, regardless of which house system is being used.
In general, the outer planets, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, when in favorable aspect to Venus
and/or Jupiter, can bring wealth. Transiting Uranus to Jupiter or Venus can lead to a sudden,

unexpected windfall. The person charted in
Figure 9.22
may be the recipient of some financial reward or may advance in his career when both
transiting Jupiter and Uranus, in Pisces in the sixth house, move forward to make a 120 degree
trine aspect to natal Jupiter/Uranus in the tenth house in the third week of January 2011. At
that time, the aspect will be exact, and this can be projected by any astro-program or looked up
in an ephemeris, as explained further on. The favorable aspects of transit planets are shown in
Table 9.1
. However, the outer planets move very slowly, and favorable or beneficial aspects from
them will not happen often. It is therefore important to also follow the transits of two of the
faster moving planets, Venus and Jupiter. When they are in harmonious aspects to natal Sun,
Jupiter, or Pluto, there is a higher probability that trading activities will be profitable.
Sometimes transiting Sun conjunct our Ascendant, or Pluto and transiting Mars trine to natal
Venus, can have the same effect. It might be helpful to make a checklist, as shown in
Table 9.1
.
FIGURE 9.22
Transits to natal planets on December 7, 2010.

The planets’ movements, as mentioned before, can be looked up in an ephemeris, which is a
set of tables that list the “ephemeral” or changing positions that each solar-system body will
occupy on each day of the year. The ephemeris contains a phenomena section that explains
how to read the different signs and glyphs. In time, many will find a manual ephemeris to be an
indispensable tool for identifying in advance potential favorable aspects to a certain chart
point. For beginners, however, it may be easier to just use an astrological software program

