
53

54

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Internet charts, real-time prices
Although most online brokers provide support for real-time prices, not all
provide real-time charting capabilities. If your broker doesn’t offer what
you need, and you find delayed prices are just too frustrating, you can find
a number of sites that offer real-time price charts. Real-time, browser-based
Internet charts usually aren’t free. You will generally find them priced
between $9.95 and $34.95 per month.
Sites offering real-time charts include the following:
✓ StockCharts (www.stockcharts.com): Chip Anderson started
StockCharts early in Internet history. He’s one of the few independents
still around, and for good reason — the site is excellent. We use charts
from this Web site throughout the book. StockCharts offers many
excellent free charting tools, but the best parts are available by
subscription. Advanced features include real-time, intraday pricing, the
ability to create and store chart annotations, the ability to create large
lists of your favorite charts, the ability to define custom chart settings,
and the capability of creating custom scans based on technical indicators.
Make sure that you click on “SharpCharts Voyeur,” which is listed under
“Tools & Charts” on the StockCharts home page. It shows charts that are
of interest to other traders.
✓ FreeRealTime.com (www.freerealtime.com): The free capabilities of
the site are fairly limited, and you’ll have to put up with banner ads and
the occasional full-page ad that display before the page you actually
want appears. The free portion of this site uses data from electronic
communications networks (ECNs), not data from the major stock
exchanges. Unfortunately, ECNs do not trade all stocks, so real-time
charts and quotes may not always be available. And ECN prices may not
always match prices on the major exchanges, but they’ll be very close. If
you can put up with these limitations, the charts and price quotes are in
real time. And they’re free.

Charting software
Before taking a step up toward a stand-alone charting application, make sure
that you explore the tools provided by your broker and other brokers and by
Web sites offering Internet charts. Some of these online tools are powerful and
may be more cost effective than a stand-alone package.
Stand-alone charting software, however, often provides capabilities beyond
what you can find online. For example, charting software packages offer
system testing but rarely are they part of a Web site’s tool set.

Chapter 4: Putting Your Computer to Work: Your Key Business Tool
Several packages are available; two examples include
✓ MetaStock (www.equis.com): MetaStock comes in two flavors, a standard
end-of-day trading package, and a professional version for intraday
charts. Each offers a variety of analysis tools, technical indicators,
system development and testing capabilities, and access to fundamental
stock data.
✓ TradeStation (www.tradestation.com): TradeStation is the gold
standard of charting software. It is powerful, flexible, and configurable,
and it’s designed to work the same way institutional trading platforms
do. You can fully automate your trading system by programming your
strategies into the system and then having TradeStation execute them in
real time. (Whether you should do so, however, is open for discussion.)
It also supports direct access to all ECNs and stock exchanges.
Many other charting packages are available, but these two packages are
widely used and give you a good basis for comparing all the other available
products.
The drawback to stand-alone charting software is the expense. In addition to
the price of the software, you need a data provider to deliver end-of-day or
intraday market prices. When selecting a charting software package, make
sure that it supports the data service you plan to use. They must work
together.
Data service vendors include
✓ Reuters DataLink (www.equis.com)
✓ QuoteCenter (www.quotecenter.ca)
✓ eSignal (www.esignal.com)

Finding Fundamental Information
Fundamental data — corporate information such as revenue, earnings, and
cash flow — isn’t as perishable as price data or trading statistics, but
accessing these numbers directly from your trading platform as they’re
updated is a nice feature. Analysis of fundamental data is discussed in
Chapters 5, 6, and 7. Many brokers provide access to at least some
fundamental data, but if you’d like to run the numbers yourself, many of
these online sources can review the raw financial data:

55

56

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
✓ The Wall Street Journal (www.wsj.com): The Wall Street Journal is
available online by subscription. It provides access to a wide variety
of information including stock quotes, stock valuation indexes,
fundamental ratios, industry comparisons, insider transactions,
earnings estimates, and stock analysis reports. Delayed-price charts
also are available. The price for subscribers to the print version of The
Wall Street Journal or Barron’s is $39 annually, otherwise it’s $119. They
offer a free two-week trial.
✓ Edgar (www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml): All publicly traded companies
are required to file 10-Q and 10-K quarterly and annual reports
electronically with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
through its Electronic Data Gathering Analysis and Retrieval system
(EDGAR). These reports are available to everyone online at no charge.

Finding Analyst Reports
Sometimes you can find these research reports at your local library, especially
for big outfits like Standard & Poor’s and Value Line. Many analysts sell
research in the form of investment newsletter subscriptions. We’ve used
several of the following subscription services through the years, with varying
degrees of success:
✓ Standard & Poor’s (www.standardandpoors.com): Registration is
required, but access is free. You cannot access the full reports and
recommendations on this site, but the Business Week magazine Web site
(www.businessweek.com/investor) offers several complete S&P
reports, stock screens, and industry reports at no charge.
✓ Value Line (www.valueline.com): The Value Line Investment
Survey has been around for a long time. It profiles many of the major
corporations and provides a variety of stock screens based on proprietary
models. It also offers opinions on current economic and market climates.
Some reports and updates are available on the site at no charge, but a
subscription is required to access the complete site.
✓ Briefing.com (www.briefing.com): This site has free and subscription
components. Advanced features include access to analysts’ upgrades
and downgrades as they’re released, access to updated earnings
guidance, an IPO calendar, notification of changes in stock indexes, and
quite a bit more.
✓ Morningstar (www.morningstar.com): Morningstar probably is best
known for its analysis of mutual funds, but it also provides extensive
stock analysis, editorial commentary, a stock-screening tool, and a
thorough snapshot tool that shows financial performance, fund
ownership, and recent fund transactions. A subscription is required to
access premium content.

Chapter 4: Putting Your Computer to Work: Your Key Business Tool

Selecting a Trading Platform
You’ll find as many different approaches to trading as you’ll find traders.
Fortunately, almost as many alternatives for setting up your trading
environment also exist.
As technology develops and expands, online brokers are providing
increasingly powerful trading tools for their clients. These tools include
market research, charting capabilities, streaming prices and news services.
If your broker doesn’t offer a specific service, you probably can find it offered
on the Internet.
When selecting a trading platform, look for the capabilities you need today
with an eye toward future expandability. You may want to consider the
features in the three lists that follow.
Trading tools to look for include the following:
✓ Stock trading
✓ Support of sophisticated option trading strategies
✓ Futures trading, especially single-stock and index futures
✓ NASDAQ Level II access
✓ Direct-access trading and ECN book data
✓ Watch lists
✓ Automatic e-mail or text message notification when a stock hits your
price point
Analysis tools to shop for include these:
✓ Sector analysis
✓ Proprietary and third-party analyst’s reports
✓ News feeds (Dow Jones, Reuters, and so on)
✓ Real-time charting capabilities
✓ Time and volume sales reports
Account management tools that you may need include the following:
✓ Real-time account balances
✓ Real-time updates of buying power and margin exposure
✓ Portfolio management tools
✓ Open-order status

57

58

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
Before putting your computer to work as a trading platform, you need to
understand the two primary techniques for delivering trading tools and
services. The first uses your Internet browser to enter orders and deliver all
information. The other approach uses a stand-alone software program, an
integrated trading platform, to interact with your broker and your brokerage
account.
For the most part, integrated trading platforms are married to specific
brokerage firms. Some brokers provide you with a choice. For example,
Charles Schwab’s CyberTrader offers the integrated software-based system,
StreetSmart Pro and StreetSmart.com for Web-based trading tools.
The approach that suits you best depends somewhat on your trading style,
cost considerations, and your computer’s configuration. You may find that
the level of service offered by your broker depends on the size of your
account or your trading volume. You have to balance your cost with your
actual information needs.
Integrated trading platforms typically are direct-access systems. We discuss
both direct-access brokers and traditional online brokers in Chapter 3.
Although direct-access systems are offered in browser-based configurations,
active day traders and swing traders may require a completely integrated,
direct-access trading platform.

Browser-based trading environment
For most new traders, trading volume starts out relatively small, perhaps five
or fewer trades each month. Your time frame for holding a position probably
is measured in days to weeks or weeks to months. You probably won’t be
making many intraday trades, except to automatically exit a position after a
stop price is hit. In that case, a browser-based trading environment certainly
is good enough to get you started and may be all you’ll ever need.
These systems may be tightly integrated or somewhat disjointed,
depending on the way the broker implements them. Some brokers, for
example, automatically fill in order-entry screens with as much data as can
be gleaned from your account. Others make you type all the data into the
order screen by hand, which can be cumbersome and time-consuming. Some
brokers provide pop-up order confirmation and fill reports, and others make
you continuously press the Enter key while waiting for a trade execution to
show in your account.

Chapter 4: Putting Your Computer to Work: Your Key Business Tool
Pros
For the most part, almost any Internet-ready computer can support a
browser-based trading platform. Although Windows is most often used for
trading platforms, even Apple Macintosh or Linux systems can be used for
most browser-based applications.
Much of the browser-based information offered by your broker is available
to all clients, regardless of account size or trading volume. If your broker
doesn’t offer something you want, you usually can find it elsewhere on the
Internet, either free or for a modest fee.

Cons
When compared to an integrated software solution, browser-based trading is
relatively slow, requiring you to open many browser windows and manually
update account information. Depending on how well your broker implements
these systems, a bit more typing may be necessary to enter and execute your
orders.
On some browser-based trading platforms, your Internet session may be
disconnected whenever your screen is inactive for an extended period of
time. At best, this kind of interruption can be frustrating. Similarly, some
configurations depend on your using a specific browser, or may require that
you download and install a special browser plug-in to operate correctly.

Integrated trading platforms
For very active traders, especially day traders and swing traders, and for
traders looking to develop personalized trading systems, an integrated
trading platform that doesn’t rely on your Internet browser can be a better
solution. You typically download these software programs, install them on
your computer, and then use them to access your brokerage account and
trading tools. They range from rudimentary text-based applications with
modest graphing capabilities to sophisticated technical-analysis programs
that enable you to design and implement custom trading systems.
The most sophisticated of these platforms provides an institutional-level
trading experience. Some, for example, permit trading baskets that enable
you to simultaneously enter orders for a number of different stocks. Others
help you to define hot keys for fast order entry.

59

60

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
You’ll also find that integrated trading platforms provide support for
sophisticated strategies. The most flexible among them give you the ability
to enter contingent orders, where, for example, a stock’s price may trigger
an option order or the execution of one order automatically cancels another.
Several brokers will notify you by e-mail or a cellphone text message when a
stock hits a price you’ve specified or an indicator reaches a preset level. One
broker even gives you the ability to automatically execute trades based on
recommendations from well-known and reputable advisory services.

Pros
These trading platforms typically are faster and easier to use and customize
than browser-based applications. The best among them have system-testing
tools that help you fine-tune your personal trading strategies.

Cons
Integrated trading platforms can be expensive. Unless you have a large
account balance, your broker may charge you either a monthly fee or base
the access on your making a minimum number of monthly trades.
Furthermore, these platforms often require up-to-date computer equipment
with a fast processor and plenty of storage to run well. Older equipment
will not run this software satisfactorily. And it’s likely you’ll need to use the
Windows operating system.

Mike’s hybrid trading platform
Mike here: My trading horizon is relatively long,
and I don’t execute enough trades each month
to justify the cost of an integrated direct-access
trading environment. My trading strategies don’t
depend on having access to NASDAQ Level
II data or direct electronic communications
network (ECN) access.
However, I prefer working with a charting
package versus evaluating charts by using a
browser. I’ve used several popular packages,
and a couple of homegrown applications. (Yes,
I’ll admit that I’m sort of a geek.)
My solution was to implement a hybrid
approach that uses browser-based tools for
account management and order entry alongside a software-based charting application.
This approach provides me with access to more

market data than I ever had when I worked as
a broker, gives me tremendous flexibility, and
minimizes my trading costs.
And it suits my trading style. For some reason,
the world looks different when I’m sitting in
front of a computer. I feel rushed, somehow,
and I don’t make my best decisions. That’s one
of the reasons I don’t day trade. The pace works
against me; I get caught up in the moment and
end up making mistakes.
I think and plan better when I’m sitting by myself,
in a quiet corner of my home, with a pen in my
hand. I’ll print the reports and charts that interest me, sit in a comfy chair, mark up my reports,
and deliberately chart my trading course.
Only then am I ready to enter orders online.

Chapter 4: Putting Your Computer to Work: Your Key Business Tool

Determining Computer Requirements
Few new traders actually need a fully integrated direct-access trading
platform to begin trading or to trade profitably. But if you’re considering a
new computer system, the hardware and software requirements for these
high-powered platforms may be of benefit. Otherwise, you may be unable to
upgrade your new computer to run these applications.

Decisions, decisions . . .
Most trading platforms are designed for Windows, but die-hard Mac and
Linux fans aren’t completely locked out. If you’re starting with a browser-based
approach, almost any modern, Internet-ready computer can handle the task.
Browser-based Internet tools usually work equally well on any hardware or
operating system. Sadly, some sites require functions provided by a specific
browser, but that is becoming increasingly rare.
If you’re planning to buy new computer hardware for trading, we recommend
that you avoid Mac hardware or Unix/Linux operating systems. Although Mac
and Linux support browser-based applications at least as well as Windows,
you may be unable to upgrade if ever you want a more integrated trading
platform. We don’t know of any commercially available trading platforms for
independent traders (as opposed to institutional traders) that run on Linux
or either Mac OS 9 or OS X.

Configuring your computer system
Regardless of whether you decide to employ a browser-based approach or
an integrated trading platform, you’re going to need a reliable computer with
sufficient horsepower, memory, and storage space.
Some of today’s high-powered, integrated trading software requires equally
high-powered computer systems. We give you general hardware guidelines in
this section, but if you decide you want a computer that can be upgraded to
handle a high-performance integrated trading platform, you also need to check
with specific software vendors to identify any special hardware requirements.
You also need to be certain that your hardware supports your software.
Software vendors often claim that their products can run on relatively modest
hardware configurations; however, you’ll probably be disappointed and
frustrated with system performance under such conditions. These software
packages run much better on a computer that surpasses the system requirements. Trading platforms — especially testing applications and multichart,
multiwindow, multimonitor displays — consume considerable amounts of
system resources and can make many computers run unbearably slow.

61

62

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
The following minimum configurations easily support browser-based
solutions. Upgraded configurations, however, may be required to adequately
support fully integrated trading environments.
✓ Central processing unit (CPU): At a minimum, you need a 1 GHz
processor. Ideally, something much faster works better. Trading
applications tend to rely on making many mathematical calculations,
so you want to avoid the value-priced CPU chip sets. Look instead for
systems that are primarily designed for graphics or gaming applications.
Ideally, you should select a DualCore processor.
The slowest machines being sold today are rated in gigahertz multiples,
and most modern machines have enough CPU horsepower to run
charting application programs. However, high-end programs like
TradeStation take advantage of specialty hardware such as multi-CPU
and hyperthreading configurations. Check with software manufacturers
for specific details.
✓ RAM memory: 1GB of RAM is the absolute minimum, but you probably
want more. Memory is inexpensive compared with other hardware
upgrades, and having too much of it is next to impossible. Errorcorrecting memory may buy only extra peace of mind, but it doesn’t
cost much more than standard memory.
✓ Available disk space: 1GB of free disk space should be enough when
starting out, but you’ll need much more for long-term storage of real-time
price data, which will be useful for developing and testing your own
trading system. Chapter 15 discusses methods to personalize a trading
system.
✓ Operating system: If you’re running a Windows environment, you need
to be running at least Windows XP or Vista. Although browsers and
software applications will run on older versions of Windows, XP and
Vista give you more stability and reliability than earlier versions of
Windows. For trading applications, you want the most reliable system
you can find and afford. Windows XP and Vista may not be bulletproof,
but they’re so much better than their predecessors that you definitely
want to upgrade if you haven’t already.
✓ Video card: Although you may be able to squeak by using a sharedmemory video system (it shares some of your RAM), you’ll be better off
with a stand-alone video card that relies on its own video memory. A
minimum configuration for a single monitor requires at least 128MB of
video memory, but 256MB of video RAM is better. You may even want
1GB whenever you opt for a single video card that supports dual monitors.

Chapter 4: Putting Your Computer to Work: Your Key Business Tool
✓ Monitor size: Modern high-resolution LCD monitors are excellent and
inexpensive. A 17-inch monitor probably is the smallest you should
consider. Bigger is better. Even more important than size is the monitor’s
resolution. Anything less than 1024 x 768 resolution is useless for
reading chart detail, but you will want more. If you’re going with a single
monitor setup, you should consider a 20- or 22-inch monitor with
resolution up to 1920 x 1200.
✓ Dual monitor configurations: Some traders swear by the dual monitor
configuration. The idea is to pull up your charts on one monitor and
everything else on the other. Many video cards support dual monitors.
✓ Network interface: You need some way of accessing a high-speed
Internet connection (see the next section). Many computers now come
with either a built-in Ethernet port or an extra Ethernet Interface Card.
Either works fine.
✓ Power supply: We recommend that you use an uninterruptible power
supply (UPS). A UPS is relatively inexpensive and provides an extra
measure of security. Some protect against lightning strikes. If you live in
an area where power fluctuations are common, a UPS is a must.

Accessing the Internet
You must have reliable Internet access, and that means a high-speed
connection — either DSL or cable Internet will work fine. Some very active
day traders will spring for a fractional T1 or dedicated T1 line for an
additional measure of reliability, but either approach is expensive. A backup
connection is a good idea. Consider a wireless laptop card or even a second
high-speed Internet connection.
A dial-up connection is not fast enough or reliable enough for trading. If
dial-up is your only alternative, you may be able to temporarily squeak by
with it, but look for an alternative as soon as possible.
