
And others:
Kristian Kerr
Randal Nishina
The Entire Staff at FXCM

xiii

P1: JYS
fm
JWBK299-Lein

September 23, 2008

9:43

xiv

Printer: Yet to come

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 1

Foreign
Exchange—The
Fastest-Growing
Market of
Our Time

he foreign exchange market is the generic term for the worldwide
institutions that exist to exchange or trade currencies. Foreign exchange is often referred to as “forex” or “FX.” The foreign exchange
market is an over-the-counter (OTC) market, which means that there is no
central exchange and clearinghouse where orders are matched. FX dealers
and market makers around the world are linked to each other around the
clock via telephone, computer, and fax, creating one cohesive market.
Over the past few years, currencies have become one of the most popular products to trade. No other market can claim a 71 percent surge in volume over a three-year time frame. According to the Triennial Central Bank
Survey of the foreign exchange market conducted by the Bank for International Settlements and published in October 2007, daily trading volume hit
a record of $3.2 trillion, up from $1.9 trillion in 2004. This is estimated to
be approximately 20 times larger than the daily trading volume of the New
York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq combined. Although there are many
reasons that can be used to explain this surge in activity, one of the most
interesting is that the timing of the surge in volume coincides fairly well
with the emergence of online currency trading for the individual investor.

T

EFFECTS OF CURRENCIES ON STOCKS
AND BONDS
It is not the advent of online currency trading alone that has helped to
increase the overall market’s volume. With the volatility in the currency
markets over the past few years, many traders are also becoming more
1

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

2

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

aware of the fact that currency movements also impact the stock and bond
markets. Therefore, if stocks, bonds, and commodities traders want to
make more educated trading decisions, it is important for them to follow
the currency markets as well. The following are some of the examples of
how currency movements impacted stock and bond market movements in
the past.

EUR/USD and Corporate Profitability
For stock market traders, particularly those who invest in European corporations that export a tremendous amount of goods to the United States,
monitoring exchange rates are essential to predicting earnings and corporate profitability. Since 2003, European manufacturers have complained
extensively about the rapid rise in the euro and the weakness in the U.S.
dollar. The main culprit for the dollar’s sell-off has been the country’s
rapidly growing trade and budget deficits. This caused the EUR/USD (euroto-dollar) exchange rate to surge, which took a significant toll on the profitability of European corporations because a higher exchange rate makes
the goods of European exporters more expensive to U.S. consumers. In
2003, inadequate hedging shaved approximately 1 billion euros from Volkswagen’s profits, while Dutch State Mines (DSM), a chemicals group,
warned that a 1 percent move in the EUR/USD rate would reduce profits by between 7 million and 11 million euros. Unfortunately, inadequate
hedging is still a reality in Europe in 2008, which makes monitoring the
EUR/USD exchange rate even more important in forecasting the earnings
and profitability of European exporters.

Nikkei and U.S. Dollar
Traders exposed to Japanese equities also need to be aware of the developments that are occurring in the U.S. dollar and how they affect the
Nikkei rally. Japan has recently come out of 10 years of stagnation. During this time, U.S. mutual funds and hedge funds were grossly underweight Japanese equities. When the economy began to rebound, these
funds rushed in to make changes to their portfolios for fear of missing
a great opportunity to take advantage of Japan’s recovery. Hedge funds
borrowed a lot of dollars in order to pay for increased exposure, but the
problem was that their borrowings are very sensitive to U.S. interest rates
and the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy tightening cycle. Increased borrowing costs for the dollar could derail the Nikkei’s rally because higher
rates will raise the dollar’s financing costs. Yet with the huge current account deficit, the Fed might need to continue raising rates to increase the
attractiveness of dollar-denominated assets. Therefore, continual rate

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

3

hikes coupled with slowing growth in Japan may make it less profitable
for funds to be overleveraged and overly exposed to Japanese stocks. As a
result, how the U.S. dollar moves also plays a role in the future direction of
the Nikkei.

George Soros
In terms of bonds, one of the most talked-about men in the history of
the FX markets is George Soros. He is notorious for being “the man who
broke the Bank of England.” This is covered in more detail in our history
section (Chapter 2), but in a nutshell, in 1990 the U.K. decided to join the
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System in
order to take part in the low-inflationary yet stable economy generated
by the Germany’s central bank, which is also known as the Bundesbank.
This alliance tied the pound to the deutsche mark, which meant that the
U.K. was subject to the monetary policies enforced by the Bundesbank.
In the early 1990s, Germany aggressively increased interest rates to avoid
the inflationary effects related to German reunification. However, national
pride and the commitment of fixing exchange rates within the ERM
prevented the U.K. from devaluing the pound. On Wednesday, September
16, 1992, also known as Black Wednesday, George Soros leveraged the
entire value of his fund ($1 billion) and sold $10 billion worth of pounds
to bet against the Exchange Rate Mechanism. This essentially “broke” the
Bank of England and forced the devaluation of its currency. In a matter
of 24 hours, the British pound fell approximately 5 percent or 5,000 pips.
The Bank of England promised to raise rates in order to tempt speculators
to buy pounds. As a result, the bond markets also experienced tremendous volatility, with the one-month U.K. London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR) increasing 1 percent and then retracing the gain over the next
24 hours. If bond traders were completely oblivious to what was going
on in the currency markets, they probably would have found themselves
dumbstruck in the face of such a rapid gyration in yields.

COMPARING THE FX MARKET
WITH FUTURES AND EQUITIES
Traditionally FX has not been the most popular market to trade because
access to the foreign exchange market was primarily restricted to hedge
funds, Commodity Trading Advisors who manage large amounts of capital,
major corporations, and institutional investors due to regulation, capital
requirements, and technology. One of the primary reasons why the foreign
exchange market has traditionally been the market of choice for these large

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

4

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

players is because the risk that a trader takes is fully customizable. That is,
one trader could use a hundred times leverage while another may choose
to not be leveraged at all. However, in recent years many firms have opened
up the foreign exchange market to retail traders, providing leveraged trading as well as free instantaneous execution platforms, charts, and real-time
news. As a result, foreign exchange trading has surged in popularity, increasing its attractiveness as an alternative asset class to trade.
Many equity and futures traders have begun to add currencies into the
mix of products that they trade or have even switched to trading currencies
exclusively. The reason why this trend is emerging is because these traders
are beginning to realize that there are many attractive attributes to trading
FX over equities or futures.

FX versus Equities
Here are some of the key attributes of trading spot foreign exchange compared to the equities market.
FX Market Key Attributes

r Foreign exchange is the largest market in the world and has growing
liquidity.

r There is 24-hour around-the-clock trading.
r Traders can profit in both bull and bear markets.
r There are no trading curbs.
r Instant executable trading platform minimizes slippage and errors.
r Even though higher leverage increases risk, many traders see trading
the FX market as getting more bang for the buck.
Equities Market Attributes

r There is decent market liquidity, but it depends mainly on the stock’s
daily volume.

r The market is available for trading only from 9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. New
York time with limited after-hours trading.

r The existence of exchange fees results in higher costs and commissions.

r There is an uptick rule to short stocks, which many day traders find
frustrating. Trading curbs may be frustrating for day traders as well.

r The number of steps involved in completing a trade increases slippage
and error.
The volume and liquidity present in the FX market, one of the most liquid markets in the world, have allowed traders to access a 24-hour market

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

5

with low transaction costs, high leverage, the ability to profit in both bull
and bear markets, minimized error rates, limited slippage, and no trading
curbs or uptick rules. Traders can implement in the FX market the same
strategies that they use in analyzing the equity markets. For fundamental
traders, countries can be analyzed like stocks. For technical traders, the FX
market is perfect for technical analysis, since it is already the most commonly used analysis tool by professional traders. It is therefore important
to take a closer look at the individual attributes of the FX market to really
understand why this is such an attractive market to trade.
Around-the-Clock 24-Hour Market One of the primary reasons why
the FX market is popular is because for active traders it is the ideal market
to trade. Its 24-hour nature offers traders instant access to the markets
at all hours of the day for immediate response to global developments.
This characteristic also gives traders the added flexibility of determining
their trading day. Active day traders no longer have to wait for the equities
market to open at 9:30 a.m. New York time to begin trading. If there is a
significant announcement or development either domestically or overseas
between 4:00 p.m. New York time and 9:30 a.m. New York time, most day
traders will have to wait for the exchanges to open at 9:30 a.m. to place
trades. By that time, in all likelihood, unless you have access to electronic
communication networks (ECNs) such as Instinet for premarket trading,
the market would have gapped up or gapped down against you. All of the
professionals would have already priced in the event before the average
trader can even access the market.
In addition, most people who want to trade also have a full-time job
during the day. The ability to trade after hours makes the FX market a much
more convenient market for all traders. Different times of the day will offer different trading opportunities as the global financial centers around
the world are all actively involved in foreign exchange. With the FX market, trading after hours with a large online FX broker provides the same
liquidity and spread as at any other time of day.
As a guideline, at 5:00 p.m. Sunday, New York time, trading begins as
the markets open in Sydney, Australia. Then the Tokyo markets open at
7:00 p.m. New York time. Next, Singapore and Hong Kong open at 9:00 p.m.
EST, followed by the European markets in Frankfurt (2:00 a.m.) and then
London (3:00 a.m.). By 4:00 a.m. the European markets are in full swing,
and Asia has concluded its trading day. The U.S. markets open first in New
York around 8:00 a.m. Monday as Europe winds down. By 5:00 p.m., Sydney
is set to reopen once again.
The most active trading hours are when the markets overlap; for example, Asia and Europe trading overlaps between 2:00 a.m. and approximately
4:00 a.m., Europe and the United States overlap between 8:00 a.m. and

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

6

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

approximately 11:00 a.m., while the United States and Asia overlap between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. During New York and London hours all
of the currency pairs trade actively, whereas during the Asian hours the
trading activity for pairs such as the GBP/JPY and AUD/JPY tend to peak.
Lower Transaction Costs The existence of much lower transaction
costs also makes the FX market particularly attractive. In the equities market, traders must pay a spread (i.e., the difference between the buy and sell
price) and/or a commission. With online equity brokers, commissions can
run upwards of $20 per trade. With positions of $100,000, average roundtrip commissions could be as high as $120. The over-the-counter structure
of the FX market eliminates exchange and clearing fees, which in turn lowers transaction costs. Costs are further reduced by the efficiencies created
by a purely electronic marketplace that allows clients to deal directly with
the market maker, eliminating both ticket costs and middlemen. Because
the currency market offers around-the-clock liquidity, traders receive tight
competitive spreads both intraday and at night. Equities traders are more
vulnerable to liquidity risk and typically receive wider dealing spreads, especially during after-hours trading.
Low transaction costs make online FX trading the best market to trade
for short-term traders. For an active equity trader who typically places 30
trades a day, at a $20 commission per trade you would have to pay up to
$600 in daily transaction costs. This is a significant amount of money that
would definitely take a large cut out of profits or deepen losses. The reason
why costs are so high is because there are several people involved in an
equity transaction. More specifically, for each trade there is a broker, the
exchange, and the specialist. All of these parties need to be paid, and their
payment comes in the form of commission and clearing fees. In the FX market, because it is decentralized with no exchange or clearinghouse (everything is taken care of by the market maker), these fees are not applicable.
Customizable Leverage Even though many people realize that higher
leverage comes with risks, traders are humans and few of them find it easy
to turn away the opportunity to trade on someone else’s money. The FX
market caters perfectly to these traders by offering the highest leverage
available for any market. Most online currency firms offer 100 times leverage on regular-sized accounts and up to 200 times leverage on the miniature accounts. Compare that to the 2 times leverage offered to the average
equity investor and the 10 times capital that is typically offered to the professional trader, and you can see why many traders have turned to the foreign exchange market. The margin deposit for leverage in the FX market
is not seen as a down payment on a purchase of equity, as many perceive
margins to be in the stock markets. Rather, the margin is a performance

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

7

bond, or good faith deposit, to ensure against trading losses. This is very
useful to short-term day traders who need the enhancement in capital to
generate quick returns. Leverage is actually customizable, which means
that the more risk-averse investor who feels comfortable using only 10 or
20 times leverage or no leverage at all can elect to do so. However, leverage is really a double-edged sword. Without proper risk management a high
degree of leverage can lead to large losses as well.
Profit in Both Bull and Bear Markets In the FX market, profit potentials exist in both bull and bear markets. Since currency trading always
involves buying one currency and selling another, there is no structural
bias to the market. Therefore, if you are long one currency, you are also
short another. As a result, profit potentials exist equally in both upwardtrending and downward-trending markets. This is different from the equities market, where most traders go long instead of short stocks, so the
general equity investment community tends to suffer in a bear market.
No Trading Curbs or Uptick Rule The FX market is the largest
market in the world, forcing market makers to offer very competitive
prices. Unlike the equities market, there is never a time in the FX markets
when trading curbs would take effect and trading would be halted, only
to gap when reopened. This eliminates missed profits due to archaic exchange regulations. In the FX market, traders would be able to place trades
24 hours a day with virtually no disruptions.
Online Trading Reduces Error Rates In general, a shorter trade
process minimizes errors. Online currency trading is typically a three-step
process. A trader would place an order on the platform, the FX dealing
desk would automatically execute it electronically, and the order confirmation would be posted or logged on the trader’s trading station. Typically,
these three steps would be completed in a matter of seconds. For an equities trade, on the other hand, there is generally a five-step process. The
client would call his or her broker to place an order, the broker sends the
order to the exchange floor, the specialist on the floor tries to match up
orders (the broker competes with other brokers to get the best fill for the
client), the specialist executes the trade, and the client receives a confirmation from the broker. As a result, in currency trades the elimination of a
middleman minimizes the error rates and increases the efficiency of each
transaction.
Limited Slippage Unlike the equity markets, many online FX market
makers provide instantaneous execution from real-time, two-way quotes.
These quotes are the prices at which the firms are willing to buy or sell

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

8

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

the quoted currency, rather than vague indications of where the market is
trading, which aren’t honored. Orders are executed and confirmed within
seconds. Robust systems would never request the size of a trader’s potential order, or which side of the market he’s trading, before giving a bid/offer
quote. Inefficient dealers determine whether the investor is a buyer or a
seller, and shade the price to increase their own profit on the transaction.
The equity market typically operates under a “next best order” system,
under which you may not get executed at the price you wish, but rather at
the next best price available. For example, let’s say Microsoft is trading at
$52.50. If you enter a buy order at this price, by the time it reaches the specialist on the exchange floor the price may have risen to $53.25. In this case,
you will not get executed at $52.50; you will get executed at $53.25, which
is essentially a loss of three-quarters of a point. The price transparency
provided by some of the better market makers ensures that traders always
receive a fair price.
Perfect Market for Technical Analysis For technical analysts, currencies rarely spend much time in tight trading ranges and have the tendency to develop strong trends. Over 80 percent of volume is speculative
in nature, and as a result the market frequently overshoots and then corrects itself. Technical analysis works well for the FX market and a technically trained trader can easily identify new trends and breakouts, which
provide multiple opportunities to enter and exit positions. Charts and indicators are used by all professional FX traders, and candlestick charts
are available in most charting packages. In addition, the most commonly
used indicators—such as Fibonacci retracements, stochastics, moving average convergence/divergence (MACD), moving averages, (RSI), and support/resistance levels—have proven valid in many instances.
In the GBP/USD chart in Figure 1.1, it is clear that Fibonacci retracements, moving averages, and stochastics have at one point or another
given successful trading signals. For example, the 50 percent retracement
level has served as support for the GBP/USD throughout the month of
January and for a part of February 2005.The moving average crossovers of
the 10-day and 20-day simple moving averages also successfully forecasted
the sell-off in the GBP/USD on March 21, 2005. Equity traders who focus
on technical analysis have the easiest transition since they can implement
in the FX market the same technical strategies that they use in the equities
market.
Analyze Stocks Like Countries Trading currencies is not difficult for
fundamental traders, either. Countries can be analyzed just like stocks. For
example, if you analyze growth rates of stocks, you can use gross domestic product (GDP) to analyze the growth rates of countries. If you analyze

P1: JYS
c01
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:39

Printer: Yet to come

Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time

9

FIGURE 1.1 GBP/USD Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

inventory and production ratios, you can follow industrial production or
durable goods data. If you follow sales figures, you can analyze retail sales
data. As with a stock investment, it is better to invest in the currency of a
country that is growing faster and is in a better economic condition than
other countries. Currency prices reflect the balance of supply and demand
for currencies. Two of the primary factors affecting supply and demand of
currencies are interest rates and the overall strength of the economy. Economic indicators such as GDP, foreign investment, and the trade balance
reflect the general health of an economy and are therefore responsible for
the underlying shifts in supply and demand for that currency. There is a
tremendous amount of data released at regular intervals, some of which is
more important than others. Data related to interest rates and international
trade is looked at the most closely.
If the market has uncertainty regarding interest rates, then any bit of
news relating to interest rates can directly affect the currency market. Traditionally, if a country raises its interest rate, the currency of that country
will strengthen in relation to other countries as investors shift assets to
that country to gain a higher return. Hikes in interest rates are generally
bad news for stock markets, however. Some investors will transfer money
out of a country’s stock market when interest rates are hiked, causing
the country’s currency to weaken. Determining which effect dominates
can be tricky, but generally there is a consensus beforehand as to what
