
book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 128

128

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

THE NEXT MORNING: FLAMES FOR BREAKFAST
The next morning as I was gulping down a glass of carrot juice, I realized
that I could have been a tad bit zealous about trading the Euro. I can remember a splash of carrot juice running down the front of my Wakeman,
Butterman, and Bailey “20th Anniversary” T-shirt. I can also recall my son
tugging on my shirt sleeve, asking when he would could play on the “tomputer” that day. I also can clearly hear my wife’s voice asking me if I took
her advice and took the trade upward. And I will never forget what the
chart looked like when I walked calmly to the computer, started up the
charting program, selected the EUR/USD, and then choked. It looked like
Figure 14.4).
Oh, crap.
This wasn’t going to look good. Not to Harvey. I suddenly realized that
no matter how much research I’d done about selling the Euro, I’d bought it
on pure speculation. Once again, I had fallen into the trap of believing I
could game the system. Thinking that I knew more than I really did, I had
managed to get a second margin call. I was down to $2,500 in my account.
I had lost more than half the account!
Even worse, I realized that I had made the right decision. Looking at
the chart (Figure 14.5), I found that I had actually made a trade that eventually would have been profitable—if I had not traded such a large lot size,
the trade would still be open at 8:00 A.M., with some smooth, tasty profit

FIGURE 14.4

Harry chokes.

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 129

Back to Square One

FIGURE 14.5

129

Harry’s bad timing.

waiting for me. Sure it had fallen right after I’d bought it. But then it just
climbed right back up!
No way! That was not fair! I had certainly picked the right direction. I
had made a good choice. But my timing was off. My trade size was too big.
My amateurish analysis had created a spark that led to a full trading account conflagration. With half my trading account in ashes, what was I
going to tell my wife? I now understood that I’d made the right decision
and I could engage in some redemptive revenge trading. If I could get back
the money I’d lost, I wouldn’t have to say anything about it at all. So what if
I’d lost half the account so far! I could gain it back by just understanding
my error and correcting it.
I’d read about this in the trading books. When a trader makes a bad decision, he should admit it readily and not stubbornly grip incorrect assumptions about the market. Better to gulp down some pride, reverse the
trade, make back the losses and move onward.
I clicked on the order button to buy $1,000,000 worth of currency—
just as I had done the night before. Figure 14.6 shows the response.
Insufficient funds! I didn’t even have enough money to execute a standard lot trade!
I needed $2,500 in order to do a standard lot, and that’s all I had in my
account—which would leave nothing for available margin. That meant I
had to reduce the size of my trade. Which I did. I traded a half standard lot,
or $500,000 worth of currency, for $50 per pip. I bought the EUR/USD at a
price of 1.2119 at 8:05 A.M. on April 7, 2004. It cost me $1,250 in margin to
make the trade.

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 130

130

FIGURE 14.6

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Harry is denied.

This wasn’t far from where I’d bought before, but at least now I knew
it was going up. At least I understood what I’d done wrong and could make
it right. I felt a sense of righteous retribution against the market for having
treated me so poorly. Everything I did in these few moments was done with
pure emotion.
I didn’t move. I couldn’t hear my wife or kids or phone or anything in
the background. It was me against the market and nothing was going to get
in the way.
At 8:10 the pair was trading 11 pips lower, at 1.2104, and I had lost
$550.
At 8:15 the pair was trading 17 pips lower, at 1.2098, and I had lost
$850.
These amounts were staggering to watch. How could I watch this
much money go by? If I’d watched this happen the night before, I would
have closed the trade early and not withstood the damage. Should I do that
now? I asked myself. Should I close it? If I closed it and it simply went in
my direction, then what? I’d lose more money and be even farther in the
hole. The only solution was to hold on tight.
Between 8:20 and 8:40, I got some delicious deliverance from the savage fall—the pair traded up to 1.2107 and was closing the gap on my loss. I
knew I’d made the right decision and took a break to use the bathroom. My
family was gone, probably to the park or something. It didn’t matter. I’d
have good news for my wife when she returned with the kids.
When I returned from the bathroom, I’d been margin-called.
I felt and heard a thumping sound in my head.
Whump!
I rubbed my forehead. A beastly headache was forming in the back of
my head, which was the section of my brain probably used for storing
numbers, such as the amount of money I just lost.

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 131

Back to Square One

131

Whump!
Now what? I had lost $1,250. I only had another $1,250 left. This was all
I had left from what had been a $5,500 account just a few hours earlier.
Why hadn’t I stopped? Why couldn’t I have at least taken some of that
money out when I had the chance?
My wife’s iPod sat on the desk in front of me. Cradled in its connector
thingy to the computer, its silky white face mocked me. The navigation
wheel looked like a giant mouth, laughing openly at my predicament.
There was nothing much left to lose. If I lost it all now it didn’t matter.
What was $1,250 at this point? What did it really mean? Not much anymore.
If I lost it, I couldn’t feel much worse than I felt right now. If I gained back
even $125, I would have doubled my account from this point and at least
would have the satisfaction of not having given up. Clearly, the EUR/USD
had never intended on going all the way up to 1.2200. Switching to the fourhour chart, I noticed that the stochastic had never reached the overbought
area but was starting to turn downward.
It was never going to get to Harvey’s number of 1.2200! Instead of rising up that high, it became exhausted near to his number and would turn
downward for at least 50 to 100 pips. So I sold. After waiting for one more
five-minute candle to close lower and prove that I was making the right decision, I sold at 1.2082 (see Figure 14.7). I could only afford to sell $200,000
worth of currency, for $20 per pip, and it cost me $500 in margin.
It only fell 3 pips lower. It never even covered the spread. Not for
one second was it profitable. It only took about 37 pips before I got a margin call.

FIGURE 14.7

Harry sells.

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

132

2:24 PM

Page 132

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Whump!
Whump!
Whump!
I stared at the $500 in my “available equity” column until 10:15 A.M.,
when my wife returned with the kids.
She banged open the door, called out to tell me she was home, and
then cheerily yelled over to me: “So, Harry, how did that trade work out
last night?”
Then I threw up.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Page 133

CHAPTER 15

Breakfast
with Harvey

arvey Winklestein was going to kill me.
It was only four hours later—or 48 five-minute candles, or 16
fifteen-minute candles. He sat in front of me at the Utopia Diner on
the West Side, on Amsterdam not far from Lincoln Center. They had great
Mexican omelets, but I didn’t order one. I couldn’t eat. I could hardly stand
up. Harvey had returned early from, or never gone to, his reunion party in
Hong Kong. In fact, he had called me not more than 15 minutes into my nap
that morning. I had been lying down on the king-size bed at home, wrapped
in blankets and protected by an outer shell of pillows, hoping that Harvey
would not find me there. Perhaps he would simply forget about me and
leave me to suffocate in a swamp of my own shame. I could cast away my
absurd plot to become a currency trader. On the phone, he’d told me that
we should meet so he could say goodbye. By trading, I’d transgressed to
the point where I lost all credibility as a student. How could he believe me
from now on?
“Harry, before I leave you, I am going to teach you one last lesson.
Then I am going to hop over to Hong Kong and try my best to celebrate
with old friends.”
What could I say? Nothing. So I remained silent.
“I am going to teach you the lesson of the pip auction game.”
I nodded.
He called over to a man and a woman who were sitting across from us.
“Sir? Ma’am?”

H

133

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

134

2:25 PM

Page 134

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

They peered over at us. This was New York. You didn’t just call over to
people and start a conversation. But they seemed to be from out of town.
Harvey continued: “You having the Mexican omelet?” he asked.
“Yessir,” the young man answered, with a Southern accent that revealed that he was not only from out of town, but he was also probably
going to play whatever game Harvey had planned.
Harvey spoke: “You in town from Georgia?”
The young woman’s eyes brightened. “Why, yes! How did y’all guess
that?”
“Just a lucky guess,” Harvey replied, but I knew it had nothing to do
with luck. He continued: “I’d like to know if I could have a moment of your
time.” He paused. “Just a moment.”
“What for?” the young man answered. “We’re due for a show in half an
hour.”
This didn’t seem to bother Harvey at all. “You folks will get to the show
on time for sure. Promise. Scoot over here for a moment and you can help
me teach this man a lesson here.”
The young man and woman looked at each other, down at their food,
and then back at Harvey. They shrugged. Apparently, they didn’t have a lot
of experience in refusing a request from an older person. They stood up
and came over to our table. Harvey asked them to sit across from each
other, with the young woman next to him and the young man beside me.
“This is the hundred-dollar auction game,” he began. “It’s a wagering
game, but no one’s going to be harmed in the playing of this game. I’m not
going to take any money from you at all, and you’re not going to lose anything yourself.”
They nodded. I could see that they were now thinking of how great it
would be to go home and tell their family and friends about this crazy old
man they’d met in New York City. I imagined that when this was all over
they would want to take pictures together with Harvey and me, and we’d
send them off to enjoy whatever boring Broadway show, for which they
had paid way too much for tickets.
“Here are the rules: To get this money, all y’all have to do is bid on it.
Highest bidder gets the money. Sitting right here. The entire one hundred
bucks. Loser still has to pay his last and final bid, but gets nothing.”
They looked again at each other, and shrugged. One asked, “So if I bid
less than $100, but I’m the winner, I still get the money?”
“Right. The other player still pays his last bid. And gets nothin’. Like
fishin’ all day and comin’ up with an old tire.”
The young man raised his eyebrows. You could see he was already
mentally spending the money he hadn’t yet won. He said: “Then I bid $1.”
He clearly believed that he was far smarter than his new wife or girlfriend.
He was going to pay the least amount possible for this money.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Breakfast with Harvey

Page 135

135

No sooner had he spoke than his wife cut in. “I bid $2.”
There was a brief pause, and I noticed that other people in the restaurant were beginning to look over in our direction. The bidding continued,
and I was amazed at how fast it was going, and how excited each player
was becoming—
“$5.”
“$8.”
“$12.”
“$16!”cried the young man, and then I looked up and noticed that a
small collection of people had now surrounded us, including our waitress,
a line cook, and enough other people to make me feel claustrophobic. On
this last bid, there was some clapping, and everyone was obviously interested in the outcome of this game.
The bidding had now progressed to the point where each player was
intent on winning. I couldn’t disagree with the bidding, because it seemed
obvious that even at $99, the $100 was worth buying. You would be getting
a discount of just a buck, but heck, that wasn’t so bad.
And the bidding did get there. Within just a moment or two, with the
bidding at only $59, the young woman yelled, “$99!” And a cry went up in
the diner, and we all assumed we had found our winner. But we hadn’t.
Our small crowd was laughing and congratulating the young woman
(for being the first one to $99), when her husband (recently married, we
discovered later, from Athens, Georgia, neither ever having journeyed past
the state line until this trip), who appeared just one notch above frustrated,
announced what seemed completely ridiculous: “$100!”
Everyone fell silent. “Wazzamadder witch you?” came a call from the
line cook. He was speaking for all of us. Everyone looked perplexed.
The wife looked even more determined now. The husband spoke in a
way that showed some intense emotions had started to brew underneath
the surface. He said: “I ain’t losin’ my money. You can pay $99, I’ll pay $100,
and at least I’ll break even.”
Then, we all realized that in the heat of the bidding, that the young
man, and the rest of us, had forgotten the rules of the game: the winner
would pay his or her last (winning) bid for the $100, but the loser would
still have to pay. And receive nothing! All of the sudden, as everyone began
to realize this, we all became tense.
Now the game wasn’t about getting $100 at a discount. It was about not
losing a ton of money.
All of us secretly wanted the game to stop now, for we now understood
what was about to happen. “Stop bidding,” said the line cook. “Neither of
yous can’t win now.” He walked away, slapping a dish rag against a booth.
A busboy cleared away the couple’s unfinished meals but they didn’t mind
at all. Breakfast no longer concerned either of them.

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

136

2:25 PM

Page 136

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Harvey delighted in this. Apparently, he felt no regret for damaging
(maybe permanently) the marriage of this handsome couple from the
South. He now had feverish, bulging eyes that spoke volumes about his
pleasure at getting the better of these two people, for having coaxed them
into doing something that they would regret. This wasn’t like Harvey at
all—not the generous and kind man I had met in the past couple of days.
The young husband was now sweating, breathing hard, and increasingly angry.
His wife, now also angry, raised her bid to $102.
There were sighs from the back of the crowd, and I placed my hand on
the $100. “Guys,” I said, “let’s just stop here. Harvey won’t make you pay
this. He’s just trying to prove a point.” I turned to Harvey. “I understand
what you’re trying to teach me,” I told him. “We can stop this now. They’re
going to miss their show.”
Before Harvey could open his mouth to reply, the wife pounded the
table and then shoved my hand aside, and shouted an obscenity at me that
I’d rather not repeat. Southern hospitality indeed!
“$115!” She had bid before her husband had raised his!
I gulped. They were doing the unimaginable. They were now going to pay
a total of $215 for the right for only one of them to have $100. Outrageous!
But it wasn’t over.
“$116.”
An obscenity.
“$117!”
“$120,” replied the young man. I wondered if this would become violent.
The wife slammed her fist down on the table. She cried out, “$150!”
And with that, the husband shouted another obscenity and stated that
his wife was a lunatic for bidding that much. And it was their wedding gift
money!
Harvey, if he was willing to do this to a newly married couple, was
probably going to finish this entire scene by killing me and feeding me to
the hungry Southerners. He looked at the couple: “Are we done? Is that all
the bidding?”
This was the type of moment when one of the two people pulls out a
chainsaw and starts to cut everyone in the restaurant into little pieces.
With all the anger in the atmosphere, something like that wouldn’t seem so
out of place.
Harvey then notified the couple that he intended to collect. He asked
them for $270. They started digging into their pockets. I was sure that they
didn’t actually have this much cash on them. At this point their anger at
each other was bound to turn into hurt and worry.
My head was spinning. The losses in my trading account from that
morning had faded away. The situation here transfixed me. Then Harvey

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Page 137

Breakfast with Harvey

137

