
Q_: Does your wife also follow your rules of trading, such as only
trading positive carry?

A : Yes, she trades in a similar style that I do.

354


FX FAMILY VALUES

Q.: what about your children, how did you teach them to trade?

A : Well, they've actually been even more prepared than we have
because they've done the business track at university. But even so,
they'll concede that a lot of success really comes with experience.
Like my wife, my children and I will trade ideas back and forth.
We'll call each other and say I think this is happening, I think that
is happening, and really try to come to a consensus. That way it’s
really within the family. Swapping trade ideas also helps to keep
our family very close. For example, my oldest son will call me on
a given day and say, “Hey, I did really well today.” And I may
say, “No, we did really well today, we made this much.” It’s a bit
competitive, but we also spend a lot of time sharing information.
My wife and I have been married for 29 years, and we have set in
stone since the beginning that our primary business is our family.

Q.: Have your children adopted their own trading style, or do

they trade similar to you?

A : Their personalities will push them to do something different,
but they have taken the base from me and use it as a starting point.

Q.: When you were teaching your kids to trade, was there any
time where you said, okay, if you made a certain amount that’s
what you could you spend it on? Did you encourage them to trade
in order to buy things, or was it just to build their saving?

A : In the beginning we would establish smaller trading accounts
if they said they wanted to learn how to trade. I would teach them
to keep risk low, but it was really up to them to make the money.
My only real guidance to them was to trade well, but to never guide
themselves solely by money or greed.

Q.:H ow old were they when you gave them their FX accounts?
A : It’s been about a year and half.

355


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- when they lost money, what would you say them?

A : Well, we would tell them that if a person is intelligent, they
could actually learn more when they lose than when they make
money. Also, we were worried that if they became successful too
young, they would never want to get a real job. Ifthey made in a day
in the Forex market what they can at a regular job in 15 days, then
they may not be motivated. We wanted to instill a very powerful
work ethic and not instill the notion that money is easy to come
by. So I would talk to my children and say that you can take your
savings and really put them to work by putting them in trading.
But first and foremost you really have to become a useful member
of society. You have to look at trading as this other resource that
puts your savings to work.

: In terms of your own trading, what is the number one lesson
that you've learned from your mistakes?

A : Well, the very first thing I have learned is that the only way
to make money is to actually open a position. Once you open that
position, the second big rule is that you need to have enough funds
behind your position such that if it drops one or two cents, you are
not completely out of the position. Although I am very successful,
my strategy does require a large amount of capital. In addition, the
most important thing that I want to impart on new traders is to tell
them not to expect to achieve riches overnight, especially with a
very small amount of money. You want to make sure that you have
a consistently profitable strategy, not one that makes money one
day but does not work weeks or even months down the road. You
have to trade in a balanced way such that not only do you have a
good strategy, but also that you control your risk. You never want it
to turn into something that you beat yourself up about. Even if you
make money, it’s only going to hurt you in the long run because
you are so unsettled about the excessive risk that you are taking.
The purpose of trading is to add to your quality of life, not take
away from it. You want to makes sure that you are actually doing

356


FX FAMILY VALUES

things properly, that you live well, sleep well, knowing that your
strategy is working the way it should.

LESSONS FROM MARCELINO LIVIAN

Make Sure You Have Enough Funds to Sustain Your
Position

Livian is the epitome of a long-term trader. With positions open
for as long as a year, he aims for big movements. Although this
style of trading comes in contrast to many of the shorter-term
traders in our book who look to make as little as 10 pips a day or
50 pips a week, Livian’s 80 percent return over the past four years
rivals that of most hedge funds. However, in order to trade the
way Livian does, you need to have deep pockets. The core of his
strategy involves identifying a trading zone and then scaling into a
trade little by little toward the bottom or top of that zone. By doing
this, Livian ends up building a large position that has a low average
entry price. However as you build your large position to the point
where only an incremental movement is needed to bring you into
a profit, any small move against you also becomes more damaging.
So it is extremely important to ensure that you have enough funds
to maintain that position.

This idea is important even if you do not trade the way Li-
vian does. If you hold too large a position and end up not having
enough capital to sustain regular fluctuations, then you can easily
get stopped out by short-term market movements.

Get Paid While You Wait

One of the Livian’s primary trading rules is to always be on the side
of carry, which is another word for positive interest. In currency
trading, you are buying and selling countries. In every currency
transaction, you are long one currency and short another. On cur-
rencies that you are long, you have the potential to earn the inter-
est. On the currency that you are short, you have to pay interest.
The difference in the spread of the interest rates between the two
countries is the net amount that you can earn or pay. Being on the

3357


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

side of positive interest is extremely important to Livian because in
long-term trades, a negative carry position would actually reduce
profits or exacerbate losses in the account. When you are taking a
position where you have to pay interest, this payment needs to be
made every day, so it becomes an added trading cost. In contrast,
being on the side of carry or holding a position where you can
earn interest actually helps to improve performance. Every day an
interest payment is deposited in your account which increases ac-
count equity and helps to reduce losses. In other words, it lowers
your entry price. On a long-term trade, this can offer a very sig-
nificant advantage. If you are holding a position for one year, the
interest income can really add up. For example, a currency like
the New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen could pay $10 in interest
every single day, which represents one pip or point on a standard
contract. If you held the position for 100 days, that equates to 100
pips. Therefore if you were long New Zealand dollar/yen, your
entry price would be reduced by approximately 100 pips after 100
days, which is quite significant.

Share Trading with Your Family

Livian’s final piece of advice is to share trading with your fam-
ily. Not only has it helped to bring his family closer through for
friendly competition, but he has also used it to teach his children
to be financially savvy at a very early age. The key, of course, is to
ingrain the discipline of risk control rather than a betting mentality.
Trading should be perceived as a way of making your money work
for you rather than letting it sit idle at the bank.

358


CHAPTER 13

MAN VERSUS
MACHINE

STEVEN ICKOW

As computerized “black box” trading has proliferated across eq-
uity markets, sometimes accounting for as much 70 percent of the
daily volume on NYSE and Nasdaq, traders have bemoaned the
fact that machines have made trading impossible. Yet Steven Ickow
is one guy who is testament to human ingenuity and resourceful-
ness. Not only has he been able to adapt to the new “black box”
regime of the machines, but he has prospered by taking advantage
of the software robots. A highly disciplined trader, Ickow lives an
almost ascetic existence, locked in his home office for six and half
hours each day without any interruptions from the outside world.
This sense of focus and discipline has made him one of the most
consistent traders in the game, registering only 4 losing days out of
the last 180. From his home in suburban Chicago, Steve sat with us
one day after the close, to chat about his approach to the markets
and to share some of the tricks of the trade.

359


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: one of the things we found interesting with many of our
interviews is that most people developed an interest in trading
from high school or earlier. Was that the case with you?

A : L always had an outside interest in stocks. But I was a premed
major so I came into it a little later in life. My dad was always into
it, but not into trading, more like retirement stuff.

Q.- was he a casual investor?

A : Yeah, my mom too. But we always had—I don’t want to say a
gambling background—but an interest in gambling.

My mom especially. She liked blackjack. Games of chance like
that. My brother too. He is professional poker player now. We had
a heavy sports background in our house, watching sports, playing
sports, and so on.

Q.: and handicapping sports too?
A : Yeah, handicapping sports too.

Q.: pia you do any trading while in college?

A : No, not really. I got into it later when I got a job as clerk
at the Merc. [Author's note: The Merc is the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange. A clerk is the go-between for the customers of big wire
houses and the pit. He or she updates the market for the customers
and helps facilitate trades for those customers in the pit.] I was in
the Nikkei pits, Nasdaq pits, and the SP pits. This was during the
Internet stock craze. So I decided to try it out. I had a friend who
was successful trader, so he backed me.

Q. pia you go off the floor when he first staked you?
A : Yes, I traded stocks off the floor.

360


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

Q.- what was the reason to try a clerkship at the Merc?

A : I got my degree in biology, but I decided I wasn’t going to go
into that. I did various other things and then I had friend who had
a friend who had a friend down at the Merc and he said he was
doing well, so I decided to give it a try.

Q.- How long did you clerk for?
A : About three years.

: Do you think most of the trading skill that you use now was
learned on the floor? Or is a lot of it inapplicable to what you do
now?

A: No, it was definitely applicable. The way I trade now I learned
from the Nikkei pit. It was smaller pit with less going on. And the
stocks I trade now are slower with less going on. You can watch
what’s going on, who is doing what. That’s kind of how I trade—the
way people do in a smaller pit where you can see who is buying,
who is selling, trying to get in between the players, buying in front
of them, selling in front of them. So the Nikkei is what molded my
style. When I first started trading, I was trading thicker stocks like
Microsoft. But I couldn’t get an edge, so I went to thinner stocks,
which are less crowded and easier to identify the players.

Quis most of your trading done on Nasdaq?
A: 100 percent Nasdaq.

: Is that because you need that open book on the Level 2 entry?
[Authors’ note: In the Nasdaq market unlike at the NYSE all bids
and offers are displayed on the single Level 2 screen providing the
trader with much better transparency than the specialist book on
the NYSE which only shows the topmost bids and offers. ]

361


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

A : Yes, Level 2 entry. Most important is immediate fills. You are
not giving your order to a specialist. Everything is done right away.
Watch the book, watch where all the bids and offer are on Level 2.
On the NYSE it’s not easy to do that. There is less transparency.

Qu mostly what you do these days tape watching, or are you a
chart reader as well?

A : No. I watch charts too, but I would say Level 2 is primary.
Charts are for confirmation. If the chart looks good, but Level 2
isn’t there, I won't trade. But if Level 2 looks good, but chart is
shaky, then sometimes I will trade even if the chart is not good.

Q.: What timeframe charts do you look at?

A : My screen. What I am looking at right now is Level 2. One
that I trade off of and seven others that I am watching. The Level 2
that I trade off of is linked to two charts: a five-minute chart and
a daily chart. I also have five-minute charts of S&P, Nasdaq, and
E-mini Russell futures, and I have daily charts of indexes. But what
Iam really watching is five-minute charts, and I also have the S&P
squawk box just for the general tone of the market.

Q.-can you give an idea of the type of stocks you are trading?

A : Lam trading stocks priced between $30 to $70 with average
daily volume of 300,000 to 1 million shares.

: So these are intermediate stocks—not extraordinarily liquid,
but liquid enough. How large a size will you go into stock that
trades 300K a day?

A : My size can vary from 100 to 5,000. But usually it goes between
100 to 2,000 shares. It depends on the day and what is going on in

362


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

the stock. If it is a slow day, and I am just trading back and forth, I
will trade small size. If I see there is a buyer, I will put on size. But
I will never put on a huge position because I never want to have a
single trade that will put me out of business.

Q.-When you go large size, do you average up?

A: No, not necessarily. Usually, when I put size on, it is because
I have an edge where I see someone pegged to the bid or offer
and I know there is a buyer or seller. Market makers and hedge
funds have a lot of positions to watch. They often have a big order
to work. So they are not micromanaging the order. They may have
100,000 shares to fill. So they put them on the computer, which
puts them on the bid. So, if the bid moves, they move. If it goes
down, they go down. They just want to get their stock filled. But
usually they have some sort of limit. So me, I am watching fewer
stocks. I see more of what’s going on. I bid up, and he comes up. I
bid up to a certain amount, and he won't go any further. Anyway,
I can usually tell where he can go to. So I will try to buy up all the
offers, bid up to the point where he won’t go any further, and then
sell the position to him.

For example, if I know the buyer will go up to 80, and I see
60 bid by 65, I watch the 65 offers and I buy those. I buy 70 offers,
I bid 70. I bid 75. I bid 80 on one ECN. I see him bidding 80 on
another ECN. I sell to him. I do it again and again. That is just one
thing. What I am trying to tell you is that these guys are watching
20 stocks. They don’t have to worry about micromanaging the
position. They have a lot stock to do. They get filled and that’s
all they care about. Once in a while the guy leaves and you get
stuck. But you have to know your size and limits and know from
experience how to do this. When a market maker has to fill a big
order, they can’t really hide from someone who is watching the
stock very closely. If the fund is buying 100K shares of stock and
they are going to hold it for a year, what do they care if they buy
it at 65.60 cents or 65.90 cents? But me, if I can make a dime on
10,000 shares, that’s $1,000.

363


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: Do those seven or eight stocks change frequently? Or do you
sit with the same portfolio for a month or more?

A : No, they don’t change that often. As long as the stock is good,
I am making money in the stock. I don’t look at anything else. The
only time it changes is if the stock goes bad. Let’s say it has really
bad news. Then I take it off my list and look for another stock.
When things are good, I don’t change at all. I am very focused on
what I am watching. I don’t watch anything else, and that’s why I
trade now, basically, from an office by myself. I used to trade from
a big office, where you hear other things and sometimes it’s hard
not to pay attention. I am in the room by myself now where I don’t
hear anything. I just know what the overall markets are doing and
what my stocks are doing, and that’s all I care about.

Q.: Do you watch CNBC at all?

A : I have it up in the background just for noise. Sometimes
someone may be talking about one of my stocks on there. So I
will know why it is going crazy. I do have a news service which
tells me the numbers when numbers come out and if something is
mentioned about my stocks. Then I will probably just get out and
watch, because I don’t like it when there is too much news on my
stock and I don’t know about it. I know I am not going to get the
news first. I don’t trade on news.

Q.: Do you know the story behind each stock quite well?

A : Yes, I do know the story behind each stock. I know when they
have their earnings because a lot of times they will trade a certain
way around earnings.

: Does that have to do with institutional order flow? Since
institutional buyers are going to be positioning themselves before
news event, do you try to capitalize on that?

364


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

A : You should know when earnings are going to be because a lot
of times there will be position squaring and things going on that
are out of the ordinary.

Q.: could you give an example of what kind of price action would
make you think something might happen? If you see buying ahead
of the earnings, does that suggest there could be positive news?

A : For example, if there are big buyers into the earnings and the
company reports better than expected, then it will usually gap up
and it’s a good place to get short. But if the stock is weak into the
earnings, then they beat the estimate. Then even if it gaps up, it’s
still good to get long after the earnings because there are still a
lot of people who were wrong. So a lot of is just watching. If I see
who the buyers were before and the news is good, then I see them
getting out of positions.

Q.: 80 you could divine a lot of market-making strategy just by
watching the tape very carefully day in and day out—even with the
fact that everybody tries to hide their identity?

A : Yes, it changes all the time. But a high percentage of Nasdaq
volume is now composed of black box trading. So a lot of times
I will test price just to see where the market is. Let’s say I am
long and I start bidding up and bids come with me, then I know
I am good. Let’s say I offer and now no one joins me, no one is
an aggressive seller. That’s how I get information on the stock by
constantly bidding and offering.

: Let’s zero in on this. Would say that by doing this kind of
probative touch-and-feel action you, you are actually testing the
machines, not the human beings? By doing this you are actually
able to understand the programming behind those machines so
you can trade off of it?

365


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

A : Right, exactly. Here is another example. If you know some of
the big market makers in the stock you can sometimes see what
he does. It used to be that you could see on Island [Authors’ note:
Island was a very popular Electronic Communication Network on
which traders could make bids and offers for stocks.] who sold
or bought from you. I remember one time Goldman was on the
offer, and I would offer Island, and he would buy from me, so you
knew he was faking his offer in order to make sure that the stock
wouldn’t get away from him. By becoming familiar with the stock
and knowing who the big players are, you could tell who is faking
or not. If the market is 79 by 80, and I buy all the 80 offers, then
the market maker gets pissed off. But if I join him and buy the 79s
with him, and as long as you are buying with them and not taking
all of their 80s, then they'll take you up for the ride. In that case
the market maker is really a buyer at 79 and he doesn’t want to sell
at 80. There are a lot of fake bids and offers in the Nasdaq, and
if you are able to identify what they are, then you can use it as a
clue for information as to what is going on. So by watching I get
my edge. If you don’t have an edge, you don’t have anything. An
up market means nothing. Every day you can have the Dow be up,
but you will have 100 stocks up and 100 stocks down.

QO. - this brings us to the next question. Precisely because these
are not Dow or the SP 500 or the Nasdaq 100 stocks, they are
less subject to broader market swings. Are they less vulnerable to
market sweeps by the stock index futures as well?

A : Sometimes they are, sometimes not. But you will know. Here
is an example. The market is going down. It is going down hard. But
you see there is one guy buying, staying on the bid. You identify
who he is and then you want to buy with him. But if he leaves
you, get out. I don’t like to buy highs and sell lows. I like to buy
pullbacks. Or I'll take a shot at buying a low or selling a high if 1
see a seller and go with him.

366


MAN VERSUS MACHINE

Q.: You day trade, meaning that you don’t hold anything
overnight. Were you always this way? Did that just develop over
time? And if it did, can you tell us why you adopted that style?

A. I like to micromanage everything. So I don’t have control after
the market closes. I don’t want to think about it. I like to go home
every day and think about other things, forget about the market for
a little bit. I like to be flat every day because anything can happen
overnight.

: How much of a risk do you typically allow yourself on a trade?
10 cents ? 15 cents?

A : It depends, but usually not much at all. I am typically getting
long on the bid with someone and if the guy leaves, I am out. Now
there are times when the guy bails and there is nothing I can do.
But usually my risk is 5 cents or less.

Q.: Pretty much always?

A : Usually. The only time when I deviate from that rule is when
there is no one there and I can’t get out.

Q:s0 what happens in that case?

A : Well, it’s a percentage game. Most of the time you can get
out—9 times out of 10 you can get out.

Q.: when you get trapped, how badly have you been stung? Has

it been as much as a dollar?

A : No, never. Maybe in the old days when stocks were $300. But
now I would say 20 cents is the worst that I get hit. I am always
watching my stock.
