
www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 9: Seeing Chart Patterns Through a Technical Lens
As with every trend that is losing steam, volume falls after the head, although
about half the time the highest volume is at the left shoulder and about half the
time at the head. Volume is low at the second shoulder. Volume on the breakout day and the next few days after the breakout day, however, tends to be
very high. This is not surprising, because by now a great number of chartoriented traders have identified the pattern and its neckline. Some traders may
see only the break of support without having seen the head-and-shoulders
pattern, adding to the number of traders who now want to sell.
The head-and-shoulders patterns shown in Figure 9-6 are easy enough to see,
but many head-and-shoulders patterns are more complex and contain other
patterns within them. The second head-and-shoulders pattern in Figure 9-6,
for example, contains a little double top and a gap (see Chapter 7). You may
also see what appears to be two heads or two shoulders, although one is
always higher, which makes it the head.

Evaluating the Measured Move
The term measured move is used in a number of contexts in technical analysis, so it can become confusing. In essence, a measured move is a forecast of
the upcoming price move after a chart event, including completion of a pattern. Unfortunately, these forecasts are seldom correct, or rather, they vary
by too much from actual outcomes to serve as reliable trading guides. Below,
I outline three types of measured moves. (Point-and-figure charting also features its own version of the measured move — see Chapter 15.)

Taking dictation from the pattern
One definition of measured move is the price change expected to result from
a particular pattern. For example, in the ascending triangle pictured at the
top of Figure 9-7, the gray lines denote the height of the pattern. Imagine that
the distance between the high and low within the pattern is $5. After the
price breaks out above the top of the triangle, you expect the subsequent
rise to be the same amount, $5.
One useful (if general) observation is that the size of a move after a pattern
is proportional to the size of the pattern. When a pattern takes a long time to
form (three months or more) and when it is very deep (30 to 50 percent of the
annual high-low range), the bigger the eventual reaction to the pattern.
As I mention in Chapter 11, you often get a sideways movement that results
in a horizontal channel (a Darvas box), also called a rectangle. You project

www.pdfdummies.com

165

166 Part IV: Finding Patterns
the height of the existing box into the future to gauge the extent of the breakout move. A measured move of this type has a certain amount of logic. The
traders in a particular security may become accustomed to rises or falls of a
certain amount before pausing or retracing.
Tom Bulkowski, in his books and articles, provides measurement guidelines
for the range, average, and mode (most often seen) price change upon the
completion of a pattern. Seldom are they exactly 100 percent of the height of
a pattern. Every pattern is measured in its own way. The expected move after
a head-and-shoulders pattern (described in the section “The ultimate triple
top: Head-and-shoulders” earlier in this chapter), for example, is measured
from the top of the head to the neckline. You then subtract that number from
the neckline at the breakout point to derive the expected stopping point of
the down move. This target is met only 63 percent of the time in Bulkowski’s
study, which falls short of a convincing forecasting technique.

MEASURED MOVE
PRICE TARGET

MEASURED MOVE
PRICE TARGET

D

B

C
A

MEASURED MOVE
PRICE TARGET

MIDDLE OF GAP
Figure 9-7:
Measured
moves.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 9: Seeing Chart Patterns Through a Technical Lens
Knowing that the down move on confirmation of a head-and-shoulders is equal
to the expected move only 63 percent of the time doesn’t mean that you
shouldn’t heed a head-and-shoulders pattern when you see it. This reversal
pattern is still valid, and if you own the security, you should exit at the pattern
confirmation neckline, because so many other traders are going to identify the
pattern and do precisely that, causing a self-fulfilling prophecy.

Resuming the trend after retracement
Another type of measured move is when a price repeats the extent of a first
move after a retracement. The retracement takes back 30 percent of the gain
from the low to the high, or some other percentage. The point is that after
the retracement, you often see the price resume the trend at the same slope
and to the same extent as in the first move.
This type of measured move is illustrated in the second chart in Figure 9-7.
Here you see an already established channel consisting of support and resistance lines. (See Chapter 10 for more information on support and resistance.)
The price is oscillating between the two channel lines. After you see the price
stop at Price C, you simply copy and paste the A-to-B move to C to arrive at
price target D.
Bulkowski found that in a measured move up, the first A-B leg averages 43
percent over 87 days while the second leg, C-D, averages 37 percent in 65
days. You have to decide for yourself whether these numbers confirm or
repudiate the idea of the measured move. In a measured move down, the first
leg averages 25 percent and the second leg averages 27 percent, and that
seems to affirm the idea of proportionality. Note that the retracement in measured moves up averages 14 percent over 45 days while in measured moves
down, the corrective retracement averages 16 percent over 39 days.

Measuring from the gap
A third type of measured move is when you have a gap. (See Chapter 7 for a
discussion of gaps.) A gap is a price bar whose high or low is separated from
the preceding bar by open space, meaning that no trades took place at those
intervening prices. A gap is important because it shows, graphically, that
something happened to alter perception of the security. In Figure 9-7, you
measure the distance from the lowest low in the up move to the middle of the
gap, and then project that height from the middle of the gap to the upside (in
an uptrend). You do the opposite in a downtrend.

www.pdfdummies.com

167

168 Part IV: Finding Patterns

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 10

Drawing Trendlines
In This Chapter
▶ Getting to know the price chart
▶ Figuring out trends
▶ Knowing about rule-based trendlines
▶ Acquainting yourself with internal trendlines

O

ften you can see a trend with the naked eye, but to impose order on
your visual impression, you can connect the dots, so to speak, by
actually drawing a line along the price bars. A trendline is a straight line that
starts at the beginning of the trend and stops at the end of the trend. You can
do this the low-tech way by using a piece of paper, a ruler, and a Number 2
pencil, or go high tech with software like Excel or special charting software.
Figuring out where trends start and stop can be complicated, but in this
chapter, I explain how to spot them, plot them, and figure out what they’re
telling you.

Looking Closely at a Price Chart
Sometimes a trendline pops out when you look at a chart. The price is
moving in a consistent fashion, either up or down. Usually your eye directs
your hand to draw a trendline — but then you see another one that may be
more representative. You may find yourself frustrated at this situation and be
tempted to give up. Persevere for two reasons:
✓ You can feel a higher level of confidence that your trade is the right one
when prices are following your trendline.
✓ A break of a trendline is a high-probability indication that the trend has
ended and you need to take action.

www.pdfdummies.com

170 Part IV: Finding Patterns
You never know in advance when a trendline should start or stop. You know
only after the fact. So a trendline is a work in progress that needs constant
reevaluation. Yes, this means that you need to check the price after the close
to see where it stands in relation to the trendline. You probably know people
who check their prices every day. It’s a mystery why they do that if they don’t
have an analytical framework on which to judge the day’s outcome, even just
a rough hand-drawn trendline. To help in the process, you may extend a trendline artificially out into the future in the hope and expectation that new prices
will be near it, but remember that the extended line is only a hope and expectation, and not real.
The time frame of the chart you’re looking at influences what you see. A
trader with a long-term time frame may see one trend on a weekly chart,
whereas a swing trader with a shorter time frame in mind sees multiple
trends on the same chart. In order to see the single long-term trendline, you
have to accept that charting is a dynamic process. Your work is never done.
Every day (or hour or week) provides new data. You need to be ready, willing, and able to discard a trendline when it stops representing the trend — or
to restore an old trendline with some minor modifications if your original
drawing turns out to be right, after all. In this case, the move is a big-picture
uptrend, but you don’t know it for sure until late in the move.
You may not be able to see or place a trendline on certain charts. No security
is in a trending mode all the time. On other occasions, you draw one trendline
only to realize later that you can draw a better one. Some trends are orderly,
making it easy to spot them, while other trends are disorderly and hard to see.

Following the Rules with
Rule-Based Trendlines
You are welcome to draw any old line that your eye dictates, but rule-based
lines have a long history of actually working to improve trading results, in
part because everyone knows the rules and draws the same lines. This gives
some practical meaning to the phrase “reading the mind of the market.”
A rule-based trendline is one that starts and stops according to well-defined
conditions, such as a line starting at the lowest low of the last three days and
ending at the highest high of the last three days. A rule-based trendline is
better than an impressionistic trendline for three reasons:
✓ It doesn’t let you impose your personal view of what the trend should be.
✓ It improves your ability (and self confidence) to buy a security when its
price is rising or sell it when the price is falling.
✓ It helps prevent loss by showing you the exit at the right time.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 10: Drawing Trendlines

Drawing rule-based trendlines
Here’s how you draw a rule-based trendline for an uptrend:
1. Start at the lowest low and connect the line to the next low that precedes a new high.
2. As long as new highs are being made, redraw the line to connect to
the lowest low before the last high.
3. When prices stop making new highs, stop drawing. Extend the line out
into the future at the same slope.
Here’s how you draw a rule-based trendline for a downtrend:
1. Start at the highest high and connect the line to the next high that precedes a new low.
2. As long as new lows are being made, redraw the line to connect to the
highest high before the last low.
3. When prices stop making new lows, stop drawing. Extend the line out
into the future at the same slope.
Notice that this is a dynamic process. You often have to erase one line and
draw another one as conditions change.

Using the support line to enter and exit
In Figure 10-1, the trendline illustrates the rule-based trendline named a
support line. It’s named support because you expect the line to support the
price — traders won’t let the price fall below it. You start at the lowest low
and draw a line to the next low. This generates a line that can be extended at
the same slope, but it becomes a trendline only when another daily price low
touches the line and bounces off it. This touch-bounce is confirmation that
the line is more than just a line and is a true trendline. When you use the support trendline as a trading guide, you initiate a new position on the confirmation, right after the third touch.
Some technical traders say that to require a third touch is to be overly cautious and to miss out on some perfectly good trends that fail to meet the
third-touch qualification. This is true — many valid trends do have only two
touches before they end. If you’re waiting for the third touch, you may miss
the entire move. You may even say that two touches is better than three
or more because that means this security doesn’t have a crew of wiseguys
always testing support. But, experience shows that your trust is better
placed in a trendline with three or more touches. You’re taking more risk if
you accept two touches.

www.pdfdummies.com

171

172 Part IV: Finding Patterns
125

SELL ON BREAK
OF SUPPORT LINE

120
115
110
105
100

BUY ON THIRD
TOUCH OF SUPPORT

95
90
85
15000

Figure 10-1:
Drawing a
support line.

10000
5000

x10

1 6

13

20

27

4
10
24
September

1
8
October

15

22

29

5
12
November

19

26

3
10
17
December

24

The support line entry rule says: Buy on the third touch of the support line
by the low of a price bar. On the flip side, the support line exit rule says: Sell
when the low of the price bar falls below the support line. In some securities,
including foreign exchange (FX), traders like to play games and push the price
to break the support line but then buy it back so that the close remains over
the support line. You need to watch your security to see whether it’s the low
breaking the line that matters, or if it must be the close.
You use the support line to identify an uptrend. The price is rising, and rising
consistently. This provides comfort that the purchase of this security is
returning a profit and may continue to return a profit. Notice that on many
days in Figure 10-1, the low price touched the line but didn’t cross it.
The more times that a low-of-the-day touches the support line without crossing it, the more confidence you should have that it is a valid description of the
trend. This is called a test of support and encourages buyers of the security to
buy more after the price passes the test. Fresh buying constitutes demand for
the security and is called accumulation. Those who already own the security
are reluctant to sell it after support has passed the test, and now require a
higher price to put their inventory of the security on offer.
Here’s a trader’s trick: Sometimes traders engineer a test of support by selling
the security down to the support line to see whether support will hold. If you
put on a new long position above the support line, you’re sweating bullets when

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 10: Drawing Trendlines
traders test support. Will holders of the security rush in to buy more of the
security to defend their positions? When the support line does hold, the traders who were selling become big buyers. They’ve just been given proof that the
bulls put their money where their mouth is. If you had bought and survived a
test of support, you are likely to get a fat gain after support was respected.
When any part of the price bar penetrates the line on the downside, support
has been broken, and you may deduce that the trend is over. However, this
trend end may or may not be true. In Figure 10-1, the move continues after
the line was broken — but experience teaches that the trendline is no longer
reliable. This analysis is logical because every market participant can draw
the same support line. A break of support is literally just that — some holders of the stock were willing to break ranks with the other holders and to sell
at progressively lower prices.
A breakout is any part of the price bar penetrating a line that you drew on the
chart. Some traders require that to qualify as a breakout, the bar component
that breaks the line has to be the close. The word breakout is used in a dozen
contexts in technical analysis, but it always refers to a significant violation of
the trend. Sometimes the offending breakout is quickly roped back into the
herd, but usually a breakout means that the trend has changed its nature —
and usually that is an impending change of direction. In some cases, though,
a downside breakout of support that is immediately followed by a series of
higher highs indicates that bulls got a second wind and are violently repudiating the breakout. A continuation move after a downside breakout tends to be
uncommon, so don’t count on it.
Sometimes the low extends beyond the support line for just one day, and
then prices obediently fall back into line. Subsequent prices respect the support function of the line. A one-day break of the line is called a false breakout.
The word false is misleading because the price really does break the line;
what’s false is the conclusion you draw from it.
To estimate whether a breakout might be false, master trader Larry Williams
recommends that you consider the position of the close on the day before
the breakout. In an uptrend, if the close is at or near the high, chances are
good that it’s a false breakout. The breakout was due to profit-taking that
got carried away, it was triggered by a false rumor, or it was a random move.
If the close on the day before is at or near the low, though, chances are the
breakout is real.
Discard the support line as a trading tool after it has been broken. However,
you may want to leave it on the chart for a while. Sometimes old support
becomes new resistance and vice versa.

www.pdfdummies.com

173

174 Part IV: Finding Patterns
The other side of the coin: Using
resistance to enter and exit
Resistance is the mirror image of support: A line drawn along a series of highs
marks where buyers resist buying more — the price is too high for them.
Traders expect sellers to emerge at the resistance line (taking profit). You
may be wondering why you should care about resistance lines if all you ever
do is buy securities. As a buyer, the only trendline you care about is the support line. But you should care about identifying a downtrend using the resistance line for two reasons:
✓ When a downtrend ends, the next move may be an uptrend. You want
to get in on the action as early as possible, so you care when a downtrend is broken to the upside. The breakout is an important clue that an
uptrend may be starting and you should start paying attention.
✓ You may someday do the unimaginable — sell short. If you have been
trading exclusively in the U.S. stock market, chances are you’re not
familiar with initiating a short position, or selling a security first and
buying it back later after its price has fallen. Commodity traders, on the
other hand, are familiar with the practice. After all, we’re striving to be
emotionally neutral about whether prices are rising or falling. Why not
profit symmetrically? To make a profit only when a price is rising is to
lose 50 percent of the opportunity presented by trend-following.
Figure 10-2 shows two resistance lines drawn according to the rule. The
uppermost line correctly advised shorting this security at the third touch of
the line. The price falls off the cliff. But the price never returns to this first
resistance line. Instead you get the opportunity to draw a new resistance line
a few months later.
An experienced trader would probably see the new line as an opportunity to
increase his short position. A long-only trader would be watching this second
resistance line for the opportunity to buy the security — with a holding period
that lasts only until the price nears the topmost resistance line, where it will
face (you guessed it) resistance. Note that selling this security on the third
touch of resistance and covering the short position when the price breaks the
second resistance line would have given you a return of 20 percent.
The logic for trading using resistance lines is the same as for the support line
(see the preceding section), but in reverse. The more times the high-of-theday touches the resistance line and doesn’t cross it, the more confidence
you have that it is a valid description of the trend. This is called a test of
resistance and encourages sellers of the security to sell more after the price
passes the test. Fresh selling constitutes supply of the security and is called
distribution. Those who own the security are reluctant to hold it after resistance was proved to resist an effort to break above it. They’re willing to sell
their inventory at increasingly lower prices.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 10: Drawing Trendlines
11600
11500

SELL ON THIRD TOUCH
OF RESISTANCE

11400
11300
11200
11100
11000
10900
10800
10700
10600
10500
10400

SELL ON THIRD TOUCH
OF RESISTANCE

10300
10200
10100
10000
9900
9800
9700
9600
9500
9400
9300
9200
9100

Figure 10-2:
Drawing
resistance
lines.

CLOSE SHORT POSITION
WHEN RESISTANCE IS
BROKEN TO THE UPSIDE

9000
8900
8800
8700
8600

23

29

5
April

12

19

26

6
May

17

24

31
7
June

14

21

28

5
July

12

20

26

2
9
August

16

23

30

6
13
September

20

27

4
11
October

16

To trade using support and resistance exemplifies the ruling principle of
trend-following trading: You never enter at the absolute high and never exit at
the absolute low. The goal is to capture a portion of the trend. Famous trader
Bernard Baruch said he was willing to let others have the first third of a move
and the last third of a move — he just wanted the middle third.

Fine tuning support and resistance
You need patience and persistence to work with trendlines, because you
need to adjust the lines often, sometimes daily. You will hardly ever be lucky
enough to get a clear uptrend along a support line and then a breakout of the
support line that turns into a downtrend with a tidy resistance line. Instead
the price will wander around and perhaps test the last high, which can be
very annoying if you sold at the break of support.
See Figure 10-3. This chart is an adaptation of one shown by Victor
Sperandeo in Trader Vic: Methods of a Wall Street Master. First is the break
of the support line. But instead of an inverted V-shaped down move coming
right afterward, the price tests both the highest high and a significant low
along the up move. It is only when it crosses under this previous significant
low that you are 100 percent certain that the move is over. Sperandeo calls
it the 1-2-3 method for identifying a change in trend. Not every break of support looks like this, of course, but it’s an excellent model, not least because it
reminds us that trends hardly ever end and reverse in one fell swoop.
