are not published or reported in any way because they represent a proprietary account, the figures have been audited.)
When I first saw Fletcher's track record, I couldn't conceive how he
could achieve such a substantial return with virtually no risk. In our
meeting, he explained exactly how he does it. Yes, in reading this chapter,
you will find out as well. However, so as not to create false expectations,
I will tell you at the outset that his methods are not duplicable by ordinary investors. Even so, why would he reveal what he does? The answer
is explained in the interview.

When did you first develop an interest in the markets?
It probably started when I was in junior high school and my father
and I worked on developing a computer program to pick winners at
the dog racetrack. [He laughs robustly at ike memory.]
Did you have any success trying to forecast dog races?
Oh yes. The computer would eliminate one set of races it couldn't
predict. In the remaining races, the program had an 80 percent accuracy rate in picking a dog that would place in the money [win, place,
or show].
That's pretty impressive. How much money did you make?
I learned an interesting lesson about odds: winning 80 percent of
the time may not be enough if the odds are not right. I forget the

A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " RIIKHER J R !

exact number, but the track takes about 40 percent or more off the
table.
Wow, that's incredible—that even makes slot machines look good!
So even though we won 80 percent of the time, it still wasn't enough
to make any money.
What information were you using to predict the race outcome?
All the information that comes in the racing program—finish times
for the dogs in different races, positions at different poles, weather
conditions, etc.
How did you try to solve this problem? Did you use multiple
regression?
Hey, remember I was only in junior high.
When did you actually get involved with stocks?
When I was in college, I had a summer job with Pfizer, and they had
an employee program that allowed you to buy stock in the company
for a 25 percent discount. That sounded like a great deal to me. Ironically, as we fast-forward to the present, both of these principles—the
computerized analysis of odds and buying stock at a discount—are
hallmarks of what we do today. Of course, I don't mean this literally,
since we don't buy stocks at a discount, and we don't make bets on
who's going to be the winner. Nevertheless, those concepts tie into
our current strategies in a remarkable way.
Let's go back to your origins. How did you actually get involved
in trading the market?
I graduated Harvard with a math degree. At the time, everyone was
going into M.B.A. programs or Wall Street.
As a math major at Harvard, I assume that you must have had
phenomenal SAT scores.
Let's just say that I did very well. The funny thing is that I didn't take
any of the SAT preparatory courses. I prefer to figure out things for
myself rather than learn the tricks of the trade. I'm still like that today.
Sometimes I play word or math games for fun.
For example.
This is my latest thing. [He picks up an abacus.] I have no interest in
reading instructions on how to use it, but I am intrigued by the idea of
trying to figure it out for myself. I want to work out what algorithm

W I N - W N I N V E S T NG

you would use to do addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division on this instrument.
Did you plan to go to Wall Street when you finished college?
No, actually I planned to go into the air force
Why the air force?
I had been in air force ROTC in college, and the idea of becoming a
weapons officer and being responsible for all the new high-tech
equipment appealed to me.
Did you join the air force?
No. In the late 1980s, there were significant cuts in the defense
budget. In order to reduce the number of personnel, the air force
encouraged us to go into the reserves. A good friend convinced me to
look for a job on Wall Street. I was offered a position at Bear Stearns
and fell in love with the place. They in turn virtually adopted me. I
don't know what the magic was, but Elliot Wolk, who was a member
of the board of directors and the head of the options department, took
a liking to me.
Were any of your courses at Harvard helpful in preparing you for
the real world?
In my senior year, I took a graduate-level course in financial engineering. I did my project on the options market and found it fascinating. ]
tried to model what would happen if an option price was forced away
from its theoretical value, say because someone placed a large buy or
sell order that moved the market. My results convinced me that I had
found a way to consistently capture profits in the options market. The
idea that I could develop a model that would consistently make
money in options, however, went against all the theory I had learned
about the markets.
From that comment I take it that, at the time, you believed in the
efficient market hypothesis, as it was taught at Harvard.
Yes indeed [he laughs loudly]. In many respects, I still believe it, but
as you'll see, there is an interesting other side.
You believe it—in what sense? After all, your own performance
seems to belie the theory that markets are perfectly efficient.
If IBM is trading at $100 right now, it's probably worth $100. I think
it is very difficult to outsmart liquid markets.

A l P H O N S E " B U D D Y " fISEHER J R .

You mean by using a methodology that depends on getting the
future price direction right?
That's correct.
So where doesn't the efficient market hypothesis apply—say in
your own case?
My analysis implied that it was possible to implement offsetting
trades, in which the total position had little or no risk and still provided a profit opportunity. In the real world, such discrepancies might
occasionally occur because a large buy or sell order might knock a
specific option or security out of whack with the rest of the market.
In a theoretical model, however, it should be impossible to show a
consistent risk-free opportunity if the efficient market hypothesis is
correct. As it turned out, my model was right. In fact, it was the basis
for the very first trade I did for Bear Stearns, and it was very lucrative
for them.
What was this virtually risk-free market opportunity that you say

was consistently available?
The concept was based on the cost of financing. Sure IBM is worth
whatever it's trading at. However, let's say that I can earn 7 percent on
my money, and you can earn 9 percent on your money. Given the
assumption of our having different rates of return on our money, I
should be able to buy IBM and sell it to you at a future date for some
agreed price, and we would both be better off. For example, I might
buy IBM at $100 and agree to sell it to you for $108 one year from
now. 1 would make more than my 7 percent assumed alternative rate
of return, and you would lock in ownership of IBM at less than your
assumed opportunity cost of 9 percent annualized. The transaction
would be mutually beneficial.
Wouldn't arbitrage drive that opportunity away?
Arbitrage will only eliminate opportunities where we both have the
same costs of funds. If, however, your cost of funds is significantly
higher or lower, then there will be an opportunity. In a more general
sense, the markets might be priced very efficiently if everyone had
the same costs of funds, received the same dividend, and had the
same transaction costs. If, however, one set of investors is treated

W I N - W I N INVESill

very differently, and persistently treated differently, then it should
be possible to set up a transaction that offers a consistent profit
opportunity.
Give me a specific example.
Instead of IBM, say we're talking about an Italian computer company. Assume that because of tax withholding, U.S. investors receive only 70 cents on the dollar in dividends, whereas Italian
investors receive the full dollar. If this is the case, a consistent arbitrage becomes available, wherein a U.S. investor could sell the
stock to an Italian investor, establish a hedge, and after the dividend
has been paid, buy it back at terms that would be beneficial to both
parties.
It almost sounds as if you are performing a service. If I understand you correctly, you find buyers and sellers who have different costs or returns, due to a distortion, such as differences in
tax treatment. You then devise a transaction based on this difference in which each party ends up better off, and you lock in a
profit for performing the transaction.
Exactly. The key word you used was service. That's one of the key reasons why the results we have delivered are so different from those of
traditional investment managers, who buy and sell and then hope for
the best.
How could you ever lose in that type of transaction?
Very easily. It is very important that there is a real economic trade in
which the Italian investor actually buys the shares and is the holder of
those shares at the time of the dividend payment. If that's the case,
then there are real transactions, with real exposure to economic gains
and losses, and something can go wrong. For example, if there is an
adverse price movement after the trade and before we can fully
implement the hedge, then we could lose money.
The trading opportunity based on the option model you developed in college, however, was obviously different, since it only
involved U.S. markets. What was the idea behind that strategy?
In my model, I was using two different interest rates. I found that
assumption led to a consistent profit opportunity.

A L P H O N S E "BUDDY" F L E T C H E R JR.

Why were you using two different interest rates?
I used the risk-free interest rate [T-bill rate] to generate theoretical
option values, and I used a commercial interest rate to reflect the perspective of an option buyer who had a cost of borrowing funds that
was greater than the risk-free rate. As a consequence of using two different rates, trading opportunities appeared.
What precisely was the anomaly you found?
The market was pricing options based on a theoretical model that
assumed a risk-free rate. For most investors, however, the relevant
interest rate was the cost of borrowing, which was higher. For example, the option-pricing model might assume a 7 percent interest rate
while the investor might have an 8 percent cost of borrowing. This
discrepancy implied a profit opportunity.
What was the trading strategy implied by this anomaly?
An option box spread.
[If you are one of the few readers who understands this, congratulations. If, however, you think an option box spread is a quilt design, a
sexual position, or some other equally accurate conjecture, don't
worry about it. Any explanation I might attempt would only serve to
confuse you further. Take my word for it. For the purpose of what follows, it is sufficient to know that an option box spread is a trade that
involves the simultaneous implementation of four separate option
positions.]
Given the substantial transaction costs (commissions plus
bid/ask differentials), is this trade applicable in the real world?
You're quite right. Normally, the interest rate differences are not sufficiently wide to offer any consistent opportunity once trading costs are
taken into account. The key point, however, is that there are exceptions, and it is these exceptions that provide the profit opportunity.
For example, a corporation that has a large capital loss would have to
pay the full tax rate on interest income, but would not have any tax
obligation if they earned the equivalent income in an option trade
[because the capital gain on the option trade would be offset by their
existing capital loss]. Assume their short-term interest rate is 8 percent and they can implement an option box spread at levels that

JlVIN-WIN I N V E S T I N G

imply the same 8 percent return. Although it is the same return, the
corporation would be much better off because the return is a capital
gain instead of interest income. To them, the return would look more
like 11 percent.
Where do you get your income on the trade?
Initially, we made money either by implementing the transaction for
the corporation and charging a commission, or by taking the other
side of the trade. The difference in the tax treatment of different parties is what creates the profit opportunity. I would add that although
. the examples I have given you used illustrations in which the economic profits were enhanced by tax benefits, most of our trades are
not tax-related.
What was your job at Bear Stearns?
I had no specific responsibilities; I was just told to figure out how to
add value to the company. I started a couple of months before the
1987 stock crash. While all my friends are trading stocks and bonds,
and the market is crashing and layoffs are going on, I'm sitting there
without any specific responsibility and a mission to figure out how to
make money in the Bear Stearns style.
And exactly what is that?
To commit very little capital, take on very little risk, and still make a
significant return consistently. And if you can't do that, they don't
want to put their money into the trade. They are a very smart firm.
Even though you were left to come up with your own ideas, you
must have had an immediate superior.
Sure, Elliot Wolk.
Did you learn anything from him?
A great deal. One useful piece of advice he gave me, which summarized the philosophy of Bear Stearns was: Never make a bet you can't
afford to lose. My extreme aversion to risk traces back to Bear
Stearns. To this day, I am deeply appreciative of the opportunity they
gave me and for what I learned at the firm.
Why did you leave Bear Stearns?
Kidder made me a great offer. It was really hard to leave. My initial
intentions were to stay at Bear Stearns for my whole career.

A L P H D N S E " B U D D Y " FLTTCHER J R .

Was this the proverbial deal you couldn't refuse?

Yes.
Did Bear Stearns try to counteroffer?
I met with Ace Greenberg, Bear Stearns's CEO at that time, over
the course of two days, but his only real response was advice. He
told me that the deal sounded too good to be true and that I should
just continue to make my bet with Bear Stearns. It turns out that he
was right. It's a shame, because I was really excited about going to
Kidder Peabody. Not only did the firm have a great history, but the
opportunities that existed with General Electric as the majority
shareholder were truly remarkable. Unfortunately, some misunderstandings and miscommunication with management caused an
uncomfortable situation. At that point, it was best for me to just
leave.
I already know the situation you're talking about. It was amply
reported in the press. I prefer to get the story directly from you,

however, as opposed to secondhand. I also know that the resulting legal suits were resolved, and therefore there is no legal
restriction to your talking about the case.
The only restriction is that I really love not to dwell on it [he laughs]. I
am glad it is all over. Kidder was great for me in many ways and bad
for me in many ways. Essentially, they offered me a great deal to come
over, and then the deal changed. Then they said a number of things
that were very insensitive and impolite. So I left them and won the
arbitration on the contract dispute. A suit on race discrimination
ended up being unsuccessful—good riddance.
[Based on public documents, this suit was not lost on the merits
of the discrimination case, but rather because the New York Court
of Appeals ruled that the standard registration form signed by
Fletcher as a condition of employment compelled arbitration.
Although the court ruled against Fletcher's petition because it felt
such a decision was dictated by the letter of the law, the written
opinion appeared to reflect a reluctant tone: "We stress that there is
no disagreement among the members of this court about the general
proposition that racial, gender, and all other forms of invidious discrimination are ugly realities that cannot be countenanced and that

WIN-WIN INVEST!

should be redressable through the widest possible range of remedies . . ."]
If you don't mind my asking, other than this particular episode,
have you encountered prejudice elsewhere in the industry?
I have definitely experienced some things, but it is usually more subtle. I really prefer not to dwell on it.
I'm just curious whether prejudice is still a factor.
Frankly, whenever there's a difficult situation, race is always one of
those easy cards to play. For example, if someone is envious. Usually,
nothing is direct. Ultimately it's a very subtle issue, and you never
know for sure. Someone acts in a certain way, and you think it is one
thing, but eventually you find out that it's not. In the last eight years,
I haven't seen anything . . . actually, I guess I have seen a number of
things that are somewhat direct [laughing]. My view is that as long as
I do the best I can for the people who put their trust in me—my
investors, my employees, and the companies I invest in—then everything else will take care of itself.
When I read about the whole episode, I thought it was pretty
gutsy of you to bring a legal suit instead of taking a settlement. I
assume that you just wanted to fight back.
I didn't want to be adversarial, but they were sooo . . . . You got me
talking about it; I didn't want to talk about it. [He laughs long and

hard.] Kidder was great, GE was great, and I really wanted to be there
for a long time. If they had said to me, "We're going to pay you half
the amount we agreed to, and we'll work out the remainder," I probably could have lived with that. I wouldn't have minded those issues if

they were prepared to let me be part of the team and really participate
and contribute going forward. But far worse than the compensation
issue was the treatment—the attitude that I didn't belong and some
of the comments from senior management.
So it wasn't just one person.
No, it wasn't just one person.
But what's odd is that you did so well for them.
Sometimes, I think that makes it worse.
But that's what I don't understand. They hired you. It's not as if
they suddenly discovered you are black. Oh well, I guess there is

A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " F L E T C H E R JR

no reason to expect prejudice to be logical. How did you go
about starting your own firm when you left Kidder?
I went back to Ace Greenberg. Bear Stearns set me up with an office
and gave me access to its very supportive clearance department, which
provided financing and brokerage services for professional investors.
What did Bear Stearns get out of this deal?
I still had very friendly relationships with the people at Bear Stearns.
To some extent, they just wanted to help me out. But it was also beneficial to them because they gained a customer. Based on their previous experience with me, I'm sure they assumed that I would generate
significant brokerage business for them.
After I left Ace's office, I went downstairs to the computer store
and bought myself a Macintosh, which I set up on my dining room
table. I constructed the spreadsheets for a transaction opportunity I
saw would be feasible over the next few days and then faxed the
sheets to a Fortune 50 company for whom I had done similar deals
that had worked out well. They liked the idea and gave me the goahead. The next day I opened the account at Bear Stearns and did
the other necessary preparations for the trade. On the third day, I
executed the transaction, and on the fourth day, I went to the bank
to open an account for $ 1 00 so that I could receive the fee as a wire
transfer. In effect, Fletcher Asset Management was funded for
$100.
Could you elaborate on the strategies you're using today.
A common theme in all our strategies involves finding someone who
is either advantaged or disadvantaged and then capitalizing on their
advantage or minimizing their disadvantage. Arbitrage opportunities
are very difficult to find without that type of an angle.
We are still pretty active in the dividend capture strategy we talked
about earlier. Our primary current activity, however, involves finding
good companies with a promising future that need more capital, but
can't raise it by traditional means because of a transitory situation.
Maybe it's because their earnings were down in the previous quarter
and everyone is saying hands-off, or maybe it's because the whole sector is in trouble. For whatever reason, the company is temporarily disadvantaged. That is a great opportunity for us to step in. We like to

^ W I N - W I N IK V E S T ING

approach a company like that and offer financial assistance for some
concession.
For example, in a recent deal involving a European software company, we provided $75 million in exchange for company stock. However, instead of pricing the stock at the prevailing market price, which
was then $9, the deal was that we could price the stock at a time of
our choosing up to three years in the future, but with the purchase
price capped at $16. If the price of the stock falls to $6, we will get
$75 million worth of stock at $6 per share. If, however, the stock goes
up to $20, we will get $75 million worth of stock at a price of $16 per
share because that was the maximum we agreed to. In effect, if the
stock goes down we're well protected, but if the stock goes up a lot,
we have tremendous opportunity.
Are you tben totally eliminating the risk?
The risk is reduced by a very significant amount, but not totally. There
is still risk if the company goes bankrupt. This risk, however, is small
because we are only selecting companies we consider to be relatively
sound. In fact, a senior officer of one of the companies we previously
invested in is now part of our own staff and helps us evaluate the
financial prospects of any new investments. With this expertise inhouse, it would be rare for us to choose a company that went bankrupt.
The logic of the transaction is pretty clear to me. As long as the
company doesn't go bankrupt, if the stock goes down, stays about
unchanged, or goes up moderately, you will at least break even,
and if it goes up a lot, you can make a windfall gain. Although
there is nothing wrong with that, doesn't it imply that the vast
majority of times these transactions will end up being a wash and
that significant profits will occur only sporadically? Why wouldn't
you end up with an equity curve that is fairly flat most of the
time, with only occasional upward spikes?
Two reasons. First, the money we invest in the company doesn't just
lie idle; it generates annual income—8.5 percent using the example
we just discussed—until we price the stock. Second, since the maximum price we will have to pay for the stock is capped—$16 in our
example—we can sell out-of-the-money calls against this position,
thereby guaranteeing an additional minimum revenue.
