
WHAT ARE PRICE PATTERNS?
If you have been trading for any length of time, you've certainly heard of at least one of the dozens of
popular patterns traders use. With names as colorful as a dead cat bounce, cup with handle, head and
shoulders, and many other lively titles, price patterns are sure to grab your attention as a trader, if
anything, to arouse your curiosity as to what the pattern means. You may even decide to classify some
of the price patterns you discover on your own—there is no limit!
Simply defined, a price pattern is a repeatable formation that has been observed in the past by many
traders and has been classified with specific parameters. Traders label patterns by drawing lines,
arcs, squares, triangles, circles, parabolas, or any other geometric tool on the price chart itself. New
traders, and even experienced traders, often recognize patterns best on a pure price chart devoid of
indicators. A price pattern provides a logical entry price as a trigger, profit target price in the event
the pattern succeeds, and stop-loss price in the event the pattern fails to generate the expected price
movement. Like anything in trading or investing, there's no guarantee of a successful outcome, but a
pattern can give objective prices to anticipate when odds favor pattern completion or pattern failure.
The art of using price patterns to develop trading decision stems from the idea that history repeats,
and thus patterns repeat—this is one of the main principles of technical analysis. Therefore, when a
trader begins to recognize a common price pattern developing in real time, he or she can anticipate
the resolution of the pattern to unfold similarly to the way it has in the past, allowing the trader to

envision the next move ahead in price. In this way, traders can use patterns as potential roadmaps
today to the immediate future, in the event that price continues to form the classic pattern as expected
from start to finish.
In price patterns, you gain the immediate benefit of trading price itself in generating your initial
trading decision, rather than analyzing potentially contradictory indicators that are derived from price,
and thus lagging indicators by definition. If you use price-based indicators alone to generate trading
ideas, such as buying a stock that is showing an oversold stochastic or RSI indicator, you are one step
behind the price itself because all price-based indicators are mathematical derivations of the price of
a stock, and are thus based on lagging calculations.
In addition, using oscillators or other price-based indicators leaves you wondering exactly where to
enter, place a stop, or aim for a price target. If you trade using an overbought and oversold oscillator,
your price target is unknowable because you will exit your trade when your indicator tells you that
price is now overbought. You are relying on indicators for trading decisions, rather than price itself
and are one step removed from the action.
With price patterns, you decide where to enter, where to place a stop, and where to aim for an
expected price target using price itself. Remember the old saying “Only price pays”? Traders who
incorporate price pattern analysis into their trading decisions pay homage to that time-tested
statement.
In popular trading literature, authors classify price patterns generally into continuation or reversal
patterns, but that has often led traders to confusion when a pattern that is defined as a reversal pattern
fails and price then moves in an unexpected direction, which can result in large losses for traders
positioned the wrong way. For example a descending triangle, which is often classified as a bearish
reversal pattern, is considered to fail if price breaks to the upside instead of breaking to the downside
as expected.
While it's not possible to cover every single pattern that exists in the trading literature in a single
chapter, this chapter's purpose is three-fold:
1. Tie price patterns to foundation principles
2. Explain how these principles enhance your confidence in the pattern
3. Challenge your thinking on how to trade common patterns
For a full discussion on price patterns, there are four main texts which traders use as a reference:
The Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns by Thomas N. Bulkowski
Martin Pring on Price Patterns by Martin Pring
Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits by Richard Schabacker
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends by Robert Edwards and John Magee
Before I begin discussing price patterns, I felt it was necessary to make a distinction between blind
reliance on a pattern and intelligent integration of the larger chart structure when taking a trade based
on a chart pattern.
To be clear, you first have to learn the patterns—the classic definitions and expectations—before
you can master how to trade chart patterns. Once you have developed some experience in the art—
and often frustration of having a perfect pattern not work out as you expected—you will then begin to

see the patterns as a way to see how other traders or investors are reacting to the pattern, as well as
the supply/demand relationship that is setting up as the pattern forms. Patterns are similar to candle
charts in that they reveal insights into the supply/demand relationship that exists between buyers and
sellers. Thinking about why a pattern might be forming, along with the context in which the pattern
forms, is far more important than excitedly pointing out a pattern and then rushing to put on a position
when a popular price pattern forms on a chart.
It's important to remember that patterns are not magic profit pathways to the future, but rather
insights into a temporary potential window into the future that can simultaneously give you insights
into the minds of traders who are forming the pattern and the frustration—evident on the charts—when
a popular pattern fails. It seems that in today's educated trading world, everyone knows the patterns,
but the ones who are profiting from the patterns are the ones who can see beyond the patterns and into
the minds of traders taking the setup. Specifically, experienced traders profit not just from successful
obvious patterns, but from obvious patterns that fail and thus trap traders on the wrong side of the
market. That is the most important distinction you can make. If something looks too good to be true, it
probably is, and the pattern will likely fail; it is one of the strange paradoxes of trading. However,
there can actually be better opportunity in a pattern failure, which can give you a quick, profitable
trading opportunity that other traders do not see, provided you have quick reflexes and the ability to
see patterns for what they are, meaning they are not perfect windows to the future.

TRADING PATTERNS: TWO SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT
Adam Grimes, a trader at SMB Capital and Director of Tactical Investments at Waverly Advisors, explained in a blog post
the distinction between the two prevailing modes of thought—namely between the amateur and the expert—when trading
price patterns. I wanted to share a portion of that discussion as we begin examining price patterns. Here is what Adam
says:

I believe there are serious flaws in the way most of us start learning technical analysis.
Usually a set of patterns is presented to the student, with the idea that once you have
learned to recognize these patterns, all you have to do is go find them in the market, put
on your trades, and then dream of the profits that will roll in. As Mike Bellafiore, cofounder of SMB Capital, tells every trader who walks through the door: the world
does not work like that. There is more to successful, consistent trading than simply
recognizing a set of patterns.
There are two radically different schools of traditional technical analysis, and both
spring from the writings of two men in the 1920s and 1930s. Richard Schabacker was
a successful trader, investment advisor, and author whose approach was based on
classifying many variations of patterns. His books include variation after variation on
continuation patterns, trend change patterns, consolidation patterns, etc. After studying
thousands of these patterns and then seeing them in action, the student is supposed to
be able to gain some intuition about the future direction of prices.
Richard Wyckoff was another author whose approach was completely different. He
focused on trying to understand why the market was doing what it was doing. The
“why” was much more important than the “how”—the concept was more important
than any specific pattern—the thing itself more important than the form of the thing.

Rather than equip the student with a large set of potential patterns, Wyckoff believed it
was important to understand how the motivation of buyers and sellers showed itself in
the patterns of price and volume.
To my thinking, this is a much more valuable approach, but it seems like 90 percent of
the books, web sites, and courses today focus on patterns like “cup and handle”, “head
and shoulders”, etc.
One possible reason for this is that everyone reads Edwards and Magee's Technical
Analysis of Stock Trends , which itself springs from the Schabacker school of thought,
but it's also much easier to teach specific patterns than to teach real understanding of
supply and demand. Without that understanding of supply and demand, any approach to
trading is ultimately doomed to fail.
Source: Adapted from Grimes, Adam. “Technical Analysis: A Little Background and History.” SMB Training Blog.
May 5, 2010. http://www.smbtraining.com/blog/technical-analysis-a-little-background-and-history

We as traders must realize that price patterns are not magic, and what's important is the
supply/demand factors, as well as the underlying context in which the pattern forms. Today, it's not
enough to take a trade based on a single chart pattern alone; rather, we need to look at the broader
picture to determine the odds of a pattern succeeding or failing, both of which give traders
opportunities.
We will discuss how to trade these patterns when we discuss execution tactics in Chapter 8 and
combine the bigger picture in a later chapter on integrating concepts, patterns, and indicators into
specific trade setups, some of which derive their edge directly from an existing price pattern. For
now, similar to the prior chapter on candlestick charting, we need to learn the basics of price patterns
so we can build upon that knowledge to generate high-probability, low-risk setups.

INTRODUCTION TO THE MOST POPULAR
PATTERNS
In his book The Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns, Thomas Bulkowski quantifies 52 patterns, some of
which consist of one to three bars while others may last many bars. Some patterns, like the head and
shoulders reversal pattern, are in the common trading knowledge that even non-chartists would
recognize, while other patterns, like the shark-32, are obscure patterns that not even expert market
technicians can define on the spot! Like candles, you need only learn the basics to be successful,
rather than know the intricacies of every single price pattern—or candle pattern—that exists.
Just like any form of charting analysis, you can delve as deeply into the material as you wish, but
the benefit will be not from the depth of knowledge of the intricacies of chart patterns, but in
integrating the most common patterns into a larger framework of supportive methods and confirming
signals from non-correlated styles of market analysis.
You will benefit most from understanding the edge that is inherent in most price patterns. By edge,

we refer to the inherent price levels that a pattern provides as an entry, stop-loss, and target, where
the target is always larger than the stop-loss. In the event that you can consistently find a pattern with
a two-to-one reward (target) to risk (stop-loss) from the entry point, then you will consistently make
money over time even if 50 percent of the patterns that you trade fail. That's because you can expect to
make twice what you lose on the trades that you win.
If you risked $500.00 on each trade and lost that amount when the pattern failed, but profited
$1,000.00 each time the trade succeeded, then you would have a pattern-based edge that resulted in
consistent profits with a 50 percent win rate of your trades. Out of 10 trades taken, five would lose,
costing you $2,500.00, but five would win, profiting $5,000.00. A 10-trade string that results in a gain
of $5,000.00 minus loss of $2,500.00 results in a net gain to your account of $2,500.00, minus
commission and slippage. This is how you would approach trading patterns from an edge-based
standpoint. We will discuss the finer details of a trader's edge in Chapter 8.
Your goal is not to work as hard as possible and get every signal in alignment to produce a very
high win rate. Rather, your goal is to identify patterns that generate a minimum of a two-to-one
reward-to-risk ratio or better. Most trading literature suggests a three-to-one edge is minimum, but
you must develop your own style from your personal experience and risk tolerance. Perfection in win
rate is never the goal with any style of trading. As such, focusing on edge reduces the psychological
discomfort or frustration that will befall you when a perfect pattern that meets all the textbook
definitions unexpectedly fails, resulting in confusion.
The focus of the patterns in this chapter is on popular trading patterns rather than the lesser-known
patterns. Why? We want to know what the mass public is thinking, and how they might behave when
they see a popular pattern. To an extent, the benefit you receive as a thoughtful, well-reasoned trader
will be in assessing self-fulfilling prophecies that result when popular patterns form. At times, when
price triggers an entry for a popular pattern in a popular stock, traders will behave in a predictable
fashion and enter at the same point, place a stop at the same point, and exit at the same point.
You'll soon learn the benefit of failed patterns, where the public enters a well-known pattern,
places their stops at the exact same level, and then all rush for the exits at the same time as the pattern
mysteriously fails. This is the logic of how positive feedback loops develop, such as those we
discussed in Chapter 3. You'll be in a better position to profit if you fully understand that patterns are
not magic, but are temporary windows of probability, not certainty. Many traders believe that price
patterns are magic, and thus get very frustrated when a pattern fails. Don't be like the public!
With that in mind, let's survey a few of the most popular trading patterns that have grabbed the
attention of the public, and thus give us insights into the supply/demand relationship.

HEAD AND SHOULDERS
If you took a poll of the general trading public and asked them to list their favorite pattern, chances
are the head and shoulders would make the top three. In many cases, it might even be the number one
most-recognized pattern because even financial commentators on popular financial news broadcasts
have been known to describe a head and shoulders pattern forming on an index or a popular stock.
They even bring in technical analysts to describe the pattern and draw it on the charts and explain to
the general public what is ahead for the market, usually a reversal, when this pattern develops.

Defining the Pattern
What exactly is a head and shoulders pattern? Let's turn to AIG's daily chart as the stock formed a
lengthy pattern in 2006 (see Figure 5.1).
FIGURE 5.1 AIG Head and Shoulders. Daily Chart: 2005–2006

If you're wondering if the price scale is an error, it's actually not. AIG issued a one-to-twenty
reverse split to shareholders on July 1, 2009, which meant shareholders saw their total shares
invested decrease such that for every 20 shares they owned before July 1, they would now own one
share for those 20 shares. A person who owned 100 shares at $1.00 would now own only five shares
worth $20.00. The value of their investment remained the same after the split.
As a result, the share price of $1.00 at the time was multiplied by 20, which resulted in a stock
price of $20.00. Due to the split, there was no change in market capitalization, however for those of
us looking at historical charts such as this one of AIG, we see the price scale inflated by a factor of
20, which means that the $1,300.00-per-share level, the neckline of the pattern, actually was
equivalent to $65.00 per share, which is how investors saw the price in 2005 and 2006. This chart
provides us an interesting history lesson in reverse splits as well as showing us a near-perfect head
and shoulders pattern.
The classic head and shoulders pattern requires four points to define the pattern. The left shoulder
is the initial swing high (a higher high in an uptrend) that gives way to a standard retracement, which
is seen as a buying opportunity into support in the established uptrend. No danger exists on the
horizon during the left shoulder, and we would expect volume and momentum to register new or
equivalent highs as on prior swings. Price would not break trendlines or moving averages during this
time. The key to remember on the left shoulder is that investors can see no hint that the pattern is
forming in real time and no bearish signals yet.
The head is often the final peak in the up-trending market. We cannot know this is the final peak as

it forms, but many times the head portion will form on a negative divergence in volume or momentum,
which should be your first clue as a trader that things are not as bullish as they seem. Sometimes the
head will actually be the terminal fifth wave in Elliott wave notation as we will discuss in Chapter 1
and so advanced traders might start to sell shares while the general public, who do not pay much
attention to negative divergences or Elliott wave counts, see no danger and continue to buy shares as
the price rises and rises. Notice that we have competing behaviors from professional and amateur
traders as the head portion forms in the prospective pattern: professionals are exiting (selling)
positions (the right side/decline portion of the head) while amateurs see no danger at all and continue
buying shares.
Experienced traders sense that a reversal is nearing, and will behave more conservatively.
However, amateurs who see nothing but the prior rise in a lengthy uptrend, are unaware of the
potential reversal pattern forming. The sell-off from the absolute peak might break under key rising
trendlines or the 20- (or 50-) period exponential moving average, both of which are early warning
signs that a trend may be getting ready to reverse.
The right shoulder forms in part from amateurs continuing to buy the stock despite the warning
signals that are mounting. Price rallies a final time as traders buy shares as they see price coming into
a prior support level, which is the low formed from the bottom swing of the left shoulder—the
neckline. However, the picture of who is holding shares is changing. Head and shoulders patterns are
clean distribution patterns where professional traders take profits (sell shares) to late-comers who
have waited to buy when they are convinced price will continue to rise forever, which occurs at the
later stages of a trend. Price rises, but soon fails to make a new swing high as the right shoulder
completes. By this time, you have probably seen a clean rising trendline break and price has almost
certainly broken through the 20- or 50-period EMA, and now we see a clean lower high put in place,
which is the first step before a confirmed trend reversal according to the Pure Price Method (see
Chapter 1).
By the time the right shoulder has formed, experienced traders already anticipate a break of the
neckline and are prepared to get short to take advantage of the pattern forming and triggering an entry,
which would be as soon as price broke the neckline trendline. Notice the dynamic in supply and
demand. Professional traders are distributing throughout the whole pattern (see Chapter 7), amateurs
are buying shares because they do not see the danger (only the rising trend), and chart-specialist
traders (technical analysts) are getting ready to go short (put on new short-sale positions) in the event
that price breaks and closes under the neckline, or fourth component of the pattern. Traders who will
enter a new short-sale position under $1,300.00 will place a stop either directly above the right
shoulder at $1,380.00, or above the head (the absolute high) at $1,420.00. Keep in mind that if the
pattern fails, these same traders who tried to get short will be forced to cover (buy, adding a force of
demand) in the event that price rallies above $1,380.00 or $1,420.00.
If price does break under the neckline, what is likely to happen? The rush of new short sellers will
be a force of supply to drive price lower by their actions (putting on new positions). Many amateur
traders who did not see the pattern forming will have placed their stop loss orders under the support
zone that comprises the neckline. This is also a form of supply, which is old buyers selling old
positions for a loss, usually in a panic.
The combination of new short sellers and old buyers who are being stopped out can create a
positive feedback loop (see Chapter 3) which can send price much lower as a result of the dynamics
that formed the pattern: professionals selling (perhaps for fundamental reasons), technical analysts

selling (because of the break under the neckline and negative divergences), and
amateur/inexperienced traders panic selling because they are losing money and their expectations of
higher prices are being dashed.
Where might this positive feedback loop end? Or stated differently, what will stop the flood of
sellers? All of the chart books that describe the head and shoulders pattern place the target at the same
location. To derive the price target for the pattern, which is the place where short-sellers will then
buy to cover the shares that they shorted (a force of demand), take the distance from the top of the
head to the neckline and then subtract that value from the breakdown price of the neckline.

Price Targeting in the AIG Head and Shoulders Example
In our example in Figure 5.1, AIG's split-adjusted neckline formed at $1,300.00 per share. The top of
the head—or the peak of the rally—formed at $1,420.00. If we subtract $1,300.00 (neckline) from
$1,420.00 (top of the head), we arrive at a distance of $120.00. To complete the projection, we then
subtract this distance ($120.00) from the breakdown of the neckline ($1,300.00) to arrive at a pattern
price target of $1,180.00. At that price, the chart traders who went short from this pattern will begin
to buy back their shares at the target zone.
This zone may also correspond with other investors, perhaps fundamental investors (not using
charts to make investment decisions) who determine that the share price is now cheap compared to
what it should be (or used to be), and thus they will begin buying the shares at the reduced price that
happens to correspond with the chart traders buying back shares (demand) to cover.
To recap, a trader will enter a short-sale position when he or she observes a left shoulder, head,
right shoulder, and then a break under the neckline (entry). The same trader will place a stop either
above the right shoulder (which is a conservative strategy) or above the top of the head/peak (which
is a more aggressive strategy). The traders will play for a target that is equal to the distance of the
head from the neckline, which is subtracted from the neckline.
To confirm that you are truly seeing a head and shoulders develop, watch for a potential fifth-wave
clear Elliott Wave count when combined with negative volume, momentum, or breadth (market
internals if looking at an index such as the S&P 500), divergences as the head forms.
Look for price to break under established rising trendlines and the 20 or 50 exponential moving
averages to increase your confidence that you are witnessing a market in a trend reversal stage. Look
for new momentum lows and volume spikes to form as price breaks under the neckline (horizontal
support) which confirms that the momentum and trend is shifting to the downside, and also watch for a
confirmed trend reversal using the pure price method (lower high, lower low).
What happened to AIG? Did it ever break the neckline and trigger a short-sale trade? Yes, but it
threw in one curve ball before giving an official signal—that is why I chose this example of a textbook pattern with a real-world curve-ball. Let this be a reminder that patterns are never as perfect as
the textbooks say, but still give excellent opportunities for those willing to position themselves
accordingly. For the resolution, see Figure 5.2.
FIGURE 5.2 AIG Head and Shoulders Resolution. Daily Chart: 2005–2006
