
Figure 4.1 A trading model that works.

62

Figure 4.3 Trade day of the week: Tuesday.

63

Figure 4.5 Trade day of the week: Thursday.

64

Figure 4.6 Trade day of the week: Friday.
take buy and sells on certain specific days. To get a sense of this, Figures 4.2 through 4.6 show the buys for
each day of the week, then the sells for each day, and finally we put together the best buy/sell days for a
working model we can actually trade.
The listings indicate the best days to buy have been Tuesdays and Thursdays, whereas the best sell
days have been Wednesdays and Thursdays. Figure 4.7 shows that if we restrict trading to just these days,
we don't make as much money, only $56,43 7, but just about cut the number of trades in half and boost our
profits up to $173 on average, a number worth trading for. Your lesson here is that the Trade Day of Week
(TDW) can make a big difference in your system's performance. Best yet, the drawdown plummets to only
$3,500 from $10,031 and the accuracy jumps to 84 percent. This is a big improvement, as explained in the
discussion of money management in Chapter 13.

65

Figure 4.7 Restricting trade days makes a big difference.

66

A Look at Volatility In the S&P 500
Does this concept have application for the S&P 500?
Although there can be no doubt about this technique working with a 50 percent volatility expansion, we
can improve on it a great deal. How? By using something we already know about, the impact of TDW. The
next set of data shows the volatility breakout performance by each day of the week for

Figure 4.9 Trading on Tuesdays.

67

Figure 4.10 Trading on Wednesdays.
the S&P 500. The exit is the same as with the bonds shown earlier. Clearly, some are days better than others
to trade. Figures 4.8 through 4.12 show the buy signals by day of week; Figures 4.13 through 4.17 show
sell signals by day of week.
Figure 4.18 shows trading on just the more influential days. The best days to be a buyer were all days
except Thursday and Friday, while the best sell day was Thursday, with Friday a push, but it is used in the
following listing. This is not a bad system, it "made" $227,822 with 75 percent accuracy on

Figure 4.11 Trading on Thursdays.

68

69

70

1,333 trades and had a very small drawdown of only $13,737. I would prefer a larger average profit per
trade than the $170 shown here.
An astute, thinking trader should be asking questions like, "Could we use a closer volatility expansion
number to be a buyer on the more bullish days and a farther away entry value on the days that don't work so
well with the 50 percent value? And how about our exit, would it pay off to hold longer on the more
bullish/bearish days?"

71
These questions can continue indefinitely, but do need to be asked to optimize performance. Proof that
research pays off is offered by Figure 4.19, which shows the use of the preceding rules, except that the buy
entry comes at 40 percent of the previous day's range added to the open, the sell entry at 200 percent of the
range subtracted from the open. There is a big difference here; while it actually makes a little less money
($14,000), the accuracy goes to 83 percent, the average profit per trade is escalated to $251, and our number
of trades is reduced by 46 percent!

Separating Buyers from Sellers to Find Volatility Using Market Swings
A third way to measure potential volatility expansions comes from looking at price swings over the
past several days. Mike Chalek deserves credit for this concept with a system he designed and labeled,
"Talon." The basic idea is to look at the various swings price has taken from one point to the next over the
past few years. There are many such points to study.
The ones I have chosen for this next glimpse into market activity, measure the amount of price
movement from the high 3 days ago to today's low. That is Step 1. Step 2 is to take the swing distance from
the high 1 day ago minus the low 3 days ago. Finally, we will use the largest of these values as our basic
volatility measurement to begin the process of designing a filter or price cushion to add to tomorrow's
opening for buying or subtract for selling.
The system does okay; it makes money as the following results on the S&P 500 from 1982 to 1998
demonstrate (see Figure 4.20).

72
The rules are to buy at 80 percent of the swing value above the opening and sell at 120 percent of the swing
value below the opening. Use a dollar stop of $1,750 and my bailout exit. This makes $122,837 from 1982
to 1998 with an average profit per trade of $228.

Results
As always though, the question becomes, can we do better? Our last attempt at doing better was to use
TDW as our filter to substantially improve performance. We will now go beyond this and bring in a
fundamental consideration-the impact of bond prices on stock prices.
We will now try this concept as a filter (Figure 4.21). The rule is quite simple, we will only take buy
signals if the closing price of bonds is greater today than 5 days ago, and only take sells if bonds are lower
than 3 5 days ago. Our reasoning is well founded in the somewhat common knowledge that higher bond
prices are bullish for stocks, lower bond prices bearish.
What a difference this makes! An average profit per trade goes from $228 to $281 while our drawdown
plummets from $13,025 to only $5,250. Best of all though is that in the original "nonfiltered" trades we had
a largest losing trade of $8,150, whereas with the bond filter the largest loss was only $2,075!

73

One Step Further
Your education is nearing completion if you are wondering what happens in this model if we only
take signals on the best TDWs while the trend of the Bond market is giving us bullish or bearish
confirmation?
Again, the results speak for themselves: by combining all these ingredients we increase our chances or
odds for short-term trading success. 'Notice the number of trades is substantially reduced, this means our
exposure is less, but our average profit per trade increases. Our profits decline to "only" $76,400 but the
average profit per trade jumps to $444, drawdown stays about the same at $5,912 but the percent of
winning trades goes to 90 percent.
What we have done here is filter out trades that are not backed by all three of our conditions. Filtered
trading for short-term swings will put you a light year-or two-ahead of all the rest of the short-term traders.
There is an extra advantage here; by using filters you are placing demands on the market, demands that
mean you will not trade every day, demands that naturally force you to trade less, not more. Active traders
are usually losing traders. Those of us who pick and choose our spots to speculate are more inclined to
come out winners as we have tipped the scales in our favor, which is what intelligent speculation is all
about.

Chapter 5

The Theory of
Short-Term Trading

In the short term, theories work, but in the long term, give way to reality

Now that you have an understanding of how markets move from point to point and the basic strategy
of how to best take advantage of these swings it is time to examine the theory of what we are doing so I can
then take you back to practical application.
Our basic concept or working theory is that something causes explosive market moves. These
explosions put the market into a trend phase, and these trends, for our purpose, last from 1 to 5 days in
most markets. Our object is to get aboard as close to the start of this explosion as possible.
Which gives rise to the questions, "What causes these explosions in market activity, when are they
most apt to occur, and is there anything here we can use to pin down the time and place of these moves>?
"
Succinctly stated, those are the problems I have dealt with most of m, life. Long ago, I recognized that
if I could not identify a problem there was no way on earth I could find its solution. You now know the
problems so let's look for some solutions. Let me hastily add that I do not have all the answers to this
gigantic puzzle. There is nothing like losing to bring you to your senses, to teach you that you are not so
damned smart, that you need more education. I still have losses, plenty of them. so I too, still need more
education. And always will.
The biggest "cause" of these moves is probably news. But we have trouble trading on news because,
first, the news can change as quickly and as unpredictably as the weather. News, or changes in world
events and marketplaces, can be random; thus, the markets wobble around from one unknown news event
to the next.
75

76
The drunken sailor analogy mathematicians have used is most likely due to news knocking prices back
and forth. Second, we may be the last guy on the food chain getting such news so we receive it too late.
Third, there is nothing we can look at or observe that tells us what specific future news might be. Fourth, my
years of trading strongly suggest that those who are close to the news usually position themselves prior to
the announcement. (Note: There is not one group taking advantage of news; the group varies from source to
source.) Bankers might have inside news about the T-Bond market, but not on Cattle, whereas feedlot
operators might have that data, but nothing on Bonds. There is not an Illuminati controlling all news sources.
While Mel Gibson's character Jerry Phillips was right on in the movie Conspiracy Theory, do not extend that
theory to the markets.
While I was writing this book, a book about some of my archeological exploits, The Gold of Exodus, by
Howard Blum (New York: Simon & Schuster), was discussed in several magazine and newspaper articles. In
one of them, where I lived was stated incorrectly as was my occupation, my age, the type of car I drive, and
my description of what the book is all about' In short, if I can't believe what I read about myself from a
reporter who personally interviewed me, I suggest you probably can't trust much of what is written about
Orangejuice, Oats, and Oil.
The supposedly prestigious Wall Street Journal is no exception. In early 1998, they told readers their
source inside the Federal Reserve System was certain the Fed Open Market Committee was about to raise
interest rates. Six weeks later when the Fed released their notes on the meeting, we learned the truth, they
had voted 11 to 1 to not raise rates! On at least two occasions, reporters of the Wall Street journal have been
found to be touting stocks they, themselves, had already acquired a position in. Television is not exempt
from this same problem; CNBC's lead "Inside source" Dan Dorffinan is no longer on air for the same
allegations of misleading viewers. A few years back, even Ralph Nader was caught, or rather his mother
was, by the Securities and Exchange Commission, selling short stocks in General Motors and a tire company
just before Nader attacked them with his consumer complaint law-suits. So what else can we look at if we
can't really examine news'
"Price action! Charts” scream technicians and most short-term swing players. The nice thing about
price action, as reflected on charts, is that there are plenty of things to look at and analyze, the most common
being (1) price patterns, (2) indicators based on price action, and (3) the trend or momentum of price. Not so
common, and the fourth one of my big tools, is the relationship one market may have on another. Remember
the S&P 500

77
system and how much better it was when we required that bonds be in an uptrend? That is an example of
market relationships that I discuss in detail a little later on.
Our final and fifth set of data to key off of comes from following the crowd most often found to be
wrong. On a short-term basis, the great unwashed public trader is a net loser. Always has been, always will
be. The figures I have heard bandied about over the years are that 80 percent of the public lose all their
money, be they stock or commodity traders. Thus coppering their wagers should lead us to those short-term
explosions and profits. There are various ways to measure the public; these are called sentiment indicators.
The two best ones I know of are surveys of the public done by Jake Bernstein and Market Vane.
For short-term traders, I prefer Jake's because he actually calls 50 traders after the close each day to
find out if they are bullish or bearish on any given market. Since these are short-term traders, and by
definition usually wrong, we can use them as a guide of when not to be a buyer or seller. I will not use
them exclusively as an indicator to buy or sell, but as a tool that should not be in agreement with my own
hand-selected trade. If the public is excessive in their selling, I don't want to be a seller along with them. I
may not always fade the public, but I sure don't want them on my side of the table.
Market Vane takes sentiment readings from newsletter writers as opposed to short-term traders; thus
their index appears to be better suited for a longer-term view of things.
Well, there you have it, the five major elements I have found that can help with ferreting out
short-term explosions. We will overlay these "tools" or events on market structure to enable us to hop
aboard up and down moves. Since all these tools can be quantified, the logical procedure is to convert these
observations and tools into mathematical models. The next leap of logic traders make is that since math is
always perfect (two plus two always equals four), there must be a perfect solution to trading and
mathematics can provide the answer.
Nothing could be more distant from the truth. There is not a 100 percent correct mechanical approach
to trading. There are tools and techniques that based on observation usually work, but the reason we lose
money is that we either reached an incorrect conclusion or did not have enough data to make a correct one.
So math is not the answer, mechanics is not the answer The truth of the market comes from ample
observations, a dose of correct logic, and correct conclusions from the data at hand.
I am telling you this right up front so you do not get lulled into the idea that speculation is a game of
blindly following the leader, a system. or absolute approach. If any one thing is certain about the markets
it is that things change. In the early 1960s, an increase in money supply figures was considered very
bullish and always put stock prices higher.

78
For whatever reason, in the late 1970s and early 1980s, an increase in money supply figures, as released
from that largest of all privately held corporations the Federal Reserve, put stock prices down. In the 1990
time period money supply is barely looked at or felt in the marketplace. What was once sacred became
apparently meaningless.
One of the markets I trade the most heavily in, Bonds, traded totally different after 1988 than prior to
that date. Why? Prior to October of that year there was only one trading session, then we went into night
sessions and eventually almost a 24-hour market. That changed trading patterns. What is more confusing to
researchers is that "in the old days" the Fed released reports on Thursday that had huge impact on Friday's
Bond prices. This effect was so great a popular novel used it as the central theme of a Wall Street swindle.
As I write this, in 1998, there are no Thursday reports, hence Fridays look and trade differently now.
If you are to do me any favor as a reader of my work, you will not only learn my basic tools but also
learn to stay awake and current to what is happening. Great traders, which I hope you become, are smart
enough to note and respond to changes. They do not lock themselves into a "black box" unchangeable
trading approach.
One of the truly great traders from 1960 to 1983 was a former professional baseball player, Frankie Joe.
Frankie had a great wit and a deep understanding of his approach to trading. He was quite a guy, sharp as a
tack and a delight to talk with. After we had developed a three-year friendship, he revealed to me his
technique, it was to sell rallies and buy back on dips in the stock market. That is all there was to it; no more,
no less. This was a great technique during that time period, it amassed a fortune for Frankie.
Then along came the most predictable, yet unpredictable, bull market of all time triggered by Ronald
Reagan's tax and budgetary cuts. It was quite predictable that the bull market would come about. What no
one realized was that there would be no pullbacks along the way as we had seen for the previous 18 years.
Not even one of the greatest traders of all time, FrankieJoe. He kept selling rallies and was never able to
cover on dips; there just weren't any. Eventually, he became so frustrated with losses and the lack of success
(like all great traders, he was also compulsive about winning), that he apparently committed suicide.
What works, works in this business, but often not for long, which is why I so admire ballerinas, they
stay on their toes.

What Is Wrong about the Information Age
Fundamental principles do not change-that is why they are called fundamentals. "Do unto others as
you would have others do unto you," was good advice 2,000 years ago and will be good advice 2,000
years

79
from now.
The principles I'm laying out in this book are enduring; I have lived with them for close to 40 years and
have literally made millions of dollars trading.
Yet, were I to fall into coma today and wake up 10 years from now I might not use the exact same
rules with these fundamental principles. Whereas fundamentals are permanent, the application and
specifics do change and will vary.
Technology has become king, speeding up every facet of life. We can now learn about anything faster,
communicate faster, and find out about price changes faster. Indeed, we can buy and sell faster; get rich
quicker; go broke faster; and lie, cheat, and steal at unbelievable speeds. We can even get sick or healed
faster than ever before in the history of the world!
Traders have never had so much information and so much ability to process this information, thanks
to computers and to Bill and Ralph Cruz, who invented the first and best workable software, System
Writer, which evolved to Trade Station. Thanks to these products from Omega Research, average joes like
you and me can now test market ideas. For more than 10 years now, thanks to Bill's foresight, it has been
possible to ask just about any question to find the "truth of the markets."
But guess what? This technical revolution in the age of information has brought no concomitant
breakthrough to the world of speculation. We still have the same numbers of winners and losers. Guys and
gals with state-of-the-art computers still get blown out on a regular basis. The difference between winners
and losers is largely based on one simple turn of events, winners are willing to work, to notice changes, and
to react. Losers want it all without effort; they fall for the pitch of a perfect system and an unchanging guru
or indicator they are willing to follow blindly. Losers don't listen to others or to the market; they are
unyielding in their minds and trades.
On top of that, they consistently fail to abide by the fundamental of successful business, which is to
never plunge, to manage your money as well as your business by getting rid of bad deals and keeping the
good ones. Me? I will stick to the fundamentals, as taught, with a healthy willingness to adapt to change.
When I stay flexible, I do not get bent out of shape.

E. H. Harriman's Rule of Making Millions
The Harriman family fortune, which endures to this day, was created in the early 1900s by "Old
man Harriman," who had started his career as a floor runner and wen on to become a major banking and

80
brokerage power. He made a $15 million profit in 1905 from one play in Union Pacific. This speculator king
focused on just railroad stocks, the hot issue of his era.
In 1912, an interviewer asked Harriman about his stock market skills and secrets. The trader replied,
"If you want to know the secret of making money in the stock market, it is this: Kill your losses. Never let a
stock run against you more than three-quarters of a point, but if it goes your way, let it run. Move your stops
up behind it so that it will have room to fluctuate and move higher."
Harriman learned his cardinal rule from studying trading accounts of customers at a brokerage firm.
What he discovered was that of the thousands upon thousands of trades in the public accounts, 5- and
10-point losses outnumbered 5- and 10-point gains. He said, "by fifty to one!" It has always amazed me that
businesspeople who have tight control and accounting practices in their stores and offices lose all control
when it comes to trading. I cannot think of a higher authority than E. H. Harriman, nor a more enduring rule
of speculation than what this man gave us in 1912.
Like I said, fundamentals don't change.

Chapter 6

Getting Closer
to the Truth

Beginning proof the market is not random and our first -key- to market explosions.

Losers of Any game typically lament that either the game was rigged. or it is one no one can beat; thus, their
failure is excusable. Well, the game of the market has been beaten by many people for many years. So while
I have read the laments of the academicians such as Paul Cootner in his classic, The Random Character of
Stock Prices, whose morose verdict is that prices cannot be predicted: past price activity has no bearing on
what will happen tomorrow. or next week for that matter. This is true, he and a host of other apparently
nontrading authors suggest, because the market is efficient. All that is to be known is known and thus already
reflected in current prices. Therefore. today's price change can only be caused by new information (news)
coming to the marketplace.
The bottom line of these authors is that returns from one day to the next are independent, thus price is
impacted by random variables which accounts for the notion that prices move totally by random, thus defy
prediction. Believing in this random walk means acknowledging that the market is efficient, that all is
known. Obviously, you do not accept this concept; you spent hard-earned money on this book thinking that
perhaps I. can teach you, something most other traders or investors do not know.

81

82
You are right! Cootner and his crowd apparently tested for dependence on future action of price in a
one-dimensional approach. I suspect they may have tested future price change based on some sort of moving
averages, thus while looking for the right direction, they used the wrong tools.
If there is no dependency on price action, over a long time period, 50 percent of the days a market
should close higher and 50 percent of the time lower. It is supposed to be like flipping a coin-the coin has no
memory. Each new toss is not biased by what went on in the past. If I were to flip such a fair coin on
Tuesdays, I would get the same 50/50 heads and tails as I would by flipping on any other day of the week.
