
FIGURE 15.15
Large Nasdaq stocks exhibit great ECN depth and liquidity. This will spread to more issues and other exchanges as
these popular execution systems gain acceptance and find their way into discount order interfaces. But beware of partial
fills that chew up commissions and waste attention. Note how order size as low as four shares waits to trap unsuspecting
participants.

Try to exit winners while the move is still in progress. ECNs offer dramatic price improvement
during these fast conditions. For example, use sharp rallies to place sell orders one-quarter to onehalf of a point above the inside ask. The excitement generates greed, which encourages dumb orders
from those in a hurry to get into the stock. Smart players willingly exit into these anxious hands to
increase profit. But act quickly. Other participants will use the same tactics and start to undercut
orders to get out. This will eventually short circuit the rally and could trigger a deep pullback.
Trade slower stocks and build comfort with complex direct-access tools before attempting more
volatile positions. The Nasdaq 100 components offer many issues with stable characteristics and
consistent price movement. These provide a great learning ground for rapid execution methods.
Gain experience and then look for other markets that show good depth and allow conservative risk
management. At all times, develop a sense of where to find the escape hatch and when to run for it.

THE TAPE
Swing traders now access three levels of ticker tape information. At one time market professionals
relied solely on the scrolling ticker. This early version of what now flashes across the bottom of
financial TV screens followed transactions rather than individual stock activity. This simple
solution worked very well when there were only a limited number of issues to track each day. This
scroll survives in modern software but has little use in its generic form. However, it can effectively
capture important institutional and block trading bias when data first pass through narrow size
barriers.
Level I introduced real-time data that display the inside bid-ask and individual trades for each issue.
All major exchanges currently provide this real-time information for capture by quote vendors.
Many successful traders still rely on Level I alone for reading the tape. Rather than deal with market
complexity, this summary information digests the ongoing battle between bulls and bears. It
resolves winners and losers at each turn while trading rhythm pulses through the unit transaction
display. Level I has grown substantially since its release. Increased processing power and lower
data costs triggered the addition of historical time and sales grids as well as other sophisticated
features that enhance the original product.
Nasdaq Level II revolutionized trade data with a central display that tracks all of the key players in
a single market. Vendors and other wise men insist that LII will reveal great market secrets through
correct interpretation. Unfortunately, most of this hype lacks truth. This valuable tool usually tracks
only very short-term buying and selling behavior. But it does permit highly effective tape reading
when combined with swing levels on the intraday chart. It also allows direct-access traders to
determine available execution levels through tier depth and order flow.
More detailed information does not necessarily improve trading results. Level II emits substantial
data on market makers and the size of their markets. Unfortunately, this may focus the swing trader
on the process rather than the result. The final resolution of short-term price competition presents
more valuable signals than many of the indecisive battles to get there. Pay greater attention to the
inside market than the outside order flow. Watch price development on the time and sales ticker
more closely than the Axe or INCA.
Always look outside the tape flow before execution. Time of day, market sentiment, characteristics
of a particular stock, and chart swing levels all affect the reliability of transaction data. Keep in
mind that skilled tape reading depends on one key observation to locate profitable signals: insiders
consistently move their markets in whatever direction yields the greatest volume. The most basic
tape mechanics manipulate crowd emotions against the order flow coming in the door.
Understand the many ways that professionals manipulate the markets. They always keep one eye on
their stock and the other on external conditions that affect price. They apply knowledge of the order
book to bend the tape towards the highest potential volume in an effort to trigger execution. The
lunch hour, holidays, and other quiet times offer prime conditions to gun key support and trigger
common stop locations. During long rangebound phases, they can push price toward important
levels with very little volume and test the breakout waters to see how much new interest they can
generate.
Filter the ticker tape’s message through TICK, market breadth, and index charts. Measure
convergence-divergence between these indicators and the tape’s order flow. For example, stocks
often track related index movement. The tape on an individual issue should reflect agitation and
excitement as it responds to an index breakout. Also, a very strong tape can ring a very loud bell in
a weak market. The activity may uncover impending news or major insider knowledge.

Profit or loss results from four basic activities: picking a promising market, choosing to go long or
short, finding a point of entry, and exiting the position. Swing trading depends on skilled tape
reading to accomplish each of these important tasks successfully. Numbers provide fuel for the
markets. Core values and their rate of change over time characterize all stock trends. Observation of
price pulses on the time and sales log or Level II screen offers highly accurate short-term
prediction, when used in conjunction with other tools. Just as the chart uncovers hidden patterns of
herd behavior, greed and fear reveal themselves quickly through the rapid bursts seen on the ticker
tape.
The bid-ask spread tracks underlying supply and demand within the ticker tape. For years, it also
represented a market middleman who was certain to get a substantial cut before allowing an
investor the right of passage into their chosen stock. This unfortunate and inequitable system has
evolved substantially over the past few years. Class action suits, ECNs, and alternative markets
combined to shorten the distance between a security’s buy and sell prices. This positive trend will
surely continue, and a single unified price or spread as low as one penny may guide market
transactions in the future.
The spread engine compresses and expands constantly as it responds to shifting market conditions.
But most bid-ask movement emits only noise and won’t predict future price movement. While a
scalper can execute an inefficient spread to grab a quick profit, the swing trader must stand aside
and wait for clearer opportunity. The spread will issue directional signals at times and generate
rewarding entries.
Bid-ask distributes market transactions and helps establish fair value for equities. This complex
mechanism frustrates participants because all executions require hitting a moving target. Nasdaq
spreads arise from competition between all participants. NYSE specialists and their order book
control that exchange’s bid-ask display, although third markets impact their unique auction. The
spread emanates both price and volume components that shift according to demand, manipulation,
and legal necessity.
Learn to read the spread through each component’s relative strength. Bid and ask present strong,
neutral, or weak states at any given time. For example, strong bid reflects intense buying interest
through many participants stacked up for execution or a very high number of displayed shares.
Weak bid shows little support through few participants and low displayed shares. Neutral bid prints
a mixed picture with little conviction one way or the other.
Compare the strength of one side of the spread against the other to predict very short-term
movement. When strength meets weakness, look for price to break through the weak direction.
When both sides show similar demand, it represents a standoff. Neutral interest on one side of the
market offers few directional clues when it combines with strong or weak conditions on the other
side. Keep in mind that this short-term information will only predict the next tick or two in most
cases. But this micro-momentum can fine-tune trade execution and offer important clues near major
S/R extremes.
Price may test a major S/R level repeatedly before the barrier breaks. Watch the spread as it strikes
these important levels to see how supply-demand plays out. Consider any defense that shows up to
maintain the boundary and whether counter-force looks ready to oppose it. Which side seems more
determined in the conflict? These battles can play out for hours at major price points before one side
yields.
Take time to learn the spread profile for each trading vehicle. When conditions generate volatility or
imbalance, the bid-ask range widens and price tends to surge farther on fewer shares. While this

movement can be nerve-wracking, the mechanism provides a good part of the price swing that
setups depend upon each day. Wide spreads make great partners when positions sit on the right side
of the action, but they induce misery when the market heads the wrong way.
The electronic markets operate differently than the listed exchanges. Nasdaq Level I shows only the
best bid-ask that underlies their competitive market maker system, while Level II lists all the
players chasing the inside price. A single specialist and several third party exchanges direct the
price action on the NYSE. The size of available shares shown on the tape tends to be accurate on
the listed exchanges. But Nasdaq size remains highly deceptive. While the drab 10 × 10 mystery
lots of previous years have disappeared, exchange rules distort spreads to profit insiders but hurt
both investors and traders.
Although the marketplace ultimately decides price direction, market professionals constantly use
inside knowledge to trigger volume and profit their own accounts. Specialists have the little black
book that shows the location and size of all stop orders. Market makers have a similar advantage
through Level III and advanced Instinet terminals. In the absence of more pressing market
conditions, insiders will always push price in the direction that yields the most volume or the one
that sets up their own accounts for the most gain.
A neutral to neutral-negative bid-ask or high volume, strongly negative bid-ask provides the most
supportive environment to catch falling knives and go long. In neutral markets, cash waits for
opportunity and price can jump quickly when it strikes. And very active markets with wide, highly
negative spreads often signal short-term bottoms that offer quick bounce profits. But never execute
on spread alone. Enter these high-risk trades only after cross-verification confirms a major reversal
opportunity.

LEVEL II
Use the Level II screen to fine-tune the execution target. As price pierces the execution zone, shift
focus to very short-term action in anticipation of the new entry. Observe the intraday chart and pay
close attention to the outer LII tiers where the ET resides. This allows preliminary S/R analysis
before price reaches the target. At times these levels will offer few clues. But they may show other
participants ready to trade the same opportunity.
One final look at Level II can confirm or refute the trade when price strikes the ET. Strong demand
in the intended direction may not offer the best entry, since the new order must sit in a queue. Very
often the best conditions show price with only moderate support that refuses to get taken out by
opposing force. This suggests hidden interest in the expected direction that still allows precise
execution at the target. Every situation requires a different approach. It makes little sense to miss an
excellent opportunity just because other participants see it. But stepping in front of the crowd before
it acts offers less risk and better odds for the position.
Level II presents the complex interface between knowledge of a stock chart and execution of a
specific trading strategy. Consistent profits require skill and insight into both market disciplines.
Excellent chart technicians will lose money through tape reading incompetence. Expert screen
readers can make the small play but miss out on the big opportunity. Successful swing traders
master the charting landscape but manage execution through Level II.
No two markets trade alike. After uncovering a new opportunity, take the next step and learn that
stock’s action profile. Observe price movement through Level II and check out important risk
characteristics. Look at the depth of ECN participation and which market makers actively spend
time at the inside bid-ask. Measure volatility through the natural width of a price swing in a quiet

market. For example, if a $50 stock moves back and forth 2 points in a few minutes, it displays
much higher risk than one that swings three-eights of a point in an hour.
Then watch the same stock in a fast market. Observe how quickly bids disappear during a selloff.
See how many points the stock can rise or fall in 2–3 minutes. Does posted size appear to reflect
reality, or do participants constantly refresh with new offerings? Does price appear to swing at
natural chart levels, or does Level II have its own internal S/R logic? Look at participation a few
tiers to the outside. An active market here suggests good depth and interest.
A promising setup may generate great excitement but have undesirable tape action. Opportunities
need to fire on all cylinders to produce profits. If Level II does not support the pattern, wait for
better confirmation or move on to the next setup. When the tape presents a mixed message, don’t
hesitate to enter the trade, but first recalculate reward:risk based on this new challenge. Often the
tape will lag the pattern itself. In other words, the setup first moves in the intended direction and
then builds excitement that pulses on the LII screen.
Interpret the Level II screen with answers to these important questions:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

How do the spreads move and who is moving them?
How do they widen and contract?
At what times of day does the stock tend to act or react?
When does it reach intermediate highs or lows?
How easily does it violate the first hour range?
What happens during the first and last 15 minutes of the market day?
What happens during lunch hour?
How easily does it gap from close to open?

Level II will cross-verify stock chart observations, improve reward:risk profile significantly, and
add to profits. Prepare a classic swing trade at S/R when tape momentum moves counter to the
intended entry direction but volume starts to fade. Confirm a breakout when Level II shows strong
evidence of synchronization in the direction of the setup. Bulls must observe underlying strength
through small pull-backs, while bears see distribution interrupted only by feeble rallies or short
squeezes.
Many swing traders ignore the time and sales log to concentrate on a chart’s more attractive
graphics. But the rapid flow of individual sales transactions offers vital information on breakouts,
reversals, and other market swings. Bar charts also lack data on changing spreads and how that
underlying tension may resolve into price change. Use Level II in conjunction with time and sales
to look for clues to the market markers’ intentions, how they interact with each other, and their
trading bias.

MARKET LIES
The markets lie in many ways. Price can shoot above resistance, draw intense buying interest that
exhibits all the signs of a breakout, and then suddenly drop back into a range. Patterns can show
perfection but never leads to trends. Level II sellers can stack up high on each other and watch the
market head straight up. Deception shadows every legitimate move, and fakeout follows every real
observation.

FAKEOUTS
Insiders deceive because deception works. Instructional books and the media tutor neophytes on the
financial world’s many rules and regulations. But they do a poor job communicating the shades of
truth that move modern markets. For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. Insiders
have little motivation to carry price directly toward the current fair value. They grab better profits
along the way by taking two steps forward followed by one step back. Eventually they reach the
goal, but not before leaving a scarred landscape of short-term losers.
The markets evolve through perverse logic. If the crowd sees up, then it must be down. When the
time says breakout, the danger of breakdown increases. Understand this frustrating concept with
this simple truth: whatever the market says should happen right now probably won’t happen right
now. For example, don’t expect a breakout to occur on schedule when popular forces fit into perfect
alignment. Odds still favor the market eventually breaking out since supply and demand prevail
over time. But internal mechanics will turn that anticipation against the crowd until the majority
gets thrown off guard. Then the trend will likely proceed as originally anticipated.
FIGURE 15.16
Hewlett-Packard sets up a perfect 3rd watch that traps buyers and triggers a sharp selloff. The market then heads
back through the breakout level after the NYSE specialist takes out the losers and short-term traders. Recognize
the fakeout when a pattern does what it was supposed to do as soon as the crowd loses confidence.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Adapt timing to this discordant rhythm and stand behind, step in front of, or fade the crowd.
Consider when to pause and wait although the signals say buy or sell. This strategy misses excellent
trades, but it also avoids major fakeouts. Refocus execution toward the natural shakeout point that
should terminate a false move. Jump in the shoes of those who act prematurely and visualize where
they will likely give up. That level probably represents the market turn and best opportunity to get
on board for a trip through the breakout.
Many participants find this timing shift very difficult. The competitive market atmosphere
ingrains a natural bias toward being early into new positions. Of course, those who yield to this
temptation face the greatest fakeout danger. Learn to hesitate at the moment of execution and
consider past experience. What are the odds that this moment represents a trap rather than an
opportunity? Be willing to miss a profit if a trade takes off without entry, but prepare to act when
others run for the hills.

WHIPSAWS
Breakouts occur where an irresistible force meets an immovable object. This odd description
illustrates the underlying physics of the bull-bear conflict. No one really knows how much pressure
or volume will push price into a profitable trend. Every position carries considerable risk, no matter
how perfect the setup or underlying news. And every market action triggers a strong reaction.
Painful whipsaws arise naturally or through conscious manipulation. Because markets move
constantly in and out of balance, sudden reversals can occur when conditions trap one side of the
action. While everyone knows where key breakout numbers reside, no one can be sure what will
happen when price gets there. S/R demands greater volume for breakouts as it builds over time.
Each test triggers more recognition among the crowd and raises the stakes. When price returns for a
new test, everyone watches to see what happens.
Successful breakouts generally occur in two phases. First, price thrusts through S/R on increased
volume. It expands a few ticks and then pulls back while interest ebbs. A second surge then carries
price well past the initial thrust as the trend strengthens into a ramping event. Success requires that
both crowd impulses appear and contribute to awakening momentum.
Whipsaws push price backward when breakouts don’t generate this second surge efficiently. This
failure swing may or may not elicit a false breakout. The pullback forces weak hands to dump
positions quickly and can generate a self-fulfilling event with price spiraling into a major reversal.
But another breakout surge can appear if exit pressure ebbs quickly. Of course, this produces great
frustration for those who just cut their losses.
Markets overshoot natural targets all the time. They crash through S/R, Bollinger Bands, and
moving averages with ease. Then, just as participants look elsewhere, the trend reverses and carries
price back within expected boundaries. These frustrating whipsaws have become far more common
in recent years. The crowd’s love of technical analysis ensures that they will be part of the charting
landscape for many years to come.
Overshoots capitalize on S/R knowledge. Insiders know that trading strategies shift on key price
violations, so action pushes through these levels to force volatility and volume. The apparent signal
increases momentum in the broken direction and carries price further into the hole. As it reaches the
next major barrier, a reversal finally begins that returns price back across the original violation. So
how can the swing trader tell if an overshoot signals a real trend change? Unfortunately, there is no
simple answer. An apparent overshoot may reflect a real violation or just a routine shakeout. Use
candlestick shadows after the event to interpret overshoots whenever possible and always exercise
defensive risk management.

FIGURE 15.17
Burr-Brown takes the first step but fails to follow through. Lack of volume on the 3rd watch breakout offers a
clue to the ensuing whipsaw. Price pulls back right on schedule and encourages a low-risk entry. But it reverses
near the intermediate high and rolls over in an Adam and Eve top that prints a high-volume failure.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Fibonacci retracements should hold 62% to remain intact. But pullbacks often overshoot all the way
to 75% before they reverse. When a market reaches the 62% barrier, stand aside and watch for
overshoots. Price may violate the level several times while shaking out the expectant crowd.
Consider a trade after the overshoot ends and momentum starts to build in the opposite direction.
Use candlestick shadows to watch Fibonacci support levels. These allow deep violations as long as
the bar closes within retracement boundaries.
Markets try to fool swing traders at every turn, but the ability to see past the violation game grows
with every successful execution. Insiders cannot repeal the laws of physics, and supply-demand still
guides short-term direction most of the time. Estimate the force required to lift price to new highs or
sink it below support for every setup. Whipsaws and overshoots can occur only if market interest
falls below this important level.
