
Download at www.wowebook.com

398

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Evening Star

Morning Star

Top

Bottom

Spinning Top Can Be
Black or White

FIGURE 17.25 Evening star and morning star candlestick patterns

The morning star, which occurs at a market bottom, is the opposite formation of the
evening star. As shown in Figure 17.25, it begins with a black-bodied candlestick, followed by a
star. The body of the star lies completely below the body of the previous candlestick. The pattern
is then confirmed if, on the third bar, a white-bodied candlestick closes well within the range of
the first candlestick.
The morning and evening stars were the second-best patterns in our ranking of Schwager’s
tests. They were first in net profits, had the least drawdowns, and were second in the percentage
of winning trades. In the Caginalp and Laurent study, the morning and evening star pattern
ranked third out of the four multibar types studied.
Three Black Crows and Three White Soldiers
White soldiers are white bodies and black crows are black bodies. Three black crows is a pattern
with three consecutive black bodies, preferably long, closing near their lows, openings within
their previous day’s body, and occurring after a meaningful upward trend. They are a top-reversal formation. As shown in Figure 17.26, three white soldiers is a bottom-reversing formation
and requires the same parameters in the opposite direction.
Unfortunately, traders have difficulty profiting from these patterns because by the time
they are recognized, a large portion of the new trend has already occurred. They are best played
on a pullback or throwback. Nison believes that the first or second bar in the pattern is the best

Download at www.wowebook.com

399

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

location for entry on the retracement. That level is often accompanied by another pattern suggesting a short reversal in the direction of the trend signaled by the major pattern.
Three Black Crows

Three White Soldiers

Top

Bottom

FIGURE 17.26 Three black crows and three white soldiers candlestick patterns

Three Inside Up and Three Inside Down
The three inside up pattern is a reversal pattern that occurs at the end of a declining trend. The
first bar of this pattern has a large black body, and the second bar is a white spinning top (or doji)
that forms a harami pattern. Then, the third bar is a large, white candle that breaks and closes
above the large black body of the first bar. Although the name may sound like it, the three inside
up pattern does not imply that three inside bars in a row occur, as we saw with the NR3 pattern.
Instead, the three inside up pattern is similar to an upward breakout from an inside bar in a bar
pattern.
As shown in Figure 17.27, the three inside down pattern is the reverse of the three inside
up pattern. The three inside down pattern consists of a large white bar followed by a black spinning top and a downward break by a large black body. This pattern signals that an upward trend
has ended. From the Caginalp and Laurent study, we ranked this pattern type the best. It had the
highest percentage of winning trades of the four pattern types studied.

Download at www.wowebook.com

400

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Inside Down

Inside Up

Top

Bottom

FIGURE 17.27 Inside down and inside up candlestick patterns

Three Outside Up and Three Outside Down
This pattern type starts with an engulfing pattern after a trend, just as the inside up and down
started with a harami pattern. The three outside up version occurs at market bottoms. The first
body is small, a spinning top, and the second body is large, engulfing the smaller previous body.
The first is black and the second is white. A white body that closes above the second bar and
reaches a new high above the previous two bars follows the engulfing pattern. This pattern is pictured in Figure 17.28.
Figure 17.28 also shows how the three outside down pattern is the same with opposite
parameters. For the outside down pattern, the first bar is a small, white body, and the second bar
is a black body that engulfs the first. The third bar is also a black body with prices moving lower
than the second bar. Outside down bars occur at market tops.
From our look at short-term bar patterns, we know that outside bars are less predictable
and less profitable than inside bars because the volatility has already expanded and is open to
contraction at any time soon thereafter. The results of the three outside bar pattern types show the
same decreased performance and were ranked fourth in our interpretation of the Caginalp and
Laurent study.

Download at www.wowebook.com

401

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

Outside Down

Outside Up

Top

Bottom

FIGURE 17.28 Outside down and outside up candlestick patterns

Candlestick Pattern Results
We have described several of the most popular candlestick patterns. Bulkowski maintains a Web
site (www.thepatternsite.com) with an extensive list of candlestick patterns. Table 17.1 highlights Bulkowski’s ranking of the 10 best performing candlestick patterns.
TABLE 17.1

Bulkowski Ranking of Candlestick Patterns—10 Best (Some are not shown above but may
be accessed from www.thepatternsite.com.)
Pattern

Reversal or Continuation

Percent Accurate

Three line strike
Three line strike
Three black crows
Evening star
Upside Tasuki gap
Hammer, inverted

Bullish reversal
Bearish reversal
Bearish reversal
Bearish reversal
Bullish continuation
Bearish continuation

84%
65%
78%
72%
57%
65%

Matching low

Bearish continuation

61%

continues

Download at www.wowebook.com

402
TABLE 17.1

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Continued

Pattern

Reversal or Continuation

Percent Accurate

Abandoned baby
Two black gapping
Breakaway

Bullish reversal
Bearish continuation
Bearish reversal

70%
68%
63%

Source: www.thepatternsite.com © 2008–2009 by Thomas N. Bulkowski

CONCLUSION
We have looked at a number of short-term patterns in this chapter on both bar charts and candlestick charts. To use these patterns successfully, a trader must be familiar with the underlying market trend. Remember that these short-term patterns are most often reversal patterns, giving the
trader a hint that the underlying trend may be changing.
Short-term patterns forming as open, high, low, and close prices occur in particular combinations during a bar or over a few bars of trading. Particular short-term patterns occur frequently.
Because of the frequency with which they occur, many times they are false patterns. Traders
must be aware of this and not simply rely on a particular short-term pattern to make decisions.
These short-term patterns can be useful indicators, but traders need to watch for a cluster of evidence instead of relying on a short-term pattern to make decisions.
Remember that the key to making money is riding a trend. Short-term patterns are a tool to
help us determine when a new trend is beginning. These formations can also help us determine
when a trend is ending. This allows us to participate in the trend as soon as possible and to exit
the market as quickly as possible whenever the trend has ended. Using short-term patterns and
protective stops can aid traders in maximizing their gains and minimizing their risk.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why must investors know the underlying long-term trend before using short-term patterns?
2. Explain what is meant by the term gap. How do breakout, runaway, and exhaustion gaps
differ from each other? How would an analyst distinguish between these three types of
gaps?
3. What is a spike? How is it similar to a gap?
4. In August 2005, Merck (MRK) lost an initial Vioxx product liability lawsuit. Create a daily
bar chart for MRK for August 2005–September 2005. Use this chart to describe the Dead
Cat Bounce. Did MRK follow the typical Dead Cat Bounce pattern?

Download at www.wowebook.com

403

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

5. Define an inside day, outside day, narrow-range day, and wide-range day. Which of these
days represents increasing volatility, and which represents contracting volatility? Explain
your answer.
6. Schwager (1996) states that the one-day reversal pattern “successfully call(s) 100 out of
every ten highs.” What does he mean by this statement, and what is the implication for
traders using these reversal patterns?
7. The candlestick chart in Figure 17.29 is of AmeriSourceBergen Corp. (ABC) for August
15, 2005–October 15, 2005. Find the following patterns in this chart. Does the price
behave as you would expect after each of these patterns? Explain.
a. Morning star
b. Doji
c. Hammer
d. Inverted hammer
e. Shooting star
f. Harami
g. Engulfing
h. Hanging man

39.00

38.00

37.00

ABC—AmeriSourceBergen
Corporation

36.00

3,500,000
3,000,000
2,500,000
2,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000

A

22

29 S

12

19

26

O

10

17

FIGURE 17.29 Review Question 7

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

P A R T

V

TREND
CONFIRMATION
C HAPTER 18 C ONFIRMATION

405

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

1 8

CONFIRMATION

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
By the end of this chapter, you should be familiar with

• The methods of plotting volume information on charts
• Traditional general rules for interpreting volume statistics
• The major indexes and oscillators that are designed to use volume information as
confirmation

• The concept of open interest and how it might be used for confirmation
• The concept of momentum
• The major indexes and oscillators that use price data
The odds increase that a technical signal is correct if there is confirmation from another unrelated
indicator. Charles Dow recognized this concept and used the confirmation of two different price
averages before he recognized a legitimate market signal. In the days when only chart patterns
were available as a means of interpreting price action, the technical analyst often used volume as
the confirming indicator. Sometimes, depending on the calculating ability of the analyst, moving
averages, rates of change, and momentum price oscillators were also used. After the introduction
of the computer, the ability to calculate more complicated indicators increased. Many analysts
began to use more complicated indicators as the primary source of signals and deviated from the
old price pattern analysis. The number of possible combinations of prices, volume, and other factors has become almost infinite. Indeed, there is some question as to whether all this computing
power has increased the ability of technical analysts to interpret price action. Some would argue
that most of the indicator calculations correlate with each other, and that the market is no more
understandable today than it was 50 years ago. Others maintain that the proper use of confirming
indicators helps considerably in decision making, and that many successful trading models
depend almost exclusively on these complex calculations.

407

Download at www.wowebook.com

408

Part V Trend Confirmation

In this chapter, we look at volume, the oldest confirming indicator, but which has developed some problems recently from the increase in program trading and other mechanical trading
systems. We look at open interest in the futures markets, and then we look at price oscillators,
indicators, and the discouraging evidence for their reliability in giving stand-alone signals.

ANALYSIS METHODS
The methods for analyzing confirmation rely on two main tools: indexes and oscillators. Indexes
are similar to the breadth line described in the market indicators discussion in Chapter 8, “Measuring Market Strength.” They are cumulative sums of data, usually some variation of volume
and price, that continuously measure supply and demand over time rather than over a specific
period. They do not have an upper or lower bound and are plotted with price charts where they
can be compared with price action. The level of the index is irrelevant. What is relevant is the
trend of the index relative to the price trend. The only useful indexes are those that begin to
change direction before prices, signaling a change in trend. The analyst, thus, compares the
prices with the index, looking for divergences between highs and lows in each. Although indexes
can also be used with trend line, channel, and occasionally pattern analysis, their most important
use is that of divergence analysis in trending markets.
Oscillators, on the other hand, are often bounded and limited to a specified past period. As
shown in Figure 18.1, they tend to oscillate within these bounds and demonstrate when volume
or prices are relatively high or low. These indicators show the relative changes rather than the
absolute changes demonstrated in indexes and are also amenable to divergence, trend line, and
pattern analysis. Oscillators are used more successfully in trading range markets.
As with many technical indicators, research has not shown that indexes and oscillators are
profitable on their own. The student must judge after thorough testing and experience whether to
use them as secondary indicators to price analysis.
Various visual techniques have been developed to determine some meaning from these
indexes and oscillators. They are divided into methods that are peculiar to indicators, such as
divergences, and those that are just an extension of classical chart pattern analysis such as trend
lines and support and resistance. The principal methods unique to indicators are discussed in the
following sections.

Overbought/Oversold
Oscillators can be bounded or unbounded. Bounded means that the oscillator swings back and
forth within certain bounds or limits. These limits are the extremes to which the oscillator can
reach. In most bounded and in some unbounded oscillators, a zone is chosen to represent the
range near the extreme bounds. The oscillator might not reach the actual extreme bound, but
might come close and by doing so have the same implications. The zone then is the range that is
close enough to the extreme bound to be important. The upper zone is called overbought and the
lower zone is called oversold. When a security has risen far enough that its oscillator reaches the
overbought zone, it is said to be overbought, and when the price has fallen far enough that the
oscillator reaches the oversold zone, it is said to be oversold.

Download at www.wowebook.com

409

Chapter 18 Confirmation

price

overbought
reversal
negative divergence
failure swing
oscillator
oversold

FIGURE 18.1 Example of oscillator analysis methods

In a trading range, the overbought and oversold levels are excellent indications of potential
reversal levels, especially when the oscillator breaks out from the zone. The zones, however, can
be deceiving in a trending market because the oscillator will remain in them during the period of
the trend, and, thus, many breakouts from the zone will be false signals. In the following description of oscillators, we point out the conventional zone levels, but as always, the analyst must test
for those most appropriate to the time and security being traded.

Failure Swings
A failure swing is a specific type of breakout from an overbought or oversold zone first
described by Wilder (1978). A stronger version of the breakout, it often is the first sign of a
potential reversal after a lengthy trend in which an oscillator has remained within or close to a
zone. A negative failure swing is shown in Figure 18.1; it occurs when the oscillator breaks
down out of an overbought zone, creates a reversal point, pulls back but fails to reenter the zone,
and then breaks back down below the earlier reversal point. A positive failure swing is the opposite at an oversold zone.

Divergences
Although Wilder is also credited with discovering divergences, the concept is at least as old as
Dow Theory. The basic concept is that to ensure a trend has begun or is still strong, all methods
must be confirming the trend. If one index, for example, is breaking out upward but other indexes
are not, the indexes are said to be diverging; in other words, they are not acting in concert with

Download at www.wowebook.com

410

Part V Trend Confirmation

each other. A legitimate, strong trend, however, should have all indexes acting in concert. A
divergence is, thus, considered to be a sign, especially after a trend has been in existence for a
while, that the trend is slowing down and preparing to reverse. We saw breadth divergences in
Chapter 8 and how important and reliable they have been. This is the same concept applied to
oscillators and price charts.
The basic rule is that when a price reaches a new high, the oscillator should also reach a
new high. Of course, this is subject to some interpretation, namely “what high is a new one?” but
generally the relative highs should take place at the same time. A high on day 4 and another on
day 20 should appear in both the price and the oscillator. If the price high on day 20 is higher
than the high on day 4 but the oscillator high on day 20 is not higher than on day 4, the pattern is
called a negative divergence. An example of negative divergence is shown in Figure 18.1. A
positive divergence occurs at a series of price lows when the price reaches a new low unconfirmed by a new low in the oscillator. In a particularly strong trend, several divergences can occur
and, of course, if the oscillator is bounded, it will occur more often because there is little room
for the oscillator to keep making new highs or lows. This is why the first negative breadth divergence is often a false signal, but when two occur, back-to-back, the oscillator breakdown signal
is more meaningful.

Reversals
Brown (1999) describes a variation of divergences known as oscillator reversals in detail. Like
divergences, reversals have been used by technicians since oscillators were first used, but they
have been popularized recently by Andrew Cardwell. A reversal differs from a divergence in that
price leads the change instead of the oscillator. For example, a negative reversal occurs when,
on day 20 the oscillator reaches a new high above that of day 4 but the price does not. As illustrated in Figure 18.1, it is sort of a divergence in reverse in that the price is showing weakness
when the oscillator is not as opposed to the divergence when the price is still strong but the oscillator is not. Nevertheless, in keeping with the concept of confirmation, the two factors, price and
oscillator, are not in sync and are, thus, no longer confirming the trend. A positive reversal is the
same as the negative only at low bars. A reversal has the same implications as a divergence,
namely that the trend is beginning to show signs of stress and potential reversal.

Trend ID
Brown (1999) also describes what she calls “trend id.” In a trending market, oscillators will
remain in one half of their range for long periods and breakout signals from the standard overbought and oversold zones are often false. For example, when a price is trending upward, the
oscillator can remain at or close to the overbought zone and never reach the oversold zone to give
a signal during corrections. Brown suggests that the zones should be redefined with the zone
parameters raised to include those corrections at a slightly higher level. Her work centers around
what is called the “RSI,” a bounded oscillator that we look at later, that traditionally has an oversold zone below 30 and an overbought zone above 70. In a strongly upward trending market, the
price corrections at which opportune trades might occur are never reached by the oscillator.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 18 Confirmation

411

Thus, she suggests that during the rising trend, the oversold zone be raised to 40 and the overbought zone be raised to 90. Better signals then occur using these new levels as long as the
underlying trend remains strong. In a downward trend, the zone levels can also be adjusted
downward for the same reason. This adjustment of zones has no effect on divergences or reversals or any of the other chart patterns that might suggest an upcoming trend change. The analyst,
however, must test for the best zones to fit the trend.
A variation of trend id that is commonly used is the standard deviation of the oscillator,
similar to the use of standard deviation in Bollinger Bands. The oscillator is calculated and two
bands, upper and lower, surround its plot at the level of some multiple, usually one, of the oscillator’s standard deviation. This gives a “moving” overbought and oversold that trend with the
oscillator and adjust to changes in the oscillator’s volatility. Signals are generated when the oscillator breaks out of the overbought or oversold zone toward the center just as with the classic
zones.

Crossovers
Crossovers occur when the oscillator crosses over either a particular level or another oscillator.
One level that is often important is the middle value, usually either zero or one that bisects the
range of the oscillator’s travels. Almost by definition, when an oscillator reaches and remains
above or below the midpoint in the oscillator range, it is defining the underlying trend. It is, thus,
a potential trend indicator. Other oscillators have their raw figures smoothed through a moving
average, and crossovers occur when the raw figure crosses over the moving average. These
crossovers can either be signals to act or indications of trend change.

Classic Patterns
Strangely, oscillators and indicators often make simple patterns, such as triangles and rectangles,
and produce support and resistance levels just as does price, and even have trends that can be
defined by a classic trend line. These patterns have the same validity as price patterns, even when
the oscillator is bounded, and can be additional evidence of trend change or short-term opportunity.

VOLUME CONFIRMATION
Volume is the classic confirming indicator. Volume measures are often portrayed on stock charts,
and volume statistics are incorporated in a number of indexes and oscillators.

What Is Volume?
Volume is the number of shares or contracts traded over a specified period, usually a day, but can
be one trade (called tick volume) to months or years, in any trading market—stocks, futures, and
options.
