
■ Common Pitfalls of Backtesting
Although almost every strategy allows for unique opportunities in committing errors in backtesting, there are a number of common themes, some
generally applicable to all markets, others pertain to specific ones.

3
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

Backtesting.” Often, each market and each strategy presents its own very
specific set of pitfalls. Usually, a pitfall tends to inflate the backtest performance of a strategy relative to its actual performance in the past, which is
particularly dangerous.
Even if we have satisfied ourselves that we have understood and implemented every detail of a strategy in a backtesting program, and that there is
no pitfall that we can discover, backtesting a published strategy can still yield
important benefits.
Backtesting a published strategy allows you to conduct true out-of-sample
testing in the period following publication. If that out-of-sample performance
proves poor, then one has to be concerned that the strategy may have worked
only on a limited data set.This is actually a more important point than people
realize. Many authors will claim in their articles that the backtest results were
“verified with out-of-sample data.” But, actually, if the out-of-sample testing
results were poor, the authors could have just changed some parameters, or
they could have tweaked the model substantially so that the results look good
with the “out-of-sample” data. Hence, true out-of-sample testing cannot really begin until a strategy is published and cast in stone.
Finally, by backtesting a strategy ourselves, we often can find ways to
refine and improve the strategy to make it more profitable or less risky.
The backtesting process in trading should follow the “scientific method.” We
should start with a hypothesis about an arbitrage opportunity, maybe based
on our own intuition about the market or from some published research.
We then confirm or refute this hypothesis by a backtest. If the results of the
backtest aren’t good enough, we can modify our hypothesis and repeat the
process.
As I emphasized earlier, performance of a strategy is often very sensitive
to details, and small changes in these details can bring about substantial improvements. These changes can be as simple as changing the look-back time
period for determining the moving average, or entering orders at the open
rather than at the close. Backtesting a strategy allows us to experiment with
every detail.

Look-ahead Bias
As its name implies, look-ahead bias means that your backtest program is using tomorrow’s prices to determine today’s trading signals. Or, more generally, it is using future information to make a “prediction” at the current time.
A common example of look-ahead bias is to use a day’s high or low price to
determine the entry signal during the same day during backtesting. (Before
the close of a trading day, we can’t know what the high and low price of the
day are.) Look-ahead bias is essentially a programming error and can infect
only a backtest program but not a live trading program because there is no
way a live trading program can obtain future information. This difference
between backtesting and a live trading program also points to an obvious
way to avoid look-ahead bias. If your backtesting and live trading programs
are one and the same, and the only difference between backtesting versus
live trading is what kind of data you are feeding into the program (historical
data in the former, and live market data in the latter), then there can be no
look-ahead bias in the program. Later on in this chapter, we will see which
platforms allow the same source code to be used for both backtest and live
execution.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

4

Data-Snooping Bias and the Beauty of Linearity
Data-snooping bias is caused by having too many free parameters that are
fitted to random ethereal market patterns in the past to make historical performance look good. These random market patterns are unlikely to recur
in the future, so a model fitted to these patterns is unlikely to have much
predictive power.
The way to detect data-snooping bias is well known: We should test the
model on out-of-sample data and reject a model that doesn’t pass the out-ofsample test. But this is easier said than done. Are we really willing to give up
on possibly weeks of work and toss out the model completely? Few of us are
blessed with such decisiveness. Many of us will instead tweak the model this
way or that so that it finally performs reasonably well on both the in-sample
and the out-of-sample result. But voilà! By doing this we have just turned
the out-of-sample data into in-sample data.
If you are unwilling to toss out a model because of its performance on
a fixed out-of-sample data set (after all, poor performance on this out-ofsample data may just be due to bad luck), or if you have a small data set
to start with and really need to tweak the model using most of this data,
you should consider the idea of cross-validation. That is, you should select a

5
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

number of different subsets of the data for training and tweaking your model
and, more important, making sure that the model performs well on these
different subsets. One reason why we prefer models with a high Sharpe ratio
and short maximum drawdown duration is that this almost automatically
ensures that the model will pass the cross-validation test: the only subsets
where the model will fail the test are those rare drawdown periods.
There is a general approach to trading strategy construction that can minimize data-snooping bias: make the model as simple as possible, with as few
parameters as possible. Many traders appreciate the second edict, but fail
to realize that a model with few parameters but lots of complicated trading
rules are just as susceptible to data-snooping bias. Both edicts lead to the
conclusion that nonlinear models are more susceptible to data-snooping bias
than linear models because nonlinear models not only are more complicated
but they usually have more free parameters than linear models.
Suppose we attempt to predict price by simple extrapolation of the historical price series. A nonlinear model would certainly fit the historical data
better, but that’s no guarantee that it can predict a future value better. But
even if we fix the number of parameters to be the same for a nonlinear
model versus its linear contender, one has to remember that we can usually
approximate a nonlinear model by Taylor-series expansion familiar from
calculus. That means that there is usually a simpler, linear approximation
corresponding to every nonlinear model, and a good reason has to be given
why this linear model cannot be used. (The exceptions are those singular
cases where the lower-order terms vanish. But such cases seldom describe
realistic financial time series.)
An equivalent reasoning can be made in the context of what probability distributions we should assume for returns. We have heard often that the
Gaussian distribution fails to capture extreme events in the financial market.
But the problem with going beyond the Gaussian distribution is that we will
be confronted with many choices of alternative distributions. Should it be a
Student’s t-distribution that allows us to capture the skew and kurtosis of the
returns, or should it be a Pareto distribution that dispenses with a finite second
moment completely? Any choice will have some element of arbitrariness, and
the decision will be based on a finite number of observations. Hence, Occam’s
razor dictates that unless there are strong theoretical and empirical reasons
to support a non-Gaussian distribution, a Gaussian form should be assumed.
Linear models imply not only a linear price prediction formula, but also
a linear capital allocation formula. Let’s say we are considering a meanreverting model for a price series such that the change in the price dy in

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

6

the next time period dt is proportional to the difference between the mean
price and the current price: dy(t) = (λy(t − 1) + μ)dt + dε, the so-called
“Ornstein-Uhlenbeck” formula, which is explained and examined in greater
detail in Chapter 2. Often, a trader will use a Bollinger band model to capture profits from this mean-reverting price series, so that we sell (or buy)
whenever the price exceeds (or falls below) a certain threshold. However, if
we are forced to stick to linear models, we would be forced to sell (or buy)
at every price increment, so that the total market value is approximately
proportional to the negative deviation from the mean. In common traders’
parlance, this may be called “averaging-in,” or “scaling-in,” a technique that
is discussed in Chapter 3.
You will find several examples of linear trading models in this book because the simplicity of this technique lets us illustrate the point that profits
are not derived from some subtle, complicated cleverness of the strategy
but from an intrinsic inefficiency in the market that is hidden in plain sight.
The impatient reader can look ahead to Example 4.2, which shows a linear
mean-reverting strategy between an exchange-traded fund (ETF) and its
component stocks, or Examples 4.3 and 4.4, showing two linear long-short
statistical arbitrage strategies on stocks.
The most extreme form of linear predictive models is one in which
all the coefficients are equal in magnitude (but not necessarily in sign).
For example, suppose you have identified a number of factors ( f ’s) that
are useful in predicting whether tomorrow’s return of a stock index is
positive. One factor may be today’s return, with a positive today’s return predicting a positive future return. Another factor may be today’s
change in the volatility index (VIX), with a negative change predicting
positive future return. You may have several such factors. If you normalize these factors by turning them first into Z-scores (using in-sample
data!):
z(i) = ( f(i) − mean( f ))/std( f ),

(1.1)

where f (i) is the ith factor, you can then predict tomorrow’s return R by
R = mean ( R ) + std (R)∑ i sign(i)z(i)/ n.
n

(1.2)

The quantities mean( f ) and std( f ) are the historical average and standard
deviation of the various f(i), sign(i) is the sign of the historical correlation
between f(i) and R, and mean(R) and std(R) are the historical average and

standard deviation of one-day returns, respectively. Daniel Kahneman, the
Nobel Prize-winning economist, wrote in his bestseller Thinking, Fast and
Slow that “formulas that assign equal weights to all the predictors are often
superior, because they are not affected by accidents of sampling” (Kahneman,
2011). Equation 1.2 is a simplified version of the usual factor model used in
stock return prediction. While its prediction of the absolute returns may or
may not be very accurate, its prediction of relative returns between stocks
is often good enough. This means that if we use it to rank stocks, and then
form a long-short portfolio by buying the stocks in the top decile and shorting those in the bottom decile, the average return of the portfolio is often
positive.
Actually, if your goal is just to rank stocks instead of coming up with an
expected return, there is an even simpler way to combine the factors f ’s
without using Equations 1.1 and 1.2. We can first compute the ranks(i) of a
stock s based on a factor f(i). Then we multiply these ranks by the sign of the
correlation between f(i) and the expected return of the stock. Finally, we
sum all these signed ranks to form the rank of a stock:
ranks = ∑ i sign ( i ) ranks (i).
n

(1.3)

Stock Splits and Dividend Adjustments
Whenever a company’s stock has an N-to-1 split, the stock price will be divided by N times. However, if you own a number of shares of that company’s

7
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

As an example, Joel Greenblatt has famously used a two-factor model as a
“magic formula” to rank stocks: f(1) = return on capital and f(2) = earnings
yield (Greenblatt, 2006). We are supposed to buy the top 30 ranked stocks
and hold them for a year. The annual percentage rate (APR) for this strategy
was 30.8 percent from 1988 to 2004, compared with 12.4 percent for the
S&P 500. Quite a triumph of linearity!
In the end, though, no matter how carefully you have tried to prevent
data-snooping bias in your testing process, it will somehow creep into your
model. So we must perform a walk-forward test as a final, true out-ofsample test. This walk-forward test can be conducted in the form of paper trading, but, even better, the model should be traded with real money
(albeit with minimal leverage) so as to test those aspects of the strategy that
eluded even paper trading. Most traders would be happy to find that live
trading generates a Sharpe ratio better than half of its backtest value.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

8

stock before the split, you will own N times as many shares after the split,
so there is in fact no change in the total market value. But in a backtest,
we typically are looking at just the price series to determine our trading
signals, not the market-value series of some hypothetical account. So unless
we back-adjust the prices before the ex-date of the split by dividing them by
N, we will see a sudden drop in price on the ex-date, and that might trigger
some erroneous trading signals. This is as true in live trading as in backtesting, so you would have to divide the historical prices by N just before the
market opens on the ex-date during live trading, too. (If it is a reverse 1-toN split, we would have to multiply the historical prices before the ex-date
by N.)
Similarly, when a company pays a cash (or stock) dividend of $d per
share, the stock price will also go down by $d (absent other market movements). That is because if you own that stock before the dividend ex-date,
you will get cash (or stock) distributions in your brokerage account, so
again there should be no change in the total market value. If you do not
back-adjust the historical price series prior to the ex-date, the sudden drop
in price may also trigger an erroneous trading signal. This adjustment, too,
should be applied to any historical data used in the live trading model just
before the market opens on an ex-date. (This discussion applies to ETFs as
well. A slightly more complicated treatment needs to be applied to options
prices.)
You can find historical split and dividend information on many websites,
but I find that earnings.com is an excellent free resource. It not only records
such historical numbers, but it shows the announced split and dividend
amounts and ex-dates in the future as well, so we can anticipate such events
in our automated trading software. If you are interested in historical stock
data that are already adjusted for stock splits and dividends, and are easy to
download, try csidata.com.

Survivorship Bias in Stock Database
If you are backtesting a stock-trading model, you will suffer from survivorship bias if your historical data do not include delisted stocks. Imagine
an extreme case: suppose your model asks you to just buy the one stock
that dropped the most in the previous day and hold it forever. In actuality,
this strategy will most certainly perform poorly because in many cases the
company whose stock dropped the most in the previous day will go on to
bankruptcy, resulting in 100 percent loss of the stock position. But if your

Primary versus Consolidated Stock Prices
Many U.S. stocks are traded on multiple exchanges, electronic communication networks (ECNs), and dark pools: The New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE), NYSE Arca, Nasdaq, Island, BATS, Instinet, Liquidnet, Bloomberg
Tradebook, Goldman Sachs’ Sigma X, and Credit Suisse’s CrossFinder are
just some of the example markets. When you look up the historical daily
closing price of a stock, it reflects the last execution price on any one of
these venues during regular trading hours. Similarly, a historical daily opening price reflects the first execution price on any one of these venues. But
when you submit a market-on-close (MOC) or market-on-open (MOO)
order, it will always be routed to the primary exchange only. For example,
an MOC order on IBM will be routed to NYSE, an MOC order on SPY

9
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

historical data do not include delisted stocks—that is, they contain only
stocks that survive until today—then the backtest result may look excellent.
This is because you would have bought a stock when it was beaten down
badly but subsequently survived, though you could not have predicted its
eventual survival if you were live-trading the strategy.
Survivorship bias is more dangerous to mean-reverting long-only stock
strategies than to mean-reverting long-short or short-only strategies. This is
because, as we saw earlier, this bias tends to inflate the backtest performance
of a long-only strategy that first buys low and then sells high, whereas it will
deflate the backtest performance of a short-only strategy that first sells high
and then buys low.Those stocks that went to zero would have done very well
with a short-only strategy, but they would not be present in backtest data
with survivorship bias. For mean-reverting long-short strategies, the two
effects are of opposite signs, but inflation of the long strategy return tends
to outweigh the deflation of the short portfolio return, so the danger is reduced but not eliminated. Survivorship bias is less dangerous to momentum
models. The profitable short momentum trade will tend to be omitted in
data with survivorship bias, and thus the backtest return will be deflated.
You can buy reasonably priced historical data that are free of survivorship bias from csidata.com (which provides a list of delisted stocks). Other
vendors include kibot.com, tickdata.com, and crsp.com. Or you can in fact
collect your own survivorship bias–free data by saving the historical prices
of all the stocks in an index every day. Finally, in the absence of such survivorship bias–free data, you can limit yourself to backtesting only the most
recent, say, three years of historical data to reduce the damage.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

10

will be routed to NYSE Arca, and an MOC order on Microsoft (MSFT) will
be routed to Nasdaq. Hence, if you have a strategy that relies on marketon-open or market-on-close orders, you need the historical prices from
the primary exchange to accurately backtest your model. If you use the
usual consolidated historical prices for backtesting, the results can be quite
unrealistic. In particular, if you use consolidated historical prices to backtest a mean-reverting model, you are likely to generate inflated backtest
performance because a small number of shares can be executed away from
the primary exchange at a price quite different from the auction price on
the primary exchange. The transaction prices on the next trading day will
usually mean-revert from this hard-to-achieve outlier price. (The close and
open prices on the U.S. primary exchanges are always determined by an
auction, while a transaction at the close on a secondary exchange is not the
result of an auction.)
A similar consideration applies to using high or low prices for your strategy. What were recorded in the historical data are usually the consolidated
highs or lows, not that of the primary exchange. They are often unrepresentative, exaggerated numbers resulting from trades of small sizes on secondary exchanges. Backtest performance will also be inflated if these historical
prices are used.
Where can we find historical prices from the primary exchanges? Bloomberg users have access to that as part of their subscription. Of course, just as
in the case of storing and using survivorship bias–free data discussed earlier,
we can also subscribe to direct live feeds from the (primary) exchanges and
store those prices into our own databases in real time. We can then use these
databases in the future as our source of primary exchange data. Subscribing
to such feeds independently can be an expensive proposition, but if your
broker has such subscriptions and it redistributes such data to its clients that
colocate within its data center, the cost can be much lower. Unfortunately,
most retail brokers do not redistribute direct feeds from the exchanges, but
institutional brokers such as Lime Brokerage often do.
If we don’t have access to such data, all we can do is to entertain a healthy
skepticism of our backtest results.

Venue Dependence of Currency Quotes
Compared to the stock market, the currency markets are even more fragmented and there is no rule that says a trade executed at one venue has to be
at the best bid or ask across all the different venues. Hence, a backtest will

be realistic only if we use historical data extracted from the same venue(s)
as the one(s) we expect to trade on.
There are quotes aggregators such as Streambase that consolidate data
feeds from different venues into one order book. In this case, you may use
the consolidated historical data for backtesting, as long as you can execute
on the venue that formed part of the consolidated order book.
Another feature of currency live quotes and historical data is that trade
prices and sizes, as opposed to bid and ask quotes, are not generally available, at least not without a small delay. This is because there is no regulation that says the dealer or ECN must report the trade price to all market
participants. Indeed, many dealers view transaction information as proprietary and valuable information. (They might be smart to do that because
there are high-frequency strategies that depend on order flow information and that require trade prices, as mentioned in Chapter 7. The banks’
forex proprietary trading desks no doubt prefer to keep this information
to themselves.) But using bid-ask quotes for backtesting forex strategies
is recommended anyway, since the bid-ask spreads for the same currency
pair can vary significantly between venues. As a result, the transaction costs
are also highly venue dependent and need to be taken into account in a
backtest.

A stock-trading model that involves shorting stocks assumes that those
stocks can be shorted, but often there are difficulties in shorting some
stocks. To short a stock, your broker has to be able to “locate” a quantity of
these stocks from other customers or other institutions (typically mutual
funds or other asset managers that have large long positions in many stocks)
and arrange a stock loan to you. If there is already a large short interest out
there so that a lot of the shares of a company have already been borrowed,
or if the float of the stock is limited, then your stock can be “hard to borrow.” Hard to borrow may mean that you, as the short seller, will have to
pay interest to the stock lender, instead of the other way around in a normal
situation. In more extreme cases, hard to borrow may mean that you cannot
borrow the stock in the quantity you desire or at all. After Lehman Brothers
collapsed during the financial crisis of 2008–2009, the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) banned short sales in all the financial industry stocks for several months. So if your backtesting model shorts stocks
that were hard or impossible to borrow, it may show a wonderful return
