
telling me now?” bringing to the table no preconceptions or intentions of your own.

What Is the Easiest Way to Establish a Consistently Winning Outlook?
Just as a professional gambler is unfazed by his winning and losing streaks, great traders learn to roll with the punches (because they are so used to taking them), while
managing their money in such a way that no one session leaves them broke.
One strategy in establishing the proper outlook is to stop thinking of your money as money. Anyone who had a job as a teenager will surely remember the way in
which every hour of work could be translated into a real-life desire. An hour of work might have been a bit of gas for the car, a night out at the movies, or dinner with a
girlfriend. In trading, there is the temptation to do precisely the same thing: to say, “I just won my car payment,” or, “I could have bought a new home entertainment
center with that loss.” Don’t think of it as money. In the world of trading, remember that money is only a tool of the game, a means to keep score.
Though this removal from the literal value of money could certainly be a hazard in real life, it is an excellent habit for removing an emotional element from the trading
day. The moment you lose sight of money as a tool of the game and revert to thinking of it in terms of its purchasing power, you have sentenced yourself to playing
less skillfully and more emotionally, which is poison to any trader.

What Does Personal Integrity Have to Do with Successful Trading?
In the game of life, everything is in play: your time, your money, your relationships, your social position. Every element of your day-to-day existence is in your
hands, and you protect each part of your life by investing wisely in each category. In fact, your quality of life is entirely determined by the way you handle those
investments. You invest in your health by treating your body in a certain way and asking only reasonable things of it. You invest in your relationships by fostering
them, treating them respectfully and with care. The way in which you invest in your life for a positive outcome can be boiled down to a single word: integrity.
Integrity is often thought of as doing what you say you are going to do with regard to other people. When you say you’ll be at a meeting, you show up at the
appointed time. When you promise to take out the trash, you get it to the curb before the trash man cometh. Other people’s faith in you grows each and every time
you keep your word. People who don’t keep their word are not treated seriously. If you have an opportunity for a new business venture and you need to find a
partner, whom are you going to choose? Not someone who can’t even keep his word on the little things. Integrity is its own type of currency in the world. It is how
we show others that we deserve their respect, their love, and their compensation for our hard work.
The problem comes when we don’t treat ourselves with the same integrity. We do have a sense of self that we come to rely on when the chips are down. We have
varying degrees of faith in ourselves in various situations, based on how we’ve handled those situations in the past. In trading, it is critical that we are able to trust
ourselves to follow our plan, preserve our capital, and not freeze when the going suddenly gets very rough. How do we build integrity with ourselves? Simple: we keep
our word. If we write down that we are going to go to the gym at 3:00 p.m., then come hell or high water, we get to the gym at 3:00 p.m. And if we also tell ourselves,
“Today I’m not eating any dessert,” then we stick to the plan, honor our word, and pass on the dessert. With each missed workout, with each slice of cheesecake,
another shred of integrity is lost. This chips away at our own sense of self, creating a growing sense of unreliability. The end result? For traders, it’s being scared to
take a trade because you don’t know if you can trust yourself to follow your plan once you are in it. And not trusting yourself as a trader is a guaranteed route to
disaster.
How do you build up this sense of self, this sense of trust in yourself? It’s very simple: keep your word with others and yourself, starting today. M ore important,
learn to say no so that you don’t overcommit. But when you agree to do something, whether it’s meeting someone for a drink or going to the gym at a certain time,
then fight like hell to make it happen. Be unreasonable if you have to—after all, you are building up your most important trading tool, and that is faith in yourself that
you will follow your trading plan, which is following your word.
There’s no one else there to hold you to it. You have to rely on yourself, and you have to know with absolute conviction that you are someone who can be counted
on.
As traders, we are confronted each moment with opportunities to violate our plans. Every new bar or candlestick is a chance to let just one of our rules slip.
Whether the outcome is a win or a loss, toying with your rules in the heat of the moment is more than merely a bad idea; it’s a message to yourself that you aren’t
reliable, that you don’t play with integrity. Eventually your integrity with yourself erodes to the point where you don’t even trust yourself. “M an, I hope I don’t
screw this up again,” Joe Trader thinks.
Integrity in trading is the most critical component of your trading plan. Building up that integrity is easy to do. Start with the next trade. Follow your plan and
follow your word, and your trading skills will increase.

Where Are You Now in Your Trading Journey?
It is critical that traders understand this process and recognize where they are on their journey. This is obviously important for a trader’s own development, but there
is a more subtle reason why it’s essential to grasp this concept—so that a trader can understand what mistakes other traders are making and how to profit from those
mistakes. This is the biggest poker game on the planet, and the money that’s flowing into your account isn’t appearing as if by magic. It’s coming from someone who
is still learning how the markets work, and who most likely followed her gut and got suckered into taking the wrong side of the trade.
Believe it or not, everyone who is trading today has about the same odds of making money on his very next trade. There is simply not a lot of skill involved in
making money on one trade. The difference is over the course of 60 trades, 100 trades, or 1,000 trades … who is going to be able to generate an uptrending equity curve
over the course of that many trades? It’s the traders who have graduated from the four basic phases of trading:
• Phase I: Destined to lose—six months to a year
• Phase II: Fear-based trading—two to six months
• Phase III: Search for the Holy Grail—six months to death
• Phase IV: Learning how not to lose
I’ve found that most traders go through these phases in one fashion or another. Unfortunately, by the time they get through Phase III, they are typically out of
money and can’t even move on to—or grasp—learning how not to lose.
Phase V, of course, represents the time when a trader has become consistently profitable. This doesn’t mean on every trade—it means creating an equity curve that
33

has an overall upward slope. It means having the ability to be strict enough in your discipline to be able to make a consistent income from the markets. This means
trusting yourself that you won’t break down and screw it up yet again. Remember, the moment a trader wavers from her plan, the market is ready to attack. It’s
waiting ever so patiently, ready to suckle those emotions, ready to lure traders back into their old habits … just one more time! And the trade might even work. If it
does, it doesn’t matter. That’s not the point. If you break your rules once and win, you’ll break them again. At some point, this will come back to haunt both you and
your trading account. This discipline and patience has to be utilized on every trade, period. Are you starting to see that this is 90 percent of the battle here?

Phase I Trading: Destined to Lose—What Are the Traits That Make People a Success in Life but Routinely Get Them
Killed in the Markets?
He that lives on hope will die fasting.
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

It has been said that the road to hell is paved with good intentions, and nowhere is this more apparent than in the world of trading. (It also becomes very apparent
when you start hiring relatives to help you with your business, but that story is for another book.) I have yet to meet one individual who went into trading with the
goal of losing money. Everybody’s intentions are quite the opposite, and the first thing people do when they enter the world of trading is tap into what has worked for
them successfully in the past. The problem is that the tactics that an individual uses to achieve his goals in everyday life do not work in trading; in fact, they are one of
the main reasons for failure. While good judgment is critical for an individual who wants to climb the corporate ladder or start a business, we have already seen why
“good judgment” didn’t work in the middle of the TASR trade. This leads us to what has to be the most painful lesson ever inflicted on the optimistic nature of the
human species: the tactics that an individual uses to achieve her dreams and goals in everyday life do not work in trading; in fact, they are one of the main reasons for a
trader ’s failure. The determination, courage, positive thinking, and resoluteness that have made people a success in one area of their life simply set them up for
slaughter in the markets. It is these types of traders who obstinately hold on to a losing position, adding to it on the way down, using positive thinking techniques to
visualize this fiasco eventually turning into a winning trade. I don’t care how many Tony Robbins tapes the employees of Enron listen to; it’s not going to get their
stock back up to $90 a share. The trader who is unaware of this phenomenon is set up for failure from the very beginning. This doesn’t mean that a person shouldn’t
be positive about her ability to eventually become a successful trader. Far from it. However, a trader will be much better off assuming that every trade she takes is
going to fail. This way, she learns to focus on protecting her downside and minimizing her risk. The upside can take care of itself, thank you very much. It’s the
downside that can easily get out of hand. Be positive on life, but pessimistic on your next trade.
Traders who “play the markets” with a mental framework oriented toward how external society rewards and punishes “good” and “bad” behavior are set up to lose
from day one. For example, “cutting one’s losses short” is difficult when there is the possibility of the market’s coming back to the breakeven point. At breakeven, the
trader is not a “loser.” Thus, according to the benchmarks of society, if traders can exit a position with a gain, they are “successful.” This leads to the removal of stops
“once in a while” in the hopes of getting out at breakeven—in order to be a winner in the eyes of society (sigh). This can work 10 times in a row, even 100 times in a
row, but it is the one time when it doesn’t work that knocks traders flat on their back. On this particular day, these traders will be among the many who cause a
“riplike movement” in the markets as they pound their keys in disgust to get out of a trade that is killing their account. This habit of removing stops, even if it is done
only once in a while, is reinforced by the societal belief of what defines a winner versus a loser. This habit will destroy a trader’s account faster than anything else—
and the smaller the account, the more quickly it will be destroyed. By using hard stops and sticking to them, a smaller trader at least has a fighting chance of being able
to do this for a living. If he can’t at least do that, he will not make it as a trader. Period.
What happens to traders in the beginning is that they naturally end up on a cycle in which they label themselves as good traders on days when they make money
and as bad traders on days when they lose money. This is an ordinary reaction instilled into them based on the principles that apply to general society. After all,
straight As mean that a student is a success, while Fs mean that he is a failure, right? If there is anything I can emphasize in this book, it would be this: trading has
nothing to do with general society. In fact, the markets are set up in such a way as to use what most people hold near and dear to their hearts as a means of taking
advantage of them. The markets thrive on taking the rules and ideals that govern general society, wadding them up into a ball, setting them on fire, and then shoving
them down a new trader’s throat. Any trader who is unaware of this phenomenon is being played like a fish right from the opening bell.
General society tells us that losing money equates with failure and making money equates with success. After a losing day, the trader unconsciously thinks, “I’ve
lost money. I can’t do this. If I had just removed my stop, the market would have come back and got me out at breakeven, and then I’d still be a contender.” So what
happens is that the trader starts looking for opportunities to remove her stops in order to not end up with a losing trade. Not on every trade, of course. Just on some
trades. And how do traders determine when to do this? It’s easy enough; they just use their “judgment” while they’re in a trade. And this is exactly when professional
traders step in for the kill.
This society focus on money traps traders into the very habits that cause their ruination. Removing a stop in the hopes of getting out at breakeven is one of the
worst habits a trader can develop. Sure, it will work some of the time, but it has to turn into a disaster only once to wipe out half or more of an account. While the rest
of the world views losing as a bad thing, in trading, small losses are the best sign of success. Nobody outside of trading will ever understand this, so don’t waste a lot of
time telling your in-laws how losing only $2,000 yesterday is part of your success plan. Yes, this means you are doing your job, but as long as the sun continues to
rise in the east, other people will never get it. The only people who understand traders are other traders. Personally, when I’m at a cocktail party and people ask me
what I do for a living, I’ve found it’s easier to say that I do charity work. People at least understand that and can empathize.
The biggest issue for newer traders is to reprogram their brains into realizing that in trading, losing is winning. A professional trader’s job is to take small losses.
Period. M ost traders don’t realize that there are only a few days each month where big profits can be made. The rest of the time, traders are doing their job if they are
keeping their heads above water. The idea is to keep the trading account intact for when the big moves come along. If on M onday some traders take three small losses
in a row and end up down on the day, they are doing their job and have the chance to be successful professional traders, because they will have maintained the bulk of
their account to use on one of the few days when the markets really move. That is what trading is about. It’s about traders sticking to the parameters that they have set
for themselves and sticking to the setups that they’ve decided to follow. It’s not about gut reactions and chasing the latest sound bite mentioned on CNBC. That is the
path to trading annihilation.
I remember getting a call in mid-2003 from a guy who was running a $10 million hedge fund for his family. It was never made clear to me how he qualified for this
34

role, although I think he mentioned something about knowing how to use the Internet. He sent me an e-mail about YHOO, asking me for my thoughts. I looked at the
chart. The stock was trending higher on nice volume, and I told him about a couple of different setups I would use to get long the stock. Apparently that wasn’t the
answer he was looking for, because he called me the next day and told me that I was reading the chart wrong. As I listened to him rant on about page views and
price/earnings (P/E) ratios, a light went on. I interrupted him and asked, “Where did you short this stock?” After a moment of silence followed by a cough, the story
emerged. He had shorted it at $12.00 based on a newsletter recommendation. As the stock rallied, the newsletter had shorted more, and so did he. By the time I talked
to him, he had shorted 400,000 shares at an average price of $16.25, for a total outlay of $6.5 million.
I asked if the newsletter was still short, and he said no. I checked my quote screen and saw that YHOO was trading at $22.50 and had just cracked out new 52-week
highs. He asked me if he should short some more to raise his average cost, “so it won’t have to go down as much for me to get back to breakeven.”
Here he was down $2.5 million on the trade, his family hadn’t seen the statements, and he was trying to salvage his career as the family financial guru. There was
zero rationality in his thinking. I told him he needed to get out of the trade, or at least buy call options for a hedge. I even said that YHOO was going to keep on
rallying until all the people who were short cried uncle and covered. Apparently that wasn’t the advice he was looking for, either. He ended up shorting another
100,000 shares. He finally caved when YHOO hit $30, for a loss of $6.25 million. It’s an excruciating story, but this happens all the time with all types of different
account sizes. This guy didn’t want to take a small loss because he didn’t want to look like a loser to his family. His motto became, “As long as I hold on to this
position, it’s not really a loss.” This is like having blood pour out of your bowels and choosing not to go to the doctor. “As long as I don’t go to the doctor, no one will
know I’m dying.” Trust me, once you are dead, people will figure it out.
Averaging down on a losing position is like a sinking ship taking on more water. When the family fund manager kept shorting YHOO as it made new highs, he might
as well have been driving nails into the Mona Lisa. Both are deliberate acts of destruction. Financial planners always talk about dollar cost averaging. I call it dollar
loss averaging. Adding to a winning trade is okay, but adding to a losing trade is insane (unless scaling into a full-sized position is part of your trading plan). If you
caught some of your employees stealing from you, would you give them a raise or fire them and find somebody else? This guy trading YHOO would have given them a
raise, a housing allowance, and a comfortable pension.
As traders approach the end of Phase I, assuming that they still have any capital left, they have some solid experience under their belt. However, they haven’t quite
figured out why they are getting hammered by the markets. It’s not as if they have lost money on every trade. In fact, they’ve had some great trades. Unfortunately,
they’ve also been knocked down pretty hard on a number of occasions, and their account is under water. They started off optimistically, but now they just want to be
a little more careful. And the bottom line is that they don’t want to lose any more money. Welcome to Phase II.

Phase II Trading: Fear-Based Trading, or, “Why Does Everything I Touch Turn to Crap?”
M any traders think that once they become more cautious, their trading will improve. They’re wrong.
When traders decide that they don’t want to lose any more money, they unwittingly turn themselves into the “late entry” champions of the trading world. They
wait and they wait and they make doubly sure that a trade looks good before they take it. In this scenario, the markets start to rally, but by the time the trader is
absolutely convinced that this rally is for real, she is jumping in near the dead highs of the move. She and the rest of the traders who did this just gave the markets the
fuel they needed to start moving down. Why? Because suddenly the market has a lot of stops being placed beneath it, and like wind on a forest fire, these stops will
ignite a sell-off. This safe, cautious entry quickly turns into a loss. The difference this time is that prudent traders religiously stick to their stops. The problem is that
this overcautious behavior gives them terrible entries, and their odds of getting stopped out are extremely high. Yes, small losses are good, but if nearly every trade
results in a small loss, the account will eventually be worn down.
Phase II usually doesn’t last very long. Traders in this phase generally don’t lose a lot of money, but they lose enough. Once traders figure out that they can stick to
their stops, but that their entries are suffering, they reach what alcoholics refer to as a “moment of clarity.” If their entries are bad, then obviously their indicators are
bad. So they go looking for some better ones. And thus begins the search for the Holy Grail.

Phase III Trading: Why Is the Search for the Holy Grail Guaranteed to Limit Your Success as a Trader and an Investor?
The search for that fail-safe indicator that’s going to work nearly every time takes a trader down a path that’s littered with corpses, broken dreams, and stuttering
fools. M any traders stay in this search for the rest of their lives. The irony is that individuals in this phase think they are developing as traders, when in reality their
development as traders is dead in the water, having been stopped faster and with greater intensity than M onica Lewinsky’s future in government. Traders in Phase III
are stuck in quicksand, entrenched in a losing game that can last years, decades, or longer. The end result is a trader who spends this time repeating the same mistakes
over and over again or happily discovering new ones.
The cycle that takes place is one of always looking for the next best thing. It’s the search for that oh-so-special indicator or system that is going to give the traders
their lodestone reward. In a typical scenario, this means diving headlong into a couple of different trading programs or ideas and tweaking them endlessly until they
reveal their magic. One typical scenario involves traders who develop a simple set of mechanical rules, which are kept secret, of course, that will help them attain a
substantial profit each year with virtually no risk and using only a small amount of capital. They get especially excited when they see that these methods, when
carefully applied to selected historical data, work amazingly well. The ones that didn’t work out could easily have been “filtered out.” This type of trader typically
dies with a one-page summary of how well the trade works and a stack of 68 pages that explain when not to take the trade.
Other traders who are stuck in Phase III will go to seminars and learn about trends, and learn the importance of never fighting the trend. They discover the magic of
moving averages and how they cross over when the trend changes. Oh, the power! When the market is trending, these methods work beautifully. Eventually, though,
these traders get discouraged when they figure out that 75 percent of the time, markets are trading sideways, as professionals chop the Holy Grail seekers into
mincemeat.
This may lead traders to the world of options, where they start looking at spreads to contain risk and writing premiums to generate monthly income. This works
great when the markets are chopping around, but then when the markets start trending again, these positions can, and often do, get killed.
The list goes on and on. At various stages throughout this journey, after traders have studied a number of systems, strategies, and indicators, one day they sit down
and create what they think is the perfect chart with the perfect indicators. Then they start to use it. It may work well for the first couple of days, or even the first
couple of weeks, but then the traders get burned on what they thought was a perfect setup. So, instead of using an M ACD (moving average convergence divergence)
with a setting of 12, 26, 9, they read somewhere that a setting of 12, 17, 10 is faster. They go in and reformat all their charts with the new setting and eagerly await the
next trading day. Their setups work for a couple of days or a couple of weeks, and then a couple of trade setups don’t work out. Back into cyberspace the traders go.
35
