
P1: OTA
JWBT642-c02

20

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 9, 2012

11:33

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

reason for giving up on the system that varies. The terrible-system trader
places blame on the system, and the bad-market trader is convinced the
market has fundamentally changed. Both bad-market traders and terriblesystem traders will end up searching for an entirely different trading
system.
Interestingly, the difference between a terrible-system trader and a
bad-market trader is often conscientiousness. The conscientious trader is
usually the bad-market trader. This is because the conscientious trader will
spend time testing and ensuring that any trading system employed is viable
before risking money in the market. The end result of the system testing
is confidence in the system for the bad-market trader. For the bad-market
trader, the experience of a drawdown is quite harrowing and unexpected,
because the trading system has been tested and seems viable; if the system
cannot be wrong, the market must be “wrong.”
Our terrible-system trader is unlikely to have spent the same effort testing the trading system. The terrible-system trader probably found the system on a forex Internet forum, purchased it from an Internet marketer,
learned it from a friend, or perhaps heard a circle of forex traders discussing the system in hushed tones at a party. The terrible-system trader
may be trading a profitable system, but without spending the time testing
the system, the terrible-system trader is unlikely to hold the system in high
regard.
So how might you avoid falling into the terrible system or bad-market
groups? What might you do to change your fate? You may want to carefully
consider adopting naked trading. Trading naked means trading without indicators, and removing indicators from your chart will make it difficult to
adopt the attitude of the terrible-system trader. Also, if you decide to trade
naked you will be trading on price action or the market movements. You
could blame the market for a string of losing trades as a naked trader, but
that would be a bit like blaming the river for being wet.
Naked traders find trades based on market movements, so, unless the
market is moving “incorrectly,” there is no such thing as a bad market for
the naked trader. Naked traders may only blame losing trades on poor execution (the trader’s fault) or poor luck (sometimes you flip a coin seven
times and it lands on tails every time). Naked traders may find that trading
without indicators is extremely liberating.
Traders around the world have found that adopting naked-trading
strategies means letting go of a trade. There are no indicators to give false
signals, there are no settings to tweak; there is simply the market price
and the trading decision. Naked traders have a true advantage because the
focus of the trade is the current market price. There is no better indicator
of the sentiment, attitude, or exuberance of the market than the current
market price. Naked traders make the current market price their indicator.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c02

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 9, 2012

Avoiding a Trading Tragedy

11:33

Printer: Courier Westford

21

In fact, for many naked traders, the current market price is a bit like a
biofeedback machine. I certainly look at the market price as biofeedback.
A biofeedback machine will allow you to tune into the physiological
changes in your body, in the hopes that you can better control your
physiology. For example, if I am an anxious person, and I am always
suffering from stress, I can hook myself up to a biofeedback machine. The
machine will alert me if I become anxious (blood pressure increases, heart
rate increases, etc. would cause the machine to produce the sound) by
sounding off an alert. I can then pay attention to the sounds of the machine
and use relaxation techniques to decrease my anxiety. The machine simply
alerts me when I need to recalibrate my physiology. Over time, I should
be able to wean myself off of the biofeedback machine and reduce my
anxiety on my own, without the aid of the biofeedback alerts.

LEARNING FROM MARKET
BIOFEEDBACK TM
It may seem strange, but you will eventually be able to do the same thing
with your trades if you decide to adopt naked-trading strategies. In the beginning, the market price is your biofeedback machine. If the market is
going in the wrong direction, you have valuable feedback on your trade.
Learn from this. Was the entry too early? (Most traders I know are much
more likely to jump into a trade too early than to wait too late.) Was the
entry too late? The market will tell you how your trade rates. Why is it
important to pay attention to the market biofeedback? Because you will
learn more from Market Biofeedback than you will learn from any guru,
any trading book, or any online course. Another way to state this is as follows: Paying close attention to how the market behaves after you enter a
trade is one of the best learning tools available to you.

MARKET BIOFEEDBACK
A psychological, behavioral, and trading response to the market price after a
trade has been entered.

Market Biofeedback involves two distinct domains, The first is how
the market reacts (price action) after you enter your trade, and the second is how you react to the price action in the market after you enter
your trade. Both parts of the Market Biofeedback equation are needed for

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c02

JWBT642-Nekritin

22

January 9, 2012

11:33

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

you to get a clear picture of what you are learning, and more importantly,
what you should learn, from your trading experiences. You should learn
from the price action the market offers after you enter a trade. You should
also learn from your reaction to the market after you enter a trade. Even
if you do not consciously intend to learn from Market Biofeedback, it is
important for you to recognize that Market Biofeedback will yield all your
important trading decisions. How you approach your trading, which trading systems you employ, whether you give up on your trading or go on to
a long and successful trading career, all these things are determined by
Market Biofeedback.
Most traders allow Market Biofeedback to completely dictate their
trading approach, even without realizing this is happening. For example,
some traders start out trading the five-minute charts and then slowly gravitate toward longer timeframes, such as the four-hour or daily charts. Why
do these traders do this? The answer is Market Biofeedback. Other traders,
after several losing trades, will give up on a trading system and search for
a new one. This change in trading strategy is, once again, due to Market
Biofeedback. Other traders may trade the exact same trading system and
will experience seven losing trades in succession and hold steady, knowing
that the current drawdown is simply an aberration. Market Biofeedback is
the difference between the traders who give up on a trading system and
look for a new strategy and those traders who maintain confidence despite
the losing streak.
How you react and respond to a drawdown, to a windfall of pips,
or something in between is exceptionally valuable information. The easiest way to see Market Biofeedback is to record your thoughts as you
trade. You can record your voice before, during, and after a trade. You
can take screenshots of the trade before, during, and after. You may also
record video of the trade before, during, and after with a desktop-computer
recording software.
Here are the important questions to answer as you record Market
Biofeedback:

r Where has the market moved since I entered my trade?
r If I looked at the market now, would I take the same trade?
r How do I feel about my trade?
r What do I like about this trade now?
r What do I dislike about this trade now?
r On a scale of 1 (poor decision) to 10 (great decision), where would I
rank this trade now?

r If I were not in a trade now, would I take the opposite trade?
If you ask yourself these questions and record your answers before,
during, and after the trade, you will have built up a database of your

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c02

JWBT642-Nekritin

Avoiding a Trading Tragedy

January 9, 2012

11:33

Printer: Courier Westford

23

personal Market Biofeedback—an invaluable tool. More importantly, you
will bring into conscious awareness how you react to the market. Most
traders will trade their whole lives without recognizing that Market
Biofeedback dictates how they adapt and change as a trader. By simply
acknowledging Market Biofeedback, you can understand how you react to
the market in general, and how your trades, in particular, mold your approach to trading. Market Biofeedback is the one area that most traders
neglect, most traders are not quite aware of this process. By paying attention to Market Biofeedback over time, you will be able to become aware of,
and eventually control your trading behaviors. This will allow you to take
a big step towards consistent profits.
If you would like to learn more about Market Biofeedback, please go
to www.marketbiofeedback.com.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c02

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 9, 2012

24

11:33

Printer: Courier Westford

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

CHAPTER 3

Back-Testing
Your System

You need to continue to gain expertise, but avoid
thinking like an expert.
—Denis Waitley

he consistently profitable forex trader is an expert. Just as an expert
farmer understands seeds and soil, and the expert mechanic can hear
the difference between a blown gasket and loose muffler, the expert
forex trader knows markets. Where does this expertise come from? How
does the novice forex trader become an expert? This is the million-dollar
question.
Make no mistake about it, when you step into any market, including the
forex market, and decide that you want to make money, you have decided
you will outwit and outperform some of the most determined, intelligent,
and well-resourced people in the world. All these impressive people have
one goal: to take your money. How can you make money in the markets,
knowing whom you are up against? The answer is simple. Perhaps the answer is much simpler that you would believe.
You must practice.
Practice your craft. Practice your trading. This is the simple way to
become an expert. Simple does not mean easy, because many traders expect to become experts without practice, and sadly they never achieve expertise. Consistently profitable trading is yours if you practice trading and
become an expert.
You now have the secret formula to achieve consistently profitable
trading. Will you use this secret? The best estimates suggest as many as
74.8 percent of traders do not use the secret. This is because 74.8 percent

T

25

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

26

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

of forex traders do not consistently make money trading (Forex Magnates U.S. Forex Brokers Profitability Report for Quarter 2, 2011). The
25.2 percent of consistently profitable traders practice trading to get better
at it.
Only 25.2 percent of all of the traders reading this will decide to practice trading to become an expert. It is no coincidence that about 25.2 percent of all traders are consistently profitable. Practice helps achieve expertise in nearly every sport and vocation. It is interesting to see how the
vast majority of aspiring traders expect to immediately become successful
without putting the effort into becoming an expert.
Expert traders put the effort into becoming an expert. It is ironic that
many traders are attracted to the trading lifestyle, thinking that trading will
allow passive income to accumulate. This is certainly true, any trader can
make money while sleeping, but expert traders are much more likely to
achieve consistent, passive income from trading. Trading is like any other
job: Practice and effort must be well-placed in order to reap the rewards.
The expert trader may be able to quickly make trading decisions and place
trades, but these decisions are the fruits of many hours of practice, in
nearly every instance. Traders must earn their pips through practice.
Practice means confidence. Practicing your trading system will enable
you to keep trading your system, and avoid all distractions and excuses
(e.g., terrible-system traders and bad-market traders) along the way. Practicing your trading system will allow you to enjoy the confidence of knowing when you place a trade how likely you are to be successful with that
particular trade.
Would you enjoy trading more if you had a quiet, unshakable confidence in your trading system? Would you find it easier to walk away from
your computer if you knew the precise likelihood that your trade would
be a winner? Would it be nice to know that you will avoid the excuses
bad-market traders and terrible-system traders make? What would happen
if, from today onward, you maintained confidence in your ability to extract
profits from the market even through the ups and downs that are inevitable
in any trader’s life?
Consistently profitable traders, otherwise known as expert traders,
have one thing in common: They test their trading systems. These traders
practice their trading systems. There are many methods for testing a trading system. Each of them has advantages and disadvantages.
Depending on your personality and how you approach your trading,
one of these approaches is likely to resonate with you more than the others.
Decide which of the three methods you will adopt to become an expert
trader.
Each of these methods are back-testing methods. Back-testing is a
common term used in trading that simply means “testing a trading system

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:18

Back-Testing Your System

Printer: Courier Westford

27

through historical data.” All traders know that using historical data is not
the perfect solution to testing a trading system. A much better alternative
would be to have future data to test our trading systems. Failing that, historical data is the next best thing. There are many pitfalls and problems
associated with testing trading systems on historical data; however, the
consequences associated with trading a system in live market conditions
when it is not tested on historical data are much more problematic.

THREE GOALS OF BACK-TESTING
Your back-testing will allow you to do two things: First, you will identify
how suitable the trading system is for you. This does not mean you are
discovering whether the trading system is profitable, but, rather, you are
examining the fit between you, the trader, and the rules of your trading
system. Second, you will learn to trust your trading system and learn to
let go of your trades. You may trade in a more relaxed manner once you
have taken thousands of trades over years of market data. The confidence
gained by trading your system repeatedly will show up in the form of a
relaxed approach to your live trading. Third, you will gain expertise with
your trading system. This may only happen if you take many trades, and
back-testing is a quick way to accumulate many trades. A close look at each
of these three goals may help you to get the most out of your back-testing.

Is the System Suitable?
How suitable is your trading system? The first goal of back-testing is to find
out how suitable the trading system is for you. I have a good friend, who introduced me to forex, named Ashkan Bolour. Bolour is a well-known forex
trader, you may have read about him in the Millionaire Traders book by
Kathy Lien and Boris Schlossberg. Bolour trades the three-minute and fiveminute charts. He does exceptionally well trading these charts. No matter
how many times I watch him trade his systems on these charts, I always fail
when I try to trade as he does. I fail because his trading system does not
fit with my view of the markets. I prefer the daily, weekly, and four-hour
charts. I have great difficulty watching my trades fluctuate, which is precisely what Bolour does when he trades. I have learned to trade systems
that make sense to me. I am better at extracting profits from the longerterm charts. Your job is to find out how you should be trading, and trade
only what makes sense to you.
Perhaps you have traded several trading systems in the past. Most of
these systems probably looked outstanding at first glance. Maybe you paid

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

28

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

for the trading system, and the website you bought it from painted the system as an invincible profit-collecting machine. Or maybe you read about
the system on an Internet forum. Or perhaps a friend told you about the
trading system. No matter how good the trading system appears, it is remarkable how your trading results often differ from your expectations of
the system. How can a perfect, profitable system fall apart in your hands?
Why is it that a system that sounds good does not work once you start
trading it?
The answer is fit; if a system does not fit your view of the markets, your
approach to trading, your ability to execute trades, it will not make money
for you. A system must fit with your understanding of the markets. If you
believe the five-minute chart is “random noise,” you may be better suited to
trade the daily chart. If you believe moving averages are useless indicators,
you will not be comfortable with a moving-average-based system. If you
think that the USD/JPY is a terrible pair to trade, you are not going to trade
a system on the USD/JPY. Your beliefs about trading must fit your trading
system.
Your lifestyle will also determine the types of systems you may trade.
If you have a full-time job, and spend 10 hours of the day at an office where
you will not have access to your trading platform, you probably will be
drawn toward longer-term charts. Daily, weekly, or four-hour charts may
be best for you. This way, you may take your trades and manage them by
checking the charts once or twice each day.
Your makeup as a trader will also determine how you should trade.
Perhaps you freak out when you are in a trade on the lower-timeframe
charts, such as the five-minute charts. Perhaps it is torture watching the
profit and loss fluctuate greatly with each pip gained or lost on these lowertimeframe charts. If this is the case, you will probably want to trade highertimeframe charts. If you are risking the same percentage of your account
on each trade, it is likely that a trade on a lower timeframe chart will risk
more per pip because the stop loss is closer to the entry price than a trade
on a higher-timeframe chart. Your back-testing experience with the trading
system will show you whether you will be able to find profits with a system.
Testing will also show you whether your lifestyle will fit with the system.
Perhaps most of the trade signals for a trading system occur during the
European market, and you are fast asleep during that time; this may mean
that the trading system is not for you.

Confidence Is Letting Go
After you have found a system that fits your personality, your view of the
markets, you need to get comfortable trading this system. This will be the
second step you take on your way to consistent profits in forex. The key

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

JWBT642-Nekritin

Back-Testing Your System

January 11, 2012

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

29

here is to gain experience over a broad range of market conditions. Relaxing while you are in a trade will often help you manage the trade better.
Just the simple fact that you are relaxed means your decision-making will
be better.
Relaxation will come for you once you have confidence in your system,
a confidence gained by trading your system repeatedly, over years of market conditions and a variety of signals. You will learn to trust your trading
system and learn to let go of your trades. Micromanaging trades, particularly trades on higher timeframes, is a common mistake of novice traders.
If you can walk away from your computer after making a trade, you have
confidence in your system. This confidence is only available to traders who
have back-tested extensively.
Accelerate your learning curve by back-testing. It does not matter your
method of back-testing; it only matters that you do it. Testing over thousands of trades will enable you to be better prepared to make a decision on
your trading system. Once you deem your system profitable, you can begin
to get comfortable with the system by testing extensively, slowly building
your database of trading experience with the system. Your next step will
be to become an expert with your system.

You Are the Expert
The number-one reason traders fail in forex is this: Most traders do not
have expertise. Most traders begin trading a system without much experience trading a system. When the first bump in the road appears (e.g. an
extended losing period, a lack of signals for a week, a couple of difficultto-interpret signals, etc.) the system is abandoned. The traders who consistently pull profits from the market are experts, without exception.
To become an expert at anything, you must do it at least 10,000 times.
If you want to become an expert in your chosen trading system, you could
take 10,000 trades, which will probably take you years to achieve, or
you could back-test your system. By seriously testing your system over
thousands of trades, you will quickly achieve expertise with your system.
Seriously testing your system means making trades just as you would with
your live account: trading from the right-hand edge of the chart, without
the benefit of hindsight bias, using a strict application of your trading
rules.
The naked trader has an advantage over traders who trade “normal,”
indicator-based systems. A trader who is trading a system incorporating
seven indicators must view and interpret all seven indicators for each
trade, before, during, and after every signal is initiated. This is cumbersome and slow. The naked trader has a chart with no indicators, a very
clean chart. These charts are easy to interpret. In fact, the naked trader

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c03

30

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

21:18

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

gains experience with his system every time he sees a chart in a newspaper, on television, in a book, regardless of market. This is because the
naked trader can see, at a glance, whether the chart suggests a buy signal, a sell signal, or no trade signal. A chart on the nightly news helps the
naked trader march toward expertise. In this way, the naked trader has a
distinct advantage over traders using indicators. Expertise will come more
quickly, more easily, and allow the naked trader to interpret any chart, in
any market, at any time.
Experts in cognitive psychology agree that experts at the highest level
find it difficult to teach their expertise. Experts know what to do, in
fact, because their expert behavior is automatic. They do not think about
what they do, they just do it. Novices spend a lot of time thinking about
the procedures, setting things up correctly, and so forth. Experts spend
time thinking about how they interpret information—a very different
approach.
So what does this mean for your trading? It means you should backtest extensively. Your goal should be to pull out of the novice trader stage
and into the expert level as quickly as possible. The fast way to achieve
expertise is to gain experience trading your system via testing. All novice
traders spend a good proportion of time in orientation, “Is this a good signal?” “Does this set-up qualify as a valid trade set-up?” “Should I take this
trade? I am not sure if this constitutes a good signal . . .” Expert traders
spend more time evaluating the trade once it is initiated. In other words, experts are concerned with Market Biofeedback, and novice traders are concerned with understanding the system rules. This is understandable, novice
traders spend time thinking about possible trade set-ups, novice traders
are still learning the trading system. Expert traders spend more time managing trades and focusing on making sure that open trades are managed
efficiently, to extract maximum profits from the market once those profits
become available.
One of the true paradoxes of expertise is this: Experts find it difficult
to verbalize the decision-making process. Expert traders are often unable
to adequately explain how to duplicate their results. This is frustrating for
the novice. Experts often rely on unconscious thinking, or a “gut feeling”
when making decisions. The subtle cues experts use to make a decision are
ingrained and rote, often inaccessible to conscious consideration, and this
is frustrating for novice traders who are seeking expertise. Novice traders
are better off spending time gaining experience through testing, building
toward expertise, rather than trying to find a shortcut to expertise by mirroring experts.
Unless you want to allow a computer to do all the trading for you—
in other words you trade only fully automated trading systems—you probably will want to achieve trading expertise. Your shortcut to trading
