
AU3772_C000.fm Page 13 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

public. Could there be any more ominous sign that enormous changes are
about to occur?
Vigorous development of the systems, methods, procedures, and philosophy outlined in this book is about the only protective shield I know of to
guard against inimical change.
W.H.C. Bassetti
San Geronimo, California
January 1, 2001

AU3772_C000.fm Page 14 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

AU3772_C000.fm Page 15 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

About the Editorial Practices
in This Eighth Edition
Needless to say, one approaches the revision of a classic work with some
trepidation. Every critic and reader has his or her (cf. Note on Gender)
opinion as to how revision should be done — whether the authors’ original
text should be invisibly changed as though they had written the book in
2000 instead of 1948 and were omniscient, or whether errors and anachronisms were to be lovingly preserved, or footnoted, or… etc., etc. (I have
preserved Magee’s favorite usage of “etc., etc., etc.” against the protestation
of generations of English composition teachers because I like its evocation
of an ever-expanding universe.)
Notwithstanding every reader’s having an opinion, I am certain all
critics will be delighted with the practices followed in this 3rd millennium
edition of the most important book on technical analysis written in the 2nd
millennium.

Integrity of the Original Text
By and large, the 5th edition has been the source of the authors’ original
text. Amazingly, almost no stylistic or clarifying emendation has been necessary to that edition. This is a tribute to the clarity, style, and content of the
original — one might almost say awesome, if the word were not in such
currency on “Saturday Night Live” and the “Comedy Channel.” Considering
that it was written in the middle of the last century, and considering its
complex subject, and considering that the markets were one tenth of their
present complexity, awesome may be the appropriate word. No change or
update has been necessary to the technical observations and analysis. They
are as definitive today as they were in 1950.
While I have preserved the authors’ original intent and text, I have taken
the liberty of rearranging some of the chapters. Novices wishing to learn
manual charting will find the appropriate chapters moved to appendices at
the back of the book, along with the chapters on Composite Leverage and
Sensitivity Indexes.

About Apparent Anachronisms
Critics with limited understanding of long-term trading success may think
that discussions of “what happened in 1929” or “charts of ancient history
from 1946” have no relevance to the markets of the present millennium. They
will point out that AT&T no longer exists in that form, that the New Haven

AU3772_C000.fm Page 16 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

has long since ceased to exist as a stock, that many charts are records of
long-buried skeletons. This neglects the value of the charts as metaphor. It
ignores their representations of human behavior in the markets which will
be replicated tomorrow in some stock named today.com or willtheynevergetit.com. Even more important, it ignores the significance of the past to
trading in the present. I cite here material from Jack Schwager’s illuminating
book, The New Wizards of Wall Street. Schwager, in conversation with Al
Weiss: “Precisely how far back did you go in your chart studies?” Answer:
“It varied with the individual market and the available charts. In the case
of the grain markets, I was able to go back as far as the 1840s.” “Was it really
necessary to go back that far?” Answer: “Absolutely. One of the keys in longterm chart analysis is realizing that markets behave differently in different
economic cycles. Recognizing these repeating and shifting long-term patterns requires lots of history. Identifying where you are in an economic cycle
— say, an inflationary phase vs. a deflationary phase — is critical to interpreting the chart patterns evolving at that time.”

Identification of Original Manuscript and Revisions
True believers (and skeptics) will find here virtually all of the original material written by Edwards and Magee, including their charts and observations
on them. Changes and comments introduced by editors since the 5th edition
have been rearranged, and, when appropriate, have been identified as a
revision by that editor.
Maintaining this policy, where updates to the present technological context and market reality were necessary, the present editor has clearly identified them as his own work by beginning such annotations with “EN” for
Editor’s Note. Figure insertions are identified as “x.1, x.2.”

Absolutely Necessary Revisions
Not too long ago my youngest son, Pancho, overheard a conversation in
which I referred to a slide rule. “What’s a slide rule, Dad?” he asked. Well,
needless to say the world has, in general, moved on from the time of Edwards
and Magee when instead of calculators we had slide rules. Where time has
made the text useless, moot, or irrelevant, that problem has unobtrusively
been corrected.
Where the passage of time has made the text obsolete, I have either
footnoted the anachronism and/or provided a chapter-ending annotation.
These annotations are marked in the text with “EN” also. It is absolutely
essential to read the annotations. Failure to do so will leave the reader
stranded in the 20th century.
In some cases, these annotations amount to new chapters — for example,
trading directly in the averages was difficult in Magee’s time. Nowadays if
there is not a proxy or option or index for some Index or Average or basket
of stocks, there will be one in less than a New York minute (which, as

AU3772_C000.fm Page 17 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

everyone knows, has only 59 seconds). This new reality has resulted in major
additions to this new edition. These are detailed in the Foreword. Major
chapter additions necessary to deal with developments in technology and
finance theory have been clearly identified as this editor’s work by designating them as interpolations, viz., Chapter 18.1 (with the exception of Chapter 23, which I have surreptitiously inserted).

Absolutely Necessary Revisions Which Will Have Arisen in
the Thirty Minutes Since This Editorial Note Was Written
In a number of instances, the book relayed information which, in those days
of fixed commissions and monopolistic control by the existing exchanges,
remained valid for long periods of time, for instance, brokerage commissions
and trading costs. It is no longer possible to maintain such information in a
printed book because of the rate of change in the financial industry. It must
now be filed and updated in real time on the Internet. Consequently, readers
will be able to refer to the Internet for this kind of ephemeral data. The
general importance of the ephemera to the subject is always discussed.

About Gender
I quote here from my foreword to the 2nd edition of Magee’s General Semantics of Wall Street, (charmingly renamed according to the current fashions,
Winning the Mental Game on Wall Street):

About Gender in Grammar
Ich bin ein feminist. How could any modern man, son
of a beloved woman, husband of an adored woman,
and father of a joyful and delightful daughter not be?
I am also a traditionalist and purist in matters of usage,
grammar, and style. So where does that leave me and
my cogenerationalists, enlightened literary (sigh) men
(and women) with regards to the use of the masculine
pronoun when used in the general sense to apply to
the neuter situation?
In Dictionary of Modern American Usage, Garner
notes: ‘English has a number of common-sex general
words, such as person, anyone, everyone, and no one,
but it has no common-sex singular personal pronouns.
Instead we have he, she, and it. The traditional
approach has been to use the masculine pronouns he
and him to cover all persons, male and female alike... .
The inadequacy of the English language in this respect
becomes apparent in many sentences in which the
generic masculine pronoun sits uneasily.’

AU3772_C000.fm Page 18 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

Inadequate or not it is preferable to s/he/it and other
bastardizations of the English language. (Is it not interesting that “bastard,” in common usage, is never used
of a woman, even when she is illegitimate?) As for the
legitimacy of the usage of the masculine (actually neuter) pronoun in the generic, I prefer to lean on Fowler,
who says, ‘There are three makeshifts: first as anybody
can see for himself or herself; second, as anybody can
see for themselves; and third, as anybody can see for
himself. No one who can help it chooses the first; it is
correct, and is sometimes necessary, but it is so clumsy
as to be ridiculous except when explicitness is urgent,
and it usually sounds like a bit of pedantic humor. The
second is the popular solution; it sets the literary man’s
(!) teeth on edge, and he exerts himself to give the same
meaning in some entirely different way if he is not
prepared to risk the third, which is here recommended.
It involves the convention (statutory in the interpretation of documents) that where the matter of sex is not
conspicuous or important the masculine form shall be
allowed to represent a person instead of a man, or say
a man (homo) instead of a man (vir).’
Politically correct fanatics may rail, but so are my teeth
set on edge; thus, I have generally preserved the
authors’ usage of the masculine for the generic case.
This grammatical scourge will pass and be forgotten,
and weak-willed myn (by which I intend to indicate
men and women) who pander to grammatical terrorists will in the future be seen to be stuck with malformed style and sentences no womyn will buy. What
would Jane Austen have done, after all?

About Gender in Investors
As long as we are on the subject of gender, we might
as well discuss, unscientifically, gender in investors.
Within my wide experience as a trading advisor,
teacher, and counselor, it strikes me that the women
investors I have known have possessed certain innate
advantages over the men. I know there are women
gamblers. I have seen some. But I have never seen in
the markets a woman plunger (shooter, pyramider,
pie-eyed gambler). I have known many men who fit

AU3772_C000.fm Page 19 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

this description. I have also noted among my students
and clients that as a group women seem to have more
patience than men as a group. I refer specifically to the
patience that a wise investor must have to allow the
markets to do what they are going to do.
These are wholly personal observations. I have made
no study of the question and can’t speak to the entire
class of women investors — and do not personally
know Barbra Streisand (who I understand is a formidable investor, especially in IPOs). But just as I believe
that the world would be better off if more women ran
countries and were police officers, I expect that the
world of finance will benefit from the steadily increasing number of women investors and managers.

A Crucial Question — Sensitivity Indexes and Betas
Long before the investment community had formalized the beta measure —
the coefficient measuring a stock’s volatility relative to the market — Magee
and Edwards were computing a Sensitivity Index, which, for all practical
purposes, was the same thing. Readers interested in this aspect of their work
may find references in Resources which will enable them to obtain betas to
plug into the Composite Leverage formula with which Magee intended to
determine risk levels. The old appendix on Sensitivity Indexes has been
consigned to Appendix A, along with the chapter on Composite Leverage,
both originals of which have been emended to reflect current practices in
finance theory and practice.

Betwixt and Between, 1/8 of a Dollar or 12.5 Cents
As this edition went to press the financial services industry was once again
threatening to implement decimals in stock prices. Pricing in eighths has
endured long past its time because it was in the self-interest of the financial
industry — it allowed brokers and market makers to enforce larger bid–ask
spreads and fatten their profit margins. The importance for this book, and
for traders, is what will happen as full decimalization occurs. Often in these
pages, Magee will recommend placing a stop 1/8 off the low or high, or
placing progressive near stops in eighths. We do not yet know what the
psychological interval will be in the new era. It may be 12.5 cents, or more
psychologically, 10 cents, or for gaming purposes, 9 or 11 cents. This remains
to be seen. As all the charts in this book are in the old notation that usage
has been preserved in this edition.

AU3772_C000.fm Page 20 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

The Editorial “I”
Readers will quickly note that the “Editorial We” of Edwards and Magee
has been replaced by the first person voice — or, the “Editorial I” or perhaps
the “Professorial I.” Well, there were two of Edwards and Magee, and there
is only one of me. So my text is immediately noticeable as mine, and the
reader may discriminate quickly. As for the use of “I” as an expression of
ego, the reader is assured that after 40 years in the market the editor has no
ego left to promote. Perhaps the best way to put the editor’s sense of importance in perspective is to quote Dr. Johnson’s definition of lexicographer
from his dictionary. Some people might have thought Johnson self-important
in creating the first English dictionary. His definition of his trade put that
right. “Lexicographer: a writer of dictionaries. A harmless drudge.” An
editor is something like the same.
As this book goes to the printer, the publisher, recognizing the importance of the work done on this edition, will credit the Editor as co-author of
the 8th Edition. John Magee would be pleased. We had a cordial master–student relationship, and nothing pleases a Zen master more than to transfer
the dharma to a passionate student.

AU3772_C000.fm Page 21 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

Acknowledgments
In General:
John Magee, for his ever-patient tutoring.
Blair Hull, for teaching me the mercurial nature of options.
Bill Dreiss, for teaching me the nature of trading systems.
Art von Waldburg, respected colleague and discoverer of the Fractal Wave
Algorithm.
Fischer Black, who should have lived to get the Nobel Prize.
Bill Scott, friend and fellow trader.
For specific support and assistance in the preparation of this 8th edition:
Professor Henry Pruden, Golden Gate University, San Francisco, for invaluable support and advice.
Martin Pring; Lawrence Macmillan; Mitch Ackles, Omega Research Corporation; Carson Carlisle; Edward Dobson; David Robinson; Shereen Ash;
Steven W. Poser; Lester Loops, late of Hull Trading Company; Tom Shanks,
Turtle.
At St. Lucie Press, the dedication and support of the publisher, Drew
Gierman, and Production Associate, Pat Roberson, have been invaluable, as
has been the dedication of Gail Renard, the Production Editor.
And special acknowledgment to my Research Assistant, Don Carlos
Bassetti y Doyle.
Special appreciation goes to makers of software packages used in the
preparation of this and previous editions:
AIQ Systems
P.O. Box 7530
Incline Village, NV 89452
702-831-2999
www.AIQsystems.com
Metastock
Equis International, Inc.
3950 S. 700 East, Suite 100
Salt Lake City, UT 84107
www.equis.com
Tradestation
Omega Research
14257 SW 119th Avenue
Miami, FL 33186
305-485-7599
www.tradestation.com

AU3772_C000.fm Page 22 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

AU3772_C000.fm Page 23 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

In Memoriam
This book is a memorial for John Magee, who died on June 17, 1987. John
Magee was considered a seminal pioneer in technical analysis, and his
research with co-author, Robert D. Edwards, clarified and expanded the
ideas of Charles Dow, who laid the foundation for technical analysis in 1884
by developing the “Averages,” and Richard Schabacker, former editor of
Forbes in the 1920s, who showed how the signals, which had been considered
important when they appeared in the averages, were applicable to stocks
themselves. The text, which summarized their findings in 1948, was, of
course, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, now considered the definitive work
on pattern recognition analysis. Throughout his technical work, John Magee
emphasized three principles: stock prices tend to move in trends; volume
goes with the trend; and a trend, once established, tends to continue in force.
A large portion of Technical Analysis of Stock Trends is devoted to the
patterns which tend to develop when a trend is being reversed: Head-andShoulders, Tops and Bottoms, “W” patterns, Triangles, Rectangles, etc. —
common patterns to stock market technicians. Rounded Bottoms and Drooping Necklines are some of the more esoteric ones.
John urged investors to go with the trend, rather than trying to pick a
bottom before it was completed, averaging down a declining market. Above
all, and at all times, he refused to get involved in the game of forecasting
where “the market” was headed, or where the Dow–Jones Industrial averages would be on December 31st of the coming year. Rather, he preached
care in individual stock selection regardless of which way the market
“appeared” to be headed.
To the random walker, who once confronted John with the statement
that there was no predictable behavior on Wall Street, John’s reply was
classic. He said, “You fellows rely too heavily on your computers. The best
computer ever designed is still the human brain. Theoreticians try to simulate stock market behavior, and, failing to do so with any degree of predictability, declare that a journey through the stock market is a random walk.
Isn’t it equally possible that the programs simply aren’t sensitive enough or
the computers strong enough to successfully simulate the thought process
of the human brain?” Then John would walk over to his bin of charts, pull
out a favorite, and show it to the random walker. There it was — spike up,
heavy volume; consolidation, light volume; spike up again, heavy volume.
A third time. A fourth time. A beautifully symmetrical chart, moving ahead
in a well-defined trend channel, volume moving with price. “Do you really
believe that these patterns are random?” John would ask, already knowing
the answer.

AU3772_C000.fm Page 24 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

We all have a favorite passage or quotation by our favorite author. My
favorite quotation of John’s appears in the short booklet he wrote especially
for subscribers to his Technical Stock Advisory Service: “When you enter the
stock market, you are going into a competitive field in which your evaluations and opinions will be matched against some of the sharpest and toughest
minds in the business. You are in a highly specialized industry in which
there are many different sectors, all of which are under intense study by men
whose economic survival depends upon their best judgment. You will certainly be exposed to advice, suggestions, offers of help from all sides. Unless
you are able to develop some market philosophy of your own, you will not
be able to tell the good from the bad, the sound from the unsound.”
I doubt if any man alive has helped more investors develop a sound
philosophy of investing on Wall Street than John Magee.
Richard McDermott
President, John Magee, Inc.
September 1991

AU3772_C000.fm Page 25 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

Preface to the Seventh Edition
More than 100 years ago, in Springfield, MA, there lived a man named
Charles H. Dow. He was one of the editors of a great newspaper, The
Springfield Republican. When he left Springfield, it was to establish another
great newspaper, The Wall Street Journal.
Charles Dow also laid the foundation for a new approach to stock market
problems.
In 1884, he made up an average of the daily closing prices of 11 important
stocks, 9 of which were rails, and recorded the fluctuations of this average.
He believed that the judgment of the investing public, as reflected in the
movements of stock prices, represented an evaluation of the future probabilities affecting the various industries. He saw in his average a tool for
predicting business conditions many months ahead. This was true because
those who bought and sold these stocks included people intimately
acquainted with the industrial situation from every angle. Dow reasoned
that the price of a security, as determined by a free competitive market,
represented the composite knowledge and appraisal of everyone interested
in that security — financiers, officers of the company, investors, employees,
customers — everyone, in fact, who might be buying or selling stock.
Dow felt that this market evaluation was probably the shrewdest
appraisal of conditions to come that could be contained, since it integrated
all known facts, estimates, surmises, and the hopes and fears of all interested
parties.
It was William Peter Hamilton who really put these ideas to work. In
his book, The Stock Market Barometer, published in 1922, he laid the groundwork for the much-used and much-abused Dow Theory.
Unfortunately, a great many superficial students of the market never
understood the original premise of the “barometer” and seized on the bare
bones of the theory as a sort of magic touchstone to fame and easy fortune.
Others, discovering that the “barometer” was not perfect, set about
devising corrections. They tinkered with the rules of classic Dow Theory,
trying to find the wonderful formula that would avoid its periodic disappointments and failures.
Of course, what they forgot was that the Averages were only averages
at best. There is nothing very wrong with the Dow Theory. What is wrong
is the attempt to find a simple, universal formula — a set of measurements
that will make a suit to fit every man, fat, thin, tall, or short.
During the 1920s and 1930s, Richard W. Schabacker reopened the subject
of technical analysis in a somewhat new direction. Schabacker, who had been
financial editor of Forbes Magazine, set out to find some new answers. He
realized that whatever significant action appeared in the average must derive
from similar action in some of the stocks making up the average.

AU3772_C000.fm Page 26 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

In his books, Stock Market Theory and Practice, Technical Market Analysis, and Stock Market Profits, Schabacker showed how the “signals” that
had been considered important by Dow theorists when they appeared in the
Averages were also significant and had the same meanings when they turned
up in the charts of individual stocks.
Others, too, had noted these technical patterns. But, it was Schabacker
who collated, organized, and systematized the technical method. Not only
that, he also discovered new technical indications in the charts of stocks;
indications of a type that would ordinarily be absorbed or smothered in the
averages, and, hence, not visible or useful to Dow theorists.
In the final years of his life, Richard Schabacker was joined by his
brother-in-law, Robert D. Edwards, who completed Schabacker’s last book
and carried forward the research of technical analysis.
Edwards, in turn, was joined in this work in 1942 by John Magee. Magee,
an alumnus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, was well oriented
to the scientific and technical approach.
Edwards and Magee retraced the entire road, reexamining the Dow
Theory and restudying the technical discoveries of Schabacker.
Basically, the original findings were still good. But with additional history and experience, it was possible to correct some details of earlier studies.
Also, a number of new applications and methods were brought to light. The
entire process of technical evaluation became more scientific.
It became possible to state more precisely the premises of technical
analysis: that the market represents a most democratic and representative
criterion of stock values; that the action of a stock in a free, competitive
market reflects all that is known, believed, surmised, hoped, or feared about
that stock; and, therefore, that it synthesizes the attitudes and opinions of
all. That the price of a stock is the result of buying and selling forces and
represents the “true value” at any given moment. That a Major Trend must
be presumed to continue in effect until clear evidence of Reversal is shown.
And, finally, that it is possible to form opinions having a reasonably high
probability of confirmation from the market action of a stock as shown in
daily, weekly, or monthly charts, or from other technical studies derived
from the market activity of the security.
It is important to point out that the ultimate value of a security to the
investor or trader is what he or she ultimately receives from it. That is to
say, the price the investor gets when it is sold, or the market price obtainable
for it at any particular time, adjusted for dividends or capital distribution
in either case. If, for example, he or she has bought a stock at $25 a share,
and it has paid $5 in dividends and is now bid at $35, he or she has realized
an accrued benefit of $5 plus $10, or $15 in all. It is the combination of
dividends and appreciation of capital that constitutes the total gain.
It seems futile to try to correlate or compare the market value of a stock
with the “book value” or with the “value” figured on a basis of capitalized
earnings or dividends, projected growth, etc. There are too many other
factors that may also affect the value, and some of these cannot easily be
