
Watching the Market and Reacting to News

The people who flew those planes into the World Trade Center buildings
could not have been bought off by any concessions, not even the hundreds
of billions of dollars we are spending in bailout money today.
They want our soul—and if they are willing to die and we are not, they
will get it.

False Solutions and Real Problems
March 17, 2009
THOMAS SOWELL
Someone once said that Senator Hubert Humphrey, liberal icon of an earlier generation, had more solutions than there were problems.
Senator Humphrey was not unique in that respect. In fact, our present
economic crisis has developed out of politicians providing solutions to problems that did not exist—and, as a result, producing a problem whose existence is all too real and all too painful.
What was the problem that didn’t exist? It was a national problem of unaffordable housing. The political crusade for affordable housing got into high
gear in the 1990s and led to all kinds of changes in mortgage lending practices, which in turn led to a housing boom and bust that has left us in the
mess we are now trying to dig out of.
Usually housing affordability is measured in terms of how much of the
average person’s income it takes to cover either apartment rent or a monthly
mortgage payment.
There were certainly places here and there where it took half a family’s
income just to put a roof over their heads. Many such places were in coastal
California but there were a few others, here and there, on the east coast and
elsewhere.
But, vast areas of the country in between—“flyover country” to the east
coast and west coast elites—had housing prices that took no larger share of
the average American’s income than in the decade before the affordable
housing crusade got under way.
Why then a national crusade by Washington politicians over local problems? Probably as good an answer as any is that “It seemed like a good idea
at the time.” How are we to be kept aware of how compassionate and how
important our elected officials are unless they are busy solving some problem for us?
The problem of skyrocketing housing prices was all too real in those
places where this problem existed. When you have to live on half your
income because the other half goes for housing, that’s a real downer.
Almost invariably, these severe local problems had local causes—usually
severe local restrictions on building homes. These restrictions had a variety of

391

392 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
politically attractive names, ranging from “open space” laws and “smart
growth” policies to “environmental protection” and “farmland preservation.”
Like most wonderful-sounding political slogans, none of these lofty goals
was discussed in terms of that one four-letter word that people do not use in
polite political society—“cost.”
No one asked how many hundreds of thousands of dollars would be
added to the cost of an average home by “open space” laws, for example. Yet
empirical studies have shown that land-use restrictions added at least a hundred thousand dollars to the average home price in dozens of places around
the country.
In some places, such as coastal California, these restrictions added several hundred thousand dollars to the price of the average home.
In other words, where the problem was real, local politicians were the
cause. National politicians then tried to depict this as a national problem
that they would solve.
How would they solve it? By pressuring banks and other lenders to lower
their requirements for making mortgage loans, so that more people could buy
houses. The Department of Housing and Urban Development gave the government-sponsored enterprise Fannie Mae quotas for how many mortgages it
should buy that were made out for people with low to moderate incomes.
Like most political “solutions,” the solution to the affordable housing “problem” took little or no account of the wider repercussions this would entail.
Various economists and others warned repeatedly that lowered lending
standards meant more risky mortgages. Given the complex relationships
among banks and other financial institutions, including many big Wall Street
firms, if mortgages started defaulting, all the financial dominoes could start
falling.
These warnings were brushed aside. Politicians were too busy solving a
national problem that didn’t exist. In the process, they created very real
problems. Now they are offering even more solutions that will undoubtedly
lead to even bigger problems.

18

• CHAPTE R •

How You Could Make Your
Million Owning Mutual Funds

What Are Mutual Funds?
A mutual fund is a diversified portfolio of stocks managed by a professional

investment company, usually for a small management fee. Investors purchase shares in the fund itself and make or lose money based on the combined profits and losses of the stocks within the fund.
When you purchase a mutual fund, what you’re buying is long-term professional management to make decisions for you in the stock market. You
should probably handle a mutual fund differently from the way you handle
individual stocks.
A stock may decline and never come back in price. That’s why you must
always have a loss-cutting policy. In contrast, a well-selected, diversified
domestic growth-stock fund run by an established management organization will, in time, always recover from the steep corrections that naturally
occur during bear markets. The reason mutual funds come back is that they
are broadly diversified and generally participate in each recovery cycle in
the U.S. economy.

How to Become a Millionaire the Easy Way
Mutual funds are outstanding investment vehicles if you learn how to use
them correctly. However, many investors don’t understand how to manage
them to their advantage.

393

394 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
The first thing to understand is that the big money in mutual funds is
made by owning them through several business cycles (market ups and
downs). This means 10, 15, 20, or 25 years or longer. Sitting tight for that
long requires enormous patience and confidence. It’s like real estate. If
you buy a house, then get nervous and sell out after only three or four
years, you may not make anything. It takes time for your property to
appreciate.
Here’s how I believe you, as a shrewd fund investor, should plan and
invest. Pick a diversified domestic growth fund that performed in the top
quartile of all mutual funds over the last three or five years. It will probably
have an average annual rate of return of about 15% or 20%. The fund
should also have outperformed many other domestic growth-stock funds in
the latest 12 months. You’ll want to consult a reliable source for this information. Many investment-related magazines survey fund performance
every quarter. Your stockbroker or library should have special fund performance rating services so you can get an unbiased review of the fund you’re
interested in purchasing.
Investor’s Business Daily rates mutual funds based on their 36-month
performance records (on a scale from A+ to E) and also provides other performance percentages based on different time periods. Focus your research
on mutual funds with an A+, A, or A– performance rating in IBD. During a
bear market, growth fund ratings will be somewhat lower. The fund you pick
does not have to be in the top three or four in performance each year to give
you an excellent profit over 10 to 15 years.
You should also reinvest your dividends and capital gains distributions
(profits derived from a mutual fund’s sales of stocks and bonds) to benefit
from compounding over the years.

The Magic of Compounding
The way to make a fortune in mutual funds is through compounding. Compounding occurs when your earnings themselves (the performance gains
plus any dividends and reinvested capital) generate more earnings, allowing
you to put ever-greater sums to work. The more time that goes by, the more
powerful compounding becomes.
In order to get the most benefit from compounding, you’ll need a carefully selected growth-stock fund, and you’ll need to stick with it over time.
For example, if you purchase $10,000 of a diversified domestic growth-stock
fund that averages about 15% a year over a period of 35 years, here is an
approximation of what the result might be, compliments of the magic of
compounding:

How You Could Make Your Million Owning Mutual Funds

First five years: $10,000 might become $20,000
Next five years: $20,000 might become $40,000
Next five years: $40,000 might become $80,000
Next five years: $80,000 might become $160,000
Next five years: $160,000 might become $320,000
Next five years: $320,000 might become $640,000
Next five years: $640,000 might become $1.28 million!
Suppose you also added $2,000 each year and let it compound as well.
Your total could then come to more than $3 million!

Now, how much more do you think you’d have if you also bought a little
extra during every bear market of 6 to 12 months while the fund was temporarily down 30% or more from its peak?
Nothing’s guaranteed in this world, and, yes, there are always taxes. However, this example is representative of how the better growth funds have
performed over the last 50 years, and what could happen to you if you plan
and invest in mutual funds correctly. Over any 20- to 25-year period, your
growth fund should average two to three times what a savings account
would return. It’s definitely possible.

When Is the Best Time to Buy a Fund?
Anytime is the best time. You’ll never know what the perfect time is, and
waiting will usually result in your paying a higher price. You should focus on
getting started and becoming regular and relentless about building capital
that will compound over the years.

How Many Funds Should You Own?
As time passes, you may discover you’d like to develop an additional longterm program. If so, do it. In 10 or 15 years, you might have hefty amounts
in two or even three funds. However, don’t overdo it. There’s no reason to
diversify broadly in mutual funds. Individuals with multimillion-dollar portfolios could spread out somewhat further, allowing them to place sums into
a more diverse group of funds. To do this correctly, you need to make some
attempt to own funds with different management styles. For example, you
could divvy up your money among a value-type growth fund, an aggressive
growth fund, a mid- to large-cap growth fund, a small-cap fund, and so on.
Many fund organizations, including Fidelity, Franklin Templeton, American

395

396 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
Century, and others, offer families of funds with varied objectives. In most
cases, you have the right to switch to any other fund in the family at a nominal transfer fee. These families can offer you the added flexibility of making
prudent changes many years later.

Are Monthly Investment Plans for You?
Programs that automatically withhold money from your paycheck are usually sound if you deposit that money in a carefully selected, diversified
domestic growth-stock fund. However, it’s best to also make a larger initial
purchase that will get you on the road to serious compounding all that much
quicker.

Don’t Let the Market Diminish Your Long-Term Resolve
Bear markets can last from six months to, in some rare cases, two or three
years. If you’re going to be a successful long-term investor in mutual funds,
you’ll need the courage and perspective to live through many discouraging
bear markets. Have the vision to build yourself a great long-term growth
program, and stick to it. Each time the economy goes into a recession, and
the newspapers and TV are saying how terrible things are, consider adding
to your fund when it’s 30% or more off its peak. You might go so far as to
borrow a little money to buy more if you feel a bear market has ended. If
you’re patient, the price should be up nicely in two or three years.
Growth funds that invest in more aggressive stocks should go up more
than the general market in bull phases, but they will also decline more in
bear markets. Don’t be alarmed. Instead, try to look ahead several years.
Daylight follows darkness.
You might think that buying mutual funds during periods like the Great
Depression would be a bad idea because it would take you 30 years to break
even. However, on an inflation-adjusted basis, had investors bought at the
exact top of 1929, they would have broken even in just 14 years, based on
the performance of the S&P 500 and the DJIA. Had these investors bought
at the top of the market in 1973, they would have broken even in just 11
years. If, in addition, they had dollar cost averaged throughout these bad
periods (meaning they had purchased additional shares as the price went
down, lowering their overall cost per share), they would have broken even
in half the time.
The 1973 drop in the Nasdaq from the peak of 137 would have been
recovered in 3½ years, and as of February 2009, the Nasdaq average had
recovered from 137 to 1,300. Even during the two worst market periods in

How You Could Make Your Million Owning Mutual Funds

history, growth funds did bounce back, and they did so in less time than
you’d expect. In other words, if you took the absolutely worst period of the
twentieth century, the Great Depression, and you bought at the top of the
market, then dollar cost averaged down, at worst, it would have taken you
seven years to break even, and over the following 21 years, you would have
seen your investment increase approximately eight times. This is compelling
evidence that dollar cost averaging into mutual funds and holding them for
the long haul could be smart investing.
Some people may find this confusing, since we have said that investors
should never dollar cost average down in stocks. The difference is that a
stock can go to zero, while a domestic, widely diversified, professionally
managed mutual fund will find its way back when the market eventually gets
better, often tracking near the performance of benchmarks like the S&P 500
and the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
The super big gains from mutual funds come from compounding over a
span of many years. Funds should be an investment for as long as you live.
They say diamonds are forever. Well, so are your funds. So buy right and
sit tight!

Should You Buy Open- or Closed-End Funds?
“Open-end” funds continually issue new shares when people want to buy
them, and they are the most common type. Shares are normally redeemable
at net asset value whenever the present holders wish to sell.
A “closed-end” fund issues a fixed number of shares. Generally, these
shares are not redeemable at the shareholder’s option. Redemption takes
place through secondary market transactions. Most closed-end fund shares
are listed for trading on exchanges.
Better long-term opportunities are found in open-end funds. Closed-end
funds are subject to the whims and discounts below book value of the auction marketplace.

Should You Buy Load or No-Load Funds?
The fund you choose can be a “load” fund, where a sales commission is
charged, or a “no-load” fund. Many people prefer no-loads. If you buy a
fund with a sales charge, discounts are offered based on the amount you
invest. Some funds have back-end loads (sales commissions that are charged
when withdrawals are made, designed to discourage withdrawals) that you
may also want to take into consideration when evaluating a fund for purchase. In any event, the commission on a fund is much less than the markup

397

398 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
you pay to buy insurance, a new car, a suit of clothes, or your groceries. You
may also be able to sign a letter of intent to purchase a specified amount of
the fund, which may allow a lower sales charge to apply to any future purchases made over the following 13 months.
Few people have been successful in trading no-load growth funds aggressively on a timing basis, using moving average lines and services that specialize in fund switching. Most investors shouldn’t try to trade no-load funds
because it’s easy to make mistakes in the timing of buy and sell points.
Again, get aboard a mutual fund for the long term.

Should You Buy Income Funds?
If you need income, you will find it more advantageous not to buy an
income fund. Instead, you should select the best fund available and set up
a withdrawal plan equal to 1½% per quarter, or 6% per year. Part of the
withdrawal will come from dividend income received and part from your
capital. If you selected the fund correctly, it should generate enough
growth over the years to more than offset annual withdrawals of 6% of your
total investment.

Should You Buy Sector or Index Funds?
Steer away from funds that concentrate in only one industry or area. The
problem with these funds is that sectors go into and out of favor all the time.
Therefore, if you buy a sector fund, you will probably suffer severe losses
when that sector is out of favor or a bear market hits, unless you decide to
sell it if and when you have a worthwhile gain. Most investors don’t sell and
could end up losing money, which is why I recommend not purchasing sector funds. If you’re going to make a million in mutual funds, your fund’s
investments should be diversified for the long term. Sector funds are generally not a long-term investment.
If you are conservative, it may be OK for you to pick an index fund, where
the fund’s portfolio closely matches that of a given index, like the S&P 500.
Index funds have outperformed many actively managed funds over the long
run. I tend to prefer growth funds.

Should You Buy Bond or Balanced Funds?
I also don’t think most people should invest in bond or balanced funds.
Stock funds generally outperform bond funds, and when you combine the
two, you’re ultimately just watering down your results. However, someone

How You Could Make Your Million Owning Mutual Funds

who is in retirement might want to consider a balanced fund if less volatility
is desired.

Should You Buy Global or International Funds?
These funds might provide some diversification, but limit the percentage of
your total fund investment in this higher-risk sector to 10%. International
funds can, after a period of good performance, suffer years of laggard
results, and investing in foreign governments creates added risk. Historically, Europe and Japan have underperformed the U.S. market.

The Size Problem of Large Funds
Asset size is a problem for many funds. If a fund has billions of dollars in
assets, it will be more difficult for the fund manager to buy and sell large
positions in a stock. Thus, the fund will be less flexible in retreating from the
market or in acquiring meaningful positions in smaller, better-performing
stocks. For this reason, I’d avoid most of the largest mutual funds. If you
have one of the larger funds that’s done well over the years, and it is still
doing reasonably well despite having grown large, you should probably sit
tight. Remember, the big money is always made over the long haul. Fidelity
Contrafund, run by Will Danoff, has been the best-managed large fund for
a number of years.

Management Fees and Turnover Rates
Some investors spend a lot of time evaluating a fund’s management fees and
portfolio turnover rates, but in most cases, such nitpicking isn’t necessary.
In my experience, some of the best-performing growth funds have higher
turnover rates. (A portfolio turnover rate is the ratio of the dollar value of
buys and sells during a year to the dollar value of the fund’s total assets.)
Average turnover topped 350% in the Fidelity Magellan Fund during its
three biggest performance years. CGM Capital Development Fund, managed by Ken Heebner, was the top-performing fund from 1989 to 1994. In
two of those years, 1990 and 1991, it had turnover rates of 272% and 226%,
respectively. And Heebner’s superior performance even later in CGM
Focus fund was concentrated in 20 stocks that were actively managed.
You can’t be successful and on top of the market without making any
trades. Good fund managers will sell a stock when they think it’s overvalued,
when they are worried about the overall market or a specific group, or when
they find another, more attractive stock to purchase. That’s what you hire a

399

400 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
professional to do. Also, the institutional commission rates that funds pay
are extremely low—only a few cents per share of stock bought or sold. So
don’t be overly concerned about turnover rates. It’s the fund’s overall performance over several years that is key.

The Five Most Common Mistakes Mutual Fund Investors Make
1. Failing to sit tight for at least 10 to 15 years
2. Worrying about a fund’s management fee, its turnover rate, or the divi-

dends it pays
3. Being affected by news in the market when you’re supposed to be invest-

ing for the long term
4. Selling out during bad markets
5. Being impatient and losing confidence too soon

Other Common Mistakes
Typical investors in mutual funds tend to buy the best-performing fund
after it’s had a big year. What they don’t realize is that history virtually dictates that in the next year or two, that fund will probably show much slower
results. If the economy goes into a recession, the results could be poorer
still. Such conditions are usually enough to scare off those with less conviction and those who want to get rich quick.
Some investors switch (usually at the wrong time) to another fund that
someone convinces them is much safer or that has a “hotter” recent performance record. Switching may be OK if you have a really bad fund or if
you’re in the wrong type of fund, but too much switching quickly destroys
what must be a long-term commitment to the benefits of compounding.
America’s long-term future has always been a shrewd investment. The
U.S. stock market has been growing since 1790, and the country will continue to grow in the future, in spite of wars, panics, and deep recessions.
Investing in mutual funds—the right way—is one way to benefit from
America’s growth and to secure your and your family’s long-term, 20-plusyear financial future.

How to Use IBD to Buy ETFs
To be perfectly honest, I’m not a big fan of exchange-traded funds because
I think you can make more money by focusing on the market leaders. But
because ETFs had become so wildly popular with not only individual

How You Could Make Your Million Owning Mutual Funds

investors but also asset managers, we started covering ETFs in February
2006.
