
All Common Stocks Are Speculative and Risky
There is considerable risk in all common stocks, regardless of their name,
quality, purported blue-chip status, previous performance record, or current good earnings. Keep in mind that growth stocks can top at a time when
their earnings are excellent and analysts’ estimates are still rosy.
There are no sure things or safe stocks. Any stock can go down at any time
. . . and you never know how far it can go down.
Every 50% loss began as a 10% or 20% loss. Having the raw courage to
sell and take your loss cheerfully is the only way you can protect yourself
against the possibility of much greater losses. Decision and action should be
instantaneous and simultaneous. To be a big winner, you have to learn to
make decisions. I’ve known at least a dozen educated and otherwise intelligent people who were completely wiped out solely because they would not
sell and cut a loss.
What should you do if a stock gets away from you and the loss becomes
greater than 10%? This can happen to anyone, and it’s an even more critical
sign that the stock positively must be sold. The stock was in more trouble

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . Without Exception

than normal, so it fell faster and further than normal. In the market collapse
of 2000, many new investors lost heavily, and some of them lost it all. If they
had just followed the simple sell rule discussed earlier, they would have protected most of their capital.
In my experience, the stocks that get away from you and produce largerthan-normal losses are the truly awful selections that absolutely must be sold.
Something is really going wrong with either the stock or the whole market,
and it’s even more urgent that the stock be sold to avoid a later catastrophe.
Keep in mind that if you let a stock drop 50%, you must make 100% on
your next stock just to break even! And how often do you buy stocks that
double? You simply can’t afford to sit with a stock where the loss keeps getting worse.
It is a dangerous fallacy to assume that because a stock goes down, it has
to come back up. Many don’t. Others take years to recover. AT&T hit a high
of $75 in 1964 and took 20 years to come back. Also, when the S&P 500 or
Dow declines 20% to 25% in a bear market, many stocks will plummet 60%
to 75%.
If the S&P dives 52%, as it did in 2008, some stocks can fall 80% to 90%.
Who would have projected that General Motors would sell for $2 a share,
down from $94? The auto industry is important to the United States, but it
will require a serious, top-to-bottom restructuring and will possibly have to
go through bankruptcy if it is to survive and compete effectively in the
highly competitive world market. For 14 years, from 1994 to 2008, GM
stock’s relative price strength line declined steadily. What will GM do in the
future if India or China sells cars in the United States that get 50 miles per
gallon and have a much lower price?
The only way to prevent bad stock market losses is to cut them without
hesitation while they’re still small. Always protect your account so that you
can live to invest successfully another day.
In 2000, many new investors incorrectly believed that all you had to do
was buy high-tech stocks on every dip in price because they would always go
back up and there was easy money to be made. This is an amateur’s strategy,
and it almost always leads to heavy losses. Semiconductor and other technology stocks are two to three times as volatile and risky as others. So if
you’re in these stocks, moving rapidly to cut short every loss is even more
essential. If your portfolio is in nothing but high-tech stocks, or if you’re
heavily margined in tech stocks, you are asking for serious trouble if you
don’t cut your losses quickly.
You should never invest on margin unless you’re willing to cut all your
losses quickly. Otherwise, you could go belly-up in no time. If you get a margin call from your broker (when you’re faced with the decision to either sell

245

246 BE SMART FROM THE START
stock or add money to your account to cover the lost equity in a falling
stock), don’t throw good money after bad. Sell some stock, and recognize
what the market and your margin clerk are trying to tell you.

Cutting Losses Is Like Buying an Insurance Policy
This policy of limiting losses is similar to paying insurance premiums. You’re
reducing your risk to precisely the level you’re comfortable with. Yes, the
stock you sell will often turn right around and go back up. And yes, this can
be frustrating. But when this happens, don’t conclude that you were wrong
to sell it. That is exceedingly dangerous thinking that will eventually get you
into big trouble.
Think about it this way: If you bought insurance on your car last year and
you didn’t have an accident, was your money wasted? Will you buy the same
insurance this year? Of course you will! Did you take out fire insurance on
your home or your business? If your home or business hasn’t burned down,
are you upset because you feel that you made a bad financial decision? No.
You don’t buy fire insurance because you know your house is going to burn
down. You buy insurance just in case, to protect yourself against the remote
possibility of a serious loss.
It’s exactly the same for the winning investor who cuts all losses quickly.
It’s the only way to protect against the possible or probable chance of a
much larger loss from which it may not be possible to recover.
If you hesitate and allow a loss to increase to 20%, you will need a 25%
gain just to break even. Wait longer until the stock is down 25%, and you’ll
have to make 33% to get even. Wait still longer until the loss is 33%, and
you’ll have to make 50% to get back to the starting gate. The longer you
wait, the more the math works against you, so don’t vacillate. Move immediately to cut out possible bad decisions. Develop the strict discipline to act
and to always follow your selling rules.
Some people have gone so far as to let losing stocks damage their health. In
this situation, it’s best to sell and stop worrying. I know a stockbroker who in
1961 bought Brunswick at $60 on the way down in price. It had been the market’s super leader since 1957, increasing more than 20 times. When it
dropped to $50, he bought more, and when it dropped to $40, he added again.
When it dropped to $30, he dropped dead on the golf course.
History and human nature keep repeating themselves in the stock market. In the fall of 2000, many investors made the identical mistake: they
bought the prior bull market’s leader, Cisco Systems, on the way down at
$70, $60, $50, and lower, after it had topped at $87. Seven months later it
had sunk to $13, an 80% decline for those who bought at $70. The moral of

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . Without Exception

the story is: never argue with the market. Your health and peace of mind are
always more important than any stock.
Small losses are cheap insurance, and they’re the only insurance you can
buy on your investments. Even if a stock moves up after you sell it, as many
surely will, you will have accomplished your critical objective of keeping all
your losses small, and you’ll still have money to try again for a winner in
another stock.

Take Your Losses Quickly and Your Profits Slowly
There’s an old investment saying that the first loss in the market is the smallest. In my view, the way to make investment decisions is to always (with no
exceptions) take your losses quickly and your profits slowly. Yet most
investors get emotionally confused and take their profits quickly and their
losses slowly.
What is your real risk in any stock you buy when you use the method
we’ve discussed? It’s 8%, no matter what you buy, if you follow this rule religiously. Still, most investors stubbornly ask, “Shouldn’t we sit with stocks
rather than selling and taking a loss?” Or, “How about unusual situations
where some bad news hits suddenly and causes a price decline?” Or, “Does
this loss-cutting procedure apply all the time, or are there exceptions, like
when a company has a good new product?” The answer: there are no exceptions. None of these things changes the situation one bit. You must always
protect your hard-earned pool of capital.
Letting your losses run is the most serious mistake that almost all
investors make. You must accept the fact that mistakes in stock selection and
timing are going to be made frequently, even by the most experienced of
professional investors. I’d go so far as to say that if you aren’t willing to cut
short and limit your losses, you probably shouldn’t buy stocks. Would you
drive your car down the street without brakes? If you were a fighter pilot,
would you go into battle without a parachute?

Should You Average Down in Price?
One of the most unprofessional things a stockbroker can do is hesitate or fail
to call customers whose stocks are down in price. That’s when the customer
needs help the most. Shirking this duty in difficult periods shows a lack of
courage under pressure. About the only thing that’s worse is for brokers to
take themselves off the hook by advising customers to “average down” (buy
more of a stock that is already showing a loss). If I were advised to do this,
I’d close my account and look for a smarter broker.

247

248 BE SMART FROM THE START
Everyone loves to buy stocks; no one loves to sell them. As long as you
hold a stock, you can still hope it might come back up enough to at least get
you out even. Once you sell, you abandon all hope and accept the cold reality of temporary defeat. Investors are always hoping rather than being realistic. Knowing and acting is better than hoping or guessing. The fact that
you want a stock to go up so you can at least get out even has nothing to do
with the action and brutal reality of the market. The market obeys only the
law of supply and demand.
A great trader once noted there are only two emotions in the market:
hope and fear. “The only problem,” he added, “is we hope when we should
fear, and we fear when we should hope.” This is just as true in 2009 as it was
in 1909.

The Turkey Story
Many years ago, I heard a story by Fred C. Kelly, the author of Why You
Win or Lose, that illustrates perfectly how the conventional investor thinks
when the time comes to make a selling decision:
A little boy was walking down the road when he came upon an old man
trying to catch wild turkeys. The man had a turkey trap, a crude device consisting of a big box with the door hinged at the top. This door was kept open
by a prop, to which was tied a piece of twine leading back a hundred feet or
more to the operator. A thin trail of corn scattered along a path lured turkeys
to the box.
Once they were inside, the turkeys found an even more plentiful supply
of corn. When enough turkeys had wandered into the box, the old man
would jerk away the prop and let the door fall shut. Having once shut the
door, he couldn’t open it again without going up to the box, and this would
scare away any turkeys that were lurking outside. The time to pull away the
prop was when as many turkeys as one could reasonably expect were inside.
One day he had a dozen turkeys in his box. Then one sauntered out, leaving 11. “Gosh, I wish I had pulled the string when all 12 were there,” said the
old man. “I’ll wait a minute and maybe the other one will go back.” While he
waited for the twelfth turkey to return, two more walked out on him. “I
should have been satisfied with 11,” the trapper said. “Just as soon as I get
one more back, I’ll pull the string.” Three more walked out, and still the man
waited. Having once had 12 turkeys, he disliked going home with less than 8.
He couldn’t give up the idea that some of the original turkeys would
return. When finally there was only one turkey left in the trap, he said, “I’ll
wait until he walks out or another goes in, and then I’ll quit.” The solitary
turkey went to join the others, and the man returned empty-handed.

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . Without Exception

The psychology of normal investors is not much different. They hope
more turkeys will return to the box when they should fear that all the
turkeys could walk out and they’ll be left with nothing.

How the Typical Investor Thinks
If you’re a typical investor, you probably keep records of your transactions.
When you think about selling a stock, you probably look at your records to
see what price you paid for it. If you have a profit, you may sell, but if you
have a loss, you tend to wait. After all, you didn’t invest in the market to lose
money. However, what you should be doing is selling your worst-performing
stock first. Keep your flower patch free of weeds.
You may decide to sell your shares in Myriad Genetics, for example,
because it shows a nice profit, but you’ll keep your General Electric because
it still has a ways to go before it’s back to the price you paid for it. If this is
the way you think, you’re suffering from the “price-paid bias” that afflicts
95% of all investors.
Suppose you bought a stock two years ago at $30, and it’s now worth $34.
Most investors would sell it because they have a profit. But what does the
price you paid two years ago have to do with what the stock is worth now?
And what does it have to do with whether you should hold or sell the stock?
The key is the relative performance of this stock versus others you either
own or could potentially own.

Analyzing Your Activities
To help you avoid the price-paid bias, particularly if you are a longer-term
investor, I suggest you use a different method of analyzing your results. At
the end of each month or quarter, compute the percentage change in the
price of each stock from the last date you did this type of analysis. Now list
your investments in order of their relative price performance since your
previous evaluation period. Let’s say Caterpillar is down 6%, ITT is up 10%,
and General Electric is down 10%. Your list would start with ITT on top,
then Caterpillar, then GE. At the end of the next month or quarter, do the
same thing. After a few reviews, you will easily recognize the stocks that are
not doing well. They’ll be at the bottom of the list; those that did best will be
at or near the top.
This method isn’t foolproof, but it does force you to focus your attention
not on what you paid for your stocks, but on the relative performance of
your investments in the market. It will help you maintain a clearer perspective. Of course, you have to keep records of your costs for tax reasons, but

249

250 BE SMART FROM THE START
you should use this more realistic method in the longer-term management
of your portfolio. Doing this more often than once a quarter can only help
you. Eliminating the price-paid bias can be profitable and rewarding.
Any time you make a commitment to a security, you should also determine the potential profit and possible loss. This is only logical. You wouldn’t
buy a stock if there were a potential profit of 20% and a potential loss of
80%, would you? But if you don’t try to define these factors and operate by
well-thought-out rules, how do you know this isn’t the situation when you
make your stock purchase? Do you have specific selling rules you’ve written
down and follow, or are you flying blind?
I suggest you write down the price at which you expect to sell if you
have a loss (8% or less below your purchase price) along with the expected
profit potential of all the securities you purchase. For instance, you might
consider selling your growth stock when its P/E ratio increases 100% or
more from the time the stock originally began its big move out of its initial
base pattern.
If you write these numbers down, you’ll more easily see when the stock
has reached one of these levels.
It’s bad business to base your sell decisions on your cost and hold stocks
down in price simply because you can’t accept the fact you made an imprudent selection and lost money. In fact, you’re making the exact opposite decisions from those you would make if you were running your own business.

The Red Dress Story
Investing in the stock market is really no different from running your
own business. Investing is a business and should be operated as such.
Assume that you own a small store selling women’s clothing. You’ve
bought and stocked women’s dresses in three colors: yellow, green, and
red. The red dresses go quickly, half the green ones sell, and the yellows
don’t sell at all.
What do you do about it? Do you go to your buyer and say, “The red
dresses are all sold out. The yellow ones don’t seem to have any demand, but
I still think they’re good. Besides, yellow is my favorite color, so let’s buy
some more of them anyway”?
Certainly not!
The clever merchandiser who survives in the retail business looks at this
predicament objectively and says, “We sure made a mistake. We’d better get
rid of the yellow dresses. Let’s have a sale. Mark them down 10%. If they
don’t sell at that price, mark them down 20%. Let’s get our money out of
those ‘old dogs’ no one wants, and put it into more of the hot-moving red

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . Without Exception

dresses that are in demand.” This is common sense in any retail business.
Do you do this with your investments? Why not?
Everyone makes buying errors. The buyers for department stores are
pros, but even they make mistakes. If you do slip up, recognize it, sell, and
go on to the next thing. You don’t have to be correct on all your investment
decisions to make a good net profit.
Now you know the real secret to reducing your risk and selecting the best
stocks: stop counting your turkeys and get rid of your yellow dresses!

Are You a Speculator or an Investor?
There are two often-misunderstood words that are used to describe the
kinds of people who participate in the stock market: speculator and investor.
When you think of the word speculator, you might think of someone who
takes big risks, gambling on the future success of a stock. Conversely, when
you think of the word investor, you might think of someone who approaches
the stock market in a sensible and rational manner. According to these conventional definitions, you may think it’s smarter to be an investor.
Baruch, however, defined speculator as follows: “The word speculator
comes from the Latin ‘speculari,’ which means to spy and observe. A speculator, therefore, is a person who observes and acts before [the future]
occurs.” This is precisely what you should be doing: watching the market
and individual stocks to determine what they’re doing now, and then acting
on that information.
Jesse Livermore, another stock market legend, defined investor this way:
“Investors are the big gamblers. They make a bet, stay with it, and if it goes
wrong, they lose it all.” After reading this far, you should already know this is
not the proper way to invest. There’s no such thing as a long-term investment
once a stock drops into the loss column and you’re down 8% below your cost.
These definitions are a bit different from those you’ll read in Webster’s
Dictionary, but they are far more accurate. Keep in mind that Baruch and
Livermore at many times made millions of dollars in the stock market. I’m
not sure about lexicographers.
One of my goals is to get you to question many of the faulty investment
ideas, beliefs, and methods that you’ve heard about or used in the past. One
of these is the very notion of what it means to invest. It’s unbelievable how
much erroneous information about the stock market, how it works, and how
to succeed at it is out there. Learn to objectively analyze all the relevant
facts about a stock and about how the market is behaving. Stop listening to
and being influenced by friends, associates, and the continuous array of
experts’ personal opinions on daily TV shows.

251

252 BE SMART FROM THE START
For Safety, Why Not Diversify Widely?
Wide diversification is a substitute for lack of knowledge. It sounds good,
and it’s what most people advise. But in a bad bear market, almost all of your
stocks will go down, and you could lose 50% percent or more in some stocks
that will never come back. So diversification is a poor substitute for a sound
defensive plan with rules to protect your account. Also, if you have 20 or 30
stocks and you sell 3 or 4, it won’t help you when you lose heavily on the rest.

“I’m Not Worried; I’m a Long-Term Investor,
and I’m Still Getting My Dividends”
It’s also risky and possibly foolish to say to yourself, “I’m not worried about
my stocks being down because they are good stocks, and I’m still getting my
dividends.” Good stocks bought at the wrong time can go down as much as
poor stocks, and it’s possible they might not be such good stocks in the first
place. It may just be your personal opinion they’re good.
Furthermore, if a stock is down 35% in value, isn’t it rather absurd to say
you’re all right because you are getting a 4% dividend yield? A 35% loss plus
a 4% income gain equals a whopping 31% net loss.
To be a successful investor, you must face facts and stop rationalizing and
hoping. No one emotionally wants to take losses, but to increase your
chances of success in the stock market, you have to do many things you don’t
want to do. Develop precise rules and hard-nosed selling disciplines, and
you’ll gain a major advantage.

Never Lose Your Confidence
There’s one last critical reason for you to take losses before they have a
chance to really hurt you: never lose your courage to make decisions in the
future. If you don’t sell to cut your losses when you begin to get into trouble, you can easily lose the confidence you’ll need to make buy and sell decisions in the future. Or, far worse, you can get so discouraged that you finally
throw in the towel and get out of the market, never realizing what you did
wrong, never correcting your faulty procedures, and giving up all the future
potential the stock market—one of the most outstanding opportunities in
America—has to offer.
Wall Street is human nature on daily display. Buying and selling stocks
properly and making a net profit are always a complicated affair. Human
nature being what it is, 90% of people in the stock market—professionals
and amateurs alike—simply haven’t done much homework. They haven’t

When You Must Sell and Cut Every Loss . . . Without Exception
