that isn’t ripe and get shaken out just before the pattern does
exactly what you expected.
5. Being late. You’re unable or unwilling to pull the trigger on a
great setup, because you’re waiting to see what everyone else
does. As it turns out, everyone else is ready to get out by the time
you’re ready to get in.
6. Bullishness. You think the market is ready to go up after every
leg down, forgetting that real buyers can be real hard to find at
times.
7. Bearishness. You spend more time listening to doomsayers than
reading the charts and miss buying opportunities, even when
they’re smacking you across the face.
8. Ignoring gravity. Markets go down when they can’t find buyers,
regardless of how few sellers are out there at the time.
9. Forgetting the big picture. You get so wrapped up in current
events that you forget to step back and check out the weekly or
monthly charts.
10. Forgetting the little picture. You confuse macro events with
micro plays and let the big picture obscure what’s right in front
of your nose.
11. Fear of the squeeze. The squeeze crushes short sellers in the
early phases of downtrends, but your anxiety is misplaced when
negative momentum replaces a two-sided tape.
12. Last to the party. The fear of missing out overcomes your better
judgment, and you jump in. The trend ends immediately, and
you’re stuck holding the bag.
13. Margin fever. You have a small account but want to be a big
player, so you overtrade margin and get into a heap of trouble.

PART SIX

274

Managing Risk and Reward

14. Getting even. You lose money and vow to get it back the next
day or next week. Bad move, Charlie Brown, because you’ve just
abandoned your trading plan.
15. Listening to pundits. You shoot yourself in the foot because you
let someone else tell you what to buy or sell.
16. The agony and the ecstasy. Pleasure makes you feel like Mr.
Market, setting you up for a big fall, while pain attracts positions
you don’t want and can’t control.
17. Chasing the open. You go to bed so excited that you can’t wait
for the next day’s opening bell. Guess what? You’ve just put a big
target on your back.
18. Software fever. Pretty colors can’t make you a better trader, but
they can make you a poorer one. Sadly, kilobytes are no cure for
a lack of skills.
19. Lottery ticket. How often do you carry a position into an earnings
report, hoping to get a pop from the news? Hmm, I thought so.
20. Counting your chickens. You forget that profits on open trades
aren’t real until you put the green into your pocket.

Drawdowns
Drawdowns trigger all sorts of psychological and logistical issues. For
starters, it’s hard to trade after incurring a series of losses because the
assault of red ink undermines our confidence, making us second-guess the
strategies that worked so well in the past. Simply stated, this commonly
shared pain is a wake-up call to adjust our approach and to reduce risk
exposure. Even the best traders can’t avoid drawdowns because losing
streaks are a natural outcome of playing the financial markets. Of course,
it’s doubtful that this piece of wisdom will make you feel any better the
next time the market is beating you up.
The trader needs to regain emotional control quickly during a
drawdown period and maintain a positive attitude about losing money. I
know this is hard to accomplish in real time, but despair and profit rarely
travel together, and it’s very easy to turn a string of moderate losses into
a full-blown disaster. Strategic adjustments to your methodology will also
quell the emotional fires. At the top of the list: reduce position size and
don’t try to recoup your losses in one high-risk trade. Smaller positions let
beaten-down traders get their minds back into harmony with the market

CHAPTER 11

The Nature of Losing

275

flow. Obviously, the reduced profits can’t undo the prior damage, but they
will help to reestablish the methods and workflows that paid your bills in
the past.
Drawdown periods force traders to experience a level of impotence
that can be very frightening. You might discover your assumed profitability came during a period when everyone else was making money and
then realize those happier times induced ego gratification and a false belief
you had become a gunslinger. That particular wake-up call has two equal
and opposite outcomes. First, it can force the marginal trader to wash out
of the markets and move on to a safer hobby. Second, it can motivate the
serious-minded trader to fathom how the markets really work and what it
takes to survive in all types of environments, good and bad.
Identify your “fail-safe” drawdown level early in your career. This
is the maximum amount you’re willing to lose before turning off your
screen and walking away from the market. This hiatus need not be permanent. Rather, it’s a physical recognition that things have gone wrong
and a period of self-analysis is required before taking on fresh risk. This
vacation from the market lets weakened traders examine personal issues
that may be hidden in the heat of day-to-day battle. It also gets them into
bed at night without fresh losses weighing on their minds. Indeed, this
abstinence often ends the drawdown cycle and fosters instant success
when they finally return to the action.
The pain of a drawdown will turn you into a more profitable trader
if you listen closely and adapt quickly to its embedded messages. But the
same pain can easily destroy your financial ambitions if you choose to
ignore the wake-up call. The bottom line: do you want to fight the market
and your personality, or do you want to make money? The key difference
between good traders and bad traders is how they turn their drawdowns
into acts of personal power or personal misery. Let’s face it. We’re all
shocked to find out we’re mere mortals when the tables turn and we start
to take big losses, but the experience exposes us to the truth serum we
need to survive and prosper in the long term.
Many traders blame drawdowns on everything except their failure
to recognize and respond to a changing market environment. This is
pure denial because we have tremendous input on our losing streaks.
At any time we can lower position size, trade less frequently, or just sit
on our hands until the odds are back in our favor. Instead, many folks
just ignore the danger and keep throwing money at strategies that have
stopped working. This self-inflicted pain usually doesn’t stop until they
finally incur enough losses that reality gets into their thick heads and tells

276

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

them things have gone horribly wrong. Ironically, these individuals fully
understand the performance cycle but still believe the giveback phase will
magically disappear over time. Sadly, they don’t realize this stumbling
block, exemplified in the yo-yo trader, marks a final obstacle that can limit
profitability for the rest of their careers, no matter how much they pray to
the trading gods for relief.

Self-Destruction
It’s tough enough to trade successfully when hidden forces are picking our
pockets each day, but it’s even tougher when we get sidetracked by selfdestructive habits. That’s why we need to identify and control inappropriate behavior that bleeds into the trading day and sets us up for failure.
This cleansing process starts by recognizing when delusion replaces reality
in our daily mindset. Consider these warning signs. Do you think you’re
losing money because the market is rigged? Do you believe you’d be profitable if the brokers, computer programs, and hedge funds would just get
out of your way? Do you think your losses stem from the opinions of a
guru, analyst, or talking head, rather than from your own actions?
At its core, trading is a process of awakening to your personal
power. This can be an impossible leap after years of playing the blame
game because you’ve abdicated your control to a conspiracy theory
or a rigged deck. The damage done by this self-sabotage can be brutal
and widespread. The only way to climb out of this dark hole is through
tortuous self-examination that begins with detailed record keeping, so
you can go back and reconstruct your motives for each trade. Indeed, one
of the hallmarks of destructive trading is poor record keeping because the
lack of a personal history allows the trader to prolong the actions that lead
to destructive outcomes. Unconsciously, most of these individuals don’t
want to change how they’re playing the markets because the bad behavior
gives them all sorts of secondary reinforcement. In a perverse way, the
endless losses become a major addiction that’s hard to break.
Destructive trading usually revolves through an insidious cycle.
First, the trader enjoys a series of profitable days and starts to recover
lost equity. Mental attitude improves, and self-confidence makes a return
appearance. Then danger reappears in the form of a toxic position that
looks benign at first glance. The improved mental state now works against

CHAPTER 11

The Nature of Losing

277

the trader who fails to note the hidden risks. A worst-case scenario then
kicks in, with a devastating loss that hurls the trader over the cliff and
back down to planet earth.
You can also defeat this monster by focusing religiously on the loss
side of the equation rather than worrying about profitability. In other
words, your daily efforts should incorporate a spectrum of self-checks
and loss avoidance techniques. These include limiting total entries to the
absolute minimum, reducing position size on each trade, and placing
rigorous stop losses. Supplement these techniques by choosing shutdown
levels to incorporate into your overall strategies. For example, you might
decide that $250 is the maximum loss you’re willing to incur for all trades
on a given day. Close out everything once that level is hit, and walk away
for the rest of the day. This is tough love because destructive traders get
needed proof about their personal inadequacies at each downturn of the
equity curve, which raises an unconscious desire for more losses.
Those who ultimately find success in the markets emulate those who
are already successful. So what do consistently profitable traders look
like? They’re normal, well-balanced, and content individuals who have
mastered the highs and lows of their profession. They lose money but
don’t get depressed, make it but don’t become elated, and keep a colder
heart toward their discipline than you might expect. Above all else, these
individuals play their own games and don’t really care what the rest of us
are doing, because they already know exactly what they want to do. Over
time, they’ve learned to coexist peacefully with their trading demons and
never blame anyone but themselves when things go wrong.

Washing Out
Playing the markets is a difficult way to pay the bills, but you’re drawn
to it anyway because staying at home and working in your pajamas is
living the capitalist dream. But this discipline is not for everyone. No
one is printing money, and the majority of traders will eventually wash
out and move on to other hobbies long before they spend quality time in
their jammies.
Emotions, physical health, and your pocketbook are the best places
to look if you’re thinking about giving up and walking away. Trading is
real hard work that raises blood pressure, anger management issues, and

278

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

all kinds of self-doubt. A certain amount of stress goes with the territory,
but it’s time to find a new recreational pursuit when physical symptoms
start to overrun body chemistry. There’s no benchmark for bottom-line
capitalization or drawdown size before washing out, so red ink might not
push you to the sidelines. Paradoxically, many folks lose a fortune trying
to make a buck but continue to trade anyway, while others cry uncle and
call it a day after burning through a few pennies or dimes.
Each of us has different reasons for playing the markets, so no single
overriding flaw seals the fate of the unsuccessful trader. In the end, only
brutal honesty and self-examination will tell you when it’s the right time
to go. Of course, you should already know whether or not you have the
talent to trade successfully. This is a wholly different issue from examining
the fate of your bottom line. Great traders may not achieve greatness in
their first few years of trading, but they get a market sense they can taste
and touch very early in the learning curve.
Here are 10 more ways you can tell if it’s the right time to call
it quits:
1. Everyone needs trading rules. The ones you write down should
include a loss limit where you’ll take a permanent vacation.
2. Examine every one of your losing trades, and then quit the game
immediately if you can’t learn anything new.
3. Talk to your spouse, kids, and family pets. If any of them show
physical distress because of your trading, cancel your subscription to the Wall Street Journal.
4. Do you see trading as a form of entertainment? The truth is that
most of the time, trading is no fun at all. If you want fun, quit
trading and join a rock band.
5. Ask yourself how badly you want to trade. If you see yourself
doing this for the rest of your life, stay in the markets and take
the pain.
6. Trade to the point where you’re following all of your rules but
still losing money. Then decide whether it’s your rules or your
trading that needs to go.
7. Just quit and forget about the markets, right this minute. If that
makes you crazy, start trading again because you were on the
right path in the first place.
8. How much can you really afford to lose? Head for the exits if that
number is coming at you like headlights on a dark road.

CHAPTER 11

The Nature of Losing

279

9. Brutal honesty and self-examination will tell you when it’s time
to go. Is this just a bad year, or is every year just another bad
year?
10. Do you have a history of success when taking risk, or is your life
a string of misfortunes, misdeeds, and misfires? If the latter, get
out before you crash and burn.

This page intentionally left blank

12

C

H

A

P

TE

R

Capital Preservation

W

hy do great trade setups fail, while lousy ones move in our favor?
The answer is simple, yet quite frustrating. Trading is an odds game
in which anything can happen at any time. In other words, price will go
where price wants to go, no matter how hard we hit the books, study the
charts, or pray to the deities. So rather than searching for the perfect trade
that works 100% of the time, we’re much better off stepping back and
learning how to control risk. This is a tough task because, as odd as it
sounds, many of us don’t understand the nature of risk in the first place.
Take this little quiz:
• Do you still buy how-to books, even though you’ve been trading
for years?
• Do you sit in miserable losses because you hate to be wrong?
• Do you reject classic market wisdom because it cost you a few
bucks long ago?

281

282

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

If you answered “yes” to any of these questions, you probably don’t
understand how risk really impacts your profit and loss statement.
Calculate reward:risk before every trade, letting those numbers and
conditions guide position management from entry to final exit. To reiterate
a key point in Part Three, price close to substantial support identifies a
low-risk long-side setup. Price close to substantial resistance identifies a
low-risk short-sale setup. The distance between your trade entry and the
next obstacle within your holding period measures the reward and
intended exit. The distance between your trade entry and the price that
breaks the setup measures the risk and unintended exit. Survivalist
traders put the odds firmly in their favor by taking trades with high reward
and low risk.
The best swing trades exit in wild times, just as the trend approaches
a strong barrier. Reward planning seeks discovery of this optimum price
prior to position entry. This profit target sits at a level where risk will
increase dramatically if and when the trend strikes it. Traders should exit
immediately when this profit target gets hit, or at least place a stop that
locks in partial profits in case of a reversal. Conversely, every setup has
a failure target, or the price that busts the trade. The best entries require
just a small wiggle to signal a bad outcome and the need to jump ship.
You’ll find these decision points just behind the convergence of supportresistance, like a violated moving average, a broken triangle, and a filled
gap. The failure target changes dynamically after position entry, so you
need to consider the impact of the last bar on evolving reward:risk and
adjust the plan accordingly.
In Figure 12.1, Senior Housing Properties Trust sells off to 18 after
a strong uptrend. It bounces to the 50% selloff retracement (1) and ticks
lower in a 60-minute bull flag pattern. The stock gets upgraded prior to
the open on August 27, triggering a breakout that pulls back to flag support (2) and then surges to a new daily high (3). The profit target lies at
the 100% selloff retracement (4) in this scenario, while the failure target
is located under the gap fill (5) within the bull flag, because a selloff into
that level would signal a failed breakout. The reward:risk computes to a
favorable 9:1 ratio. Of course, the stock might turn at the 62% retracement
(6), which marks mild resistance, but the daily pattern shows wide open
Bollinger Bands (not shown) into 21.75, predicting the rally could reach the
early August high with little difficulty. In either case, the trader can manage
the profitable position proactively, depending on real time feedback
after entry.

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

F I G U R E

283

12.1

Senior Housing Properties Trust breakout.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

Risk management starts with the acute realization that the market is
a very dangerous place. Once we comprehend this fact of life, the actions
we need to take in order to survive become more intuitive. Before assuming new risk, take a moment to look in the mirror and ask yourself what
you’re going to lose if things go bad. You’ll be amazed how this simple
inquiry can open the door to opportunities you can’t see when focused
solely on the profit side of the equations. For example, a seemingly marginal
trade becomes a fantastic position if there’s practically no risk in jumping
on board.

284

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

Determine the exact dollar figure that represents the maximum loss
you’re willing to take on a single trade. Then do the math and make sure
your exposure won’t exceed this magic number, except after a shock event.
If things don’t add up, stand aside and wait for less risk or reduce your
position size. You can also dip your toe in the water with a small position
when you’re not sure what kind of risk you’re taking on and add to the
trade once the small piece eases into a profit. Then just focus on keeping
the total position as a “free trade,” regardless of the original pattern. The
bottom line: fantastic things can happen when there’s no money to lose.
Place profit and failure targets in the ideal world, but trade in the real
world. It’s easy to ruin a great position by asking too much of it, so feel
free to abandon your targets if market conditions change. For example, it
makes no sense to risk a profit trying to squeeze the last few pennies out
of a good trade. Also keep in mind that the market goes into trend mode
a few days each month. Price bars can slice through support or resistance
levels like butter in those one-way sessions and trigger stops faster than
a game of Whack-a-Mole. Use common sense when you’re caught on the
wrong side of a trend day and get out of the way, whether or not your
profit targets have been reached.
Exit your trades to book profits, take losses, or close mediocre
positions. Emotions usually run high at both profit and failure targets,
so take a deep breath and clear your mind before choosing to close out
a position. Take your profits early or late, but never in between. For
example, you get your trend and are looking for a big winner, but the
market then stalls out and threatens to reverse. You have two workable
choices: (a) take your money right away, or (b) sit on your hands through
the pullback. Unfortunately, many folks find themselves in the third
and unworkable choice, i.e., they panic on the retracement and exit at
the worst possible time, just before the position recovers. Most traders
want validation for their ideas, so they wait to see what other traders
are doing before they act. This is a great way to become a bag holder on
every position. Instead, close the time and sales ticker and focus your
undivided attention on the trigger numbers where you should be in or out
of the position.
Finally, develop a basket mentality. Your capacity for risk increases
dramatically when you manage positions as a group rather than fretting
over individual winners and losers. Start the day by considering how much
total exposure you want to take on or eliminate during that session, i.e.,
your collar. Then initiate the required action across all of your positions
and accounts to meet that objective.

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

285

Trade Collaring
The financial markets cycle through phases of opportunity and danger,
with pattern cycles pointing out the true nature of the current stage. With
this in mind, it doesn’t make sense to play a tightly converged trend using
the same strategy you would use for a choppy and divergent range. Collaring recognizes these behavioral shifts and adapts the trading plan to
match short-term risk characteristics.
A trade collar is just like the one you put on your dog to keep him
in check:
• Keep the market on a tight leash when risk is high and opportunities are tough to find.
• Loosen the collar and let positions “run free” when the market is
trending, with a single-minded goal of ramping from one price
level to another.
In other words, be aggressive in times of the greatest opportunity and
defensive in times of the greatest danger. The collaring process works best
when traders make small adjustments each morning in response to that
day’s reward:risk profile. But longer-term collaring is just as important
in building the right exposure to major position trades and even multiyear investment portfolios. The collar signals when to let profits run and
when it’s the worst thing you can do. It also defines the right financial
instruments to trade at any point in time. For example, it makes sense to
play volatile small caps when the collar is loose and the market is printing
money, but then stick with low beta issues and dividend plays when visibility is low and nasty reversals are the rule of the day.
Let’s define the characteristics of an opportunistic market that
demands more aggressive trade collaring. It starts with the index futures,
which need to be trending higher or lower, in lockstep. Daily performance
might vary, but these markets need to show nearly identical positioning in their current pattern cycles. This goes back to the issue of context.
Ask yourself the following question: where are the indices trading in
relation to big highs and lows as well as to charting landscape features
like gaps, hammers, and retracements? Just like profit targeting, few
obstacles on the index futures up to the next resistance level or down to
the next support level increase the odds of a strong trend into that magnetic price.
