
118

CHAPTER 12

The Dynamics of
Goal Achievement

The extent to which we fulfill our needs and achieve our goals with any
degree of satisfaction is, first, a function of our being able to recognize our
needs and formulate our goals. This is not as simple as it sounds. Our
natural sense of curiosity and our attractions are very powerful inner forces
that create a state of need or put us in a state of imbalance with the
physical environment until the needs are satisfied. When we feel these
attractions to certain activities, people, or objects in the environment, it is
often difficult to visualize the possibilities or formulate any plans because
of other inner forces in the form of beliefs, associations, or memories that
act as barriers. We need to understand the relationship and possible
conflicts between what we need or feel very attracted to and these other
inner forces that in a sense say no.
The extent to which we fulfill our needs and achieve our goals with any
degree of satisfaction is, second, a function of the degree to which we
understand the nature of the external environmental forces we have to
interact with to fulfill our needs and achieve our goals. (The depth of our
understanding will correlate directly with the way in which we express
ourselves in the environment to create the effect that we want.) Third, it is
a function of the repertoire of skills that we have developed to interact with
the environment and, fourth, a function of our ability to execute those
skills.
Any differences between what we wanted, expected, desired, or needed
and what we got is simply an indication of the degree to which we haven't
learned what we needed to know or evidence that we don't have the
119

appropriate skills to do what needed to be done. Included as a factor in the
first category—where we haven't learned what we needed to know—is our
ability or lack thereof to objectively (without illusion) assess the availability
of what we wanted or needed from the environment's perspective. In other
words, what we wanted may have not been available to begin with or
available in the quantity we wanted or in the time frame we wanted or
needed, and we didn't have the mental framework to make the kinds of
distinctions to indicate the actual availability beforehand.
We also have to consider that what we wanted may have actually been
available but unperceivable, as a result of not having learned to make the
appropriate distinctions, which would, in turn, give us the kind of
perspective where we could notice its availability. In these kinds of
situations we usually end up saying to ourselves, "I wish," or "If only I had
known that then," when we find out afterward what we didn't know at the
time would have made a difference on how we "saw" things. Often,
however, we never find out that what we wanted and didn't get was only
one minor shift in perspective. Not knowing, of course, that the reason
why we didn't get it was because we just didn't know there was something
more we needed to learn. If we had the mental framework to make the
appropriate distinctions, we can assume that we would have, unless
something was blocking our perception.
I might add here that when we interact with other people, if we use force
and manipulation to get what otherwise would be unavailable, what we are
doing is forcing them to behave outside of their beliefs. If their beliefs were
consistent with what we wanted from them, then we wouldn't need to use
force or manipulation because a state of harmony would exist. We don't
need to use force or manipulation on someone to do something that they
already believe in. Whenever we do, it creates a state of imbalance in them
that they would normally rectify by some means of revenge that we would
just have to deal with at some point in the future. As a general observation
of the human condition that goes along with this, most of us spend our
lives trying to change what is in front of us to suit the makeup of our inner
environment, when all we need to do is change the way we think about what
is in front of us and we will change the quality of our experience of it.
In the second category—where we don't have the appropriate skills to
do what needed to be done—we may recognize the most appropriate set of
steps to take and also objectively assess the availability of what we want,
but that doesn't mean that we have the skills to execute those steps. It is
possible to underestimate the skills required in relation to the conditions to
accomplish what we want (i.e., we don't know any better) or we could
overestimate our abilities in relation to the conditions. Furthermore, even
if we have learned the appropriate skills, there may be any number of beliefs
or fears that act as barriers or limiting forces that will prevent us from
properly executing the steps leading to what we want to accomplish. These
beliefs or fears can be something that we have a conscious awareness of, or
120

they can be completely subconscious. I am defining subconscious as any
experience that we don't have immediate access to with our conscious
thought process. For example, someone could be afraid of going into the
water, be conscious of the fear itself, but not have the slightest recollection
of a painful experience associated with water to know why he can't
express himself in that way.
There is a very important distinction here that you need to make between
recollection and memories. What we experience in the environment
becomes a memory. Our ability to bring that memory into our conscious
thought process is recollection. Some memories are easy to recall because
the pathways to wherever the memory is stored are used a lot. In other
words, we remember how to remember certain memories. However, there
are many other experiences that become subconscious. These are memories
that we have either forgotten how to remember because we don't use the
pathways or we were never really fully aware of what was being perceived
by our senses in the first place. However, the point here is that none of
what goes in to the mental environment disappears or no longer exists just
because we don't remember it. Our ability to recall consciously any
particular belief that we are taught as a child or our ability to recall any
particular experience is not a factor in the dynamics of how any of these
mental components act as a force on our behavior. Neither is physical clock
time for that matter. Our conscious recollection of experiences may fade
with time, but time has no impact on the electrical charge (quality of
energy) or the amount of emotional force behind the charge. For example,
the old adage that time heals all wounds is not applicable to the mental
environment. Time will heal wounds to the body because the body is a part
of a physical reality where everything is in motion and changing over time.
However, time has no impact on the memories stored in our mental
environment because the mental environment is not composed of physical
matter. It is composed of stored energy that does not change with the
passing of time.
Emotional wounds (negatively charged mental energy) will never go
away unless we learn how to release ourselves from them or change them.
People think time heals emotional wounds, because after years of
experiences they either inadvertently let go of the pain or build a system of
beliefs as a defense to shield themselves from it. In fact, our seemingly
infinite capacity to resist acknowledging the injury and hiding the effects of
emotional wounds makes them very elusive. We almost always know when
we have injured our bodies in some way. If you break your leg, you know it
because you won't be able to walk. If it doesn't heal properly, you will
know that too because you won't be able to walk the same as before or it
may still hurt to walk. Yet, emotional wounds are not always so self-evident,
because we can always structure our beliefs to make it seem as if we are not
responsible for the cycles of dissatisfaction and emotional pain we
experience in our lives, thus insulating ourselves from the effects of our
121

own negatively charged energy.
This is being pointed out because I have found that most people have a
great deal of difficulty believing that something that happened to them in
their childhood can still affect how they perceive their environment and
how they express themselves now. Although, when you think about it, how
could it be any other way? Everything that we experience becomes a
component part of our mental environment. All the parts then act as an
inner cause, affecting how we experience the outside environment. Again,
we don't have to be able to remember why we learned to be afraid of
something to feel the fear. We don't even have to consciously
acknowledge to ourselves that the fear exists because we can always
rationalize that it is something else or use drugs or alcohol to block our
awareness of it. However, regardless of how hard we try to stop ourselves
from feeling what is inside of us, the feelings are still there; otherwise our
efforts to block them wouldn't be necessary in the first place. The fear will
exist because the energy, somewhere in our memory of some previous
experience, will cause us to feel it, regardless of whether or not we allow
ourselves to have a recollection of the source.
Memories, beliefs, and associations do not go away with time, substance
abuse, or trying to put them somewhere in the subconscious that makes it
more difficult to gain a conscious awareness. They will continue to act as a
source of energy for the way in which we pick and choose information from
the environment and how we express ourselves, for as long as we live,
unless we learn how to manage them. Did you ever wonder why it was so
difficult to break an unwanted habit or why it can be so difficult to execute
some well-thought-out plan you were really committed to? It is difficult
because of what is already inside of us that acts as resistance to our intent.
An intent to do something is not necessarily a belief. In other words, out of
everything we intend to do, some of those intentions will be supported by
our beliefs, memories, and associations, and some will not. When there is
support, our efforts will seem effortless, because there is no conflict
between any beliefs, memories, and associations and what we intend to do.
However, if our intents are not in harmony with our beliefs, memories, or
associations, doing becomes a struggle, where we can't stay focused,
become easily distracted, or make what most people would characterize as
"stupid mistakes."
Take, for example, someone who smokes, decides it's a bad habit, and as
a result, commits himself to quitting. Thus his intent is to express himself
as a nonsmoker. However, after he has smoked his last cigarette, his beliefs
in being a smoker will immediately start drawing his attention to cigarettes
until it builds to the point where he craves a cigarette and then has one. What
we have here is a classic conflict between an intent that is not only in
conflict with other beliefs but the intent itself has no real structural
support. That is, there isn't a corollary belief that says, "I am a
nonsmoker." The energy for his behavior not to smoke will have to come
122

from his conscious willingness to be a different person in this area of his
life. However, his willingness doesn't instantly negate all the energy in the
beliefs he has built up over the years in being a smoker. These beliefs will
have a great deal of energy to act on his conscious attention (noticing
cigarettes in the environment and thinking about cigarettes) and his
behavior (to pick one up and smoke it).
We could even have inner support (beliefs, memories, and associations)
for what we intend to do and still have difficulties following through with
our plans because of other conflicting beliefs. Behavior that would fall into
the "stupid mistake" category is most often the result of subconscious or
forgotten beliefs that are in direct conflict with our intents. Trading is a
perfect example to illustrate this. Many people devote a great deal of their
time, energy, and financial resources to expressing themselves as traders.
They learn a lot about trading—they are even highly regarded by their peers
for what they know about the market—but still can't execute their trades
properly or the way they planned. There are traders who can consistently
make money day after day until they get to certain threshold levels and then
promptly give all their profits back to the market in one or two trades. The
way they give their money back is completely inconsistent with their trading
style while they were making money. After they have lost a sufficient
amount of money, they go back to the way they normally trade and start the
process all over again. This kind of behavior is no accident. It happens for a
reason.
In each of these situations these traders certainly had developed
effective, workable strategies to be successful—they definitely had some
highly structured beliefs to support their expression as a trader. However,
what they haven't done is identify and decharge a whole host of other
beliefs (both conscious and subconscious) that are in direct conflict with
the endeavor of trading or making money as a trader. For example, there
are many beliefs related to one's religious upbringing that are in direct
conflict with the whole concept of speculating. And what is trading but
taking money away from other traders with no services rendered? This
kind of activity isn't consistent with most religious teachings. Another
typical example is most people grow up with very powerful beliefs related
to the work ethic. They have very rigid definitions about what constitutes
work and how one earns one's money. Trading doesn't exactly fit into most
of these definitions either.
So regardless of how highly developed one's trading strategies become,
the act of trading will still violate the integrity of any belief that is in
conflict with the act of trading or making money from trading. Eventually
the unexpressed energy accumulating in these conflicting beliefs will build
to the point where the trader will find himself behaving in a manner
completely inconsistent with his trading rules or intent to make money.
Often, he will even be aware that he is about to make a trading error, watch
himself do it, and at the same time either feel powerless to stop himself or
123

won't stop himself until he has lost enough money to compensate for the
imbalance in his mental environment.
Now when these kinds of things happen, if we don't understand what is
going on, it could cause us to feel inadequate in some way, if we judge
ourselves harshly. Or we could be overcome by a sense of powerlessness
and fear because we seemingly have no control over these unidentified
internal forces that can exert so much control over our behavior. Without
any awareness of the problem or effective tools for dealing with it, most
people will attempt to build mental barriers to try and block these forces
from manifesting in their behavior. Obviously, they don't work, which
makes the whole situation even scarier. This is where the substance abuse
comes into play. For example, a person who is an alcoholic knows he is a
heavy drinker. At the most fundamental level a person drinks obsessively
to separate his intellect from these inner forces he believes he has no control
over. The more he blocks, the more the forces build and the more he has to
drink to block. The more he drinks, the more everything deteriorates in
his outer environment as a reflection of his inner environment. Eventually,
the physical environment, his body, or both deteriorate so badly that he
can no longer block the true state of his condition. He then acknowledges
that "Yes, I am an alcoholic, and I need to change," meaning that "Yes, I
need to address the issues in my life that caused me to start drinking in the
first place."
The point of all this is: learning how to forget our painful memories or
ignoring the existence of beliefs that don't support our intents does not in
anyway reduce their potential to cause us to behave in certain ways. If we
want to change unwanted behavior, we have to change the internal source of
that behavior. Releasing ourselves from the limitations of our fears by
healing our emotional wounds, changing the polarity of a belief, or
decharging it altogether is something that we have to learn how to do by
learning how to manage mental energy. If people knew of some way of
managing their beliefs, memories, and associations, then the kind of painful
cycles of forced awareness described earlier would never get started in the
first place.
Thus far I have identified three forces in constant operation in our lives.
First are all the external environmental forces that have the potential to act
as a cause, where we, as individuals, experience an effect. Some of these
outside environmental forces we will have some degree of understanding of
and others we will not. Our degree of understanding and insight along with
the extent to which we can act on what we know is directly proportional to
the degree of satisfaction we will experience as we interact with the
environment to fulfill our needs and achieve our goals. Implied within all
the external forces—whether we understand them or not—are all the forces
of change that automatically alter everything made of atoms and molecules
consequently making what we do know—in terms of usefulness—obsolete
at some point in time. For example, the chair you are sitting in to read this
124

book is deteriorating over time. At some point it will no longer be able to
support any weight, making your belief in its stability obsolete.
Second are the deep inner forces of curiosity and attraction that compel
us to explore, learn about, and interact with the environment in seemingly
predetermined ways. For example, there are things that we are naturally
interested in learning about or learning how to do in relationship to all the
other things that are available to learn about in the environment, but we
have no natural interest— like someone who always wanted to be a
musician, fire-fighter, actor, or doctor and pursues these vocations resulting
in feelings of deep satisfaction about their lives. However, if the
environment forces us into areas where there is no natural interest, we will
experience an emptiness that can be very difficult to identify, only that it
feels like something is missing in our lives. What each of us as individuals
is naturally curious about and attracted to in the environment come from
the deepest levels of our existence. They act as very powerful forces of selfexpression, compelling us to create in the physical environment the object
of our imagination or to pursue in the physical environment the object of
our interests, often in direct conflict with outside environmental forces as
well as inner mental forces in the form of what we have been taught to
believe.
Third are the mental forces represented by our beliefs, memories, and
associations. Even though beliefs, memories, and associations are mental
forces, they are not the same as the forces of curiosity and attraction. Beliefs,
memories, and associations exist exclusively as a result of the kinds of
experiences we have with the physical environment. This is in contrast to the
forces of curiosity and attraction that are in us before we are born and
would seem to be either predetermined in a spiritual sense or genetically
encoded. Some of our beliefs, memories, and associations will act as
positive resources for interacting with the physical environment effectively
and with some degree of satisfaction. Others, however, will have just the
opposite effect. Many of our beliefs, memories, and associations are
resources for failure, pain, and dissatisfaction because they lock us into only
perceiving what we already know as well as cutting us off from our natural
sense of curiosity. In other words, they specifically act as forces to prevent
any further mental growth.
Now, since we have to interact with the physical environment to fulfill
our needs and achieve our goals, the key to doing it to assure ourselves of
experiencing greater levels of satisfaction is to acquire deeper levels of
insight and understanding into the nature of these forces. That is, we need
to stay in a constant state of learning. The only thing that really stops us
from continuing to learn about the nature of these outside forces is the
mental forces in the form of beliefs, memories, and associations that build
up and as a result block our natural sense of curiosity, sometimes to the
point of shutting down the learning process altogether.
There is some element of truth to the saying that you can't teach an old
125

dog new tricks, except that it should really read "An old dog won't learn
new tricks." It's not that it is impossible for someone regardless of their
age to learn something new; the issue isn't ability. It is more a matter of
resistance and refusal. That refusal comes from the sum total of
everything we already believe, in essence saying, "Forget it—I already
know everything I need to know." Of course, the consequences to such a
stance toward the environment can be and often are devastating. And it
invariably always takes some truly devastating event or a series of them
before someone who has this kind of attitude will acknowledge that the reason
for their plight is that they just refuse to allow any changes in their mental
environment. Of course, this know-it-all attitude is very easy to recognize in
someone else; the trick is learning how to recognize it ourselves, because it
exists in all of us as a natural function of the ways in which beliefs, memories,
and associations manage information.
To stay in a constant state of learning we need to learn how to adapt. To adapt
we need to learn some specific mental techniques on how to consciously apply
our thoughts to upgrade, modify, replace, or change the polarity (electrical
charge; of various components in our mental environment that act as limiting or
inhibiting forces on our perception and behavior, preventing us from gaining
greater levels of correspondence with the physical environment. By consciously
adapting, we are making ourselves available to learn how to fulfill our needs and
achieve our goals in increasingly more satisfying ways. Note: Implied within
fulfilling our needs and achieving our goals is the need to explore the object of our
curiosities and attractions, which also get blocked by our beliefs, associations,
and memories.
To adapt, we need to choose not to resist learning and change. This requires
a willingness on our part to think outside of the limitations established by our
beliefs, associations, and memories and a willingness to learn how to manage
mental energy so we can release ourselves from the negative effects of our painful
memories. When we learn how to change the polarity of a painful memory, it
isn't painful any longer. When the memory is decharged or drained of the
negatively charged energy, it will no longer have the potential to generate fear.
Fear always limits the number of choices we perceive as available from the
environment by the way it causes us to focus our attention on the object of our
fear. The net effect is we end up creating for ourselves exactly what we are
trying to avoid. It is important for you to note that, when we change the
polarity of a memory, it doesn't actually change the structure of the memory. In
other words, we don't forget the experience, so we can still use it as a part of
our repertoire of what we know about the nature of the physical environment.
When we change the quality of energy of a memory from negative to positive,
we negate the memory's potential to generate fear, thereby allowing us to
perceive all the other choices for experience available from the environment in the same moment.
Preferably this willingness to change will come from somewhere other
than out of desperation. The idea is to learn how to recognize what we need
126

