OPTION SPREAD
STRATEGIES

Also by
ANTHONY J. SALIBA
with Joseph C. Corona and Karen E. Johnson
Option Strategies for Directionless Markets:
Trading with Butterflies, Iron Butterflies, and Condors

Related titles also available from Bloomberg Press
BLOOMBERG MARKET ESSENTIALS: TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Fibonacci Analysis
by Constance Brown
DeMark Indicators
by Jason Perl

Breakthroughs in Technical Analysis:
New Thinking from the World’s Top Minds
edited by David Keller
New Insights on Covered Call Writing:
The Powerful Technique That Enhances Return
and Lowers Risk in Stock Investing
by Richard Lehman and Lawrence G. McMillan
New Thinking in Technical Analysis:
Trading Models from the Masters
edited by Rick Bensignor
Trading ETFs:
Gaining an Edge with Technical Analysis
by Deron Wagner
Trading Option Greeks:
How Timing, Volatility, and Other Pricing Factors Drive Profit
by Dan Passarelli

A complete list of our titles is available at
www.bloomberg.com/books
ATTENTION CORPORATIONS
This book is available for bulk purchase at special discounts. Special
editions or chapter reprints can also be customized to specifications.
For information, please e-mail Bloomberg Press, press@bloomberg.com,
Attention: Director of Special Markets or phone 212-617-7966.

OPTION SPREAD
STRATEGIES
Trading Up, Down,
and Sideways Markets
ANTHONY J.

SALIBA
BLOOMBERG PRESS
NEW YORK

with Joseph C. Corona
and Karen E. Johnson

© 2009 by International Trading Institute, Ltd. All rights reserved. Protected under the Berne
Convention. Printed in Canada. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher except in the case of
brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, please write: Permissions
Department, Bloomberg Press, 731 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10022 or send an e-mail to
press@bloomberg.com.
BLOOMBERG, BLOOMBERG ANYWHERE, BLOOMBERG.COM, BLOOMBERG MARKET
ESSENTIALS, Bloomberg Markets, BLOOMBERG NEWS, BLOOMBERG PRESS, BLOOMBERG
PROFESSIONAL, BLOOMBERG RADIO, BLOOMBERG TELEVISION, and BLOOMBERG
TRADEBOOK are trademarks and service marks of Bloomberg Finance L.P. (“BFLP”), a Delaware
limited partnership, or its subsidiaries. The BLOOMBERG PROFESSIONAL service (the “BPS”)
is owned and distributed locally by BFLP and its subsidiaries in all jurisdictions other than
Argentina, Bermuda, China, India, Japan, and Korea (the “BLP Countries”). BFLP is a whollyowned subsidiary of Bloomberg L.P. (“BLP”). BLP provides BFLP with all global marketing and
operational support and service for these products and distributes the BPS either directly or
through a non-BFLP subsidiary in the BLP Countries. All rights reserved.
This publication contains the authors’ opinions and is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information. It is sold with the understanding that the authors, publisher, and Bloomberg L.P. are
not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, investment-planning, or other professional advice. The
reader should seek the services of a qualified professional for such advice; the authors, publisher, and
Bloomberg L.P. cannot be held responsible for any loss incurred as a result of specific investments or
planning decisions made by the reader.

First edition published 2009
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Saliba, Anthony J.
Option spread strategies : trading up, down, and sideways markets / Anthony J. Saliba with Joseph
C. Corona and Karen E. Johnson. — 1st ed.
p. cm.
Includes index.
Summary: “Proven author Anthony Saliba provides step-by-step instructions for spread trading
techniques for options traders. Saliba helps readers understand the nuances of each technique, when to
employ each spread strategy, and how to adjust when market conditions change. This hands-on guide
includes quizzes and a final exam to help readers test their comprehension”—Provided by publisher.
ISBN 978-1-57660-260-7 (alk. paper)
1. Stock options. 2. Options (Finance) I. Corona, Joseph C., 1957- II. Johnson, Karen E., 1967- III. Title.
HG6042.S245 2009
332.64'53—dc22
2008040986

Important Disclosures
Following are several important disclosures we are required to make
according to the rules of the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), by
which we are governed. We encourage you to read them.
• Prior to buying or selling an option, one must receive a copy of the
booklet “Characteristics and Risks of Standardized Options.” Copies of this document are available at www.theocc.com/publications/
risks/riskchap1.jsp or from International Trading Institute, Ltd., 311
South Wacker Dr., Suite 4700, Chicago, IL 60606.
• Options involve risk and are not suitable for all investors.
• In order to trade strategies discussed in this book, an individual must
first have his account approved by a broker/dealer for that specific
trading level.
• No statement in this book should be construed as a recommendation
to purchase or sell a security or as an attempt to provide investment
advice.
• Writers of uncovered calls or puts will be obligated to meet applicable margin requirements for certain option strategies discussed in
this book.
• For transactions that involve buying and writing multiple options in
combination, it may be impossible at times to simultaneously execute
transactions in all of the options involved in the combination.
• There is increased risk exposure when you exercise or close out of
one side of a combination while the other side of the trade remains
outstanding.
• Because all option transactions have important tax considerations,
you should consult a tax adviser as to how taxes will affect the outcome of contemplated options transactions.
• The examples in this book do not include commissions and other costs.
Transaction costs may be significant, especially in option strategies

vi

Important Disclosures

calling for multiple purchases and sales of options, such as spreads
and straddles.
• Most spread transactions must be done in a margin account.
• Supporting documentation for any claims and statistical information
is available upon request by contacting International Trading Institute, Ltd., 311 South Wacker Dr., Suite 4700, Chicago, IL 60606.

Contents
Acknowledgments

ix

Introduction

xi

1 The Covered-Write

2

2 Verticals

28

3 Collars and Reverse-Collars

64

4 Straddles and Strangles

94

5 Butterflies and Condors

126

6 Calendar Spreads

156

7 Ratio Spreads

190

8 Backspreads

222

Appendix: Final Exam

249

Index

263

Acknowledgments
Our goal with this book was to take a basic approach to teaching the intricacies of advanced option strategies so investors could successfully put
them to use in their own portfolios. I wish to thank my coauthors, Karen
Johnson and Joe Corona, for their diligent efforts on this project.
In addition, I wish to express my gratitude to several of our staff, including David Schmueck, Christopher Hausman, and Scott Mollner, for
their proofreading and edits of the manuscript.
I would like to extend a special thank you to the staff at Bloomberg
Press, including Stephen Isaacs, JoAnne Kanaval, and Judith Sjo-Gaber,
and to Kelli Christiansen at bibliobibuli, all of whom were very helpful
and patient throughout the process.
Lastly, I wish to thank my agent, Cynthia Zigmund, for presenting me
with this opportunity.

Anthony J. Saliba
Founder
International Trading Institute

ix

Introduction

T

he fact that listed option trading volumes are exploding is not news.
As of May 1, 2008, volume is up approximately 41 percent over 2007,
which was also a record year. Option volumes have grown at a rate
of approximately 30 percent per year for the last four years, and have more
than tripled since 2000.
The forces driving option growth are much larger than recent market
volatility and the need to hedge risk—after all, much of the double-digit
growth took place during the low-volatility years of 2003 through early
2007. Several forces have combined to give the individual investor greater
access to the options markets and to help level the playing field for the
individual and the professional options traders:
Technology—All exchanges are now fully or partially electronic. This
has opened up access to the individual options trader, as brokers now supply front-end systems that offer direct connections to every exchange and
tools to help analyze, execute, and manage position risk.
Commissions—Commission rates continue to plummet as brokers leverage technology and compete for business.
Number of viable exchanges—The number of options exchanges continues to defy predictions and grow. With the recent addition of the Nasdaq Options Market (NOM), the number has now reached seven. These
exchanges are in competition for the business of individual investors, and
fee reductions and other incentives are the result.
Educational resources—The number of entities dedicated to options
education and training continues to increase, along with the number of investors utilizing their services. The exchanges, the Options Industry Council, brokers, and other private entities offer robust programs at low cost.
Tighter bid-ask spreads—Although it is having a large negative impact on institutional options traders, the penny pilot program is very beneficial to the smaller individual investor because it has tightened spreads
in many popular names.

xi

xii

Introduction

The bigger news in the U.S.-listed options market is the growth in the
electronic trading of spreads. Behind the scenes the volume of trading of
complex option structures has outpaced overall growth in options trading.
This book is dedicated to the art (and science) of spread trading. A number
of factors have contributed to the explosion in spread trading:
Electronic spread books—Currently the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) and the International Securities Exchange (ISE) offer electronic
spread books (the Philadelphia Stock Exchange [PHLX] is not far behind).
These electronic “complex order books” allow traders the potential to electronically enter and trade multileg spread orders of various strategies—all of
which are covered in this book—without the risk of being “legged” (missing
one side of the spread). Spreads also can be traded in penny increments even
if their underlying options cannot.
Ease of entry and exit—These same electronic spread books are accessible through the same front-end systems offered by most brokers. (If a
broker doesn’t offer direct access to the spread books, it is time to switch
brokers.)
Portfolio-based margining—In the past, the margining of spreads
sometimes made them economically unrealistic for many investors. The
availability of portfolio-based margining at many brokers has made spread
margining more realistic and affordable for many investors.
Limited-risk strategies—Spreads offer investors different ways to
participate in market scenarios in a limited-risk fashion. Vertical spreads,
butterflies, condors, and time spreads are all limited-risk strategies that the
investor can use to address different market scenarios. (After the recent
subprime meltdown, limiting risk has once again become fashionable.)
Spread trading is the new frontier for the individual options trader, and
this frontier is opening up rapidly. This book is dedicated to spread strategies, both of the limited-risk and unlimited-risk varieties, and to how and
when to use them.

Option Spread Strategies: Trading Up, Down, and Sideways Markets
by Anthony J. Saliba with Joseph C. Corona and Karen E. Johnson
Copyright © 2009 by International Trading Institute, Ltd.

1

The CoveredWrite

CONCEPT REVIEW
Intrinsic value: The amount by which an option is “in-the-money.”
Extrinsic value: The portion of an option price that cannot be
attributed to intrinsic value.
Implied volatility: The volatility component of an option’s theoretical pricing model determined by using current prices along with
other known variables. It may be viewed as the market’s forecast
of what the average volatility of the underlying instrument might
be during the time remaining before its expiration.
Delta: The sensitivity (rate of change) of an option’s theoretical
value (assessed value) to a $1 move of the underlying instrument.
Gamma: The sensitivity (rate of change) of an option’s delta with
respect to a $1 change in the price of the underlying instrument.
Theta: The sensitivity (rate of change) of theoretical option prices
to the passage of small periods of time. Theta measures the rate
of decay in the time value of options. Theta may be expressed as
the amount of erosion of an option’s theoretical value over one
day in time.
Vega: The sensitivity (rate of change) of an option’s theoretical
value to a change in implied volatility. Vega may be expressed as
the number of points of theoretical value gained or lost from a
1-percent rise or fall in implied volatility.

3

Chapter 1

The Covered-Write

Synthetic: Two or more trading vehicles (for example, call, put, and
underlying) packaged together to emulate another trading vehicle
or spread. Some examples:
(long call  long put  long underlying) (short call  short put
 short underlying)
(long put  long call  short underlying) (short put  short call
 long underlying)
(long underlying  long call  short put) (short underlying
 short call  long put)
Conversion: A position that consists of a long underlying, a short
call, and a long put with the same strike price, which is considered
a market neutral position.
Vertical spread: The simultaneous purchase and sale of options of
the same class and with the same expiration times but with different strike prices. Depending on which strike is bought and which
strike is sold, vertical spreads can be either bullish or bearish. For
example, with XYZ July 100/105 call vertical spread, a bullish trader
would buy the 100 call and sell the 105 call, whereas a bearish
trader would buy the 105 call and sell the 100 call.

STRATEGY OVERVIEW
A covered-write is a strategy that combines a long stock position and
a short call (Figure 1.1). In options parlance a written option is an option
that is sold, in this case a call, and a short call is covered by a long stock
8
Long Stock

6

Short Call

4

Profit/Loss

4

2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

Underlying Price

Figure 1.1 Components of a Covered-Write P&L Diagram

50

51

52

Strategy Composition

position, hence the name covered-write. The calls are sold in equal amounts
against the long underlying shares. In the United States, the contract size
of a stock option is usually 100 shares; therefore, one call would be sold
against 100 shares, five calls against 500 shares, and so on. The strike price
and expiration date of the call(s) chosen can vary depending on the investment objective, market view, and risk appetite of the investor, as well as
the pricing of the calls themselves.

STRATEGY COMPOSITION
Components:

Sell one 45 call at $2.25
Purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock at $45.00

Maximum Profit:

Limited to the premium received for the sale of the call,
plus any increase in value of the underlying up to the
strike price of the short call ($2.25)

Maximum Loss:

Substantial loss on the downside for the long underlying
position (limited by zero), less the premium received
for the sale of the call

Breakeven:

Price paid for the underlying minus the premium
received for the sale of the call ($42.75)

The writing of a call against a long stock position serves two purposes:
It generates potential income and provides some downside protection.
However, in return, the investor gives away any upside price appreciation
in the stock above the strike price.
• Income Generation
The price of an option has two components, intrinsic value and extrinsic
value. Intrinsic value is the amount, if any, that the option is “in the money.”
A call option is in-the-money if the stock price is higher than the strike price.
Any remaining value is extrinsic value. Extrinsic value is the additional premium carried by an option based on many factors including, but not limited to, interest rate levels, dividend flows, time to expiration, and implied
volatility levels. The extrinsic value of an option declines as time passes,
and upon expiration it is gone entirely. This phenomenon is known as time
decay (see Figure 1.2). Sellers of options benefit from time decay (which is
referred to as the Greek “theta”) as the extrinsic value in an option declines
over time. This provides income for the investor in a covered-write strategy,
as over time the extrinsic value of the written (sold) call will decline.
• Downside Protection
Writing a call also offers some downside protection for the long stock
position, as the premium(s) collected from selling the call can partially

5

6

Chapter 1

The Covered-Write

Extrinsic
Value

Expiration

Time

Figure 1.2 Extrinsic Value Diagram
offset a decline in the stock price. However, this protection is only equal
to the amount of the premium collected when the call was written. Once
the magnitude of the stock decline exceeds the premium collected, the
protection ends.
• Upside Limitations
A covered-write is a neutral to mildly bullish strategy. The reason it
is only a mildly bullish strategy is that the profit potential of the position
to the upside is limited by the short call. If the stock price rises above the
strike price, the short call becomes in-the-money and begins to accumulate intrinsic value as the stock price rises, eventually offsetting any gains
in the stock with losses in the short call. Also, if the stock rises above the
strike price and the investor takes no action, it is likely for the stock to be
“called away” by the owner of the call. This may have unpleasant tax consequences that should be considered.

Modifications
In the event that the underlying stock falls too far, or rises too high,
modifications to the position will have to be made to either limit risk, as in
the case of the former, or extend the range of profitability, as in the case of
the latter. We will discuss modifications later in the chapter. These modifications may increase execution costs, affecting profitability.

RISK MANAGEMENT: THE GREEKS
OF THE COVERED-WRITE
The “Greeks” are metrics used to quantify the sensitivity of option
prices to changes in underlying market conditions. They can be effective
risk management tools and are especially helpful for understanding and
managing the risk of positions. They can also be applied to positions
that are combinations of options and underlying positions, such as a

The Greeks

covered-write. To evaluate the sensitivity of a position to changing market conditions, the Greeks of the various components of the position are
simply summed, giving an aggregate exposure for the position. It must
be understood, however, that as market conditions change, the Greeks
themselves also change, so the Greeks of any position are in a constant
state of flux.
Basic pricing models calculate the theoretical price of an option based
on six inputs used to describe market conditions:
• Underlying price
• Strike price
• Time to expiration
• Interest rates
• Dividends (if any)
• Implied volatility
Since a covered-write position is part option and part stock, it is the
Greeks of the option component of the position that will change; the Greeks
of the stock component of the position will remain constant. A brief review
of the basic Greeks follows, to help the reader understand how a coveredwrite position behaves as market conditions change.

THE GREEKS
Delta
Delta describes the sensitivity (rate of change) of an option’s price
with respect to changes in the underlying price. Expressed as a percentage, it represents an equivalent amount of the underlying at a given
moment in time. Calls are assigned a positive delta (call option prices
are positively correlated with the underlying price); puts are assigned
a negative delta (put option prices are negatively correlated with the
underlying price). The delta of a call option can range between 0.00
(0 percent) and 1.00 (100 percent), while the delta of a put option can range
between 0.00 (0 percent) and 1.00 (100 percent). (See Figures 1.3 and
1.4.) A short position in any of the above call or put options reverses the
delta; for example, a short call will have a negative delta and a short put
will have a positive delta.

Examples
By what amount can one expect the price of a call with a delta of 0.50
(50 percent) to change if the stock price rises by 1.00?
1.00  0.50  0.50

7

The Covered-Write

1.0
5 days
15 days

0.8

30 days
60 days

Call Delta

Chapter 1

90 days

0.6

180 days

0.4

0.2

0
85

90

95

100

105

110

115

105

110

115

Underlying Price

Figure 1.3 100 Call Delta vs. Underlying Price

0
5 days
15 days

–0.2

30 days
60 days

Put Delta

8

90 days

–0.4

180 days

–0.6

–0.8

–1.0
85

90

95

100

Underlying Price

Figure 1.4 100 Put Delta vs. Underlying Price

A long call with a delta of 0.50 (50 percent) represents what equivalent
amount of the underlying stock?
100  0.50  50 shares
The delta of an underlying position is constant, and is represented by
the actual amount and position in the shares; for example, long 100 shares
is a delta of 100, and short 100 shares is a delta of 100.

The Greeks

• Delta of a Covered-Write
The delta of a covered-write position is simply the sum of the deltas of
the components.

Example
What is the delta of a covered-write consisting of 100 shares of long
stock and short 1 call with a .50 delta?
100  (100  .50)  100  (50)  50 shares
Note that the delta of the call is reversed because it is a short call.

Gamma
The delta of an option does not remain constant because it is sensitive
to changes in market conditions, one of these being changes in underlying
price. Gamma describes the sensitivity (rate of change) of an option’s delta
with respect to changes in the underlying price. The convention is to express
gamma in terms of the change in delta produced by a one-point move in
the underlying. For example, if the delta of a 100 call changed from 0.50 to
0.60 as the underlying moved from 100.00 to 101.00, the call would be said
