The Real World: The Master Swing Trader
All of your trading skills, market knowledge, and ticker tape observations
can come into play at any time.
You’re up with the birds and turn on your trading screen. The last two
weeks haven’t been a good time for the markets, with a persistent
selloff following a three-month rally. You’ve adjusted to the weaker tape
by applying a defensive collar that’s keeping overnight positions to a
minimum, while hunting for day trades you can flip in one, two, or three
hours. Mr. Market hasn’t made things any easier this morning, with an
overnight selloff that’s dropped the S&P 500 futures nearly 1½% and
the Nasdaq-100 futures just under 1%.
The performance divergence between the index futures catches your
eye immediately. You look around your screen and notice that Amazon
is actually up a few cents on no news. With this in mind, you consider
that a midsession recovery might start in the four letter stocks and then
spread into the blue chips. You also realize that a downward thrust in the
Nasdaq-100 could get it in sync with the S&P 500, end the divergence,
and signal the start of a downside trend day.
A wave of program algorithms hit the index futures right at the
opening bell. There are 30 stocks on your trading screen, each set to
flash green on an uptick and red on a downtick. You notice how the
index futures convulsions are triggering lockstep gyrations on nearly
every stock you’re watching, with green and red flashing to absolute
perfection. This is a nearly perfect “tell” for broad program activity. With

306

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

this in mind, you employ the prime directive when dealing with rampaging algorithms: don’t fight the tape.
You stayed on the sidelines overnight, in line with your multiday
defensive collar. This detachment lets you watch the early price action
objectively rather than run around like a chicken with your head cut off,
looking for safe exits for losing positions. Your neutrality also gives you a
definable edge this morning because it will be much easier, emotionally,
to take advantage of a sudden reversal.
The S&P 500 and Nasdaq-100 spent the prior session bouncing
weakly at short-term support after a few down days. Those levels break
at the opening bell, setting up one of two likely outcomes:
• The thrust marks the final impulse of a down wave, with gaps that
get filled quickly and trap short sellers in a squeeze play.
• The thrust marks the next wave in a downtrend that drops prices
to even lower levels.
You mark out the opening prices on the index futures and then sit
back, doing nothing because no signals will trigger until the market
finally shows its hand. It’s tough to stay out of the early action, with all
the flashing lights and random movement, but your discipline prevails
because it’s your job to make money, not enjoy the thrill of the hunt.
So you take a deep breath and pay close attention, realizing the entry
signal might come in minutes, hours, or never, depending on the news
flow and emotional intensity of the traders looking for an edge today.
Then, in a flash, things start to make sense because two economic
reports are set for release at the top of the hour. The falling market,
which has just broken a trading range and hit a multiday low, is positioned perfectly for a news-triggered bear trap. Rather than wait and
react to the upcoming data, you start a well-rehearsed workflow that
visualizes stocks and sectors that might benefit if the news goes against
the grain of popular opinion.
Your investigation uncovers two interesting choices. First, rumblings
about inflation have been keeping a bid under the gold futures for a few
weeks, but recent data don’t offer much firepower to either side of the
argument. Inflation-sensitive components in the upcoming data might
finally decide that argument one way or the other. The top of the hour
will also bring market-moving data on retail sales. The sector has been
falling off a cliff, so good news might have a limited effect, but a few
mall favorites have become chat room “story stocks” that are bucking

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

307

the sector tide. You toss those issues onto your screen, just in case they
catch fire after the news.
Gold is the “go-to” play when inflation is moving the market, so you
pull up the gold ETF and a few sector blue chips, looking for bullish
patterns that might support rallies after an inflationary number. Scanning
through the charts, you can’t find good entries because a sectorwide gap, triggered by a selloff two months ago, is undermining the
reward:risk equation and limiting the upside. Rather than give up, you
follow your instincts and shift into the small cap universe. This effort
pays off, uncovering two small gold miners that are trading near their
monthly highs, with two to four points of “clear air” right overhead. With
the technical planets in perfect alignment, those stocks should rally,
perhaps strongly, if the precious metals group gets a lift from the news.
The gold play also fits nicely into your multiday defensive collar because
the sector is trading against the broad averages. That isn’t always the
case, but it happens often enough that a defensive equity collar usually
yields an aggressive gold and silver collar.
The economic data hit the newswires, triggering a quick buying spike
on the index futures. But the up wave just carries into the prior day’s
resistance levels, raising the odds for a sell-the-news reaction. Applying
a contrary mindset, you put yourself into the shoes of the short selling
crowd and consider what price action would force them into thinking
they’re on the wrong side of the market. Those are the levels where the
bear trap will be sprung, if it gets sprung at all. There’s an added benefit in the discovery process because the same levels will also act as
execution triggers for the two trade setups you were contemplating
this morning.
The actual news is a mixed bag for your intended strategies. There
isn’t much inflation showing up in the reports, and the gold futures are
responding with a big yawn. However, a mild uptick in retail sales is
keeping a bid under the sector’s top ETF, which is now trading above
yesterday’s low, unlike the S&P 500 or Nasdaq-100. With the modern
market seeking out leadership wherever it can find it, retail becomes the
sector to watch this morning, because a rally and short squeeze in that
single group might force program algorithms selling the index futures to
shift gears and reenter on the long side.
Meanwhile, you’ve set up buy orders on two retail story stocks that
have bounced up to three-day resistance after the news. However,
you’re wearing an intraday defensive collar in addition to the multiday
defensive collar triggered by the broad downtrend. This short-term collar

308

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

was put into place at the open, when the index futures broke support.
Applying this risk management filter, you won’t execute the buy orders,
even if those stocks break out, as long as the index futures stay under
resistance. Your reasoning is simple: with those instruments attracting
sellers and program algorithms moving the market, a retail breakout has
higher than average odds to fail because basket strategies will sell entire
sectors through ETFs, undermining individual components.
Your single-minded focus on anticipation instead of reaction now lets
you visualize a major sentiment shift if the index futures surge above
the short seller’s “panic line” and trigger a bear trap. That positive
event would remove the intraday defensive collar and replace it with an
aggressive collar that’s in sync with the rising market. This would have
a twofold effect on the retail buy setups. First, it would let you buy the
breakouts, if and when they happen. Second, it would open the door to
early entry at resistance because the sentiment shift has greater power
to trigger the retail breakouts than demand for the individual stocks.
Getting on board early, before other traders get their signals, would also
take advantage of a positive domino effect that flows from the index
futures into the session’s top-performing sectors.
The bear trap springs a few minutes later, spiking the index futures
back above the prior day’s lows. Your tape reading now watches for a
very specific secondary reaction. Simply stated, if your thesis about panicking short sellers is correct, the initial spike above resistance should
trigger a second upthrust, which confirms they’re covering their positions.
However, there’s no need to wait before executing your first trades of
the day, so you pick up a half position in each retail stock, although these
stocks haven’t broken out yet. Once that’s accomplished, you wait for
the secondary reaction and then buy the rest of the position, whether
it’s still stuck at resistance or already in breakout mode.
Market activity then slows through the middle of the day. You keep
one eye on the index futures but shift your trade management down
to the individual patterns, watching reward targets and protecting
against sudden reversals. Unless the morning bear trap has shifted the
broader environment from a downtrend into a sideways market or a new
uptrend, your multiday defensive collar remains in place. As a result,
you’ll need a good reason to hold the positions overnight, regardless of
their assumed profitably. There isn’t one, so you refocus your efforts on
taking the most money out of each trade. First, you consider how likely
it is for the index futures to close near the highs in that session. Next,
you look at advance/decline data for each exchange (market breadth) as

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

309

well as up:down volume. If both numbers are tweaking sharply to the
plus side, you try to hold the positions as long as possible, in order to
take advantage of a last hour buying surge. If not, you watch closely for
a midday reversal that might print the day’s high ahead of an afternoon
counterswing.
One of your retail positions is pushing toward a three-day swing high,
which is also sitting at a round number, while the other fills a down
gap printed last week. The index futures are still grinding higher, but
momentum has slowed considerably, and market internals are just moderately positive. Your inner voice speaks softly but firmly right now, telling
you to take the money and run. In response, you grab two decent profits
that will cover the rent but not a trip around the world.
You’re not complaining, though, because you’ve just taken a trading
day full of lemons and turned it into a glass of lemonade.

This page intentionally left blank

GLOSSA R Y
abandoned baby A three-bar candlestick reversal pattern. A single bar
gaps up or down but then immediately gaps back in the opposite direction
on the next bar. The shadow of the lone candle never crosses the shadow
of the bar before the first gap or after the second gap.
accumulation-distribution (acc-dis)
pressure within a particular stock.

The underlying buying or selling

Adam and Eve (A&E) Top or bottom reversal pattern noted by its sharp,
volatile first high (low) and slower, rounded second high (low).
ascending triangle A common continuation pattern that forms from a
rising lower trendline and a horizontal top resistance line.
avgLOSS A performance measurement that shows the total losses
divided by the number of losing trades.
avgWIN A performance measurement that shows the total profits
divided by the number of winning trades.
Barron’s Effect Monday price action generated by bullish or bearish
weekend columns in Barron’s news magazine.
bear hug A trading strategy that finds short sale opportunities in weak
markets that rally into resistance or narrow range bars on the verge of
breakdown.
bear trap A negative opening that encourages bears to sell positions,
followed by a sharp reversal.
Bollinger Bands (BB) Elastic support and resistance channels above
and below price bars that respond to the tendency of price to draw back
to center after strong movement in either direction. The Bollinger Band
center band sets up at the moving average chosen for the indicator.
breakaway gap A classic gap popularized in Technical Analysis of Stock
Trends (Edwards and Magee) that signals the start of a new trend after a
prolonged basing period.

311

Glossary

312

bucket shops Early twentieth-century stock gambling parlors that
catered to short-term speculation. Fictional trader Jesse Livermore discusses his experiences in them in the classic Reminiscences of a Stock Operator
(Lefèvre).
bull trap A positive opening that encourages bulls to buy positions,
followed by a sharp reversal.
charting landscape A three-dimensional view that evaluates complex
price action through multiple layers of information on a single price chart.
clear air (CA) Pockets of thin participation and ownership that often
lead to wide-range price bars.
climbing the ladder
sustained rally.

Bollinger Band pattern that indicates a strong and

coiled spring A trading strategy that executes a position at the interface
between a rangebound market and a trending market.
continuation gap A classic gap popularized in Technical Analysis of Stock
Trends (Edwards and Magee) that signals the dynamic midpoint of an
ongoing trend.
convergence-divergence (C-D) The tendency of two or more charting
landscape features to confirm or refute an expected price outcome.
cross-verification (CV) The convergence of unrelated directional information at a single price level.
cross-verification × 4 (CV×4) A high probability trade in which a single
price and time emerge from analysis through at least four unrelated
methods.
cup and handle (C&H) A popular pattern that triggers a breakout
through a triple top. The formation draws a long and deep base after an
intermediate high. The market rallies into a double top failure that creates
the “cup.” It pulls back in a small rounded correction that forms the
“handle” and then surges to a new high.
cup and two handles (C&2H) A cup and handle variation that draws
two congestion zones on the right side of the pattern before price ejects
into a strong breakout.
dark cloud cover A two-bar candlestick reversal pattern. The first bar
draws a tall rally candle. The next candle gaps up but closes well within
the range of the prior bar.

Glossary

313

dark pools Stealthy, off-market crossing systems used by funds and
institutions to trade directly with each other, out of the public eye and
away from exchange oversight.
descending triangle A common reversal pattern that forms from a
descending upper trendline and a horizontal bottom support line.
dip trip A trading strategy that buys pullbacks in an active bull market.
doji A one-bar candlestick reversal pattern in which the open and close
are the same (or almost the same) price, and the high-low range is above
average for that market.
double bottom (DB) A common reversal pattern in which price prints
a new low, reverses into a rally, and returns once to test it before moving
higher.
double top (DT) A common reversal pattern in which price prints a
new high, reverses into a selloff, and returns once to test it before moving
lower.
Dow Theory Observations on the nature of trend by Charles Dow in the
early twentieth century. Dow Theory notes that broad market trends verify
when the three major market averages all move to a new high or low.
electronic communication networks (ECNs) Computer stock exchanges
that rapidly match, fill, and report customer limit orders.
11 a.m. countertrend The tendency of intraday price to reverse direction
about 90 minutes after the open.
Elliott five-wave rally/selloff set The completed wave structure in a
primary Elliott Wave trend.
Elliott Wave Theory (EWT) A pattern-recognition technique published
by Ralph Nelson Elliott in 1939 that says all markets move in five distinct
waves when traveling in the direction of a primary trend and three distinct
waves when moving in a correction against a primary trend.
empty zone (EZ) The interface between the end of a quiet rangebound
market and the start of a new dynamic trending market.
execution target (ET) The predetermined point in price, time, and risk at
which a trade entry should be considered.

314

execution zone (EZ) The time and price surrounding an execution target
that requires undivided attention in order to decide if a trade entry is
appropriate.
exhaustion gap A classic gap popularized in Technical Analysis of Stock
Trends (Edwards and Magee) that signals the end of an active trend with
one last burst of enthusiasm or fear.
expiration magnetism The tendency of stocks to gravitate toward the
levels of highest open interest during options expiration week.
fade A swing trading strategy that sells at resistance and buys at
support.
failure of a failure A price swing that reestablishes support or resistance
after it’s broken by a failed breakout or breakdown.
failure target The projected price at which a losing trade will be terminated. The price at which a trade will be proven wrong.
falling knife A stock or other financial instrument that looks attractive
for purchase even though it’s selling off sharply.
Farley’s Accumulation-Distribution Accelerator (ADA) A technical
indicator that measures the trend of accumulation-distribution.
Fibonacci (Fibs) The mathematical tendency of trends to find support at
the 38%, 50%, or 62% retracement of the last dynamic move.
finger finder A trading strategy that initiates a variety of tactics based
upon single bar candlestick reversals.
first rise/first failure (FR/FF) The first 100% retracement of the last
dynamic price move after an extended trending market.
5-8-13 Intraday Bollinger Bands and moving average settings that align
with short-term Fibonacci cycles. Set the Bollinger Bands to 13-bar and 2
standard deviations. Set the moving averages to 5-bar and 8-bar SMAs.
five-wave decline A classic selloff pattern that exhibits three sharp
downtrends and two weak bear rallies.
flags Small continuation pattern that prints against the direction of the
primary trend.
foot in floor Bollinger Band pattern that indicates short-term support
and reversal.

Glossary

Glossary

315

fractals Small-scale predictive patterns that repeat themselves at larger
and larger intervals on the price chart.
gap echo A gap that breaks through the same level as a recent one in the
opposite direction.
hammer A one-bar candlestick reversal pattern in which the open-close
range is much smaller than a high-low range that prints well above average
for that market. The real body must sit at one extreme of the high-low
range to form a hammer.
harami A one-bar candlestick reversal pattern in which the open-close
range is much smaller than the high-low range and sits within the real
body of a tall prior bar.
hard right edge The location where the next bar will print on the price
chart—i.e., the spot where the swing trader must predict the future.
head and shoulders This classic reversal pattern forms from an extended
high that sits between two lower highs. Three relative lows beneath the
three highs connect at a trendline known as the neckline. Popular opinion
expects a major selloff when the neckline breaks.
head in ceiling Bollinger Band pattern that indicates short-term
resistance and reversal.
historical volatility The range of price movement over an extended
period of time as compared to current activity.
hole in the wall A sharp down gap that immediately follows a major
rally.
inside day A price bar that prints a lower high and higher low than the
bar that precedes it.
inverse head and shoulders This classic reversal pattern forms from
an extended low that sits between two higher lows. Three relative highs
above the three lows connect at a trendline known as the neckline. Popular
opinion expects a major rally when the neckline breaks.
January Effect The tendency for stocks to recover in January after endof-year, tax-related selling has completed.
Market Volatility Index (VIX) A classic volatility indicator used directly
by the options markets and indirectly by the equity markets as a leading
indicator of price direction.

316

Max Pain The tendency of an optionable instrument to gravitate toward
the price that causes the most options positions to expire worthless.
mesa top A double top reversal pattern that declines at the same angle
as the initial rally.
Moving Average Convergence-Divergence (MACD) A trend-following
indicator that tracks two exponentially smoothed moving averages above
and below a zero line.
moving average crossover The point at which a moving average intersects with another moving average or with price.
moving average ribbons (MARs) Wide bands of mathematically related
and color-coded moving averages.
narrow range bar (NR) A price bar with a smaller high-low range as
compared to the prior bar’s high-low range.
narrowest range of the last seven bars (NR7) A low volatility timeprice convergence that often precedes a major price expansion. A price bar
with a smaller high-low range as compared to the prior six bars’ high-low
ranges.
NR7-2 The second NR7 in a row. A low volatility time-price convergence
that often precedes a major price expansion.
neckline A trendline drawn under the support of a head and shoulders
pattern over the resistance of an inverse head and shoulders pattern.
negative feedback Directionless price action in which bars move back
and forth between well-defined boundaries.
noise Price and volume fluctuations that confuse interpretation of
market direction.
On Balance Volume (OBV) A volume indicator that measures the
progress of accumulation-distribution.
opening price principle A tendency in the futures markets for the
opening price to act as support or resistance for the entire session.
oscillator A subset of technical indicators that accurately measures flat
market conditions by assigning overbought and oversold price levels.
overbought The evolution of price action to a state in which it runs out
of buying pressure.

Glossary

Glossary

317

oversold The evolution of price action to a state in which it runs out of
selling pressure.
pattern analysis Price prediction through interpretation of the crowd
behavior seen in repeating chart formations.
pattern cycles The tendency of markets to repeat identical price formations through different stages of development in all time frames. The
master market blueprint that generates all chart patterns.
pennants Small continuation patterns that print against the direction of
the primary trend.
%WIN A performance measurement that shows the total number of
winners divided by the total number of trades.
positive feedback Directional price action in which bars gather
momentum and move from one level to the next.
power spike A trading strategy that seeks high-volume events and
executes positions to capitalize on their special characteristics.
profit target The projected price at which a successful trade will be terminated. The price at which a trade faces first resistance.
Random Walk Classic theory that chaos drives all market activity and
that price movement cannot be predicted.
rectangle Small continuation pattern that prints sideways to the primary
trend.
reflection A two-four-bar candlestick pattern that first prints a significant reversal and then thrusts away from that formation and immediately draws an identical reversal in the opposite direction.
Relative Strength Index A technical indicator that measures a stock’s
ability to close up rather than down for a specific period of time. An
oscillator invented by J. Welles Wilder that measures overbought, oversold,
and divergent market situations.
ribbon crosspoint A horizontal support and resistance zone created by a
moving average crossover.
rinse job An intraday shakeout in which price surges above resistance
or below support, triggering the stops at those levels, and then changes
direction, closing back within congestion. Similar to stop gunning.
