
FIGURE 4.26 EURUSD Daily Chart, April 15, 2009, to March 29, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Figure 4.25 is the first “zoomed-in” chart to show the multiple kinds of resistance that converged on
the area around the1.3800 price level in detail.
Figure 4.26 shows the “zoomed-out” big picture for perspective, so you can see how long
established some of these s/r indicators were. Note the highlighted arrow and upper channel line to
see where the chart in Figure 4.25 fits.
In particular, examine how long established the 1.3800 price level, 50-day EMA, and Fib levels
were, and what reliable support or resistance they had proven to be.
Here are the five kinds of resistance present in Figure 4.25.
1. Price level: The 1.3800 level is a round number that has repeatedly served as proven support
or resistance during most of the period shown. In the longer-term daily chart, the level repeatedly
served as s/r from May to July 2009 and from January to March 2010.
2. Upper channel line: A rising month-old trend line from February 18 to March 18.
3. Established EMA: The 50-day EMA, which served as reliable s/r during the period shown,
nearly a year, making it a strong s/r indicator.
4. Fibs: The 61.8 percent Fib level (under the arrow) from the low to the high of the period from
April 2010 to the end of the year, nine months. That age earned these lines more respect. Note
how well these lines served as s/r over the year covered in the chart. In particular, note how the
61.8 percent Fib line held for the March 2010 high discussed here.
5. BBs: The upper BB (settings: 20 days, two standard deviations). BBs are primarily momentum
indicators and are not reliable s/r in strongly trending markets. In range-bound markets as shown
here over the weeks prior to March 17, they provide a degree of s/r.
In addition to these kinds of resistance, there were chart patterns suggesting a reversal:
Western chart pattern: During February to March 2010, a bearish flag or rectangle formed.
Japanese candle pattern: The candle after the March 17 convergence was a bearish engulfing

pattern that confirmed the March 17 bearish hanging man. The candle of March 26 was a bullish
engulfing pattern that suggested a coming bullish reversal, which began in the following days as
shown by the right most candles.
Don't worry if terms such as EMA, Fibs, and BBs are still unfamiliar to you. Together, they form
multiple types of s/r converging on a given area that reinforce each other. Review this chapter for the
basics on these kinds of s/r indicators.
Given the above, it's no surprise that price peaked on March 17. The entire market was watching
these and other basic indicators of s/r, so a pullback was likely unless some great news about the
EURUSD changed trader perceptions and gave buyers a reason to step in even with five layers of
resistance converging on the 1.3800 area.
Here, we see a good example of how s/r levels are zones or areas and are not precise points. Even
in this example, from February 9 to March 17, daily highs ranged from about 1.3775 to 1.3835,
showing a perfectly normal, nearly symmetrical range of +/– 25–35 pips around the 1.3800 round
number.

CHAPTER 5
Trader Psychology and Risk and Money Management
(RAMM)
Now that you know some foreign exchange (forex) basics and technical analysis (TA), you have the
background needed to understand the real foundation of successful trading and investing: proper
trader psychology and risk and money management (RAMM). No matter how skilled and compelling
your analysis, it will often be wrong. Worse, you'll endure losing streaks that can irreparably damage
your account balance and confidence unless you've got the right preparation.
Welcome to that preparation. This chapter covers these core nonanalytical aspects of trading:
Basic trader psychology issues like mindset, attitude, expectations, discipline, finding a trading
style that fits your personality, and understanding the conditions you need to succeed.
Top RAMM issues, including:
Why trading longer time frames lowers risk.
Risking no more than 1 to 3 percent of your account per trade with your stop loss.
Proper risk-to-reward ratios (rrrs) for each trade.
How to set stop losses.
How account size influences RAMM issues like stop loss settings, position size, and leverage
used.
Planning trades in advance to remove emotion from your decisions in a trade journal.
Learning from your victories and losses via your trade journal.
The importance of having a business plan.
In this chapter, we'll review the key elements of proper mindset and RAMM because they are
intimately related.

RAMM: PRESERVING CAPITAL IS YOUR TOP
PRIORITY
Warren Buffett is considered one of the greatest investors ever. Here are his top two rules for
success:
Rule No. 1: Never lose money. Rule No. 2: Don't forget Rule No. 1.1
Paul Tudor Jones, the founder of Tudor Investment Corporation, has an estimated net worth of $3.3
billion and is ranked as the 336th richest in the world by Forbes magazine as of March 2011. 2 Here's
his take on the key to trading success:
At the end of the day, the most important thing is how good are you at risk control.3

Cliff Wachtel doesn't deserve to be mentioned on the same page as these giants, but heck, it's my
book, so here goes:
The key to succeeding is controlling your bleeding.
In other words, your ability to survive long enough to succeed is less a matter of how much you
make when you're right than how little you lose when you're wrong. That's because while you're
learning (and often afterward), you're likely to be wrong at least as often as you're right, probably
more often.
The reason RAMM is so essential is this: Your losses hurt you more than your gains help you.
That's not just because of the damage losses do to your confidence and motivation. After you suffer a
drawdown, you're working with a smaller principal. For example, let's say you start with $1,000. If
you lose 10 percent, you will need to earn over 11 percent on your remaining $900 to recover your
losses. If you lose 15 percent, you will need to earn almost 18 percent on your remaining $850 to get
back to $1,000. Though profits are the goal, it's the losses that can stop you from achieving it. See
Appendix E for more on this.
Having this professional trader's risk aversion is a key part of trader psychology that will determine
as much as anything else whether you survive your mistakes like a professional or get killed by them
like an amateur.
Mastering the psychological component of trading is the root of success because ultimately trading
is based on having the right mindset, attitude, expectations, discipline, and trading style that fits your
personality and doesn't drain your energy.
So, let's begin by reviewing what you must know about the psychology of successful trading.
Getting it may take a long time, but at least you know what you've got to do, and that puts you ahead of
most investors.

THE INNER GAME: TRADER PSYCHOLOGY BASICS
In Chapter 2, in the section on the Core Four Skills, we said that the psychological aspects of trading
are the basis of trading success because otherwise:
There won't be proper RAMM, without which traders are doomed no matter how brilliant their
analyses, strategies, or trading plans. The inevitable mistakes will eventually inflict too much
damage on their capital, confidence, or both.
You won't know how to handle the dangers of both losing streaks and winning streaks. Both can
be fatal. Losing streaks obviously can drain your capital and confidence, either of which is fatal
to your trading career. Winning streaks can lead to overconfidence, which encourages sloppy
habits that ultimately hit your bottom line, possibly permanently.
There won't be realistic profit expectations, so you could get discouraged too soon when in fact
you're doing fine.
Minimizing risk (versus fastest or largest potential profits) won't be your primary criteria for
choosing trading styles and durations. For example, you may attempt to day trade for faster
profits before you're ready.
There won't be proper focus on finding trading styles that suit your personality, and that could
cause you to burn out from stress even if you're successful. For example:

High-leverage, short-term day trading will drain the energy of those who are risk-averse or
lack the time and concentration needed to constantly monitor intraday trades.
Action junkies who have the time, risk tolerance, and ability to stay focused will find longerterm positions boring and frustratingly slow.
Many extroverts will need contact with others to feel energized and stimulated, and they may
find trading rooms and online forums are a better way to learn than hours of study in isolation,
which they may find tiresome.
Introverts may find such venues distracting and draining. They need quiet and will learn better
via self-study resources, and via more limited personal an online contacts.
As you gain experience, you'll realize how the following basics of trader psychology are the true
foundation of success. Until you're psychologically ready to trade, until you've got the right attitudes,
expectations, trading methods, and environment, all the analytical skills in the world won't help. This
topic is worthy of a book in itself, but here are the basics for further study.

Lesson 1: Seek Trading Styles and Methods That Fit You
Regardless of what kind of trader you fantasize about being, the cold truth is that you're far more
likely to succeed by finding trading styles and techniques that fit you, rather than trying to fit yourself
to the wrong kinds of trading.

What to Consider When Seeking Trading Styles and Methods
In other words, find ways to trade that suit your:
Skill level: Those with only basic analytical skills need methods that don't require sophisticated
and complex analysis. Beginners should also avoid short-term day trading that requires more
technical analysis skills and faster decision making. Those with strong analytical skills may want
to move as quickly as possible to designing and refining their own algorithm-based trading
systems.
Lifestyle: This includes considerations like time and energy available. If you don't have the time
or energy to monitor positions in real time, you need a trading style that doesn't require constant
trade monitoring, or a short-term trading style in a market that's liquid when you're available to
watch it.
Temperament: This includes aspects of your personality like:
1. Mental discipline and emotional control: Different traders feel different degrees of stress
when risking their money.
A. Some have the discipline and lack of ego to do the following when money is at risk:
i Resist the temptation to take a quick, small profit when they know the trade has room to
run until it hits resistance.
ii Admit they're wrong and cut their losses when their preplanned stop loss order is hit.
These traders at least have the key psychological foundations to succeed in short-term
intraday trading that demands real-time decision making. Skills are another issue.
B. Others are more emotional and struggle to stick to their plans, such as:
i They take profits too early out of fear they'll lose them, even though they know there is

still room before price hits resistance.
ii They let losses run too far because it hurts them to admit they were wrong, and they
don't exit until they've incurred losses too large for their egos or accounts to survive.
These more emotional traders need trading styles that allow them to plan and enter
entries and exits in advance so they don't have to make real-time decisions.
Risk tolerance: If you don't handle risk well, you'll need more conservative, lower-risk ways to
trade. Lower (or zero) leverage, smaller positions, and longer time frames are a few ways to
keep trader stress at acceptable levels.
How you make decisions: If you're a deliberate, analytical type who likes to look at lots of
information, consult with others, mull things over, and research, then you need to make sure you
have enough time to do so. That kind of trader will want slower, longer time frame-based trades.
Having the time you need is important in the early stages while you're learning. If you don't like a
lot of analysis and prefer quicker decisions based on limited data, you may be more comfortable
with faster, shorter time frames and simple sets of indicators and trading rules.
Patience versus a need for action: More patient traders can sit with trades for weeks or months.
Action junkies need shorter time frames; otherwise they risk entering bad trades out of sheer
boredom.
Need for wins versus profits: There are trading systems that have lots of small losses and just a
few huge gainers that make the whole system profitable. However, many traders get depressed if
70 percent or more of their trades are losers. They quit altogether or become so desperate for
winners that they exit winning trades too soon and they miss much of the profits that would have
made up for their losers. Other traders don't care about winning percentages as long as monthly or
quarterly profits are satisfactory.
The key point of this is: If something about a trading style causes you too much pain, be it too many
hours, too much stress, risk, boredom, complexity, discipline needed, or whatever, then you won't
last.

Finding Your Trading Approach Lowers Your Risk
Finding the right trading style may not sound like it's related to risk management, but it is. Without the
right trading style and methods, your risk of stress, frustration, and of quitting forex is much higher
even if you're prospering.

Accept That It Takes Time to Find Your Way
Those getting started won't know what trading styles, analytical tool sets, currency pairs, or time
frames work best for them. That's okay, since finding out is a big part of the learning process. That's
why we spend months using practice accounts before we start risking our money. Successful traders
will even return to practice accounts when trying new methods.
Getting to know yourself as a trader isn't a phase in your development that you can skip or cut short.
All the advice in the world won't help if you're trading in ways that don't fit you. You probably won't
be earning steady profits until you find what kind of trading feels comfortable. Steady profits over
time will be the confirmation that you've found your niche.

Tips to Finding Yourself Faster
To expedite that process of finding your niche, here are some tips:
Avoid day trading currencies (or anything else) until you've built up the requisite successful
experience on demo accounts for about six months of part-time trading. After that, start with real
money but with small positions, because practice accounts can't prepare you for the stress of
having cash at risk. Know that few find they have the needed skills, concentration powers, and
information resources to succeed at day trading currencies.
If the time you can dedicate to forex trading is limited, seek out styles of trading that require only
periodic monitoring at your convenience. For example, employees in an office should be careful
about attempting any kind of trading that would require monitoring during work hours. You risk
being distracted and underperforming in both capacities.
Those who are risk-averse or have limited risk capital would need to avoid any combination of
high leverage and large position sizes relative to their account size. As we'll discuss next, losses
per trade must be kept around 1 to 3 percent of your available trading capital.
Traders should never trade with money they can't afford to lose. The stress will likely prevent
you from letting winners run or cutting losses short. You must learn to view trading capital as
special funds set aside for trading that you can afford to lose with relative calm because you don't
view losing trades as losses, but rather as your tuition for learning how to trade.

Lesson 2: Basics of the Trader's Mindset—Minimizing and Accepting
Risk
Here are two tips on how the professionals deal with risk:
1. Their top priority is to minimize losses: Amateurs think first about how much they can make.
Professionals focus first on how much they could lose. They accept calculated risk as part of the
business but focus more on minimizing losses than maximizing gains. Study Appendix E to see
how losses hurt you more than profits help you.
2. They stick to their plans and accept losses as the cost of experience: Once professionals have
taken all the precautions they can and have a solid trade plan in progress, they stick with it and
don't let risk of loss shake them out of that plan unless circumstances or assumptions on which
they based their plan change and justify a change in their trading plan.
They create plans that allow profitable trades to run until they hit resistance, and that include
preset stop loss orders that will cut losses short. They avoid temptations to deviate from
their plans and do the opposite. Once they enter a trade based on a solid plan, they don't
deviate from it to take a quick profit during a normal pullback. They don't cancel stop loss
orders that are about to be hit, they accept taking a small affordable loss rather than risk a
larger one. They do this because they accept mistakes as a normal part of the business and
admit to them. They don't need to be consistently right, just profitable. As long as their plan
was solid and they stuck to it, they take satisfaction in their discipline, and if the loss bothers
them, they review the trade and discern what they might have done wrong or how their read
of the market may have been wrong.
They view their trading accounts not as savings but as risk capital, funds set aside to take

calculated risks, which over time should be profitable if they've done their jobs well.
They view losses not only as part of the business, but also as the tuition for their ongoing
training, as the cost of experience.
To make sure they get the full education that they've “paid for” with losses, they keep a trade
journal and analyze what went wrong to locate the problem or mistake so it's less likely to be
repeated. We'll cover planning and trade journals later in the chapter.

Lesson 3: Dealing with Losing and Winning Streaks
Losing and winning streaks offer their own challenges.

Losing Streaks
Losing streaks sap confidence and capital. Professionals know that when they hit a losing streak, it's
time to do one or more of three actions:
1. Cut position sizes and/or leverage used: Until they figure out what's wrong and break the
streak, they reduce the amount risked per trade.
2. Take fewer trades, limiting themselves to only the most compelling situations with the lowest
potential losses and highest potential yields (more on that later).
3. Take a break from trading: This is especially true if they're under stress from their personal
life or have gone too long without some genuine rest (as opposed to a week or more traveling
with children or touring for 12 hours a day to see a month's worth of sights in 10 days).

Winning Streaks
Winning streaks are great for our accounts, but they can also be too good for our egos. We can
become overconfident and sloppy because we don't need our plans or trading rules now that we're on
a hot streak. That bad idea can become dangerous if rewarded with a few more winners, which
encourages further recklessness that puts the odds against you and eventually ends in losses.
When I close out a big winning trade I usually take the rest of the day off from trading, and I've
known many others who would do the same when they start to feel invincible. They believed they
were saving money by waiting until they calmed down because they felt they were too likely to get
sloppy and make bad trades that violated their rules.

Conclusion
We could go deeper in trader psychology, but we won't. You've seen enough to be aware of its
importance and how it influences the kind of trading you do and how well you manage your risk and
capital. Many sources of free information on the psychological aspects of trading are available, as
well as professional trader coaches and other vendors of materials on the topic.
Now let's get into the specifics of RAMM.

WHY TRADE LONGER TIME FRAMES

Here's the most important step in reducing risk.

Seek Safer Trading Styles
The first step to lowering risk is to choose a low-risk trading style. Professional football and ice
hockey players wear more protective padding than professional golfers or tennis players and have
referees to prevent dangerous behavior. Yet the golf and tennis players suffer far fewer serious
injuries due to the far safer nature of their sports.
The same goes for trading. The best path to low risk is low-risk trading styles. One key component
of lower-risk trading is longer time frames. Though day traders avoid risks from holding positions
overnight, most people will find that trading from daily, weekly, or monthly charts is a more
profitable, lower-risk approach. This section details why.
Beginning traders, or experienced traders who are still unprofitable, should avoid trying intraday
time frames, those in which you open and close positions within a matter of minutes to the close of
one to two trading days. Instead, stick to trading price moves that occur over a number of days,
weeks, or months. That means using four-hour, daily, weekly, or monthly charts until you are
consistently profitable on a monthly basis for about six months on a practice or demo account, then a
similar period using small positions with real money. If, after that time, you still want to day trade
currencies, then use practice accounts and go through the same process. Yes, I understand you can, in
theory, make money faster on shorter time frames and this style is exciting. If your goal is to have the
fun of gambling with money you don't mind losing, rather than earn a steady income, then by all
means, pour yourself a drink, put on some music, and have fun.
Beware, however, that most short-term traders in any market, not just forex, fail. Your odds of
success are much higher with trading off of longer-term time frame charts.

As with Driving, Speed Kills
Trading off short time frames moves at a faster pace. In addition to the added difficulties of short-term
trading discussed below, this faster pace brings additional challenges that are too much for most
traders. These include the need for fast decisions with money at risk. That might not be a problem for
proven, experienced traders, but it's a potentially fatal problem for those lacking a track record with a
simple manual or more complex automated trading systems. Because:
There is often no time to create well-designed trading plans. Failing to plan means planning to
fail.
Having no time for advanced order placement risks emotion-driven decisions. Short-term price
moves can be so unpredictable and quick that it's often not possible to enter entry and exit orders
in advance. That means making real-time entry and exit decisions when your money is at risk.
That leaves the door wide open for emotions to creep in and cause you to
Cut profits short even when there is plenty of room before the next resistance point.
Let losses run beyond what you can afford in the often vain hope that the trade will turn
around.
You must constantly monitor your positions and make decisions while money is at risk rather than
making them in advance under calmer circumstances with orders placed in advance. That added
