 (Insider selling usually means nothing, and it’s silly to react to it. If a stock had gone from $3 to $12 and nine officers were selling, I’d take notice, particularly if they were selling a majority of their shares. But in normal situations insider selling is not an automatic sign of trouble within a company. There are many reasons that officers might sell. They may need the money to pay their children’s tuition or to buy a new house or to satisfy a debt. They may have decided to diversify into other stocks. But there’s only one reason that insiders buy: They think the stock price is undervalued and will eventually go up.) 
 (13) T HE C OMPANY I S B UYING B ACK S HARES 
 Buying back shares is the simplest and best way a company can reward its investors. If a company has faith in its own future, then why shouldn’t it invest in itself, just as the shareholders do? The announcement of massive share buybacks by company after company broke on October 20, 1987 the fall of many stocks, and stabilized the market at the height of its panic. Long term, these buybacks can’t help but reward investors. 
 When stock is bought in by the company, it is taken out of circulation, therefore shrinking the number of outstanding shares. This can have a magical effect on earnings per share, which in turn has a magical effect on the stock price. If a company buys back half its shares and its overall earnings stay the same, the earnings per share have just doubled. Few companies could get that kind of result by cutting costs or selling more widgets. 
 Exxon has been buying in shares because it’s cheaper than drilling for oil. It might cost Exxon $6 a barrel to find new oil, but if each of its shares represents $3 a barrel in oil assets, then retiring shares has the same effect as discovering $3 oil on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. 
 This sensible practice was almost unheard of until quite recently. Back in the 1960s, International Dairy Queen was one of the pioneers in share buybacks, but there were few others who followed suit. At the delightful Crown, Cork, and Seal they’ve bought back shares every year for the last twenty. They never pay a dividend, and they never make unprofitable acquisitions, but by shrinking shares they’ve gotten the maximum impact from the earnings. If this keeps up, someday there will be a thousand shares of Crown, Cork, and Seal—worth $10 million apiece. 
 At Teledyne, chairman Henry E. Singleton periodically offers to buy in the stock at a much higher price than is bid on the stock exchange. When Teledyne was selling for $5, he might have paid $7, and when the stock was at $10, then he was paying $14, and so on. All along he’s given shareholders a chance to get out at a fancy premium. This practical demonstration of Teledyne’s belief in itself is more convincing than the adjectives in the annual report. 
 The common alternatives to buying back shares are (1) raising the dividend, (2) developing new products, (3) starting new operations, and (4) making acquisitions. Gillette tried to do all four, with emphasis on the final three. Gillette has a spectacularly profitable razor business, which it gradually reduced in relative size as it acquired less profitable operations. If the company had regularly bought back its shares and raised its dividend instead of diverting its capital to cosmetics, toiletries, ballpoint pens, cigarette lighters, curlers, blenders, office products, toothbrushes, hair care, digital watches, and lots of other diversions, the stock might well be worth over $100 instead of the current $35. In the last five years, Gillette has gotten back on track by eliminating losing operations and emphasizing its core shaving business, where it dominates the market. 
 The reverse of buying back shares is adding more shares, also called diluting. International Harvester, now Navistar, sold millions of additional shares to raise cash to help it survive a financial crisis brought about by the collapse of the farm-equipment business (see chart). Chrysler, remember, did just the opposite—buying back stock and stock warrants and shrinking the number of outstanding shares as the business improved (see chart). Navistar is once again a profitable company, but because of the extraordinary dilution, the earnings have a minimal impact, and shareholders have yet to benefit from the recovery to any significant degree. 
 THE GREATEST COMPANY OF ALL 
 If I could dream up a single glorious enterprise that combines all of the worst elements of Waste Management, Pep Boys, Safety-Kleen, rock pits, and bottle caps, it would have to be Cajun Cleansers. Cajun Cleansers is engaged in the boring business of removing mildew stains from furniture, rare books, and draperies that are victims of subtropical humidity. It’s a recent spinoff from Louisiana BayouFeedback. 
 Its headquarters are located in the bayous of Louisiana, and to get there you have to change planes twice, then hire a pickup truck to take you from the airport. Not one analyst from New York or Boston ever visited Cajun Cleansers, nor has any institution bought a solitary share.

One Up on Wall Street 

 Mention Cajun Cleansers at a cocktail party and soon you’ll be talking to yourself. It sounds ridiculous to everyone within earshot. 
 While expanding quickly through the bayous and the Ozarks, Cajun Cleansers has had incredible sales. These sales will soon accelerate because the company just received a patent on a new gel that removes all sorts of stains from clothes, furniture, carpets, bathroom tiles, and even aluminum siding. The patent gives Cajun the niche it’s been looking for. 
 The company is also planning to offer lifetime prestain insurance to millions of Americans, who can pay in advance for a guaranteed removal of all the future stain accidents they ever cause. A fortune in off-balance-sheet revenue will soon be pouring in. 
 No popular magazines except the ones that think Elvis is alive have mentioned Cajun and its new patent. The stock opened at $8 in a public offering seven years ago and soon rose to $10. At that price the important corporate directors bought as many shares as they could afford. 
 I hear about Cajun from a distant relative who swears it’s the only way to get mildew off leather jackets left too long in dank closets. I do some research and discover that Cajun has had a 20 percent growth rate in earnings for the past four years, it’s never had a down quarter, there’s no debt on the balance sheet, and it did well in the last recession. I visit the company and find out that any trained crustacean could oversee the making of the gel. 
 The day before I decide to buy Cajun Cleansers, the noted economist Henry Kaufman has predicted that interest rates are going up, and then the head of the Federal Reserve slips on the lane at a bowling alley and injures his back, both of which combine to send the market down 15 percent, and Cajun Cleansers with it. I get in at $7.50, which is $2.50 less than the directors paid. 
 That’s the situation at Cajun Cleansers. Don’t pinch me. I’m dreaming.

One Up on Wall Street 

 9 
 Stocks I’d Avoid 
 If I could avoid a single stock, it would be the hottest stock in the hottest industry, the one that gets the most favorable publicity, the one that every investor hears about in the car pool or on the commuter train—and succumbing to the social pressure, often buys. 
 Hot stocks can go up fast, usually out of sight of any of the known landmarks of value, but since there’s nothing but hope and thin air to support them, they fall just as quickly. If you aren’t clever at selling hot stocks (and the fact that you’ve bought them is a clue that you won’t be), you’ll soon see your profits turn into losses, because when the price falls, it’s not going to fall slowly, nor is it likely to stop at the level where you jumped on. 
 Look at the chart for Home Shopping Network, a recent hot stock in the hot teleshop industry, which in 16 months went from $3 to $47 back to $3½ (adjusted for splits). That was terrific for the people who said good-bye at $47, but what about the people who said hello at $47, when the stock was at its hottest? Where were the earnings, the profits, the future prospects? This investment had all the underlying security of a roulette spin. 
 The balance sheet was deteriorating rapidly (the company was taking on debt to buy television stations), there were problems with the telephones, and competitors had begun to appear. How many zirconium necklaces can people wear?

One Up on Wall Street 

 I already mentioned the various hot industries where sizzle led to fizzle. Mobile homes, digital watches, and health maintenance organizations were all hot industries where fervent expectations put a fog on the arithmetic. Just when the analysts predict double-digit growth rates forever, the industry goes into a decline. 
 If you had to live off the profits from investing in the hottest stocks in each successive hot industry, soon you’d be on welfare. 
 There couldn’t have been a hotter industry than carpets. As I was growing up, every housewife in America wanted wall-to-wall carpeting. Somebody invented a new tufting process that drastically reduced the amount of fiber that went into a rug, and somebody else automated the looms, and the prices dropped from $28 a yard to $4 a yard. The newly affordable rugs were laid down in schools, offices, airports, and in millions of tract houses in all the nation’s suburbs. 
 Wood floors were once cheaper than carpets, but now carpets were cheaper, so the upper classes switched from carpets to wood floors and the masses switched from wood floors to carpets. Carpet sales rose dramatically, and the five or six major producers were earning more money than they knew how to spend, and growing at an astonishing pace. That’s when the analysts started telling the stockbrokers that the carpet boom would last forever, and the brokers told their clients, and the clients bought the carpet stocks. At the same time, the five or six major producers were joined by two hundred new competitors, and they all fought for customers by dropping their prices, and nobody made another dime in the carpet business. 
 High growth and hot industries attract a very smart crowd that wants to get into the business. Entrepreneurs and venture capitalists stay awake nights trying to figure out how to get into the act as quickly as possible. If you have a can’t-fail idea but no way of protecting it with a patent or a niche, as soon as you succeed, you’ll be warding off the imitators. In business, imitation is the sincerest form of battery. 
 Remember what happened to disk drives? The experts said that this exciting industry would grow at 52 percent a year—and they were right, it did. But with thirty or thirty-five rival companies scrambling on the action, there were no profits. 
 Remember oil services? All you had to say was “oil” on a prospectus and people bought the stocks, even if the closest they ever got to oil services was having the gashop check under the hood. 
 In 1981, I attended a dinner at an energy conference in Colorado where Tom Brown was the featured speaker. Tom Brown was the principal owner and CEO of Tom Brown, Inc., a popular oil-service company that was selling for $50 a share at the time. Mr. Brown mentioned that an acquaintance of his had bragged about having shorted the stock (betting on it to go down), after which Mr. Brown made the following psychological observation: “You must hate money to be shorting my stock. You’ll lose your car and your house and have to go naked to the Christmas party.” Mr. Brown got a laugh out of repeating this to us, but in the four years that followed the stock did fall from $50 to $1. The acquaintance who shorted the stock must have been delighted with the fortune he made. If anyone had to go naked to the Christmas party, it would have been the regular shareholders in the long position. They would have avoided this fate by ignoring the hottest stock in this hot industry, or at least by having done some homework. There was nothing to Tom Brown, Inc., but a bunch of useless rigs, some dubious oil and gas acreage, some impressive debts, and a bad balance sheet. 
 There’s never been a hotter stock than Xerox in the 1960s. Copying was a fabulous industry, and Xerox had control of the entire process. “To xerox” became a verb, which should have been a positive development. Many analysts thought so. They assumed that Xerox would keep growing to infinity when the stock was selling for $170 a share in 1972. But then the Japanese got into it, IBM got into it, and Eastman Kodak got into it. Soon there were twenty firms that made nice dry copies, as opposed to the original wet ones. Xerox got frightened and bought some unrelated businesses it didn’t know how to run, and the stock lost 84 percent of its value. Several competitors didn’t fare much better. 
 Copying has been a respectable industry for two decades and there’s never been a slowdown in demand, yet the copy machine companies can’t make a decent living. 
 Contrast the sorry stock performance of Xerox to that of Philip Morris, a company that sells cigarettes—a negative-growth industry in the U.S. Over the past fifteen years Xerox dropped from $160 to $60, while Philip Morris rose from $14 to $90. Year after year Philip Morris increases its earnings by expanding its market share abroad, by raising prices, and by cutting costs. Because of its brand names—Marlboro, Virginia Slims, Benson & Hedges, Merit, etc.—Philip Morris has found its niche. Negative-growth industries do not attract flocks of competitors. 
 BEWARE THE NEXT SOMETHING 
 Another stock I’d avoid is a stock in a company that’s been touted as the next IBM, the next McDonald’s, the next Intel, or the next Disney, etc. In my experience the next of something almost never is—on Broadway, the best-seller list, the National Basketball Association, or Wall Street. How many times have you heard that some player is supposed to be the next Willie Mays, or that some novel is supposed to be the next Moby Dick, only to find that the first is cut from the team, and the second is quietly remaindered? In stocks there’s a similar curse. 
 In fact, when people tout a stock as the next of something, it often marks the end of prosperity not only for the imitator but also for the original to which it is being compared. When other computer companies were called the “next IBM,” you could have guessed that IBM would go through some terrible times, and it has. Today most computer companies are trying not to become the next IBM, which may mean better times ahead for that beleaguered firm. 
 After Circuit City Stores (formerly Wards) became a successful electronics retailer, there was a string of nexts, including First Family, Good Guys, Highland Superstores, Crazy Eddie, and Fretters. Circuit City is up fourfold since 1984, when it was listed on the New York Stock Exchange, somehow avoiding the IBM curse, while all of the nexts have lost between 59 and 96 percent of their original value. 
 The next Toys “R” Us was Child World, which also stumbled; and the next Price Club was the Warehouse Club, which fared no better. 
 AVOID DIWORSEIFICATIONS 
 Instead of buying back shares or raising dividends, profitable companies often prefer to blow the money on foolish acquisitions. The dedicated diworseifier seeks out merchandise that is (1) overpriced, and (2) completely beyond his or her realm of understanding. This ensures that losses will be maximized. 
 Every second decade the corporations seem to alternate between rampant diworseification (when billions are spent on exciting acquisitions) and rampant restructuring (when those no-longer-exciting acquisitions are sold off for less than the original purchase price). The same thing happens to people and their sailboats. 
 These frequent episodes of acquiring and then regretting, only to divest and acquire and regret once again, could be applauded as a form of transfer payment from the shareholders of the large and cash-rich corporation to the shareholders of the smaller entity being taken over, since the large corporations so often overpay. The why of all this I’ve never understood, except perhaps that corporate management finds it more exciting to take over smaller companies, however expensive, than to buy back shares or mail dividend checks, which requires no imagination. 
 Perhaps psychologists should analyze this. Some corporations, like some individuals, just can’t stand prosperity. 
 From an investor’s point of view, the only two good things about diworseification are owning shares in the company that’s being acquired, or in finding turnaround opportunities among the victims of diworse-ification that have decided to restructure. 
 There are so many examples of diworseification I hardly know where to begin. Mobil Oil once diworseified by buying Marcor Inc. One of Marcor’s businesses was a retailer in an unfamiliar business that plagued Mobil for years. Marcor’s other main business was Container Corporation, which Mobil later sold at a very low price. Mobil blew more millions by paying too much for Superior Oil. 
 Since the 1980 peak in oil prices, Mobil stock has risen only 10 percent, while Exxon has doubled. Beyond a couple of unfortunate and relatively small acquisitions such as Reliance Electric, plus an ill-fated venture-capital subsidiary, Exxon resisted diworseification and stuck to its own business. Its excess cash went to buying back its own stock. The shareholders of Exxon have done much better than the shareholders of Mobil, although new management is turning Mobil around. It sold Montgomery Ward in 1988. 
 The follies of Gillette I’ve already described. That company not only bought the medicine chest, it diworseified into digital watches and then announced a write-off of the whole fiasco. It’s the only time in my memory that a major company explained how it got out of a losing business before anybody realized it had gotten into the business in the first place. Gillette, too, has made major reforms and has lately mended its ways. 
 General Mills owned Chinese restaurants, Italian restaurants, steak houses, Parker Brothers toys, Izod shirts, coins, stamps, travel companies, Eddie Bauer retail outlets, and Footjoy products, many acquired in the 1960s. 
 The 1960s was the greatest decade for diworseification since the Roman Empire diworseified all over Europe and northern Africa. It’s hard to find a respectable company that didn’t diworseify in the 1960s, when the best and the brightest believed they could manage one business as well as the next. 
 Allied Chemical bought everything but the kitchen sink, and probably somewhere in there it actually took over a company that made kitchen sinks. Times Mirror diworseified, and so did Merck, but both have wised up and returned to their publishing and their drugs. 
 U.S. Industries made 300 acquisitions in a single year. They should have called themselves one-a-day. Beatrice Foods expanded from edibles into inedibles, and after that anything was possible. 
 This great acquisitive era ended in the market collapse of 1973–74, when Wall Street finally realized that the best and the brightest were not as ingenious as expected, and even the most charming of corporate directors could not turn all those toads they bought into princes. 
 That’s not to say it’s always foolish to make acquisitions. It’s a very good strategy in situations where the basic business is terrible. We would never have heard of Warren Buffett or his Berkshire Hathaway if Buffett had stuck to textiles. The same might be said of the Tisches, who started out with a chain of movie theaters (Loew’s) and used the proceeds to buy a tobacco company (Lorillard), which in turn helped them acquire an insurance company (CNA), which led to their taking a huge position in CBS. The trick is that you have to know how to make the right acquisitions and then manage them successfully. 
 Consider the story of Melville and Genesco, two shoe manufacturers—one that successfully diversified and one that diworseified (see charts). Thirty years ago Melville was manufacturing men’s shoes almost exclusively for its own family of shoe stores, Thom McAn. Sales grew as the company began to lease shoe departments in other stores, most notably the chain of K mart stores. When K mart began its great expansion in 1962, Melville’s profits exploded. After years of experience in discount shoe retailing, the company launched into a series of acquisitions, always establishing the success of one before proceeding with another: they purchased CVS, a discount drugstore operation, in 1969; Marshall’s, a discount apparel chain, in 1976; and Kay-Bee Toys in 1981. During the same period, Melville reduced the number of its shoe manufacturing plants from twenty-two in 1965 to just one in 1982. Slowly, but efficiently, a shoe manufacturer had transformed itself into a diversified retailer. 
 Unlike Melville, Genesco went off in a frenzy. Starting in 1956, it acquired Bonwit Teller, Henri Bendel, Tiffany, and Kress (variety stores), then got into security consulting, men’s and women’s jewelry, knitting materials, textiles, blue jeans, and numerous other forms of retailing and wholesaling—while still trying to manufacture shoes. In the seventeen-year period between 1956 and 1973, Genesco made 150 acquisitions. These purchases greatly increased the company’s sales, so Genesco got bigger on paper, but its fundamentals were deteriorating. 

 The difference in Melville’s and Genesco’s strategies ultimately showed up in the earnings and stock performances of the two companies. Both stocks suffered during the 1973–74 bear market. But Melville’s earnings were growing steadily and its stock rebounded; it had become a thirtybagger by 1987. As for Genesco, its financial position continued to deteriorate after 1974, and the stock has never come back. 
 Why did Melville succeed while Genesco failed? The answer has a lot to do with a concept called synergy. “Synergy” is a fancy name for the two-plus-two-equals-five theory of putting together related businesses and making the whole thing work. 
 The synergy theory suggests, for example, that since Marriott already operates hotels and restaurants, it made sense for them to acquire the Big Boy restaurant chain, and also to acquire the subsidiary that provides meal service to prisons and colleges. (College students will tell you there’s a lot of synergy between prison food and college food.) But what would Marriott know about auto parts or video games? 
 In practice, sometimes acquisitions produce synergy, and sometimes they don’t. Gillette, the leading manufacturer of razor blades, got some synergy when it acquired the Foamy shaving cream line. However, that didn’t extend to shampoo, lotion, and all the other toiletry items that Gillette brought under its control. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway has bought everything from candy stores to furniture stores to newspapers, with spectacular results. Then again, Buffett’s company is devoted to acquisitions. 
 If a company must acquire something, I’d prefer it to be a related business, but acquisitions in general make me nervous. There’s a strong tendency for companies that are flush with cash and feeling powerful to overpay for acquisitions, expect too much from them, and then mismanage them. I’d rather see a vigorous buyback of shares, which is the purest synergy of all. 
 BEWARE THE WHISPER STOCK 
