
Major Reversal Patterns 109

volatility of the various patterns. The theme of measuring the height
of the pattern and then projecting that distance from a breakout
point will be constantly repeated.

It’s important to remember that the objective arrived at is only
a minimum target. Prices will often move well beyond the objec-
tive. Having a minimum target to work with, however, is very
helpful in determining beforehand whether there is enough
potential in a market move to warrant taking a position. If the
market exceeds the price objective, that’s just icing on the cake.
The maximum objective is the size of the prior move. If the previ-
ous bull market went from 30 to 100, then the maximum down-
side objective from a topping pattern would be a complete
retracement of the entire upmove all the way down to 30.
Reversal patterns can only be expected to reverse or retrace what
has gone before them.

Adjusting Price Objectives

A number of other factors should be considered while trying to
arrive at a price objective. The measuring techniques from price
patterns, such as the one just mentioned for the head and shoul-
ders top, are only the first step. There are other technical factors
to take into consideration. For example, where are the prominent
support levels left by the reaction lows during the previous bull
move? Bear markets often pause at these levels. What about per-
centage retracements? The maximum objective would be a 100%
retracement of the previous bull market. But where are the 50%
and 66% retracement levels? Those levels often provide signifi-
cant support under the market. What about any prominent gaps
underneath? They often function as support areas. Are there any
long term trendlines visible below the market?

The technician must consider other technical data in try-
ing to pinpoint price targets taken from price patterns. If a down-
side price measurement, for example, projects a target to 30, and
there is a prominent support level at 32, then the chartist would
be wise to adjust the downside measurement to 32 instead of 30.
As a general rule, when a slight discrepancy exists between a pro-
jected price target and a clearcut support or resistance level, it’s


110 Chapter 5

usually safe to adjust the price target to that support or resistance
level. It is often necessary to adjust the measured targets from
price patterns to take into account additional technical informa-
tion. The analyst has many different tools at his or her disposal.
The most skillful technical analysts are those who learn to blend
all of those tools together properly.

THE INVERSE HEAD
AND SHOULDERS

The head and shoulders bottom, or the inverse head and shoulders
as it is sometimes called, is pretty much a mirror image of the top-
ping pattern. As Figure 5.2a shows, there are three distinct bot-

Retum Move

Left Shoulder Right Shoulder
— Head

LLIN ET

Figure 5.2a Example of an inverse head and shoulders. The bottom ver-
sion of this pattern is a mirror image of the top. The only significant differ-
ence is the volume pattern in the second half of the pattern. The rally from
the head should see heavier volume, and the breaking of the neckline should
see a burst of trading activity. The return move back to the neckline is more
common at bottoms.



111

Major Reversal Patterns

toms with the head (middle trough) a bit lower than either of the
two shoulders. A decisive close through the neckline is also nec-
essary to complete the pattern, and the measuring technique is
the same. One slight difference at the bottom is the greater ten-
dency for the return move back to the neckline to occur after the
bullish breakout. (See Figure 5.2b.)

The most important difference between the top and bot-
tom patterns is the volume sequence. Volume plays a much more
critical role in the identification and completion of a head and
shoulders bottom. This point is generally true of all bottom pat-
terns. It was stated earlier that markets have a tendency to “fall of
their own weight.” At bottoms, however, markets require a signif-
icant increase in buying pressure, reflected in greater volume, to
launch a new bull market.

714195 (FRX) Forest Labs Inc 01/02/98
ber char i
| i Head and Shoulders Bottom bso
po
Ih Wy
i hi s ! | i | ; Loe
y fh yy ih °
i | | " | :
Left Shoulder I a) Shoulder sane
Figure 5.2b A head and shoulders bottom. The neckline has a slight

downward slan

t, which is normally the case. The pullback after the breakout

(see arrow) nicked the neckline a bit, but then resumed the uptrend.


112 Chapter 5

A more technical way of looking at this difference is that
a market can fall just from inertia. Lack of demand or buying
interest on the part of traders is often enough to push a market
lower; but a market does not go up on inertia. Prices only rise
when demand exceeds supply and buyers are more aggressive
than sellers.

The volume pattern at the bottom is very similar to that
at the top for the first half of the pattern. That is, the volume at
the head is a bit lighter than that at the left shoulder. The rally
from the head, however, should begin to show not only an
increase in trading activity, but the level of volume often exceeds
that registered on the rally from the left shoulder. The dip to the
right shoulder should be on very light volume. The critical point
occurs at the rally through the neckline. This signal must be
accompanied by a sharp burst of trading volume if the breakout
is for real.

This point is where the bottom differs the most from the
top. At the bottom, heavy volume is an absolutely essential
ingredient in the completion of the basing pattern. The return
move is more common at bottoms than at tops and should occur
on light volume. Following that, the new uptrend should resume
on heavier volume. The measuring technique is the same as at
the top.

The Slope of the Neckline

The neckline at the top usually slopes slightly upward.
Sometimes, however, it is horizontal. In either case, it doesn’t
make too much of a difference. Once in a while, however, a top
neckline slopes downward. This slope is a sign of market weakness
and is usually accompanied by a weak right shoulder. However,
this is a mixed blessing. The analyst waiting for the breaking of
the neckline to initiate a short position has to wait a bit longer,
because the signal from the down sloping neckline occurs much
later and only after much of the move has already taken place. For
basing patterns, most necklines have a slight downward tilt. A ris-
ing neckline is a sign of greater market strength, but with the
same drawback of giving a later signal.


Major Reversal Patterns 113

COMPLEX HEAD AND
SHOULDERS PATTERNS

A variation of the head and shoulders pattern sometimes occurs
which is called the complex head and shoulders pattern. These are
patterns where two heads may appear or a double left and right
shoulder. These patterns are not that common, but have the same
forecasting implications. A helpful hint in this regard is the strong
tendency toward symmetry in the head and shoulders pattern.
This means that a single left shoulder usually indicates a single
right shoulder. A double left shoulder increases the odds of a dou-
ble right shoulder.

Tactics

Market tactics play an important role in all trading. Not all tech-
nical traders like to wait for the breaking of the neckline before
initiating a new position. As Figure 5.3 shows, more aggressive
traders, believing that they have correctly identified a head and
shoulders bottom, will begin to probe the long side during the
formation of the right shoulder. Or they will buy the first techni-
cal signal that the decline into the right shoulder has ended.

Some will measure the distance of the rally from the bottom
of the head (points C to D) and then buy a 50% or 66% retracement
of that rally. Still others would draw a tight down trendline along
the decline from points D to E and buy the first upside break of that
trendline. Because these patterns are reasonably symmetrical, some
will buy into the right shoulder as it approaches the same level as
the bottom of the left shoulder. A lot of anticipatory buying takes
place during the formation of the right shoulder. If the initial long
probe proves to be profitable, additional positions can be added on
the actual penetration of the neckline or on the return move back
to the neckline after the breakout.

The Failed Head And Shoulders Pattern

Once prices have moved through the neckline and completed a
head and shoulders pattern, prices should not recross the neckline


114 Chapter 5

Figure 5.3 Tactics for a head and shoulders bottom. Many technical
traders will begin to initiate long positions while the right shoulder (E) is
still being formed. One-half to two-thirds pullback of the rally from points
C to D, a decline to the same level as the left shoulder at point A, or the
breaking of a short term down trendline (line 1) all provide early opportuni-
ties for market entry. More positions can be added on the breaking of the
neckline or the return move back to the neckline.

again. At a top, once the neckline has been broken on the down-
side, any decisive close back above the neckline is a serious warn-
ing that the initial breakdown was probably a bad signal, and cre-
ates what is often called, for obvious reasons, a failed head and
shoulders. This type of pattern starts out looking like a classic head
and shoulders reversal, but at some point in its development
(either prior to the breaking of the neckline or just after it), prices
resume their original trend.

There are two important lessons here. The first is that none
of these chart patterns are infallible. They work most of the time,
but not always. The second lesson is that technical traders must
always be on the alert for chart signs that their analysis is incor-
rect. One of the keys to survival in the financial markets is to keep
trading losses small and to exit a losing trade as quickly as possi-
ble. One of the greatest advantages of chart analysis is its ability


Major Reversal Patterns 115

to quickly alert the trader to the fact that he or she is on the
wrong side of the market. The ability and willingness to quickly
recognize trading errors and to take defensive action immediately
are qualities not to be taken lightly in the financial markets.

The Head And Shoulders as a
Consolidation Pattern

Before moving on to the next price pattern, there’s one final point
to be made on the head and shoulders. We started this discussion
by listing it as the best known and most reliable of the major
reversal patterns. You should be warned, however, that this for-
mation can, on occasion, act as a consolidation rather than a
reversal pattern. When this does happen, it’s the exception rather
than the rule. We'll talk more about this in Chapter 6, “Con-
tinuation Patterns.”

TRIPLE TOPS AND BOTTOMS

Most of the points covered in the treatment of the head and
shoulders pattern are also applicable to other types of reversal pat-
terns. (See Figures 5.4a-c.) The triple top or bottom, which is much
rarer in occurrence, is just a slight variation of that pattern. The
main difference is that the three peaks or troughs in the triple top
or bottom are at about the same level. (See Figure 5.4a.) Chartists
often disagree as to whether a reversal pattern is a head and shoul-
ders or a triple top. The argument is academic, because both pat-
terns imply the exact same thing.

The volume tends to decline with each successive peak at
the top and should increase at the breakdown point. The triple
top is not complete until support levels along both of the inter-
vening lows have been broken. Conversely, prices must close
through the two intervening peaks at the bottom to complete a
triple bottom. (As an alternate. strategy, the breaking of the
nearest peak or trough can also be used as a reversal signal.)
Heavy upside volume on the completion of the bottom is also
essential.


ul lll

Figure 5.4a__A triple top. Similar to the head and shoulders except that all
peaks are at the same level. Each rally peak should be on lighter volume. The
pattern is complete when both troughs have been broken on heavier volume.
The measuring technique is the height of the pattern projected downward from
the breakdown point. Return moves back to the lower line are not unusual.

Figure §.4b A triple bottom. Similar to a head and shoulders bottom
except that each low is at the same level. A mirror image of the triple top
except that volume is more important on the upside breakout.



Major Reversal Patterns 117

08/13/93 (KBH) Kaufman & Broad Home 01/02/98

Weekly Bar Chart 25

238

‘s

i 188

SA we

Figure 5.4c A triple bottom reversal pattern. Prices found support just
below 12 three times on this chart before launching a major advance. The
bottom formation on this weekly chart lasted two full years, thereby giving it
major significance.

The measuring implication is also similar to the head and
shoulders, and is based on the height of the pattern. Prices will
usually move a minimum distance from the breakout point at
least equal to the height of the pattern. Once the breakout occurs,
a return move to the breakout point is not unusual. Because the
triple top or bottom represents only a minor variation of the head
and shoulders pattern, we won’t say much more about it here.

DOUBLE TOPS AND BOTTOMS

A much more common reversal pattern is the double top or bottom.
Next to the head and shoulders, it is the most frequently seen and
the most easily recognized. (See Figures 5.5a-e.) Figures 5.5a and


118 Chapter 5

Figure 5.5a Example of a double top. This pattern has two peaks (A and
C) at about the same level. The pattern is complete when the middle trough
at point B is broken on a closing basis. Volume is usually lighter on the sec-
ond peak (C) and picks up on the breakdown (D). A return move back to the
lower line is not unusual. The minimum measuring target is the height of the
top projected downward from the breakdown point.

dlnallal

Figure 5.5b Example of a double bottom. A mirror image of the double
top. Volume is more important on the upside breakout. Return moves back to
the breakout point are more common at bottoms.

l



Major Reversal Patterns 119

Daily Bar Chart | ee

hy | hy | Resistance | :

M \ hth ; | 7
|

ih °

ee | 7

\ \ ha i" .

Figure 5.5c Example of a double bottom. This stock bounced sharply off
the 68 level twice over a span of three months. Note that the second bottom
was also an upside reversal day. The breaking of resistance at 80 completed
the bottom.

5.5b show both the top and bottom variety. For obvious reasons,
the top is often referred to as an “M” and the bottom as a ew.”
The general characteristics of a double top are similar to that of the
head and shoulders and triple top except that only two peaks
appear instead of three. The volume pattern is similar as is the
measuring rule.

In an uptrend (as shown in Figure §.5a), the market sets a
new high at point A, usually on increased volume, and then
declines to point B on declining volume. So far, everything is pro-
ceeding as expected in a normal uptrend. The next rally to point
C, however, is unable to penetrate the previous peak at A on a
closing basis and begins to fall back again. A potential double top
has been set up. I use the word “potential” because, as is the case
with all reversal patterns, the reversal is not complete until the


120 Chapter 5

05/19/97 (AMAT) Applied Matis Inc 01/02/98

Daily Bar Chart

ye

un i y ‘Oct Nov ‘Dec’

Figure 5.5d Example of a double top. Sometimes the second peak doesn’t
quite reach the first peak as in this example. This two month double top sig-

naled a major decline. The actual signal was the breaking of support near 46
(see box).

previous support point at B is violated on a closing basis. Until
that happens, prices could be in just a sideways consolidation
phase, preparing for a resumption of the original uptrend.

The ideal top has two prominent peaks at about the same
price level. Volume tends to be heavier during the first peak and
lighter on the second. A decisive close under the middle trough at
point B on heavier volume completes the pattern and signals a
reversal of trend to the downside. A return move to the breakout
point is not unusual prior to resumption of the downtrend.

Measuring Technique for the Double Top

The measuring technique for the double top is the height of the
pattern projected from the breakdown point (the point where the


Major Reversal Patterns 121

07/15/97 (OTC) Nasdaq Composite Index 02/27/98

Daily Bar Chart

4750

tl | ™
I I It
| wi " i
I -
fy 4500
Double Bottom ia)
Tog Sep et Nov Dec’ Ge Feb

1a %

Figure 5.5e Price patterns show up regularly on the charts of major stock
averages. On this chart, the Nasdaq Composite Index formed a double bot-
tom near the 1470 level before turning higher. The break of the down trend-
line (see box) confirmed the upturn.

middle trough at point B is broken). As an alternative, measure the
height of the first downleg (points A to B) and project that length
downward from the middle trough at point B. Measurements at
the bottom are the same, but in the other direction.

VARIATIONS FROM THE
IDEAL PATTERN

As in most other areas of market analysis, real-life examples are
usually some variation of the ideal. For one thing, sometimes the
two peaks are not at exactly the same price level. On occasion, the
second peak will not quite reach the level of the first peak, which
is not too problematical. What does cause some problems is when


122 Chapter 5

the second peak actually exceeds the first peak by a slight margin.
What at first may appear to be a valid upside breakout and
resumption of the uptrend may turn out to be part of the topping
process. To help resolve this dilemma, some of the filtering crite-
ria already mentioned may come in handy.

Filters

Most chartists require a close beyond a previous resistance peak
instead of just an intraday penetration. Second, a price filter of
some type might be used. One such example is a percentage pene-
tration criterion (such as 1% or 3%). Third, the two day penetration
rule could be used as an example of a time filter. In other words,
prices would have to close beyond the top of the first peak for two
consecutive days to signal a valid penetration. Another time filter
could be a Friday close beyond the previous peak. The volume on
the upside breakout might also provide a clue to its reliability.

These filters are certainly not infallible, but do serve to
reduce the number of false signals (or whipsaws) that often occur.
Sometimes these filters are helpful, and sometimes they’re not.
The analyst must face the realization that he or she is dealing with
percentages and probabilities, and that there will be times when
bad signals occur. That’s simply a fact of trading life.

It’s not that unusual for the final leg or wave of a bull mar-
ket to set a new high before reversing direction. In such a case, the
final upside breakout would become a “bull trap.” (See Figures
5.6a and b.) We'll show you some indicators later on that may
help you spot these false breakouts.

The Term “Double Top” Greatly Overused

The terms “double top and bottom” are greatly overused in the
financial markets. Most potential double tops or bottoms wind up
being something else. The reason for this is that prices have a
strong tendency to back off from a previous peak or bounce off a
previous low. These price changes are a natural reaction and do
not in themselves constitute a reversal pattern. Remember that, at
a top, prices must actually violate the previous reaction low before
the double top exists.


}—Figure 5.6a
Example of a false
breakout, usually
called a bull trap.
Sometimes near the
end of a major
uptrend, prices will
exceed a previous
peak before failing.
Chartists use vari-
ous time and price
filters to reduce such
whipsaws. This top-
ping pattern would
probably qualify as
a double top.

08/14/97 (JPM) Morgan J P & Co Inc 01/29/98
Daily Bar Chart

False Breakout lla

minty
i h
[yf yin ive i " lr

im A124
| \ we

Volume

cul uaa ld

‘Sep
ET RG TRIES OTS RCE TOT

tliat

Figure 5.6b Example of a false breakout. Notice that the upside breakout
was on light volume and the subsequent decline on heavy volume—a nega-
tive chart combination. Watching the volume helps avoid some false break-
outs, but not all.


124 Chapter 5

Figure 5.7a Example of a normal Figure 5.7b Example of a nor-
pullback from a previous peak before mal bounce off a previous low. This is
resumption of the uptrend. This is normal market action and not to be
normal market action and not to be confused with a double bottom. Prices
confused with a double top. The dou- __ will normally bounce off a previous
ble top only occurs when support at low at least once, causing premature
Point B is broken, calls for a double bottom.


Major Reversal Patterns 125

Time Between Peaks or Troughs
Is Important

Finally, the size of the pattern is always important. The longer the
time period between the two peaks and the greater the height of
the pattern, the greater the potential impending reversal. This is
true of all chart patterns. In general, most valid double tops or
bottoms should have at least a month between the two peaks or
troughs. Some will even be two or three months apart. (On longer
range monthly and weekly charts, these patterns can span sever-
al years.) Most of the examples used in this discussion have
described market tops. The reader should be aware by now that
bottoming patterns are mirror images of tops except for some of
the general differences already touched upon at the beginning of
the chapter. .

SAUCERS AND SPIKES

Although not seen as frequently, reversal patterns sometimes take
the shape of saucers or rounding bottoms. The saucer bottom
shows a very slow and very gradual turn from down to sideways
to up. It is difficult to tell exactly when the saucer has been com-
pleted or to measure how far prices will travel in the opposite
direction. Saucer bottoms are usually spotted on weekly or
monthly charts that span several years. The longer they last, the
more significant they become. (See Figure 5.8.)

Spikes are the hardest market turns to deal with because the
spike (or V pattern) happens very quickly with little or no transi-
tion period. They usually take place in a market that has gotten so
overextended in one direction, that a sudden piece of adverse
news causes the market to reverse direction very abruptly. A daily
or weekly reversal, on very heavy volume, is sometimes the only
warning they give us. That being the case, there’s not much more
we can say about them except that we hope you don’t run into
too many of them. Some technical indicators we discuss in later
chapters will help you determine when markets have gotten dan-
gerously over-extended. (See Figure 5.9.)

