
himself in the secret London vault, smiling as he counted the gleaming bars.17 The silver question sent
Buffett’s and Munger’s eyes rolling heavenward a fraction of an inch, although Buffett responded politely
that owning the silver had been a dull ride. He refrained from mentioning that a visit to the silver would have
livened up the ride considerably.
The questions droned on as Buffett and Munger listened, unwrapping Dilly Bars with much rustling.
Shareholders began to voice complaints. They didn’t like the stock price.18 One said she was going to look
into correspondence schools, since her Berkshire stock would no longer pay for college.19 Gaylord Hanson of
Santa Barbara, California, stood at the microphone to harangue that he had bought BRK near its highs in
1998 because of Buffett’s track record and had come out okay only because the money he’d lost had been
made up by four technology stocks.20 He urged Buffett to invest at least ten percent of Berkshire’s assets in
technology, “the only game in town. Isn’t there enough left in your brain power to maybe pick a few?”
The questions kept veering along these lines. What about famous money managers like Stanley
Druckenmiller, who had given in and bought technology at Soros? Given Berkshire’s disappointing
performance, couldn’t Buffett find something new to do? If not technology, couldn’t he make some
international investments?
It was worse than humiliating. Looking out into the audience, Buffett saw that, for the first time, some of
them assumed that he was letting them down: the effort of nearly fifty years rolled backward, undone, his
own shareholders turned against him. His age suddenly signified not experience but obsolescence. In the
press, people now referred to him as an old man. It seemed that the world today did not want Berkshire
Hathaway.
Afterward, Buffett guzzled Cherry Coke while signing autographs, then donned a baseball uniform to throw
out the first pitch at the Omaha Royals game. He made another round of parties with Astrid, still wearing his
baseball uniform, Dilly Bars dripping in his wake. He held court at Gorat’s with the family on Sunday night,
then oversaw the board meeting—another teaching exercise—on Monday morning. Afterward, he, Susie, and
the kids and their families flew to New York. By the time he was catching up with friends, eating out and
seeing shows with the family, and dutifully checking off his list the unloved annual chore of buying suits at
Bergdorf’s, the bathtub memory had done its work. While in New York, he also taught a session of the
modern version of the Ben Graham course at Columbia and met with half a dozen journalists attending
Columbia’s business-journalism program.21
Saturday morning he summoned three members of General Re’s management to his suite at the Plaza Hotel.
Ron Ferguson brought a series of PowerPoint handouts and began to pace through General Re’s string of
terrible results. Buffett listened for a few minutes, frowning and fidgeting. Finally he said, Why don’t we just
jump to the end. Results had to improve. The lines of authority must be reinforced. Clients were dictating
terms to General Re, not the other way around. This must end. Somebody had to be accountable.22
He stopped short of telling Ferguson to retire, betrayed by his weakness for older managers. He sympathized
with Ferguson, who’d suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage in late 1999. Ferguson, who had seemed just
slightly off-kilter for some time afterward, had offered to step down then. Buffett had told him no. He didn’t
believe in putting people out to pasture; some of his best managers had been elderly, including Mrs. B, who
had worked until age 103 and died a year later. He missed her caustic little soul, but felt great relief that she
had not outwitted the terms of her noncompete. His own goal was to outlive Mrs. B, not by just a few years
but by five years beyond forever, as he had once feared that she would outlast him. He bragged all the time
about Berkshire’s geriatric crew, and his board of directors was beginning to resemble the elderly U.S.
Supreme Court.
Imagine, therefore, if Buffett’s genie had been watching over his shoulder a few weeks later, as he played
bridge after dinner at Bill and Melinda Gates’s house. He was answering questions in the raspy voice that
meant he hadn’t been sleeping, repeating that he was “just fine,” but clearly not enjoying himself. Sharon
Osberg, who knew how to read the signs that meant Buffett was in real distress, conferred with the Gateses,

who immediately summoned a doctor, over Buffett’s protests.23
The doctor was surprised that Buffett had never had a colonoscopy. He gave him a painkiller to get him home
in comfort. But, he said, you really should go in and have a complete examination and a colonoscopy when
you get back to Omaha.
The genie would have been less tactful. Howard Buffett had had colon cancer and died of complications from
it. What was Buffett thinking, at age sixty-nine, never having had a colonoscopy? This was certainly not
treating your body like the only car you’d ever own.
A month later, BRK had recovered by nearly $5,000 a share to $60,000. Fortune magazine noticed that even
though he “lost his heavenly touch” in 1999, Berkshire’s recent forty-seven percent recovery from its March
low made him a “good revivalist.”24 He would need some reviving in other ways, however.
Buffett had scheduled the dread procedure at last.25 So much medical attention at once—only a month after
the kidney stone. But a colonoscopy could be considered “routine.” He distracted himself by talking on the
phone and playing bridge. He played helicopter on the computer. When people asked him about the
upcoming procedure, he said, “I’m not the least bit worried.”
But he woke up from the colonoscopy to a nasty shock. A sizable benign polyp was nesting in his gut. The
polyp had taken over so much real estate that removing it would require demolishing a good chunk of the
surrounding neighborhood. It had a few small friends nearby as well. This was not something to trifle with.
Buffett decided to have surgery in late July, after Sun Valley. “Oh, I’m not worried at all,” he said, making
jokes and stressing the good results from his cardiology tests. “I never worry about my health. Unless you’d
brought it up, I never would have even thought about it.”
But Buffett now seemed cornered into issuing press releases about his health, this one blaring in embarrassing
detail:
Warren E. Buffett, Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. (NYSE: BRK.A, BRK.B), expects to enter
an Omaha hospital in the next month to undergo surgery to remove several benign polyps in his colon.
The polyps were discovered on Monday when Mr. Buffett underwent a routine physical examination,
which otherwise found him to be in excellent health. The surgery is expected to keep Mr. Buffett in the
hospital for several days, after which he expects to return quickly to work. Berkshire Hathaway is
releasing these facts to forestall the kind of false rumors about Mr. Buffett’s health that disrupted the
market for its stock earlier this year.26
The surgery took several hours, during which fifteen inches of Buffett’s innards were removed, and left him
marked with a seven-inch scar. He spent a week recovering at home. He also grew a beard for the first time
in his life. Deprived of Berkshire Hathaway, he talked a lot on the phone. He sounded weak.
“Oh, no, I’m not tired at all, I’m perfectly fine,” he said. “I’ve lost a few pounds I needed to lose. Astrid’s
taking good care of me. The doctor says I can eat anything I want. By the way, did I tell you that I went into
the hospital with a colon, but I came out with a semicolon?” Asked if he was concerned about a recurrence:
“Oh, no, I’m not worried at all about that. I never worry about anything, you know. Incidentally, did I tell
you that the anesthesiologist used to be my caddy at the country club? I told him before he put me under
that I sure hope I tipped him well.”
Berkshire Hathaway’s press release simply noted that the polyp was confirmed benign and no further
treatment was required. Despite the announcement, rumors raced over the Internet and around Wall Street
again. Some insisted that Buffett must have had cancer; polyps did not require surgery. But Warren was not
sick and certainly did not feel old. He still felt like the “Firebolt.”
Yet after tolerating cavalier treatment all his life, his health was beginning to set limits. Someday, his
wrestling match with infinity would end; the questions he was avoiding must be faced. Since Berkshire and

Buffett were interchangeable in his mind, everything in his nature rebelled against this task. Many of the
questions hinged on Big Susie, who was going to outlive him. He told people that she would take care of
everything.

55
The Last Kay Party
Omaha • September 2000–July 2001

By the time Buffett got his semicolon, the Internet boom had boomeranged. The dotcoms were dying at the
pace of one a day: Arzoo.com, Boo.com, Dash.com, eToys.com, Flooz.com, FooDoo.com, Hookt.com,
Lipstream.com, PaperFly.com, Pets.com, Wwwwrrrr.com, Xuma.com, Zing.com.1 The NASDAQ was trading
at less than half the value of its peak; the old economy stocks were still swooning. The Federal Reserve had
started to cut interest rates once again. Buffett’s reputation, however, began to revive.
Berkshire dipped its soup ladle into a huge stockpot of capital for Buffett to buy private companies, bankrupt
companies, under-the-radar companies as the window to invest began to open again. He bought U.S.
Liability, an insurer of unusual risks; Ben Bridge, another jeweler;2 and Justin Industries, parent of Acme
Brick and Tony Lama and Nocona Boots;3 Shaw, the world’s largest carpet maker;4 and Benjamin Moore
Paint.5 He bought Johns Manville, a home-building-products maker,6 and Mitek, a high-tech steel component
fabricator.7 Even so, by the end of 2000 Berkshire still had billions of unused capital: a baled-in-thebasement, batched-to-the-rafters, wadded-to-the-walls, stashed-up-the-chimney, thatched-to-the-rooftop
mass of money that continued to pour out from the self-perpetuating cash-spinning machine.8
Buffett’s foreboding prediction about the market in his 1999 Sun Valley speech had proven right so far. Now
he sermonized in his letter—which had become a global media event, released on the Internet and awaited by
so many thousands of people that the Berkshire Web site nearly crashed on the appointed Saturday
morning—that the birth of the Internet was a chance for cynical financiers to “monetize the hopes” of the
credulous. He alluded again to the Aesop’s fable he had invoked in his Sun Valley speech: Investing in the
Internet is laying out the bird in the hand—money today—to get birds in the bush. The resulting “wealth
transfer on a massive scale” was going to benefit only the very few.
“By shamelessly merchandising birdless bushes, promoters have in recent years moved billions of dollars
from the pockets of the public to their own purses (and to those of their friends and associates)….
Speculation is most dangerous when it looks easiest.”9 The audience listened, and at the 2001 shareholder
meeting, the crowds started coming back.
A small part of Berkshire’s good fortune came from a turnaround at Gillette, where Buffett had been
instrumental in replacing its CEO, Mike Hawley, with Jim Kilts.10 Shortly before that, near the end of 2000,
he had thrown off his torpor as a Coca-Cola board member once again when Doug Daft, the new CEO, tried
to make a deal to buy Quaker Oats. Buffett was one of several board members whose lack of support spiked
the deal. But it remained to be seen whether the changes at Coca-Cola would make a difference. Certainly
replacing one ham sandwich with another had not helped the stock.
Buffett’s return to Sun Valley in 2001 was another opportunity to table-thump. But as the Gulfstream jets
glided their way down the mountain wave to Hailey, the corporate chiefs heading to the Sun Valley Lodge
had deals on their mind and rumors were flying. Most of the rumors concerned AT&T fighting off an
unfriendly offer for its cable assets from Comcast.

For the first time, an archipelago of television news tents filled the lawn in front of the Sun Valley Inn.
Equipped as though for a movie shoot with distracting lights, silver reflecting sheets, producers, cameramen,
assistants, makeup people, and reporters, all waiting to wrestle CEOs into giving interviews, they fueled the
rumor mill. TV cameras hovered around the Duck Pond; reporters pounced on the willing and unwilling after
their speeches. They chased after people from companies that were supposedly involved in the deals.
On Friday afternoon, after playing bridge, Katharine Graham, who was now left in relative peace at age
eighty-four, rode back to her condo in the little golf cart she used to get around in Sun Valley. Tall and still on
the slender side, she had had both hips replaced, and one worked better than the other. People noticed that
she seemed worn out and “fading,” but she had been saying what a marvelous time she was having this year.
The company that she and her son Don had created, with much help from Buffett’s advice, was now
regarded almost as iconic for its financial and journalistic success at a time when newspaper profits were
slipping badly. Graham took obvious pleasure in the way the Allen conference brought together so many of
the people she enjoyed. She had been assigned an assistant to escort her everywhere, but she had the grit to
resist handling, so for much of the conference she was seen on the arm of either Don or Barry Diller,
chairman of USA Networks and a close friend. At the moment, however, she was alone.
Susie Buffett Jr. and her mother, in their car, spotted Graham and drove into the employee parking lot where
Graham could not see them, so that they could watch her climb the four steps to her condominium. She was
taking the anticoagulant Coumadin, which greatly increased the risk of serious hemorrhage should she fall.
She clung to the handrail and looked shaky but made it inside without incident.11
Later, outside on the deck of the Wildflower condos, overlooking the golf course and mountains, where
Graham often sat reading the Washington Post in the afternoons, fashion designer Diane von Furstenberg
threw her annual women’s cocktail party for Kay, a Sun Valley tradition. Susie Buffett brought See’s
lollipops, and they all gathered around Graham for a picture, with lollipops in their mouths.12 After a while,
Don Keough, Diane’s husband Barry Diller, News Corporation CEO Rupert Murdoch, and several of the
other men crashed the party and joined Don Graham.
Saturday dawned. The audience settled into its chairs to hear Andy Grove, head of Intel, kick off the morning
with “Internet Interrupted.” Then Diane Sawyer moderated a panel, asking Meg Whitman of eBay; Sir
Howard Stringer, CEO of Sony; and AOL Time Warner’s Steve Case “Pulse of America: How Do You Find
It?” Sun Valley frothed and bubbled like a junior high school cafeteria being filmed for a documentary, with
reporters round-robining rumors that USA Networks, or AOL Time Warner, or Disney, or Charter
Communications, or some combination of them, were going to hook up with AT&T Broadband.13 Many of
those present wished the television tents would disappear.
After Diane Sawyer, Buffett was once again the scheduled speaker. Since the market’s peak in March 2000,
over four trillion dollars of stock-market value had evaporated.14 At least 112,000 dotcom employees had
been fired.15 Meanwhile, the surviving Internet businesses were entering their adolescence. Surely, some
reasoned, he would no longer think Internet stocks overvalued. The audience was hoping he would relent
from his previous bearishness.
Yet Buffett showed them a graph indicating that the value of the market was still one-third larger than the
economy. That was far higher than the level at which Buffett said he would buy stocks. It was considerably
higher than the market had ever stood in modern history—higher, even, than the peak of the Great Bubble of
1929. In fact, the graph suggested that the economy would have to nearly double, or the value of the market
would have to fall by nearly half, before he would get really excited about it.16 He told them that despite two
years of keelhauling, even with the NASDAQ down by more than half, he would still not buy. He expected
the stock market (with dividends included) to grow at no better than about seven percent a year, on average,
for possibly as long as the next twenty years.17 That was only about one percent higher than he had said two
years before. It was a dispiriting message, most of all to Buffett himself—who was about to celebrate his
seventy-first birthday—and to the track record he wanted to maintain.

“That shouldn’t be the way markets work,” he said, “but that is the way markets work. And in the end, that’s
what you should remember.” He put up a slide.
ANYTHING THAT
CAN’T GO ON FOREVER
WILL END.
—Herb Stein18
Many in the audience were shocked and sobered—but impressed. “You basically have to listen to Warren,”
said Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon.com. Amazon was trading at $17, down from $113 at its high. “Some things
he said were quite painful, but, by God, the man is a genius and so far seems to be right.”19
Buffett enjoyed congratulations for his speech at lunch under a tent on the deck behind Herbert Allen’s
condo, where a group of about a hundred people, including the Grahams, had gathered. He sat with President
Vicente Fox of Mexico—whom he thought of as “an old Coca-Cola guy”—and kicked around the
economy.20 Then he went off to play golf.
Kay Graham rode over to the bridge room to play cards. After a while she said she was not feeling well and
had decided to go back to her room. She called to alert her assistant, whom she had left waiting for her at
Herbert Allen’s condo next door to her own, then walked out to her golf cart and drove back to her condo
alone.
The assistant had started to check out the window for her every couple of minutes. She looked and saw that
Kay’s golf cart had already arrived, but it was empty. She sprinted outside and saw Kay lying at the top of
the steps on the porch in front of her door. Running over, she bent and spoke to Graham, who didn’t respond.
She started screaming for Herbert Allen to come out.21 By the time the emergency medical technicians
arrived a few minutes later, Don Graham had rushed back from the golf course. He was going to need
someone to help him make decisions, and asked Buffett whether he wanted to come along. But Buffett could
not do it.22 Griffith Harsh, a prominent neurosurgeon who was married to eBay CEO Meg Whitman, went
with Don to look at the CAT scan at St. Luke’s hospital in Ketchum, about ten minutes away.23

Photo Insert Four

Image 72
Buffett and Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan appear at the Greater Omaha Chamber of
Commerce, February 20, 2004.

Image 73
“End Zone” Buffett explains the finer points of the game during a charity event for Jean Naté.

Image 74
Warren holds Susie close in July 2004, one of her few public appearances after recovering from oral
cancer surgery.

Image 75
Buffett shows his feelings for GEICO at the company’s new Amherst, NY, facility in January 2005.

Image 76
Charlie Munger goes for a read in England.

Image 77
Buffett and former president Bill Clinton at a Girls, Inc. fund-raiser in Omaha, December 2006.

Image 78
Buffett with friend Sharon Osberg.

Image 79
Bill Gates Sr., Bill Jr., and Warren in China, 1998.

Image 80
Bitten by a cheetah, chased by a polar bear…photographer and conservationist Howie Buffett donates to
wildlife preservation.

Image 81

Image 82
At Buffett’s 75 birthday party at Sharon Osberg and David Smith’s house, he and Gates attempt to learn
landscape painting. Afterward, Buffett stands by his finished work of art.

Image 83
After his colon-polyp surgery in 2000, Warren grew a beard for the first time in his life.

Image 84
Warren, Doris, and Bertie reenact their childhood photograph (see Photo Insert 1) with expressions
appropriate to their feelings at the time.

Image 85
Buffett and Arnold Schwarzenegger at a NetJets conference for business leaders in England, September
2002.

Image 86
Buffett interviews San Francisco 49ers cheerleaders for flight attendant jobs at another NetJets event.

Image 87
Buffett concedes defeat to Ariel Hsing, the nine-year-old ping-pong player who trounced him on his
birthday, August 30, 2005.

Image 88
In May 2004 in New York, Bono presents Susie with a picture he painted of her featuring U2 lyrics.
Afterward he declared they were “soulmates.”

Image 89
Buffett’s friend Walter Schloss boogies the night away at his ninetieth birthday party in 2006.

Image 90
On his birthday on August 30, 2006, two years after Susie’s death, Warren marries a tearful Astrid in a
private ceremony at Susie Jr.’s house.

Image 91
A scene from Peter Buffett’s Spirit: The Seventh Fire, a show about recovered identity. The Philadelphia
Inquirer compared it to a Philip Glass opera, with “guitar rolls that would put U2’s The Edge to shame.”

Image 92
Bill and Melinda Gates share a joyful day with Buffett on June 26, 2006, when he announces that he will
give most of his fortune to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

Susie Jr. drove off to meet Don and Herbert Allen at the hospital. She knew very well that no one could
expect her father to deal with any kind of medical crisis. Big Susie had had a cardiac catheterization in 1997,
and Warren got on a plane to go to San Francisco to be with her. When Kathleen Cole called to say that Susie
was going to be okay, he turned the plane around in midair and went back to Omaha. Since then, Susie had
been in the emergency room repeatedly with excruciating abdominal adhesions and intestinal blockages. In
1999 she had her gall bladder removed. Throughout all of her medical problems over the years, Warren had
never once been able to endure the emotional distress of going to the hospital to be with his wife.24
Shortly after he and Don arrived at St. Luke’s and the radiologist took the CAT scan, Dr. Harsh saw it and
said, “Kay needs to get to a trauma center.” The hospital helicoptered her to St. Alphonsus Regional Medical
Center in Boise; Herbert Allen arranged a private plane—somewhat bigger than a riding lawn mower and
flown by a couple of cowboys in jeans and T-shirts—to take Don and Susie to Boise.
While all of this was transpiring, Warren retreated to his condo. Big Susie had left earlier that day for a
wedding in Greece and knew nothing of what was going on. Peter and Jennifer, Howie and Devon were still
at Sun Valley; Peter and Howie came by briefly, but even at such a time it was unnatural for Warren to tune
the unfamiliar instrument of his emotions to make an openhearted connection with his sons. Sharon Osberg
was not at Sun Valley; nor, of course, was Astrid. With both his wife and his daughter also unavailable to
him, it was Bill and Melinda Gates, Ron and Jane Olson, and Susie Jr.’s boyfriend who sat with him waiting
for news of Kay. Their job was to help distract him from what was going on by talking of anything but her.
Susie Jr. had called from Boise to say that she was going into surgery, but that was all.25
Kay was taken into the operating room, then brought out. Around midnight, Dr. Harsh came by to tell Don
and Susie that things looked worse and Kay needed another CAT scan. They wheeled the gurney back into
surgery and handed her watch to Susie Jr., who felt her stomach drop.26
Around two o’clock in the morning, since there had been no further word from Boise, Buffett decided to go
to bed. Everybody left.
Ninety minutes or so later, the doctors moved Kay to intensive care. “We’re really not sure what’s going to
happen,” they said. Susie Jr. called her father and woke him up. She told him to get the family on the plane.
Buffett had to call everyone and organize their departure.
A couple of hours later, when the NetJets plane taxied into Boise, Warren called Susie Jr. and said he didn’t
feel he could come to the hospital. She told him that he had to come; Don was distraught and needed him to
be there. Even if Kay was not conscious and couldn’t see him, she would be able to sense his presence.
Reluctantly, he acquiesced.
When he got to the hospital, his daughter met him downstairs in the lobby. She knew he was so frightened
that he would have to be coaxed. “You have to come upstairs,” she insisted. “You have to come.” She led
him to intensive care, where Don Graham, red-faced from weeping, was sitting alone with his mother. Kay,
drained of color and unconscious, lay connected to monitoring devices that blinked little lights and made tiny
noises. There was an oxygen mask over her mouth. Warren and Don clung to each other, sobbing. Lally
Weymouth, Kay’s oldest child and only daughter, arrived. Eventually, Susie Jr. took her father downstairs.
There was nothing more they could do. As the rest of Kay’s children gathered in Boise, the Buffetts boarded
a plane for a sad ride back to Omaha.27
