
The chart begins with the distribution phase from 1999 to 2002, which was an arc formation in
price. Buyers and sellers stabilized price between $30.00 and $37.00 per share from mid-2002 to
late 2003, at which time buyers pushed price upward through the horizontal resistance line at $37.00
per share in early 2004. Experienced speculators began to join the professionals in buying shares at
the breakout in early 2004 as eventually more investors, driven more by emotions and less by
experience perhaps, continued to buy price during the realization phase.
The Price Alternation Principle, introduced in Chapter 3, states that price alternates between states
of range expansion (positive feedback) and range contraction (negative feedback). The sustained
range breakout from early 2004 to early 2005 represented a classic range expansion positive
feedback loop where buyers pushed price higher and short sellers also pushed price higher via their
buying from covering their short positions.
Buyers and sellers met at the $60.00-per-share level throughout 2005 to establish a range
contraction phase of negative feedback that gave rise to a clear horizontal trendline at the $65.00-pershare level as drawn along with a rising lower support line during this contraction phase. The
important concept to know is that you must combine the Price Alternation Principle with the concepts
of Accumulation and Distribution.
Be aware that price will not rise forever without small or even intermediate pullbacks or
corrections during the realization phase. In other words, do not automatically assume that because
price has entered a range contraction phase that the price has now entered a period of distribution.
During such phases, it may be best to take profits on any long-term trend following positions while
price bounces between the defined levels, and then wait to see if what you observe is truly a range
contraction phase that marks distribution, or whether it marks a simple consolidation in the context of
a rising, powerful uptrend that may be labeled a re-accumulation period.
Instead of attempting to outsmart the market by guessing in which direction price will break, stand
aside or put your money to work in another stock that is showing a range breakout phase of positive
feedback. Recall our discussion on triangle consolidation patterns in Chapter 5 and the benefit of
waiting for an official breakout rather than trying to guess the direction of the break. In the event that

the price breaks to the upside, you can always establish a new position in the direction of the
breakout. Our goal is not to outsmart the market, but to manage risk and trade when the odds favor
successful outcomes. Most traders find it extremely difficult to profit during a trading range
environment and prefer the stability of a comfortably rising uptrend move of a stock during a
realization phase.
Buyers and sellers formed a negative feedback loop or range compression environment between
2005 and mid-2006 that gave way in late 2006 to another range breakout and positive feedback loop
to the upside that continued the Realization phase. Price eventually rallied above $90.00 per share
and then formed another negative feedback, range consolidation phase with clear horizontal trendlines
at the $80.00- and $95.00-per-share levels. Though this could have been another range compression
phase that led to another new breakout phase to the upside, it did not. The period from 2007 to mid2008 marked a clear distribution phase between professionals and amateurs that led eventually to a
true distribution phase in the stock which took price 30 percent lower to the $60.00-per-share level in
early 2010.
Figure 7.4 shows us the same Exxon-Mobil weekly chart as Figure 7.3 but adds the 3/10 MACD
Momentum Oscillator to show that clear negative divergences often form during the price highs in the
distribution phase.
FIGURE 7.4 Large-Scale Stage Transition in Exxon-Mobil

In Figure 7.4 we see that the 3/10 MACD Momentum oscillator peaked in April 2000 with price
trading at $42.00 per share. As price pushed its way to a new high in October 2000 at $47.70 per
share, the oscillator registered a clear lower high, locking in a nonconfirmation of the price high with

a negative divergence. During a clean transition phase that takes the form of a rounded arc instead of a
spike, you will almost always observe a negative divergence with the 3/10 MACD Oscillator or
other momentum oscillators including the Rate of Change and indicator named Momentum. Look for
negative divergences to signal the onset of a likely distribution phase.
The same structure occurs in 2007, but this time we see a lengthy negative momentum divergence
that began with the oscillator high in 2005. Look closely at the 3/10 MACD Oscillator throughout
2007 and into 2008 as you observe lower oscillator highs. Price peaked in May 2008 slightly above
$96.00 per share, which was just higher than the two prior price peaks from 2007 at the $95.00 level.
Notice the clear lower high in the oscillator. I drew vertical lines to reveal the absolute price highs in
2000 and 2008 as they corresponded with the momentum oscillator values.
As a rule, look for new price and momentum highs to highlight the likely transition from an
accumulation phase into the realization phase, and look for momentum to confirm new price highs
during the realization phase. Finally, look for lengthy or obvious negative momentum divergences to
mark the final price highs during a likely distribution phase in price. Refer to Chapter 2 for full
descriptions on how to use momentum oscillators along with price for confirmation and nonconfirmation tactics.

A Violent Distribution Example: Potash Corporation of
Saskatchewan
While Exxon-Mobil gave us an example of a stable transition through the three phases, high-volatile
stock Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan (POT) provides an example of a V-spike or violent
reversal as the stock transitioned from realization into sudden distribution.
The weekly progression through the three stages in the weekly chart of Potash-Saskatchewan shows
the alternative progression to the distribution phase: a violent end. Potash Corp actually experienced
a lengthier accumulation than shown in Figure 7.5 which begins in early 2005. The origin of the
accumulation phase began in 1999 between $8.00 and $12.00 per share, and lasted until the reaccumulation phase seen here between 2005 and 2007 in the $25.00 to $35.00 two-year accumulation
range phase.
FIGURE 7.5 Stage Transition and Arc Pattern in Potash Saskatchewan Weekly

Buyers pushed the price of Potash Corp above the $45.00 level in November 2006 to begin the
two-year realization phase that began slowly and rallied to an exponential price peak above $240.00
per share in June 2008. Notice again the rising angles you can draw to connect the swing lows for the
duration of the Realization phase. In fact, if you connect all lows as I have done in the chart, you can
draw a clear rising arc trendline that occurs before the violent end to the uptrend. Notice during the
early months of 2008 that the lower arc trendline turned vertical as the price trend also took a vertical
shape to it. Professional traders know that such steep increases in price are unsustainable, and that the
longer the vertical rally lasts, the more violent the sell-off phase will be.
Look closely at the absolute peak at $241.00 per share in June 2008 to note the shooting star weekly
candle that formed the new all-time high in price. Look also at the 3/10 MACD Momentum oscillator
to observe the clear negative momentum divergence that failed to confirm the new high in price. I
drew a vertical line to connect the price peak to the final lower peak in the momentum oscillator. You
cannot expect to find a clean negative momentum divergence on every single violent V-spike top
formation as seen here, so do not be alarmed if you do not see a corresponding negative momentum
divergence accompany a final price high after a near-vertical price rally.
On a related note about momentum, notice how the momentum oscillator formed higher indicator
peaks as Potash Corp continued its uptrend to new highs through 2007. Recalling our discussion on
the Momentum Principle in Chapter 2, new momentum highs and new price highs often lead to higher
price highs yet to come after a retracement in price. Potash Corp shows this to be the case as the
momentum oscillator on the weekly chart formed higher highs along with the corresponding new price
highs. When you see this pattern, it indicates that the price remains in a steady rising Realization
phase and that it is a generally safe, or at least low-risk, opportunity to buy pullbacks to rising short-

term moving averages within the context of the developing uptrend.
Unlike Exxon-Mobil which transitioned into a stable distribution phase, Potash Corp transitioned
almost immediately into a violent distribution phase without a meaningful sideways pause or
consolidation period in price. Be aware that trading within the context of a vertical price move is like
playing a child's game of musical chairs. When the music stops, everyone will be rushing for the
nearest chair. However, when you extend the analogy to discuss participants in the market, realize that
some participants will not hear the music stop (meaning the market has peaked), and will continue
trading long well into the first sharp down-move of the sudden distribution phase.
From a chart standpoint, pay very close attention to stocks on higher timeframes that exhibit rising
exponential arc formations similar to the chart of Potash Corp in Figure 7.5 When you see price break
such a steeply rising trendline, it is almost always best to sell your position, take your profits, and
move on to trade or invest in another stock that is in earlier stages of Realization. If you fail to
understand this principle, you could be caught long stock in a price move from $240.00 to $60.00, as
you see occurred in six-month's time from June to December 2008 in Potash Corp. You will do best
as a trader to avoid attempts to capture the final part of a move, or sell as close as possible to the
absolute high.

WYCKOFF'S ALTERNATE STAGE LABELS
Before discussing how Ralph Elliott built upon the early concepts from Dow and his contemporaries, it's worth noting the
alternate terms for the accumulation/distribution cycle as explained by Richard D. Wyckoff, also in the early 1900s.
Wyckoff incorporated volume and sentiment into his explanation of the similar accumulation and distribution cycles he
observed in his research. His contributions to technical analysis include the concept of the “Composite Man,” and the
Wyckoff Method, both of which focus on the deeper details of the larger accumulation/distribution cycles, supply/demand,
and investor psychology.
This figure shows the two additional terms that Wyckoff uses to clarify the life cycle of a stock. The diagram is the same
as Figure 7.1 only Wyckoff uses two different terms, as labeled.

Idealized Progression through the Stages as Explained by Richard Wyckoff

While Wyckoff continues the use and same explanation for the accumulation and distribution phases as Charles Dow,
Wyckoff first replaces the Realization term with the concept of Mark-up and then divides the distribution phase into an
additional Mark-down phase to classify what happens when price falls sharply after a period of distribution. Just as one can
characterize the Realization phase as both the professionals and amateurs buying stock, one can simplify the Mark-down
phase as both the professionals selling or short-selling stock along with the broader public who is also selling stock. While
the concepts are the same, Wyckoff adds an additional phase and reclassifies the Realization phase in his analysis.

For those who want to learn more about Wyckoff's methods, read Wyckoff's original works entitled How I Trade in
Stocks and Bonds, or Wyckoff's Stock Market Techniques. Dr. Hank Pruden also published a book in 2007 entitled The
Top Three Skills of Top Trading in which he summarized most of the Wyckoff Method for today's markets.

RALPH ELLIOTT'S WAVE THEORY
While it is impossible for one chapter in a book to address the Elliott Wave Principle adequately, I
did want to highlight how Elliott's work complemented the larger life cycle concepts as explained by
Charles Dow, Richard Wyckoff, and other early technicians. For those interested in specific study and
application of the Elliott Wave Principle, I recommend you begin your journey with the book traders
consider the contemporary reference book for understanding Elliott's original work. A.J. Frost and
Robert Prechter published The Elliott Wave Principle originally in 1978 and have updated the
publication over the years. The book contains all of the rules, guidelines, and descriptions needed for
a deeper understanding of the principle explained by Ralph Elliott's original work from the 1930s.
Where Charles Dow and others saw three stages, Ralph Elliott saw five waves to a bull market
advance. Where Richard Wyckoff characterized a Mark-down phase after a peak in prices, Elliott
saw a three-wave downward progression. Elliott's contributions added to the work of Dow,
Hamilton, Rhea, Wyckoff, and other founding fathers of technical analysis.
Let us first see how Elliott conceptualized the life cycle of a stock and then compare his numbering
scheme to the phrases of Dow and Wyckoff. Figure 7.6 begins with an ideal Elliott Wave full
progression, and compares those numbers with the schema from Dow and Wyckoff.
FIGURE 7.6 Elliott's Waves and Dow/Wyckoff's Stages Overlaid

Where Dow saw three stages, Elliott saw five. In simplest comparison, Elliott's Waves 1 and 2
represent Dow's Accumulation Stage, Wave 3 represents the Realization or Mark-up stage, and
Waves 4 and 5 mark the start of the Distribution stage. When we add in Wyckoff's term of Mark-down
to describe the sell-off phase after a distribution top has occurred, Elliott divided the Mark-down
phase into three stages with letters A, B, and C instead of numbers to distinguish between the upward
move and the corrective downward move. One can label the A Wave down as the ending phase of
Dow's distribution phase and beginning of Wyckoff's Mark-down phase.

The main idea is that Elliott labeled the corrective waves or swings in price that divide the
different phases, while Dow did not do so specifically. Charles Dow labeled smaller corrective
swings against the rising upward primary trend as secondary reactions. Elliott classified these
secondary reactions as corrective waves, numbered Wave 2 and 4, in the context of the three stage, or
five-wave upward move that marked a standard bull market.
Like both Dow and Wyckoff, Ralph Elliott believed that the waves represented distinct stages that
were best explained in terms of investor participation, expectations, and psychology. Similar to our
discussion about the characteristics of the three different stages of accumulation, realization, and
distribution, Elliott characterized common occurrences not just in these stages, but in the two
corrective phases that temporarily interrupted the upward advance.
In general, the following discussion, adapted from Frost and Precter's Elliott Wave Principle ,
addresses how Elliott viewed the characterizations and expectations of each of the five waves of a
bull market and three waves of a bear market on the larger scale.

Wave 1: The Beginning of Something New
Like the Accumulation/Distribution discussion earlier in the chapter, we begin our journey on the
wave progression cycle after a lengthy sell-off or downward trend in the price of a stock or market.
To outside observers, the first wave will be non-distinct from any of the other prior waves that have
occurred in the context of the prevailing downtrend. Most participants will see it as another bearmarket retracement and will either avoid buying shares or may even consider short-selling the
perceived top of the wave into resistance. The public is bearish but the professionals may be buying
shares in anticipation of a bottom in price, or during the beginning of a new accumulation phase.
However, if you look deeper inside the price components, you might see that what will later be
described as a Wave 1 will have a possible new momentum high or an increase in breadth or market
internals (if assessing a stock market index). This is also known as a Kick-off. Wave 1 might break
upward through either the 20- or 50-period moving average in a sign of strength. Professionals often
see these hidden bullish signals where amateur investors do not.

Wave 2: The Failed I-Told-You So Correction
If investors perceive what will later be Wave 1 as just another standard upward retracement within
the context of a prevailing downtrend, then they will see what will later be labeled Wave 2 as any
other downward swing within the context of the prevailing bear market. The sentiment still remains
negative, bears continue holding short-sale positions, but professionals may be slowly accumulating
shares in the context of a broadening trading range of the accumulation cycle.
Wave 2 is a down wave where the majority of participants expect the market to continue to a new
low. However, second waves by definition do not make a new low. Instead, price forms a higher low
above the prior low that began the first wave. This is confusing to many market participants as it
occurs in real time, but most do not feel compelled to act yet. In this description, midway through the
second wave, participants might declare “I told you we were still in a bear market” to those who
believe the market has bottomed. However, their assessment will be short-lived, as second waves
eventually give way to a pivotal third wave, which sets the stage for the Realization phase in a stock.

Wave 3: The Powerful Rally We All See
In Elliott Wave theory, the third wave is the most powerful, most dynamic wave. It makes sense why
this occurs, because a market is now transitioning to new swing highs and evolving into a more
powerful technical position that begins the Realization stage. Think back to Chapter 3 on the Price
Alternation Principle to our discussion on Positive Feedback Loops. If indeed that the majority of
market participants view Waves 1 and 2 as nothing more than movements in a continuing bear market,
then when Wave 3 breaks above the prior resistance line of the peak of Wave 1, those traders who
remain short will first start to buy back their borrowed shares, which drives the market higher.
Aggressive traders see this new price breakout as a new buying opportunity in which to invest, and
their buying also drives the market higher. The combination of bulls buying willingly and bears
buying to cover unwillingly explains why Elliott observed the third wave to be the most powerful
wave: it is the wave where we begin to see Positive Feedback Loops begin.
As price rises higher and higher beyond its prior resistance boundaries, more participants take
notice and buy as price continues to rise. During the Realization phase, both professional and savvy
retail traders purchase shares. Volume and momentum should confirm the new price highs and
forecast higher price highs yet to come according to the momentum principle.
Despite the strength of the rally, many investors still doubt the price move and believe that it will
end at any moment. It will take more than an initial breakout to compel them to buy shares. Remember
that toward the later stages of a Realization phase, professionals cease buying, preferring to hold on
to shares they have already accumulated. Eventually as price rises to their targets, they will start to
sell shares to the eager public who are now aggressively buying shares. The fourth wave often
interrupts the euphoria and often marks the beginning of a distribution phase ahead.

Wave 4: Profit Takers and Retracement Buyers
Wave 4 is a downward move in price that is often a stable, relatively mild correction that finds
support at the daily or weekly short- or intermediate-term moving averages, or a popular Fibonacci
retracement level. The selling pressure here comes from those who bought at much lower prices as
they take their profits. Fourth waves often formally begin the transition of shares from the
professionals who bought during the accumulation phase (characterized by Waves 1 and 2) to the
broader retail public who have waited on the sideline until their greed forced them to buy shares of a
stock that they believe will never reverse down. Aggressive short-term traders might decide to short
sell shares here, perhaps believing that the market has moved too far and has already peaked.
These combined dynamics push the price lower, but because professionals are not yet aggressively
selling and because there are traders waiting eagerly to buy comfortable pullbacks to support, Wave 4
finds support and begins a final push to new highs that mark the end of the upward move.

Wave 5: Distribution and Divergences
The emotional buying of a large number of retail investors, particularly as greed causes them to
ignore developing weakness in a longstanding rally, pushes price to the final peak. Calm
professionals sell (distribute) their shares to the eager and emotional public who buys the stock
without fear of potential price declines. Wave 5 often reveals cracks in the price structure through
negative momentum, breadth, or volume divergences. Experienced retail traders will immediately see

these structural divergences, or nonconfirmations in price, and sell their shares to take whatever
profit they have. Aggressive traders, including professionals, may decide to short sell shares as close
to the top as they feel they can.
Fifth waves exhibit the battle between professional traders who use time-tested strategies and
indicators to assess the signals from price and the life cycle of a stock and smaller, less experienced
investors who are guided by emotion, specifically the fear of missing more of the continued rally.
This fear of missing out, when combined with the greed of making money quickly, causes them to buy
shares without observing the potential reversal signals or other dangers inherent on the chart.
Fifth waves often occur at the heart of the distribution phase between professionals and amateurs
and eventually give way to a price breakdown that begins Wyckoff 's Mark-down phase. Instead of
labeling the Mark-down phase as waves 6, 7, and 8, Ralph Elliott chose instead to label this distinct
sell-off phase with the letters A, B, and C to distinguish the two separate phases of the life cycle.
