
Outflanking the Market

.7.

lose value. At that time the hope is that premium collected from selling
$940 puts will cover the losses and help the trade to break even.
For a more advanced trader who has a thorough understanding of
option volatility and has the ability to juggle the risk of multiple positions,
this type of ratio spread may be just the ticket. For those traders who are
a little more conservative with both their capital and their time, a second
type of ratio spread exists: the backspread.

Backspreads
The backspread is so powerful that it has the ability, depending on the market's volatility, to give you 360-degree protection from risk. At the outset
the backspread ratio spread is designed to manage the risk. Instead of buying the at-the-money call and paying a significant premium, the backspread
requires that you sell the more expensive option and use that premium to
purchase two slightly out-of-the-money options. Instead of dreading any
market move, the backspread thrives on the volatility.
If the market moves aggressively in the direction of the backspread,
bullish or bearish, the purchased options create the opportunity for unlimited gains. While the frontspread is exposed to unlimited risk by the one
uncovered option, this setup is inverted in the backspread. The original
sold call is covered by one of the purchased options. The second option is
where all of the profits accumulate. This is liberating.
Add the fact that the backspread trade protects itself from accumulating losses by setting up a break-even scenario between the sold option
and the two bought options, and the backspread ratio spread beats out the
frontspread any day. The worst loss that can occur is the premium paid
for the bought options, and most of that can be made up by the premium
collected by the sold option.
For example, if the technical analysis is pointing to the oil market moving up in price, but the high cost of the margin (as of this writing $10,000
per contract) drives you away, a backspread ratio spread has the ability to
get you in. You sell a call option at a strike price of $145 per barrel and collect a premium of $6,000. You then purchase two out-of-the-money options
with a strike price of $150 per barrel for a total of $7,000 in premium. Your
net expense is $1,000, plus the clearing firm runs the SPAN risk management software program and reduces or eliminates any margin requirement
for the sold option.
If the market moves in the direction of the purchased call options at
$150 per barrel, then the risk between $145 per barrel and $150 per barrel
equals $5,000. At the same time the options are increasing in value because
of increased volatility as the underlying asset moves closer to the strike

172

BASIC STRATEG IES

price. Once the underlying asset breaks through the $150 strike price, the
premium increases rapidly.
If the market were to hit $160 per barrel, then gross proceeds would
be $20,000. However, $10,000 would have to be subtracted to cover the
increase in the premium of the sold $145 call. An additional $5,000 would
have to be subtracted as well, the difference between the two strike prices.
This leaves a net profit of $5,000, give or take a few dollars due to slippage.
This is not a bad return for a $1,000 investment, 1 for 5.
What happens if the market moves against the position? Let's say it
falls from $145 per barrel to $135 per barrel. The collected premium of
$6,000 begins to erode in value at the same time that the options you bought
at $150 decrease in value. Even if both of the options lose their entire premium, the net expense to execute the trade~is $1,000. This is in sharp contrast to the futures oil margin of $10,000- practically a tenfold increase in
the leverage without the tenfold increase in risk.
In a one-for-one comparison, the frontspread has just as many variables as a backspread, but its unlimited risk makes the frontspread an inferior trade to the backspread. Yet they both are trades that suffer from
the one-trick pony syndrome. While selling a call is a way to have a bearish bias in the market or selling a put is a way to have a bullish bias in the
market, they are both passive ways to be involved in a trade. This in effect
can cut your returns in half if the market dictates that you have to reverse
your position quickly.

TRADING BACKSPREADS
The core benefit of trading a backspread ratio spread is the ability to use
the market's money to trade. There are few times when the market actually works on your behalf to help you succeed, but this is one of those
times. Throughout the book we have looked at the favoritism given to
hedge traders and commercial traders for daisy-chaining multiple positions
together; there is no better place where this is exemplified than in the backspread ratio spread. Selling an option and buying two options provides a
sincere opportunity to trade practically for free. It is therefore important to
discern how many options should be bought, whether price or delta should
be the guide, and when a call or a put should be sold to establish the beginnings of a backspread trade.

Price versus Delta
Thus far we have talked about the ratio spread as if there is a specific number of options sold versus options bought, in this case two. The reality is

Outflanking the Market

173

that for every option sold you can determine the number of options purchased in any fashion. Some have strictly adhered to the price difference
between the bought and sold options, whereas others have used delta as a
guide to optimizing how many contracts to initiate.

Price If price is used as the litmus test of what options to buy and
sell, then the premium collected should represent no less than 50 percent of the total value of the options purchased. This goes back to our
one-for-two money management trading rule. If the price of the sold option is less than 50 percent of the value of the bought options, then the
question that has to be asked is, "Can I use a less exposing risk management tool to achieve the same results?" The answer is most likely yes.
Regardless of whether the sold option is being covered by a bought option, the less capital you commit to the trade, the more profitable the
trade will be for you in the long run. Ideally you would like the sold option to cover the cost of both of the bought options, but this can be a
difficult task.
There are trade-offs when attempting to make a backspread ratio
spread entirely free; they involve the strike price. The closer an option
strike price is to the underlying asset price, the more expensive that option's premium is. When the goal is to collect premiums, at-the-money or
in-the-money options are great. Unfortunately, the inverse is also true: The
closer you buy options to the underlying asset's fair market value, the more
you will spend.
So when it comes to trading the ratio spread, the further out that the
strike price is for the bought options, the more likely you will be able to use
the premium collected to pay for most or all of them. Yet at the same time
the further out that the bought option strike price is from the sold option,
the greater the loss difference before the positive effects of the bought
options can kick in.
In our oil example earlier, we sold an option at $145 and bought two
options with a strike price of $150. The difference between $145 and $150,
$5, equates to a built-in loss between the prices of $5,000. If the strike price
for the purchased options were to be stretched out to $155 per barrel, the
loss gap would extend from $5,000 to $10,000. This would mean that more
patience would be required on the part of the trader, more volatility would
be necessary on the part of the option, and the opportunity costs would
simply have a disastrous effect on any trader who was right about the market's direction but had used two strike prices that were simply too far out
to take advantage of a move.
Therefore, when an option's premium is used to determine the buying
of a covered position, it is essential that the difference in strike prices plays
a role in the decision-making process for a ratio spread.

174

BASIC STRATEGIES

Delta Delta is a little trickier than choosing a strike price or collecting
and comparing premiums. Delta measures how closely an option's change
in price mirrors the change in its underlying asset. If the delta is .S, that
means that it moves SO cents for every one-dollar move in the underlying
asset. This also means that your ratio of sold options to bought options
can have multiple permutations. You could buy two options with a delta
of .4 or you could buy four options with a delta of .2. This is known as a
delta-neutral strategy.
This significantly changes the trader's dependence on the strike price.
If the delta of the underlying sold option is fiat or slightly increasing in
value while the bought options are rapidly increasing, then the trade is
succeeding.
For instance, if the sold option has a delta of .6 and the purchased options have a delta of .3, then any change in delta value ofthe bought option
enhances the ratio trade. Let's say the market moves in the same direction as the purchased options, the sold call moves deeper into the money,
and the delta shifts from .6 to .S. At the same time, the purchased options
shift from a delta of .3 to .6 each. This is a very bullish sign. Where once
before there was a one-to-one ratio regardless of the number of options,
now the ratio has moved in favor of the bought options, making it .S to 1.2
(a 2:3 ratio), and climbing.
In this breakdown we are looking purely at price in relation to the underlying asset. In this way we can assess whether we can exit a trade with
a profit, regardless of whether it has actually reached the underlying strike
price. Of course there is no hard-and-fast rule when it comes to using the
delta. This is simply a tool to help you play with the ratio spread and adds
another dimension to help you succeed in your trading.

Bullish Backspread
The bullish backspread is also known as a call ratio backspread. This is
the strategy that is used if a trader wants to catch the long momentum of a
market. The call ratio backspread consists of two components: the sale of
calls and the purchase of a greater number of calls at a higher strike price.
This strategy has the exact same profile as a standard call option: limited
downside risk and unlimited profit potential. If this strategy is established
at a credit, the trader stands to make a small gain if the price of the underlying asset decreases dramatically.
Let's take a look at how a call ratio backspread would be executed in
the com market (see Figure 11.1).
The September com futures price is $5.74 per bushel after dropping
from a high of $6.20 per bushel. The price is sitting on the 50-day MA with
one of two scenarios presenting itself. Either the market will bounce off

.75

Outflanking the Market
C2-(167;'~Com CST (Comb) C'd! Uq '(6.dy bm)

Initiating a Bullish Backspread

FIGURE 11.1

Buy 2 Calls at 580 for 23'3 each

Initiating a Bullish Backspread

Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

the 50-day MA and resume its up trend or it will break through the 50-day
MA and make a fundamental shift in becoming a bearish market.
With the bias being on the upside for as long as it has been for this
chart, two months, putting on a bullish backspread is not unreasonable.
Based on Table 11.1, a bullish backspread could work based on our 50
percent or greater criterion.
The 570 call commands a premium of 28'2 and the 580 call commands
a premium of 22'2. If you are willing to be 30 cents out-of-the-money, you
can get a 605 call for 14'6. This would definitely be a two-for-one scenario,
but in the process you would be exposing yourself to a loss of $1,500 (30
cents times $50/cent) before you could make any money.
By selling the 570 call and purchasing two 580 calls, the maximum
amount of loss you are exposIng yourself to between the two strike prices

TABLEtl.1

570
580
590
600
605

Corn Option Prices
Call

Put

28 ' 2
22'2
19'4
16'2
14'6

21
26
32'2
39
42'4

176

BASIC STRATEGIES

is $500. At the same time the 570 option has an additional 5 cents left over
after paying for its covered option. This means that the second call option effectively cost just 18'3, making the cost of the 580 premium less
than that of a 590 option, 19'4. There is a $500 difference between the
two strike prices, which you get to collect if the market moves in your
direction.
As shown in Figure 11.2, the price of com drops briefly below the
50-day MA before turning around and resuming its upward trend. Each
of the bought calls grosses $1,800 in profits for a total of $3,600. The net
proceeds to the trader come out to around $1,300.

Bearish Backspread
On the opposite side the bullish backspread is the bearish backspread, also
known as the put ratio backspread. Everything is done the exact same way
as in a bullish backspread, but instead options are bought and sold to take
advantage of the drop in prices.
Let's rewind the com contract to a time before it dropped down toward
the 50-day MA.
In Figure 11.3 the price has stalled out at around 620. Significant horizontal resistance has developed around this price. This is definitely an
indicator that the market has the potential to pull back at least to the

Completion of a Bullish Backspread
Buy 2 Calls at 580 for 23'3 each

FIGURE 11.2 Completion of a Bullish Backspread
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

177

Outflanking the Market

ist"

FIGURE 11.3 Initiating a Bearish Backspread
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

50-day MA. A drop from 620 to 570 is a potential gross profit of $2,500
(50 cents x $50/cent).
In Table 11.2 the premium received from a 620 put is 32 cents. By
selling one 620 put and buying two 610 puts, the effective cost of the profitmaking put is just 18'1, almost the same price as the 590 put, which is 20
cents away or $1,000.
In Figure 11.4 the price of com drops, and it grosses the trader $2,775
for each sold put because it gaps below the 50-day MA. The net profit for
the trader is $2,275. In order to arrive at the figure, we have to take the
$2,775 and subtract $500, which is the difference between the 620 and 610
strike prices.

TABLE 11.2 Corn Option Prices

620
610
600
590
580

Call

Put

26'1
28'1
32'2
38
43'2

32
25' 1
21 '4
17'1
15'2

178

BASIC STRATEGIES

Completion of a Bearish Backspread

+ tl"'t

.t+,t~lt t.f+l---",,·~~·v~
II
//~
~,~

~----------

/--------

FIGURE 11.4 The Price of Corn Drops
Source : TradeNavigator,com © 2007, All rights reserved ,

Weaknesses of the Bullish and
Bearish Backspreads
The bullish and bearish backspreads are highly effective strategies if you
have both the time and the capital. Yet there are some key weaknesses that
can't be overlooked. First is the cost of the bought options versus the premium collected. If you hope to not be caught off guard by a huge difference
in the strike prices, you will be paying top dollar for the close-to-the-money
options. As we have seen, this can playa significant role in how much of
a discount can truly be applied to the bought options from the sale of an
option. The premium can be used to acquire more options the further outof-the-money their strike prices are, but that also means more missed profit
opportunity.
A second problem is the one-sided emphasis on the market's direction.
When you are bullish or bearish, that is your market bias. In our examples
the market behaved, but what if it doesn't? Then the premium you paid for
the second option is fully at risk. Another risk management strategy would
need to be implemented to protect the option that is meant to make you a
profit.
Finally, if the market moves but not significantly enough to gain a
profit, the option seller is still on the hook to give back the premium, plus
any gains due to the purchaser. So while our idealized scenarios showed
the market dropping or moving up significantly, what would happen if it

Outflanking the Market

179

moved only halfway or a quarter of the way? Those near successes would
be as bad as a complete failure in some instances.

CONCLUSION
Ratio spreads are an exciting way to get the market to pay for part if not
all of your trading activity, but they come with some significant pitfalls
and risks. Whether you trade frontspreads or backspreads, there are no
surefire ways to guarantee that you won't be exposed to losing something.
The question that needs to be answered is, "Is the risk worth it?" That can
only be determined by the level of faith you have in your technical and
fundamental analysis. How well you pick market direction and set profit
targets will directly impact whether ratio spread trading can work for you.

Advanced Strategies

n this section we look at six advanced risk management strategies.
While some basic strategies were mentioned briefly in Winning the
Trading Game, these strategies are altogether brand-new. We explore synthetic futures, selling straddles, selling strangles, intercommodity
spread, naked option selling, and bull/bear call spreads. These strategies,
while having some risk management components associated with them,
also provide more exposure to the unlimited risk aspect of selling options.
I discuss these strategies because they have the potential to minimize
costs and maximize profits. These strategies are broken down by definition,
potential application, the risk and rewards associated with them, and when
(and when not) to use them.
This section lays the groundwork for you to be able to add a higher
level of sophistication to your trading. You will be able to think beyond the
trade that you may have just executed and see the bigger picture of the
market's movements. Knowing how to use these advanced strategies will
lead to a better understanding of the market and give you the know-how to
react appropriately to the market when it does the unexpected. This skill
is just as valuable as knowing how to get into a trade in the first place.
We explore the concept of synthetic futures and the simultaneous buying and selling of options, and we discover whether a synthetic future is superior to a pure futures position. Then we tackle the elusive sell side straddle and sell side strangle. This section also contains information on how
to create anyone of the most common intercommodity spreads (grains,
metals, energy). We also analyze how to sell a naked option with the help

I

181

182

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

of the greeks. Finally the bull call spread and the bear put spread are introduced. Traders learn how to match the premium gains with the strike
price differences in order to optimize the benefits of the bull call-bear put
spread.
Much information is covered in few pages. As you progress in your understanding of the various ways that the markets interconnect, it becomes
easier to take chances. Eventually you will be able to fluidly combine basic
and advanced strategies based on the demands of the market, with little
separation between the two approaches.

(; H t\ I- 'I' E R I 2

Exposing
Yourself to Loss

reviously we focused on risk management-investing and trading
with few if any chances being taken with your principal. This chapter and the next take a different approach. Now that you have a
thorough understanding of how to minimize risk, these more advanced
techniques can show how to optimize profits. You can expand your versatility by mixing these strategies, which expose you to loss, with the risk
limiting strategies found in earlier chapters.
We explore three advanced strategies: synthetic futures, intercommodity spreads, and bull call-bear put spreads. Each strategy revolves around
the interrelationship of two or more different markets or two different
contracts all combined together to help maximize returns. Once these
strategies are applied in a trading environment they can diminish margin
expenses, give traders access to market relationships that they didn't know
existed, and put a trader in control of how he interacts with the market.

P

SYNTHETIC FUTURES, LONG-SHORT
Throughout this book I have liberally included information on trading futures and forex. In fact I have even paired futures contracts with options
to create synthetic option positions. As we learned earlier, a synthetic position combines various types of derivatives to simulate the risk associated
with a pure position. A trader would use a simulated contract for various
reasons. Sometimes it is not easy to obtain a pure position (price, liquidity,
and regulations can playa role). Other times a pure position can prevent
183

184

ADVANCED STRATEGI ES

a trader from maximizing all the different types of profit available to him
(as is the case with options). Finally, a pure position can simply be too
expensive in relationship to a synthetic position.
Putting on a synthetic futures position can solve the problems that can
be associated with having a pure futures, spot, or cash position. A synthetic
futures position is the combination of buying an option and selling a second
option at the san1e strike price, but in the opposite directions. This option
combination gives you unlimited access to profits and loss simultaneously.
It's worth having because the sold option has the potential of paying for
most, if not all, of the premium of the bought option. The combined sold
and bought premium can end up being a fraction of the cost of an outright
futures contract or of purchasing a cash position.
An exchange market you trade a pure' position on can have just one
of the problems discussed previously or the complete trifecta. The stock
market is a prime example of an exchange market that is affected by all
the problems that traders have to contend with. This is in sharp contrast
to the fact that the stock market is very versatile. There are at least three
active derivative markets available to stock investors. At any given time
a trader can buy or sell options, futures, and/or contracts for difference
(CFDs). While there are varying levels of availability, each derivative has
its own associated risk as well as margin and premium price figures.
Often the most economical stock derivatives to trade are the CFDs.
They tend to have the greatest liquidity and can have some of the best trading margins, depending on the publicly listed corporation you trade shares
in. Unfortunately, as of this writing, it is illegal for U.S. traders to trade
directly in CFDs; they're only allowed to trade stock options and stock futures. This is an example of how the first problem-regulatory issues-can
stop traders from participating in the best possible market.
The closest trading alternative to CFDs is single stock futures contracts, created by the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 and
designed to be a compromise for both the SEC and the CFTC. Instead, single stock futures have become the laughingstock of the investment world.
While good in theory, they lack the same mainstream support that CFDs
have gained around the world. This demonstrates the second problem, the
inability to maximize opportunities. The weakness of single stock futures
leaves stock options as the only realistic derivative left to trade.
To get a better understanding of the stock derivatives, let's break down
the numbers. The regulatory compromises that established single stock futures require that there be a uniform margin of 20 percent of a stock's face
value. Depending on the shares that are traded, putting up 20 percent of
the face value can quickly get expensive. Each single stock futures contract is based on 100 shares. Before a contract can even be established a
trader must have the required 20 percent margin available to him. If the
