-Harmon Killebrew
Athletics Are Such a Parallel to Trading
Maybe it's just my personal athletic background, but I think not. Over the years I've written about
the similarities between winning on the court, track or field and the pits in Chicago. I don't think it's
any fluke the most successful bond trader in the history of the world was also a High School All
American football star, Paul Tudor Jones a pretty darn good boxer, and Frankie Joe an outstanding
professional baseball player.

209
So, when I heard the above quotation from Harmon Killebrew, I was really rocked. Killebrew,
Mantle, Jordan, Namath, Ali, were all born with and developed great athletic abilities, but, then so do
many other individuals, who never become such superstars.
I've always wondered why that is. What are the differences between the SuperStars and the
others? I used to think it was media flash, but then noticed guys like Brian Bosworth, Dion Sanders, or
even Bo jackson never attained superstar status though they had all the trappings of making it.
There are many brilliant market lecturers, authors, analysts and traders, but the really great ones
have the same unique quality as Wilt Chamberlain . . . the ability to not blow up when the team started
losing the ability to turn on scoring power when things looked pretty bleak. That's what makes a
champion.
Not raw ability, not learned ability and not luck, which clearly wins some games but never
establishes legendary champions. Luck is too infrequent and too easy to see when it does appear.
THE POINT THEN is that as traders we need to devote a great deal of time and energy into
figuring out how we handle "getting behind" and what our response is. Do we give up, do we fold, get
angry? Or do we take the emotions of the moment and turn the anger or frustration into not just
scoring points, but winning the game?
if we are to win at this game, we must develop the ability to score when we
are behind; that's the key ingredient to develop in your psyche.

June 1991

Volume 28, Issue 6
What Causes Stock and Commodity Market Trends
Freight Train Theory Explained

The first 17 years of my market research revolved around trying to figure out when in the heck a trend
was about to begin, had begun, or was in the process of reversing.
I read all the fancy math books, studied all the chart systems from Gann to Z charts, got totally lost in
angles and confused by exponential. I had about resolved that the PhD crowd was correct in their
assumption that it is impossible to know the trend of a stock or commodity.

210
An Important Analogy
The problem, they said, is that the market is not a fixed energy vehicle, like, say a rocket. A rocket
starts with a certain thrust and runs into a certain resistance. Hence, we can measure its speed, project
where it will go and tell when it is spent.
The market, though, is more like a ship at sea ... we see its wake ... the chart book price pattern ... and
try to tell from the wake where the ship is going. That's fine ... if the ship stays on course.
Our problem is that the ship does not stay on course very often, as external energy flows-new ship
captains-are always trying to take over the helm and redirect the ship.
So, while we measure the wake, all we can learn is where the ship has been. The new captain, or even
the old one, can and will change the course at will ... seemingly without warning.
From Boats to Trains
My biggest research breakthrough came in 1983, and then again in 1985, when I discovered what I
loosely call the "FREIGHT TRAIN THEORY." My theory is that once a train gets rolling to a certain
speed it is damn well impossible to bring it to an abrupt halt.
Sure, go ahead and pull the emergency brake ... it will still take time for the train's forward force to
grind to a halt.
Ditto, Pork Bellies and Bonds, S&P's or Soybeans. Once any market really picks up a head of steam, it will
keep rolling, and in the process a trend will be established.
Critical Mass
The last paragraph above explains it all ...
Trend, I always thought (and so does the PhD crowd), was a function of slope, angle, slant, etc. It is
not.
Trend is begun by an explosion in price. The resulting new trend stays in
effect until there is a new explosion in the opposite direction.

211
What happens between the explosion points is the construction or definition of trend, but not the
creation of trend. Trend is begun with a big reversal and stays in effect until there is a new reversal.
This means all we have to worry about is catching the explosions and then
letting the trend that follows take us along for the ride.

August 1997

Volume 28, Issue 8
The Farmer, the Gambler, and the Speculator

It's an easy game, this business of making money trading.
There are only three or four rules to follow. But ... you and me ... we overdo the game ... and end up
pouring money in, good after bad.
How come? What can we do about it? At last weekend's seminar in Florida, Jake Bernstein shared a
very telling story. It goes like this
Several years ago jake was speaking to a brokerage firm gathering of farmers, ranchers and a few
speculators. After his speech he was asked if he'd like to meet the one customer who made money. They
said he wasn't very bright, but made money. Always.
The old farmer and jake hit it off pretty well, so the gent asked jake if he'd like to learn his system.
"Sure," Jake replied. 1'd like to see what you do."
With that, the crusty, aged trader opened up his chart of Pork Bellies and brought out a pendulum on a
string ... held it over the belly chart and advised jake, 1f it swings up and down on the page, I buy 'em ... if
it swing cross ways, I sell 'em. There it is, jake, now ya seen my system."
Jake stepped back, thought for a minute, and then asked, "That's all, there's nothing else to it?"
"Mmmm," mumbled the market wizard. "There is one other thing, but it don't mean much, I think. If I
got a loss at the end of the day, I get out of them things."
I mulled over this wisdom on the delayed flight home (a bomb threat forced us to switch to another
airline) and, while driving up 1-5 listening to Country Western music at 1:15 A.m., heard-I mean really
heard-Kenny Rogers' song "The Gambler." It struck me that everyone else has focused on his words,
"Know when to hold them, know when to fold them" . . . but the real message I heard was in the refrain,
"You gotta know what to throw away, know what to keep."

212
That dumb old farmer must have written Kenny's song. A gambler knows what to throw away ... bad
cards. Traders might want to listen to the farmer's and the gambler's work the next time they want to play
speculator.
Proving the Point
To drive this point home I tried an interesting experiment ... my thought was to develop a trading
system for bonds that had three simple rules.
Rule one was to buy today's close if it was greater than the close 8 days ago. No magic here, just a
demand the market is trending higher. The next step was to know when to throw them away ... so I placed a
stop of $850. Anything beyond that would be bad cards.
Finally, all cards ... trades ... would be held until a profit of about three times the stop was tested. The
best was a profit of $3,500.
With just those rules, one could have made $36,500 trading one Bond since they began trading. The
worst drawdown was a little large, but the average profit per trade, after $50 commissions and slippage, was
an attractive $160.
This "system" was not based on magic or fancy math. The only strategy was that of money
management. Kenny Rogers was right.

October 7991

Volume 28, Issue 70
How to Measure the Public vs. the Pros

There is a big difference in the emotional state of the “public" and the "professionals " that I think one
can measure through watching the entry and exit styles they are most apt to use.
I'd like to explain this fascinating technique that will help you spot major divergences in the attitude of
professional and amateur traders.

213
Let's Begin
Let's begin with an understanding of the typical "public" trader. Most likely he/she is short of cash
either by having a small bankroll or, if fortunately possessed with a large bankroll, carries too many
contracts, thus landing in the same fix as the small-time trader.
It is usually because of this pressure-which we bring on ourselves-that the trader becomes emotional
and easily influenced by his broker, the WSJ, astrology or gracious who knows, maybe even charts that
look like candies.
Think about it: When you are pressed for money. what is your natural reaction? Isn't it to run scared ...
to cut your losses very (too) quickly and to play catch-up ... hopping aboard whatever looks like a good way
to make money to balance out your losses?
That's the way it was for me, and I suspect pretty much the same for you.
What Does This All Mean?
What this means is that the "public" trader becomes emotional or irrational in style. In fact, pressure
destroys style, so neither style nor a system are followed. It becomes a willy-nilly game of catch up and the
trader dances to the flow of the most current wind, even if it is a breeze.
The key difference is the public (or almost always wrong) trader appears to be unduly influenced by
opening prices. In fact, this relationship is so consistent that since 1969 I have advocated the use of
opening prices for all market measures. In recent years, many analysts have finally gotten the message. For
22 years, this same powerful relationship has beat through all markets, stocks or commodities.
The Key
The key you need to understand is that the public action can be measured by taking the difference
between last night's close and this morning's open.
Conversely, professional activity, or true underlying price direction. best shows up by taking the
difference between the opening and the close of the same day.

214
August 1992

Volume 29, Issue 8
Folks, It Just Can't Be Done

Admittedly, our last market letter clearly explained and laid out a projected market high you to
"focus on August 14th-1 7th for the high to appear." Beginning on the 17th a bear market attack was
begun on stock prices, as we now know.
If we were like other services, we'd probably go out and buy a big ad in Investor's Daily you how
great we are (were).
But, folks, 27 years of trading has proven to me that forecasting prices, politics and our lives is
difficult if not damned near impossible. Please, let me explain ... because as soon as you get this point you
will become a successful trader.
Gracious, What a Messy Drawer
I've used the top right-hand drawer of my desk now for the last 18 months as a vault to store predictions
from a wide array of market letters (stocks and/or commodities) as well as other prognostications of what was
to happen.
Last night I delved into this pile to rummage around with yesterday's news and possibilities. What I found
was thrilling, enlightening, and most rewarding.
This culmination of hard work and multifaceted predictions of the future illustrates quite clearly that-it
can't be done. Let's see, how do I prove it to you? Should I show you the chart from a leading computer type
letter that used a Neuro-Net to scribe out that bonds would stage a big bull rally-in February? Nope, maybe I
should quote from an Investors Daily interview with Guru Elaine Garzarelli, wherein she expected (as of
March this year)that "Stocks should provide 20 percent returns over the next six to twelve months."
Garzarelli follows fundamental indicators. Others follow astrology. Frankly, compared to the fancy
fundamentalists, they have not done a bad job. What I mean is they are no worse than the better educated
Wharton or Harvard forecasts.
I could belabon the point by showing you one of this country's major forecasters whose graphic forecast
showed a continued bear market all the way down to a low in December ... in Bonds. But, so what? Would
that better prove the point I trust I have already made? If no ... do what I did ... collect all the forecasts that
cross your desk. Store them up for a year and let the point prove itself.

215
When I was younger I had this silly notion that my personal future could be divined by some psychic
means. Hence, I tried them all, palmistry, astrology, Tarot. The method did not matter, the outcome did. I
learned a lot which all boils down to this, "There are better ways to spend your money."
After all, I began as an art major in college, switched to journalism and here I end up using math to trade
the markets. None of those seers of what's to come, came remotely close to forecasting my future.
Politics Too
Heard "Slick Willie" say the recent DJIA spill-off was Wall Street's reaction to the Bush acceptance
speech. That's almost as bad a statement as to say our call for the August high predicted a bad Bush speech
which would lead to the tumble. Speaking of politics, where are the spin doctors today who so boldly
predicted that it would be folly to run against Bush as he was unbeatable?
OK-Let's Wrap This Up
It all gets down to this; in 27 years of trading I have yet to see anyone who can consistently forecast the
future of anything. Every few years we have a Granville, Precheter, Inger or Williarns that holds a hot hand,
but not for long.
That's right-27 years-and not one of us have yet been right for long with prediction. Moral of the Month;
"Just Say No" to anyone who claims such ability. God does not grant us that power it appears. But, he did
give us the ability to have a better understanding of things so that we might develop a systematic way of
driving, flying, living ... even trading commodities.
It Gets Down to This
You do not need to know the future of the world to make money trading (you'll never have that view
anyway). What you need is a consistent advantage in the game. No more. No less. That's where commodity
trading systems come into play, they, or any consistent approach, can give you and advantage in this game ...
and that, folks, is all you need.

216
September 1992

Volume 29, Issue 9
The Rush of Trading

Dostoyevsky, the Russian poet and gambling addict, said the greatest thrill in life is making money on a
speculative wager.
The second greatest thrill was losing money. Perhaps that's what led to the title Notes from the
Underground for his most famous writings. The point is well taken. Making money is a great rush, strangely
enough so is getting out of a loss. Few things feel better than getting out of that much pain and anguish.
The Dilemma
This sets up a mental conflict. Negative action, losing, creates a "rush" or feeling of exaltation that our
minds scramble. Just maybe, the lot of men and women like us, is that we just like rush, thrill and excitement
... to the point that we'll pay for the experience ... with margin calls.
Think I'm kidding? In written interviews with almost 600 traders, when asked to list the three primary
reasons they were trading not a one of them put down (as their first choice) to make money. That's right. They
listed things like, thrill, challenge, excitement ... but not one put to make money as their first choice.
Here's my next point; when people call wanting to learn a system, or subscribe to this letter, they seldom
ask if we make money ... instead they want to know how many trades we have a week and if we trade XYZ
commodity, their current love. Many callers lose interest when they find we don't trade XYZ, because that is
what they want to trade. Period. Even though they have been losing money doing it!
This Leads to Psycho Babble
There has been a spate of books and seminars in the last few years claiming that all you had to do to make
money was "get clear" to arrive at some sort of psychological understanding about you and the market.
People have paid tens of thousands for this "enlightenment." Now it happens to be I know little bit about this.
First, let me give my qualifications about what I'm going to tell you. I have my minor in psychology, I'm
as comfortable in front of a Skinner Box as a chart book, understand the subject matter from more than just a
"pop" vantage point.
More importantly, though, there was a time in my life when I did indeed think it was our minds that
screwed us up and kept us away from the unlimited wealth the markets seemingly offer. With that belief
system operating at full speed, I dabbled in them all. Geez, I could never admit it before now, but turning 50
as this written, makes confession of the soul much easier.

217
I tried Scientology, rebirthing, ARICA, EST, Rolfing, Reichan, sat for countless hours in a Zen
meditation center by Big Sur ... listened to subliminal tapes for a message I could not hear, chanted, panted,
prayed and pranced with the Sufis ail to "get clear" so I could tap the market's till. In short, I went through
more mental processes than coleslaw does in a Cuisinart.
It was fun, I learned a hell of a lot about myself, my body and rest of the people out there-like you. But,
you know what? None of that stuff helped one iota in making money trading. Not a twit.
My experience had been to make big money-with splash as you all know then give a little back, play
some games and hit it big again. It seemed I was good, but haphazard.
The Unvarnished Truth
Finally it hit me ... all this time and money had been a waste.
My trading success had nothing to do with my mental state. The market did not care if I'd rather drink
vinegar than kiss my mother. My mind-set about her, a Rorschach blot or my first-grade teacher ... no not
even my concept of God ... made any difference.
The reason I lost money was not because I wanted to ... or that I was retentive, possessive, etc. Nope, I
lost because I did the wrong thing and losing was what screwed up my mental attitude or approach.
It is not the other way around.
So, for my money you can forget the psychobabble currently being offered. You don't need 6 hours in a
flotation tank, mind-altering drugs, or hypnosis. All you need is ...
A Winning System and Patience
Frankly, I don't know which is the most important, the winning system or patience. It takes both. Why?
Because even the best of systems does not make money every day. When you plant a crop, you don't dig it up
every week to see how it's doing. Ditto systems, market letters, gurus etc. It always takes time to make money.
Making money is about time. time is about patience. Moral of all this: Forget Freud; Shut down your Primal
Scream; Activate your reactive mind if you want. It doesn't matter. just find a reliable approach to trading and
stick with it. And, for the record. of the 25 services monitored by Commodity Traders Consumers Reports. we
are in the top 5 or so for profits for the year, one of the few that made money in 1991.

218
December 1992

Volume 29, Issue 12
Beating Them to the Punch

In a matter of days, pundits will be telling you what 1993 has in store. All sorts of claims will be heard
and sage, crystal ball, advice given based on these oracles. Will they be any good?
Sometimes You Can Judge the Future from the Past
Listen up here real good ... people (analysts) tell you all the time that you can foretell the future from
studying past events. That's true, but not as often as you might think. If that was totally true, all we market
soothsayers would be multimillionaires. Few of the talking heads you see on CNBC, who judge from the past,
have more than cab fare to get to the TV station.
But ... there are some things you can judge from the past-one of these things is past predictions. I've been
waiting 12 months to pull out last year's predictions, for this year to prove, that prognosticators' ability to see
the future is no better, and probably worse, than yours.
It Means Millions of Dollars
Say what you want, the National Enquirer is a multimillion-dollar operation that would just love to take
bragging rights to being able to predict the future. Every year they have their psychics tell us what will unfold.
If they could be right certainly the NE would shout it out to the world and make more $$. Ditto all market
letters. Guess what? Sneaky me kept the NE's 1992 forecast as well as the market letters that make yearly
forecasts to see how their 1992 expectations came out. Here are the results:
The National Enquirer These journalists paid the top 10 psychics for their predictions and printed them
last January. Here's the scorecard; of 41 forecasts for 1992 not a single cotton-picking one of them was
correct. The closest was that "an AIDS epidemic will devastate prosports." Well, AIDS devastated Magic, but
there was certainly no epidemic. Chicago psychic, Irene Hughes (who charges a pretty penny to forecast
markets, and I've seen make major misses) saw that Vanna White would be "nearly killed" from a shock
while turning the Wheel of Fortune ... Angie Dickinson was to appear nude in Playboy at 60 years of age and
Cybill Shepherd would renounce acting in favor of running a medical clinic for the poor. NONE of these
hotshots predicted Bill Clinton's victory, most all gave the nod to Bush.
Moving Right Along Reading the Enquirer's predictions is a stop far removed from reality ... Donald
Trump was to lose it all but become a successful late night talk show host ... Michael jackson was to have lost

219
his voice ... and Liz Taylor was to have children ... maybe one would think that market forecasters would have
a better grasp on reality.
The truth is they don't. Several of the more respected soothsayers were looking for a December 1992
(that's now) drop of 1,000 DJIA points. Another said George Bush's New World Order troops would take the
U.S. over on December complete with a bank holiday!
Some market analysts said we would be in a rip-roaring bull market, others, a devastating bear market.
What became of the best-selling author of the 1992 depression book? And, what became of his depression and
stock market crash? I hold in my hand an October 19th epistle which proclaims, "Have no doubt about it, a
Crash will occur ... there is a fast fortune to be made ... $2,000 will become $20,000 ... THE DECLINE WILL
BEGIN NOW." Of course you are given the opportunity to call, with credit cards, for their recent update. The
point is no crash came.
Like the National Enquirer crystal ball gazers, the markets pundits I kept book on also had a perfect
record-of not being right. None of their "projected major turning points" were on the money. Several of them
called for a major high in March with new lows for the year to be seen in October. Instead October was an
excellent time to buy (it usually is).
The Moral of All This
Avoid like the plague attaching any significance to any ones predications of the future. The future
happens, certain laws come into play. But, the truth is good thinking and reasoning will get you much farther
along than oracle reading. If you take correct action in your life, trading or investing, you will come out on
top. Chasing guru forecasts is not right action. Prove my point-take 30 minutes right now to make your
sensible notion of what will happen in 1993. Read it one year from now and you will see how accurate you
are, compared to the headline mongers. Thinking and taking the correct action will always beat the crystal ball
crowd. Sure, it's work, but it works.
In 30 years of this game 1 have tried hundreds of "magic" forecasts and crystal ball crap. I used to
believe. But reality has taught me an important lesson I hope I can pass on to you-don't let forecasts get in the
way of doing what needs to be done. Savvy??
It's just Over My Head
Mine too ....
I've had a flurry of phone calls and letters this past week that I found revealing about folks like you and
me and the markets.
