
Let's recap two key points. In a single-rule back test, past performance
can be used as an unbiased estimate of future performance. In multiplerule back testing (i.e., data mining), past performance can be used as a selection criterion.
The data miner's mistake is using the best rule's back-tested performance to estimate its expected performance. This is not a legitinlate use
of back-tested performance because the back-tested performance of the
best-performing rule is positively biased. That is, the level of performance
that allowed the rule to win the performance competition overstates its
true predictive power and its expected performance. This is the data-mining
bias. This concept is illustrated in Figure 6.5.

Cumulative
Gains

\O~

~'I;;

e''(;T

$

~t;e
~~

Observed
Performance
Best-Rule

~;.,.9

Data
Mining
Bias
_..... -

._-.

...... __ .. _.- -----Expected
I
I
Performance
I
of Best·Rule
I

I

I
I
I
I

1+-----ln.Sam pie - - - -........I~I---Futu re---.
Time

FIGURE 6.5

Expected performance of best data-mined rule.

272 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

The best rule's performance does not truly deteriorate out of sample.
It only appears that way as the out-of-sample performance assumes a
level that reflects the rule's true predictive power without the good luck
that allowed it to beat the other rules. Its in-sample performance was a
combination of some level of predictive power, possibly zero, and a big
component of good luck. The good luck that shined on the rule during
the back test is now shining elsewhere. In a like manner, the monkey did
not suffer a loss of literary skill on the night of the big show. His performance merely reflected his true literary ability minus the good luck that
allowed him to produce letters that happened to match a segment of
Shakespearian prose.

DATA MINING AND S1J\TISTICAL INFERENCE
This section discusses the connection between data-mining bias and statistical inference. This section will cover the following points: (1) the distinction between biased and unbiased estimators, (2) the distinction
between random error and systematic error (i.e., bias), (3) the fact that
unbiased estimators are afflicted with random error but biased estimators
are afflicted with both random error and systematic error, (4) statistical
statements hold true for a large number of observations, such as a large
number of estimates, and (5) the data-mining bias is an effect that shows
up generally over many instances of data mining; thus we cannot say that
any particular data-mined result is biased.

Unbiased Error and Systematic Error
All scientific observations are subject to error. Error is defined as the difference between an observed value and the true value:
Error = observed - true

A positive error is said to occur when the observed value is greater
than true value. Negative error is the reverse. If a scale indicates a person
weighs 140 Ibs but they actually weight 150, the error is negative 10 Ibs.
There are two distinct types of error: unbiased and biased (systematic). All observations are infected with some degree of unbiased error.
No measuring instrument or technique is perfect. This type of error has an
expected value of zero. This means that if a large number of observations
are made on some phenomenon, such as the return of a rule, and those
observations are afflicted only with unbiased error, the observed values

273

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

will be haphazardly distributed about the true value. If an average were to
be computed for all these errors the average would be approximately
zero. See Figure 6.6.
In contrast, observations afflicted with systematic error tend to lie on
one side of the truth. Such observations are said to be biased. When the
errors of many biased observations are averaged, the average error will be
distinctly nonzero. See Figure 6.7. In the illustration the observations are
positively biased and their average error (observed - true) is positive.
Suppose a chemist observes the weight of a residue left by a chemical
reaction on one hundred separate instances. Unbiased error might be attributable to random variations in laboratory humidity over the course of the
one hundred weighings. The amount of moisture in the residue affects its
weight. Systematic error, if present, could be due to an imperfection in the
scale, always causing the observed weight to be lower than the true weight.
Unbiased and Biased Statistics

Interpreting a large sample of observations is difficult. As was discussed
in Chapter 4, a sensible first step is data reduction. This reduces the large

~
FIGURE 6.6

True
....,.. &
., .. Most Likely
". Observed
Value .....

Probability
Distribution
Of
Observed
Values

.........

Unbiased observations.

Probability
Distribution
Of
Observed
Values

Most
Likely
Observed

..

~

.-,'"

:

~~I.~e
True
Value

FIGURE 6.7 Observations with systematic error.

.

274 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
set of measurements to a smaller set of summary statistics: sample mean,
sample variance, and other computed measures that describe the entire
set of observations.
Chapter 4 also pointed out that a sample statistic, such as the mean, is
subject to a particular type of random error called sampling error. This error is unbiased. Here, the term error refers to the deviation between a
sample mean and the mean of population from which the sample was
taken. Because the sample does not represent the population perfectly,
the mean of the sample will deviate to some degree from the mean of the
population.
Relating this back to objective TA, a rule back test produces a large
sample of observations-the rule's daily, weekly, or monthly returns.
This sample is made more intelligible by reducing it to a performance
statistic (e.g., annualized average return, Sharpe ratio, and such). As is
true of any sample statistic, the performance statistic is subject to random error. However, the statistic may also be subject to systematic error or bias.
To state the obvious, a historical performance statistic cannot be put
in the bank or be used to buy a Ferrari. Its sole economic utility is the inference it allows us to make about future performance of the rule that
produced it. Objective technicians use back-tested performance to make
an inference about a rule's expected performance in the form of a confidence interval or a hypothesis test. In either case, the accuracy of the inference will depend on the type of error: unbiased or systematic, and its
magnitude.
Biased statistics are afflicted with systematic error. As stated previously in a single-rule back test, the mean return is an unbiased statistic.
Therefore, inferences about the rule's expected return based on back-test
performance will be subject only to a form of unbiased error called sampling variability.
This, however, is not the case for the best rule found via data mining.
The observed average return of the best-performing rule is a positively
biased statistic. As a result, inferences based on it will be systematically
in error. This means that when conducting a hypothesis test, one would
be prone to reject the null hypothesis more frequently than the significance level would suggest. For example, at a significance level of 0.05
one expects to reject the null hypothesis in error only 5 times in 100.
However, if the observed performance is positively biased, then Ho will
be rejected more frequently than it should, perhaps far more frequently.
This will result in trading using rules that appear to have predictive
power but in fact do not. The question is: What causes the back-tested
return of the best rule, the rule picked by the data miner, to overstate its
true predictive power?

275

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

The Mean versus the Maximum
Single-rule back testers and data miners are looking at two entirely different statistics. The single-rule back tester is observing the mean of a single
sample. The data miner is observing the maximum mean among a multitude of sample means. It is easy to overlook the fact that these are two entirely different statistics.
To be clear, in the case of a single-rule back test there is one set of results-the rule's daily returns generated over the back-test period. They
are summarized by a performance statistic (e.g., mean daily return). In
data mining, many rules are back tested, and so there are many sets of results and many performance statistics. If 50 rules have been back tested
the data miner has the opportunity to observe 50 mean returns prior to selecting the rule that produced the maximum mean return.
The set of 50 means returns can be considered as a set of observations, which, in tum, could be summarized with a statistic. For example
one could compute the mean of the means. That is the mean return of all
50 rules. Another statistic that could be computed for this set of observations would be the minimum mean-the mean return of the rule that did
the worst. Yet another statistic would be the maximum mean-the mean
return of the rule that did the best.
The statistic observed by the data miner is the maximum mean from
among the 50 rules. This is illustrated in Figure 6.8, where all rules are assumed to be useless and have an expected return equal to zero. Each dot
represents the observed mean return of a different rule. Note that the
mean return of the rule that had the maximum return (37 percent) is not
at all representative of that rule's expected return (0 percent). It simply
got lucky in the back test. When many rules are back tested, the one with

Mean

Of
Fifty Means
Maximum Mean
Among
Fifty Means

+37%

-30%

0
+30%
Observed Rate of Return

FIGURE: 6.8 Observed performance of 50 rule back tests.

276 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

the highest average return will almost always have been the beneficiary of
good luck. This is why its back-tested performance is likely to overestimate its expected performance. In a different sample, with less luck, the
rule is likely to do worse.
This is the key lesson to take away from this: The observed performance of the best-performing rule, amongst a large set of rules, is a positively biased estimate of that best rule's expected performance because it
incorporates a substantial degree of good luck. Data miners who don't understand this are likely to be disappointed with this rule's out-of-sample
performance.

Sound Inference Requires the Correct
Sampling Distribution
Sound statistical inference depends on using the correct sampling distribution. Each test statistic has a sampling distribution that is appropriate
for testing its statistical significance. The sampling distribution that
would be correct for testing the significance of a single sample mean or
constructing its confidence interval would not be correct if the test statistic being observed were, in fact, a maximum mean among a multitude of
sample means.
Therefore, to make sound inferences, the data miner requires the
sampling distribution of the maximum mean among a multitude of means
because that is the statistic being considered when evaluating the best
rule found by data mining. The central tendency of the sampling distribution of the maximum mean reflects the role that good luck can play in data
mining. The central tendency of a sampling distribution of a single sample
mean does not.
Now let's consider how all this impacts a test of significance. As discussed in Chapter 5, in a traditional test of significance, the null hypothesis asserts that the trading rule has an expected return equal to zero or
less. The test statistic is the rule's observed mean return. In this case let's
assume the return was +10 percent annualized. The sampling distribution
of the test statistic is centered at the hypothesized value of zero. The pvalue is the area of the sampling distribution that is equal to or greater
than a 10 percent return. This area represents the probability that, if the
rule's expected return were truly equal to zero, the rule could have produced a return of + 10 percent or higher by chance. If the p-value is smaller
than a preset value, such as 0.05, the null hypothesis would be rejected
and the alternative hypothesis, that the rule's expected return is greater
than zero, would be accepted. So long as the performance of only one rule
was being evaluated this is all well and good.
Now consider significance testing in the data mining case. Continuing

277

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

with the data mining example from the prior section, assume that 50
rules have been back tested. The rule with best performance earned annualized return of +37 percent. A traditional test of significance, with a
significance level of 0.05, would look like the one in Figure 6.9. The sampling distribution shown is centered at zero, reflecting the null's assumption that the expected return of a rule with no predictive power would
generate a return of zero. This sampling distribution does not account for
the data-mining bias. Experimental results presented later in this chapter
will show that this assumption is wrong. They will demonstrate that even
when all rules tested during data mining have expected returns equal to
zero, the best performing rule is likely to display a much higher performance than zero.
ote in Figure 6.9 that the observed performance of +37 percent
falls far out in the right tail of the sampling distribution giving a p-value
of less than 0.05. On the basis of this evidence, the null hypothesis
would be rejected and the inference would be that the rule has an expected return greater than zero (i.e., has predictive power). This conclusion is wrong!
If, however, the observed performance of this best rule of 50 were
to be subjected to a more advanced test of statistical significance that
does take into account the data-mining bias, the picture would look
considerably different. This is shown Figure 6.10, where the observed
mean return for best-rule-of-50 is compared to the correct sampling distribution. This is the sampling distribution of the statistic maximummean among 50 means. This sampling distribution properly reflects
the biasing effects of data mining. Note that the sampling distribution is
no longer centered at zero. Rather, it is centered at +33 percent. Against

f
Relative
Freq.

Observed
Performance
Best Rule of

50
37%

Sampling Distribution
Of A Single Sample
Mean

·70 ·60 ·50 -40 ·30 -20,10

0 10 20 30 40

50 60 70

FIG RE 6.9 Traditional sampling distribution (does not account for data-mining
bias).

278 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Null
Hypothesis
Expected = 33%

f
Relative
Freq.

Sampling Distribution
Of Multi-Mean
Maximum

-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10

0 10 20 30 40

50 60 70

FIGURE 6.10 Correct sampling distribution (accounts for data-mining bias).

this backdrop, the best rule's performance no longer appears significant. The fraction of the sampling distribution that is equal to or greater
than the observed return of 37 percent is nearly half (0.45) of the distribution total area. In other words, if the expected return of each of the
50 rules were zero, then there is a 0.45 probability that the mean return
of the best rule would be greater than or equal to 37 percent due to
luck. From this, it is clear that 37 percent is not a statistically significant
result. The particular sample of data in which the rule excelled just happened to favor the rule.
Figure 6.10 shows that randomness (good luck) can inflate the performance of a rule with no predictive power. It turns out that randomness is only one of two factors that jointly cause the data-mining bias.
The other cause is the selection principle that underlies all multiple
comparison procedures: picking the candidate with the best-observed
performance.

DA11\·M1MNG BIAS: AN EFFECT WITH lWO CAUSES
The data-mining bias is the result of a conjoint effect: (1) randomness
and (2) the selection imperative of data mining or any multiple comparison procedure-picking the candidate with the best-observed performance. This section will examine how these two factors combine to
cause the observed performance of the best rule to overstate its expected
performance.

279

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

Two Components of Observed Performance

The observed perfonnance of a rule can be factored into two components.
One component of observed perfonnance is attributable to the rule's true
predictive power, if it has any. This is the component of perfonnance due
to a recurring feature of market behavior that is exploited by the rule and
that should continue to manifest in the immediate practical future. This is
the rule's expected perfonnance.
The second component of observed perfonnance is attributable to
randomness. Randomness can manifest as either good luck or bad luck.
Good luck boosts observed perfonnance above expected perfonnance
whereas bad luck pushes observed perfonnance below expected. The
component of observed perfonnance attributable to randomness cannot
be expected to repeat in the immediate practical future.
This discussion is summed up by the equation in Figure 6.11.
The Spectrum of Randomness
It is useful to think of a spectrum of randomness. This concept is depicted
in Figure 6.12. 26 At one end of the spectrum, observed perfonnance is

Observed
Performance

= I Expected '+1_ IRandomnesJ
~erformanceJ

l

)

FIGURE 6.1 J The two components of observed performance.

Merit
Dominates

Luck
Dominates

FIGURE 6.12 Spectrum of randomness-relative contributions of merit versus
luck in observed outcomes.

280 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
dominated by randomness. At this extreme, all performances are purely a
matter of luck. Here we find literary works of monkeys dancing on word
processors and outcomes of lottery players. At the other end of the spectrum, observed performance is dominated by merit or systematic behavior. At this extreme, it is only merit that matters. Producing a valid proof
of a mathematical theorem resides here. Very nearby are the observed
performances of concert-level musicians. Also, in this neighborhood we
find the the laws of physics whose highly accurate predictions are made
possible by the orderly behavior of certain aspects of nature.
Toward the middle of the randomness spectrum lie the most interesting data mining problems. The farther to the random end of the spectrum
one goes, the greater the risk of data-mining bias. Toward the right end of
the continuum, we find a region that contains the TA rules. The complexity and randomness of financial markets assure us that even the most potent rules will be weakly predictive. In this zone, the magnitude of the
data-mining bias will be large.
Now we come to an important principle. The larger the contribution
of randomness (luck) relative to merit in observed performance, the
larger will be the magnitude of the data-mining bias. The reason is this:
The greater the role of luck relative to merit, the greater the chance that
one of the many candidate rules will experience an extraordinarily lucky
performance. This is the candidate that will be selected by the data miner.
However, in situations where observed performance is strictly or primarily due to a candidate's true merit, the data-mining bias will be nonexistent
or very small. In these cases, a candidate's past performance will be a reliable predictor of future performance and the data miner will rarely fill the
hopper with fool's gold.
Because financial markets are extremely difficult to predict, most of a
rule's observed performance will be due to randomness rather than its
predictive power. Thus the equation previously given in Figure 6.11 might
be better illustrated as it is in Figure 6.13. The large role of randomness
relative to merit (Le., predictive power) makes it likely that TA rule data
mining will be infected with a large bias.
The range of problems to which multiple comparison procedures
might be applied can be visualized as lying along the spectrum of randomness. Toward the random end of the spectrum is a range associated with

Observed = (predictiVe) +/_ [Randomness]
Performance
Power
FIGURE 6.13

Relative contributions of randomness and predictive power in observed performance.

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

281

TA rule data mining. I used a range to represent rule data mining rather
than a single location to indicate that the level of randomness will vary
from one mining venture to the next. As will be demonstrated later in this
chapter, the level of randomness in any given data mining venture is determined by five independent factors. 27 When these factors are taken into
consideration, it becomes possible to develop statistical significance procedures that are better able to deal with the data-mining bias. In other
words, it becomes possible to compute the statistical significance of or
confidence interval for a rule that was discovered by data mining. These
procedures alleviate the key problem facing objective TA practitioners using data mining for knowledge discovery.
The Effectiveness of Multiple Comparison
Procedures under Differing Conditions
of Randomness
Multiple comparison procedures are applied to problems where a best solution is sought. A universe of candidate solutions is proposed. A figure of
merit quantifies the observed performance of each candidate and the one
with the best-observed performance is selected.
Many people presume that MCP delivers on two promises: (1) The
candidate with the highest observed performance is most likely to perfornl the best in the future, and (2) the observed performance of the bestperfornling candidate is a reliable estimate of its future performance. It
does deliver on the first promise. However, in the domain of TA rule back
testing, it does not deliver on the second.
With regard to the first promise, that the candidate with the highest
observed performance is also the one most likely to do best in the future,
this was proved to be true by White 28 as the number of observations approaches infinity. White showed that, as the sample size approaches infinity, the probability that the candidate rule with the highest expected
return (Le., the truly best rule) will make itself known by having the best
observed performance approaches 1.0. This tells us that the basic logic of
data mining is sound! The rule with the highest observed performance is
the rule that should be selected. The validity of this assumption will also
be demonstrated by mathematical experiments presented later in this
chapter: Experimental Investigation of the Data-Mining Bias. These results show that when a sufficient number of observations are used to compute a rule's performance statistic (e.g., its mean return), the rule with the
highest observed performance does have a higher expected return than a
rule picked at random from the universe of rules tested. Data mining
must, at the very least, pass this minimal test of efficacy for it to be considered a worthwhile research method, and it does!
