
PART 2

76

Conceptuaiizaticm of Your System

make a huge surge, (2) choosing tight initial stops that make sense
and that strictly limit your losses to a few dollars or even a few
ticks, (3) being willing to leave your initial stop alone, even if it
means letting a profit get away from you, and (4) being able to capture huge profits when they do come your way. When you elect to
go this route, you are probably looking at a trading system with
less than a 35 percent hit rate. However, it can still be very profitable despite the low percentage of winning trades.
10.

OPTIMIZE WITH

POSITION SIZING

Your expectancy is a rough estimate of the true potential of your
system. Once you develop a system with an adequate expectancy,
then you need to determine what algorithm you will use to size
your positions (i.e., determine how much). Position sizing is the
most important part of any system, because if you have a good,
positive expectancy system, then most of your profit or loss will
come from position sizing. Position size can help you make a little
profit, let you make a lot of profit, or cause you to go bankrupt-no
matter how rood vour svstem is.
“How much” size will you
put on in any one position? Can
you afford to take even a single
position (i.e., share of stock or
futures contract)? These questions are keys to being able to
achieve your objective-whether
it is a triple-digit rate of return or
whether it is an incredibly high
reward-to-risk ratio. If your position-sizing algorithm iS inappropriate, then you will go bust-no matter how you define going bust
(whether it’s losing 50 percent of your capital or all of it). But if your
position-sizing techniques are well designed for your capital, your
system, and your objectives, then you can generally meet your
objectives.
We’ve developed a training program for professional money
managers. At this time, we have:three graduates of that program.

The first graduate, Webster Management, was ranked the number
one fund above $10 million in September 1995 in terms of risk-toreward ratio. One primary reason for Webster’s ranking was its
knowledge of position sizing and its ability to design a methodology, through position sizing, that would give it a huge reward-torisk ratio.
The second graduate of our program, Maricopa Asset
Management,’ has achieved a 5-year average return of better than
40 percent per year with hardly a losing month. Part of the secret
behind Maricopa’s performance has been an understanding of
position sizing plus regular private consulting.
The third graduate of our program is Ray Kelly. Ray achieved
a track record of 8 years with a compounded annual return of 40
percent or better after working with me. In fact, during that S-year
period, he only had two losing months. Much of Ray’s success
could be attributed to special arbitrage situations (see Ray’s section
‘on arbitrage in the next chapter) and knowing when to really step
on the gas.
Chapter 12 discusses a number of position-sizing models that
you may want to consider in the design of your system. Once you
have your objectives and a high-expectancy system, you can use
these models to accomplish your objectives. However, you need to
apply and test various position-sizing models until you find something that perfectly fits what you want to accomplish.
1 1 . DETERMINE HOW YOU CAN IMPROVE
YOUR SYSTEM
The eleventh task in developing your system is to determine how
you can improve it. Market research is an ongoing process. Markets
tend to change, according to the character of the people who are
playing them. For example, right now the stock market is domi:@ted by professional mutual fund managers. However, of the
~,OOO-plus managers, fewer than 10 of them have been around long
enough to have seen the prolonged bear markets that occurred in
the 1970s. In addition, the futures market is dominated by profes.*loonal CTAs-most of whom have trend-following strategies that
%ey employ using very large amounts of money. In another 10 to

CHAPTER 4 Steps to Developing a System

79

20 years, the markets might have quite different participants and
thus take on a different character.
Any system with a good, positive expectancy generally will
improve its performance if more trades are taken in a given period
of time. Thus, you can usually improve performance by adding
independent markets. In fact, a good system will perform well in
many different markets, so adding many markets simply gives you
more opportunity.
In addition, performance can usually be improved by adding
noncorrelated systems-each with its own unique position-sizing
model. For example, if you have a major trend-following system
with a very short term system that takes advantage of consolidating markets, then you’ll probably do very well when you combine
them. The hope is that your short-term system will make money
when there are no trending markets. This will lessen the impact of
any drawdowns produced by the trending system during these
periods, or perhaps you might even make money overall. In either
case, your performance will be better because you will move into
trends with a higher capital base.

You also need to plan for any catastrophe that might come up,
Brainstorm and determine every possible scenario you can think of
that would be disastrous for your system. For example, how would
your system perform should the market have a l- or 2-day price
shock (i.e., a very large move) against you? Think about how you
could tolerate an unexpected, once-in-a-lifetime move in the market, such as a 500-point drop in the Dow (it has happened twice in
10 years!) or another crude oil disaster like the one we saw during
the Gulf War in Kuwait. What would happen to your system if currencies were stabilized and you were a currency trader? What will
happen when Europe develops a unified currency? Or what if a
meteor lands in the middle of the Atlantic and wipes out half of the
population of Europe and the United States? Or what about more
mundane things like your communications being shut down or
your computers being stolen?
When you have your list of disasters, develop several plans
that you can implement for each one. Plan your responses in your
mind and rehearse them. Once you’ve established your actions in
the event of a calamity, your system is complete.

12. WORST-CASE SCENARlOMENTAL PLANNING

NOTES

It’s important to think about what your system could do under a
variety of circumstances. How will you expect your system to perform in all types of market conditions-highly volatile markets,
consolidating markets, strong trending markets, very thin markets
with no interest? You won’t really know what to expect from your
system unless you understand how it’s likely to perform under
each possible market condition.
Tom Basso was fond of telling students in our system seminar
to:
Imagine what it’s like to take the other side of each trade. Pretend
you just bought it (instead of sold it) or pretend that you just sold it
(instead of bought it). How would you feel? What would your thinking be like?
This exercise is one of the most important exercises you can do. I
strongly recommend that you take it seriously.

1. There is a lot more to modeling excelknce than just finding out what
the key tasks are. You need to find the ingredients of each task, and
you need to be able to install the model in other people. We’ve been
able to accomplish this with the system development model.
However, that topic would be an entire book by itself
2 The references to all of these recommended books are given in the
Recommended Readings in Appendix I.
3. Chande’s book is very good, but I don’t agree with all his
conclusions, especially when he starts testing portfolios and
developing conclusions about position sizing.
-4. such a person may have purchased a dozen low-capitalization stocks.
Eleven may turn out to be worthless, while one turns into a new
giant. Because the stocks were largely ignored, the owner neither gets
rid of the losers before they become worthless nor finds out about the
winner until it is worth a lot of money.
‘5. Somehow fate is often cruel to people with such a great system. In
this person’s case, he could not trade size. Nor was it possible to fix

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

his problem psychologically, because he did not believe that he had
anything to do with the problem. In fact, at this point he cannot trade
at all because he’s nervous and he believes that his stomach is
stopping him from trading. Thus, in my opinion, he doesn’t
understand the real meaning behind a Holy Grail system-finding
yourself in the market.
6. One of my clients has developed a day-trading system based upon
gains being significantly larger than losses. His system has a
reliability rate of less than 50 percent, yet it nets him tremendous rates
of return. This shows that there are other ways to conceive of shortterm systems.
7. The word “stop” is used here because most people execute such stops
by putting in a stop order in the market. This means “Execute my
order as a market order once it reaches that price.”
8. If you are looking at your expectancy based upon the results of real
trading (i.e., what you have been doing in the market), then a low
expectancy (15 cents per dollar risked or less) could be due to
psychological problems such as not following your system or
panicking and taking profits too early.
9. Headed by David Mobley, Sr., who wrote the Foreword to the book,

CHAPTER 5

Selecting a Concept That Works

The more you understand the concept you are trading, how it
might behave under all sorts of market conditions, the less historical testing you need to do.
Tom sass”
My estimate is that fewer than 20 percent of the people trading the
markets have a system to guide their trading or investing. Of those
that do, most are just using predefined indicators. Very few people
understand the concept behind their system. As a result, I asked a
number of experts to write about the concepts that they trade. This
is not an exhaustive discussion of the various concepts you might
trade. It is just a sampling. Your goal in reading this chapter should
be to think about each concept and determine if any of them fits
your personality. The concept that “fits” will be the one you have
the most success trading. But you must understand your concept
thoroughly before you develop a system using it.
While I was first writing this book, I received a phone call
from an expert on chaos theory. He said that he had been following
my work for many years. He believed that I had a lot of integrity,
but that I was very wrong about systems. He said that it was ridicu,IOUS to assume that any sort of system was possible-instead, it
was all about luck and individual psychology. I said that I agreed
with him if he were defining a system as just an entry technique.
Instead, I said, one had to develop a methodology with a positive

PART

82

2

Conceptualization of Your System

expectancy’ through stops and exits in order to make psychology
and position sizing meaningful.
Most people try to find a high-probability entry with no concept of an exit or of adequate position sizing. This usually leads to
a trading methodology with a negative expectancy. On the other
hand, if people understand the role that exits and position sizing
play in systems, they could be quite satisfied with an entry system
that only produced 40 percent winners. I think my caller was a little stunned, but he then went on to say that I was wrong: “People
cannot develop any sort of expectancy based upon past data,” he
said.2 Yet interestingly enough, this person has still written a book
about how to make “big” money from the market through understanding chaos theory.
I found the conversation quite interesting. I thought that I was
one of the most open people around because I come from the viewpoint that you cnn trade ANY concept as long as you hnve a positive
expectnncy. What I learned is that even this basic assumption about
being able to trade any concept with a positive expectancy is still an
assumption-an assumption that still forms the basis for my thinking about systems. Keeping that assumption in mind, let’s look at a
few trading concepts that are used by many traders and investors.
TREND FOLLOWING
I’ve contacted some great traders (and wonderful friends) to write
about these various concepts. You’ve already met Tom Basso, since
he was interviewed in Chapter 3. Tom and I have done about 20
seminars together, and I can testify from personal experience that
he is the most balanced trader I have ever met. He’s also the most
mechanical trader I’ve ever met. Everything in his office is computerized. Even the trading orders go out to the broker by computer-generated fax. Tom trades two computerized trend following
systems, so I thought he wasp the most logical choice to write on
trend following.3
Tom Basso: The Philosophy of ‘h-end Following
Many successful investors fall into a group called “trend followers.” I will attempt to describe what trend following is all about and

CHAPTER 5 Selecting a Concept That Works

83

why investors should be interested in using these general principles in their investing endeavors.
Let’s break down the term “trend following” into its components. The first part is “trend.” Every trader needs a trend to make
money. If you think about it, no matter what the technique, if there
is not a trend after you buy, then you will not be able to sell at
higher prices. You will take a loss on the trade. There must be a
trend up after you buy in order to sell at higher prices. Conversely,
if you sell first, then there must be a subsequent trend down for you
back at lower prices.
ollowing” is the next part of the term. We use this word
trend followers always wait for the trend to shift first, then
“follow” it. If the market is in a down direction and then indicates
i a shift to the upside, the trend follower immediately buys that market. In doing so, the trader follows the trend.
“Let your profits run. Cut your losses short.” This old trader’s
axiom describes trend following perfectly. Trend-following indicators tell the investor when the direction of a market has shifted
from up to down or from down to up. Various charts or mathematical representations of the market are used to measure the current
,.,direction and observe the shift. Once in a trend, the trader sits back
land enjoys the ride, as long as the trend keeps going in the trader’s
: direction. This is “letting profits run.”
I once heard a new investor questioning a very successful
,~trend follower. The trend follower had just bought some foreign
currency contracts, and the novice asked, “Where’s your objective
on this trade?” The trend follower wisely answered, “To the moon.
‘~Pve never had one get there yet, but maybe some day....” That tells
~‘a lot about the philosophy of trend following. If the market coop$ates, the trend follower would get into the trade as soon as the
market passed his or her criteria for “trending” and would stay in
;It for the rest of his or her life.
Unfortunately, the trend usually ends at some point. As a
~,msult, when the direction shifts, then the “cutting losses short”
@pect of the axiom should come into play. The trader, sensing that
$he direction of the market has shifted against the position, immewately liquidates. If the position is ahead at that point, then the
der has made a profit. If, at the time, the position is behind, then
trader has aborted the trade, preventing a runaway loss. Either

84

PART 2

Conceptualiration

of Your System

way, the trader is out of a position that is currently going against
him or her.
The Advantage of Trend Following
The advantage of trend following is simple. You will never miss a
major move of any market. If the market you are watching turns
from a down to an up direction, any trend-following indicator must
flash a “buy” signal. It’s just a question of when. If it’s a major
move, you will get the signal. The longer term t e trend-following
definite advanindicators are, the lower the transaction costs4
tage of trend following.
Strategically, the investor must realize that if he or she can get
onboard a major move in almost any market, the profits from just
one trade can be substantial. In essence, one trade can make your
whole year. Thus, the reliability of one’s strategy can be far below
50 percent and you’ll still show a profit. This is because the average
size of one’s winning trades is so much greater than the size of
one’s losing trades.
The Disadvantage of Trend Following
The disadvantage of trend following is that your indicator cannot
detect the difference between a major profitable move and a shortlived unprofitable move. As a result, trend followers often get
whipsawed as trend-following signals immediately turn against
them, causing small losses to occur. Multiple whipsaws can add up,
creating concern for the trend follower and tempting him or her to
abandon the strategy.
Most markets spend a large amount of time in nontrending
conditions. Trending periods could be as little as 15 to 25 percent of
the time. Yet the trend follower must be willing to trade in these
unfavorable markets in order not to miss the big trend.
Does Trend Following Still Work?
Absolutely! First, if there were no trends, there would be no need
for organized markets. Producers could sell to the marketplace
without worrying about having to hedge to protect themselves.
End users would know that they could obtain the products they
need at a reasonable~piice.
And people would buy shares of com-

CHAPTER 5

Selecting a Concept That Works

85

parties purely for the income from dividends. Thus, should trends
stop occurring in the market for any length of time, those markets
would probably cease to exist.
Second, if there were no trends, you could expect a fairly random distribution of price changes. Yet if you look at the distribution of price changes over time in almost any market, you’ll see a
very long tail in the direction of large price changes. This is because
there are abnormally large price changes that you’d never expect to
see by chance over a given period of time. For example, the S&P
futures market opened in 1982 and within 5 years had a price move
that you might expect to see once every hundred years. These
abnormally large price changes over a short period of time are what
make trend following work, and you see them all the time.
Is Trend Following for Everyone?
Trend following is probably one of the easiest techniques for the
new trader or investor to understand and use. The longer term the
indicators, the less that total transaction costs will affect profits.
Short-term models tend to have a tough time overcoming the costs
of doing more trades. Costs would include not only commissions,
but also slippage on the trades. The fewer trades you make, provided you have the patience for it, the less you spend in transaction
costs and the easier it is for you to make a profit.
However, there are numerous examples where trend following is not appropriate. Floor traders who are scalping ticks are not
likely to want to use a trend-following concept. Hedging investors
may find it more risky to hedge their risk by using trend-following
indicators than by choosing some form of passive economic hedge
approach. Day traders may find it difficult to use trend-following
models. When day trading, you cannot let profits run due to the
time limits of day &ading.%e day simply e;ds, forcing the trader
to liquidate the position.
If trend fofiowing fits your personality and your needs, then
give it a try. There are many examples of successful traders and
investors who consistently use this time-tested approach to the
markets. With the economic world as we know it becoming more
unstable, there are constantly more new trends for the trend follower to exploit for profit.

86

PART 2

conceptualiration

of You system

Editor’s Comments Trend following is probably the most successful

technique for trading or investing of all the concepts discussed. In
fact, almost all the system models presented later in this book work
because of trend following. As Basso points out, the biggest problem with it is that markets don’t al ys trend. However, this is generally not a problem for people w% play the stock market. There
are thousands of stocks that you can tradean either the long or
the short side. If you are willing to go both long and short, then
there are always good trending markets.
The difficulty people have with the stock market is that (1)
there are times when very few stocks are trending up so that the
best opportunities are only on the short side; (2) people don’t
understand shorting so they avoid it; and (3) the exchange regulators make it difficult to short (i.e., you have to be able to borrow the
stock to short and you have to short on an uptick). Nevertheless, if
vou plan for short selling, then it can be very lucrative under the
right market conditions.
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
I’ve asked another friend, Charles LeBeau, to write the section on
fundamental analysis. LeBeau is well known as a former editor of
a great newsletter entitled the Technicnl Traders Bulletin. He is also a
coauthor of an excellent book, Co?nputer Analysis of the Futures
Market. Chuck is a talented speaker, and he frequently gives talks at
Dow-Jones/Telerate Conferences and at AIQ meetings. And he has
been a guest speaker at many of our How to Develop a Winning
Trading System That Fits You seminars. He has his own trading
firm, Island View Financial Group, with several million under
management, and he’s also starting a hedge fund.’
You might wonder why I asked Chuck, who has such an
extensive technical background, to write about fundamental analysis. Chuck lectures about fundamental analysis for a major university, and he once ran a discretionary fundamentally based trading
system for Island View Financial Group. In Chuck LeBeau’s words,
“I prefer to think of myself as a trader who is willing to use the best
tools available to get the job done.”

CHAmER 5

Selecting a Concept That Works

87

Charles LeBeau: Introduction to Fundamental Trading

Fundmental analysis, as it applies to futures trading, is the use of
actual and/or anticipated relationships of supply and demand toforecast
the direction and magnitude offuture price changes. There may be more

precise and detailed definitions, but this brief article is intended to
be about the benefits and practical applications of fundamental
analysis.
Almost all traders mistakenly assume that they must be either
fundamentalists who rely solely on supply-demand analysis or
technicians who ignore fundamentals entirely and make their decisions based solely on price action. Who forces us to make such
unnecessary and illogical either-or decisions about how best to
trade? If you ever have two (or more) good ideas, you will almost
certainly be better off if you do them all rather than falling into the
either-or trap.”
Fundamental analysis has a distinct advantage over technical
analysis in the area of determining price objectives. Correctly interpreted technical indicators can give you direction and timing, but
they will fall short in giving you any indication of the magnitude of
the anticipated price movement. Some technicians claim that their
methods give them price objectives, but after 30 years of trading I
have yet to find any technical methods that were valid at forecasting price objectiv&. However, there is no question that good fundamental analysis can help you determine approximate profit
objectives. By employing fundamental price targets you should
have a general idea of whether you want to take a quick, small
profit or hold for a major long-term price objective. As limited as
the accuracy of fundamental price targeting might be, having even
a general idea of the magnitude of the profit you are expecting is a
big advantage in successful trading.
Fundamental analysis does have definite limitations. The
results of the best possible fundamental analysis will be painfully
imprecise. If you do everything right, or better yet, rely on the
sophisticated analysis of a true fundamental expert, you might be
able to conclude that a particular market will probably make a
“big” move in an upward direction at some vague time in the
future. At its best, fundamental analysis will tell you only the direc-
