
Insurance companies sell a product that is indistinguishable from
those of competitors. Policies are standardized and can be copied by anyone. There are no trademarks, no patents, no advantages in location or
raw materials. It is easy to get licensed and insurance rates are an open
book. Insurance, in other words, is a commodity product.
In a commodity business, a common way to gain market share is to
cut prices. In periods of intense competition, other companies were willing to sell insurance policies below the cost of doing business rather than
risk losing market share. Buffett held firm: Berkshire’s insurance operations would not move into unprofitable territory. Only once—at General
Re—did this happen, and it caught Buffett unaware.

You can always write dumb insurance policies. There is an unlimited market for dumb insurance policies. And they’re very
troubling because the first day the premium comes in, that’s the
last time you see any new money. From then on, it’s all going
out. And that’s not our aim in life.12
WARREN BUFFETT, 2001

Unwilling to compete on price, Buffett instead seeks to distinguish
Berkshire’s insurance companies in two other ways. First, by financial
strength. Today, in annual revenue and profit, Berkshire’s insurance
group ranks second, only to AIG, in the property casualty industry. Additionally, the ratio of Berkshire’s investment portfolio ($35.2 billion) to
its premium volume ($8.1 billion) is significantly higher than the industry average.
The second method of differentiation involves Buffett’s underwriting philosophy. His goal is simple: to always write large volumes of
insurance but only at prices that make sense. If prices are low, he is content to do very little business. This philosophy was instilled at National
Indemnity by its founder, Jack Ringwalt. Since that time, says Buffett,
Berkshire has never knowingly wavered from this underwriting discipline. The only exception is General Re, and its underpricing had a

“Our Main Business Is Insurance”

39

large impact on Berkshire’s overall performance for several years. Today,
that unpleasant state of affairs has been rectified.
Berkshire’s superior financial strength has distinguished its insurance
operations from the rest of the industry. When competitors vanish from
the marketplace because they are frightened by recent losses, Berkshire
stands by as a constant supplier of insurance. In a word, the financial integrity that Buffett has imposed on Berkshire’s insurance companies has
created a franchise in what is otherwise a commodity business. It’s not
surprising that Buffett notes, in his typical straightforward way, “Our
main business is insurance.”13
The stream of cash generated by Berkshire’s insurance operations is
mind-boggling: some $44.2 billion in 2003. What Buffett does with that
cash defines him and his company. And that takes us to our next chapter.

4
Buying a Business

B

erkshire Hathaway, Inc., is complex but not complicated. It owns
(at the moment) just shy of 100 separate businesses—the insurance
companies described in the previous chapter, and a wide variety
of noninsurance businesses acquired through the income stream from
the insurance operation. Using that same cash stream, it also purchases
bonds and stocks of publicly traded companies. Running through it all is
Warren Buffett’s down-to-earth way of looking at a business: whether
it’s one he’s considering buying in its entirety or one he’s evaluating for
stock purchase.
There is no fundamental difference, Buffett believes, between the
two. Both make him an owner of the business, and therefore both decisions should, in his view, spring from this owner’s point of view. This is
the single most important thing to understand about Buffett’s investment
approach: Buying stocks means buying a business and requires the same
discipline. In fact, it has always been Buffett’s preference to directly own
a company, for it permits him to inf luence what he considers the most
critical issue in a business: capital allocation. But when stocks represent a
better value, his choice is to own a portion of a company by purchasing
its common stock.
In either case, Buffett follows the same strategy: He looks for companies he understands, with consistent earnings history and favorable
long-term prospects, showing good return on equity with little debt,
that are operated by honest and competent people, and, importantly, are
41

42

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

available at attractive prices. This owner-oriented way of looking at potential investments is bedrock to Buffett’s approach.

All we want is to be in businesses that we understand, run by
people whom we like, and priced attractively relative to their
future prospects.1
WARREN BUFFETT, 1994

Because he operates from this owner’s perspective, wherein buying
stock is the same as buying companies, it is also true that buying companies is the same as buying stock. The same principles apply in both
cases, and therefore both hold important lessons for us.
Those principles are described in some detail in Chapters 5 through
8. Collectively, they make up what I have called the “Warren Buffett
Way,” and they are applied, almost subconsciously, every time he considers buying shares of a company, or acquiring the entire company. In this
chapter, we take a brief background tour of some of these purchases, so
that we may better understand the lessons they offer.

A MOSAIC OF MANY BUSINESSES
Berkshire Hathaway, Inc., as it exists today, is best understood as a
holding company. In addition to the insurance companies, it also owns
a newspaper, a candy company, an ice cream/hamburger chain, an encyclopedia publisher, several furniture stores, a maker of Western boots,
jewelry stores, a supplier of custom picture framing material, a paint
company, a company that manufactures and distributes uniforms, a vacuum cleaner business, a public utility, a couple of shoe companies, and
a household name in underwear—among others.
Some of these companies, particularly the more recent acquisitions,
are jewels that Buffett found in a typically Buffett-like way: He advertised for them in the Berkshire Hathaway annual reports.
His criteria are straightforward: a simple, understandable business
with consistent earning power, good return on equity, little debt, and

Buying a Business

43

good management in place. He is interested in companies in the $5 billion to $20 billion range, the larger the better. He is not interested in
turnarounds, hostile takeovers, or tentative situations where no asking
price has been determined. He promises complete confidentiality and a
quick response.
In Berkshire Hathaway’s annual reports and in remarks to shareholders, he has often described his acquisition strategy this way: “It’s
very scientific. Charlie and I just sit around and wait for the phone to
ring. Sometimes it’s a wrong number.”1
The strategy works. Through this public announcement, and also
through referrals from managers of current Berkshire companies, Buffett has acquired an amazing string of successful businesses. Some of
them have been Berkshire companies for decades, and their stories have
become part of the Buffett lore.
See’s Candy Shops, for example, has been a Berkshire subsidiary
since 1972. It is noteworthy because it represents the first time Buffett
moved away from Ben Graham’s dictum to buy only undervalued companies. The net purchase price—$30 million—was three times book
value. Without doubt, it was a good decision. In 2003 alone, See’s pretax earnings were $59 million—almost exactly twice the original purchase price.
At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, 25 years after the See’s purchase, Charlie Munger recalled, “It was the first time we paid for quality.” To which Buffett added, “If we hadn’t bought See’s, we wouldn’t
have bought Coke.”3 Later on in this chapter, the full significance of that
comment becomes apparent.
Another company well known to Berkshire followers is Nebraska
Furniture Mart. This enormous retail operation began in Omaha,
Buffett’s hometown, in 1937 when a Russian immigrant named Rose
Blumkin, who had been selling furniture from her basement, put up
$500 to open a small store. In 1983, Buffett paid Mrs. B, as she was
universally known, $55 million for 80 percent of her store.
Today the Nebraska Furniture Mart, which comprises three retail
units totaling 1.2 million square feet on one large piece of real estate,
sells more home furnishings than any other store in the country. Running a close second is the second Mart, opened in 2002 in Kansas City. In
his 2003 letter to shareholders, Buffett linked the success of this 450,000square-foot operation to the legendary Mrs. B., who was still at work

44

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

until the year she died at the age of 104. “One piece of wisdom she imparted,” Buffett wrote, “was ‘if you have the lowest price, customers will
find you at the bottom of a river.’ Our store serving greater Kansas City,
which is located in one of the area’s more sparsely populated parts, has
proved Mrs. B’s point. Though we have more than 25 acres of parking,
the lot has at times overf lowed.”4
In January 1986, Buffett paid $315 million in cash for the Scott &
Fetzer Company, a conglomerate of twenty-one separate companies, including the makers of Kirby vacuum cleaners and World Book encyclopedia. It was one of Berkshire’s largest business acquisitions up to that
point, and has since exceeded Buffett’s own optimistic expectations. It is
a model of an organization that creates a large return on equity with
very little debt—and that is one of Buffett’s favorite traits. In fact, he
calculates that Scott Fetzer’s return on equity would easily place it
among the top 1 percent of the Fortune 500.
Scott Fetzer’s various companies make a range of rather specialized
(some would say boring) industrial products, but what they really make
is money for Berkshire Hathaway. Since Buffett bought it, Scott Fetzer
has distributed over 100 percent of its earnings back to Berkshire while
simultaneously increasing its own earnings.
In recent years, Warren Buffett has turned more and more of his attention to buying companies instead of shares. The story of how Buffett
came to acquire these diverse businesses is interesting in itself. Perhaps
more to the point, the stories collectively give us valuable insight into
Buffett’s way of looking at companies. In this chapter, we have space
for an abbreviated visit to just three of these acquisitions, but that is by
no means all. To illustrate the wide range of industries within Berkshire, here are a few examples of recent acquisitions:
• Fruit of the Loom, which produces one-third of the men’s and
boys’ underwear sold in the United States. Purchased in 2002 for
$835 million, which, after accounting for the earned interest on
assumed debt, was a net of $730 million.
• Garan, which makes children’s clothing, including the popular
Garanimals line. Purchased in 2002 for $270 million.
• MiTek, which produces structural hardware for the building industry. Purchased in 2001 for $400 million. An interesting aspect of this deal is that Berkshire now owns only 90 percent of

Buying a Business

45

the company. The other 10 percent is owned by 55 managers
who love their company and wanted to be part owners; this entrepreneurial spirit among management is one of the qualities
Buffett looks for.
• Larson-Juhl, the leading supplier of framing materials to custom
framing shops. Purchased in 2001 for $225 million.
• CORT Business Services, which leases quality furniture to offices
and corporate-owned apartments. Purchased in 2000 for $467
million, including $83 million of debt.
• Ben Bridge Jeweler, a West Coast chain owned and operated by
the same family for four generations. A requirement of the purchase was that the Bridge family remain to manage the company.
Purchased in 2000 for a price not disclosed publicly.
• Justin Industries, which makes Western boots ( Justin, Tony Lama,
and other brands) and, under the Acme brand name, bricks. Purchased in 2000 for $600 million.
• Benjamin Moore, which has been making paint for 121 years.
Purchased in 2000 for $1 billion.
• Shaw Industries, the largest manufacturer of carpeting in the
world. Purchased 87 percent of the company in 2000 and the remainder in early 2002, for a total of $2 billion. Currently, Shaw is,
except for insurance, Berkshire’s largest business, with 2003 earnings of $436 million.

C L AY T O N H O M E S
In 1966, James Clayton, the son of a Tennessee sharecropper, started a
mobile home business with $25,000 of borrowed money. Within four
years, Clayton Homes was selling 700 units annually. Clayton is now
one of the largest makers of manufactured homes in the United States,
with about $1.2 billion in sales in 2003. Home models range from
modest (500 square feet, priced at $10,000) to luxury ($100,000 for
1,500 square feet, with hardwood f loors, stainless steel appliances, and
island kitchens).
Clayton has about 976 retailers in the United States, including 302
company-owned stores, 86 company-owned community sales offices,
and 588 manufactured housing communities in 33 states. It also owns

46

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

and operates financing, loan-servicing, and insurance subsidiaries. The
company went public in 1983, and Berkshire Hathaway acquired it in
August 2003 for $1.7 billion.
James Clayton gained his experience and education the hard way.
Determined to pull himself out of the backbreaking work his parents
endured (his father picked cotton and his mother worked in a shirt
factory), Clayton financed his education at the University of Tennessee
by playing guitar on the radio. He eventually became a part-time host
on Startime, a weekly variety program on Knoxville TV and sang
along with people like Dolly Parton. Then, while in college, he started
a used car business with his fraternity brothers but the business went
bankrupt in 1961 when the bank called his loan. “My parents thought
for sure that we were going to jail and I made a pact with myself that I
haven’t violated: I was never going to be vulnerable to a bank again.”5
The acquisition of Clayton Homes is a typical Buffett story—
meaning that it is atypical compared with the rest of the business world.
The first aspect of the story is that Buffett had some hands-on experience with the industry. In 2002, Berkshire had purchased junk
bonds from Oakwood Homes, another mobile home manufacturer. As
Buffett has freely admitted, at the time he was not fully aware of the
“atrocious consumer financing practices” that were common in the
industry. “But I learned,” he added. “Oakwood rather promptly went
bankrupt.”6
Fast forward to February 2003. Al Auxier, a professor of finance at
the University of Tennessee, brought a group of MBA students to
Omaha to meet with Buffett for what Buffett describes as “two hours of
give-and-take.” It was the fifth time Auxier had made the trip, and it had
become traditional for the visiting students to bring a thank-you gift for
Buffett. This time, the gift was the autobiography of James Clayton, who
had located his company in Knoxville, home of his alma mater.
After he finished reading the book, Buffett phoned James Clayton’s
son Kevin, who is now CEO. “As I talked with Kevin, it became clear
that he was both able and a straight-shooter. Soon thereafter, I made an
offer for the business based solely on Jim’s book, my evaluation of
Kevin, the public financials of Clayton and what I had learned from the
Oakwood experience.”7 Two weeks later, Berkshire announced its acquisition of Clayton Homes. “I made the deal over the phone,” Buffett
said, “without ever seeing it.”8

Buying a Business

47

In the fall of 2003, Buffett was invited to attend the University of
Tennessee’s MBA Symposium. He recounted the Clayton story, and
then presented all the students who had started the ball rolling with
honorary PhDs (for Phenomenal, hard-working Dealmaker) from the
University of Berkshire Hathaway. Each student was also given one class
B share of Berkshire, and their teacher, Al Auxier, was presented with an
A share.

M C L A N E C O M PA N Y
In 1894, Robert McLane, escaping the post-Civil War poverty of South
Carolina, moved to Cameron, Texas, and started a small grocery store.
Over the years, he developed it into a wholesale grocery and distribution
business. His son, Robert D. McLane, known by his middle name of
Drayton, joined the company in 1921. Drayton’s son, Drayton Jr., began
working in the family business at the age of nine, and spent many teenage
Saturdays sweeping f loors in the warehouse. After college, he joined the
company full time.
Eventually Drayton Jr. convinced his father to move the company
close to an interstate highway and then in 1962 to automate the business
with computers. In 1990, he sold the company to his tennis pal Sam Walton, and McLane became a Wal-Mart subsidiary, supplying Wal-Mart
and Sam’s Club stores, as well as convenience stores and fast-food restaurants across the nation with everything from peanuts to pepperoni.
By 2003, McLane had become the largest distributor in the United
States to corner and convenience stores. McLane’s innovative software
systems for pricing, freight, delivery, and point-of-sales processing and
its excellent delivery service had made the company a lean and efficient
full-service delivery company.
An efficient, well-run company built on strong principles and showing consistent profitability is just what Warren Buffett likes to see. In
May 2003, Berkshire announced it had acquired McLane for $1.45 billion in cash, and assumed an additional $1.2 billion in liabilities.
The acquisition positioned McLane for even greater growth, as it
freed the company to pursue distribution contracts with supermarket
chains and with Wal-Mart competitors, such as Target and Dollar General. “In the past some retailers had shunned McLane,” wrote Buffett in

48

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

his 2003 shareholder letter, “because it was owned by their major competitor. But Grady Rosier, McLane’s superb CEO, has already landed
some of these accounts—he was in full stride the day the deal closed—
and more will come.”9

T H E PA M P E R E D C H E F
In 1980, Doris Christopher, a former teacher of home economics and a
stay-at-home mom, was looking for part-time work with f lexible hours
that would add to the family income but still allow her time with her
two young daughters. She decided to leverage what she knew—cooking
and teaching—and that led her to the idea of selling kitchenware with inhome demonstrations. So she borrowed $3,000 against her life insurance
policy, went shopping at the wholesale mart and bought $175 worth of
products she admired, then asked a friend to host a demonstration party.
Christopher was a nervous wreck before the first party, but it was
a resounding success. Not only did everyone have a great time, several
guests suggested they’d like to host a party themselves. That was the
beginning of the Pampered Chef, a company that markets gourmet
kitchenware through direct sales and in-home parties.
The 34-year-old Christopher, who had no business background,
started the company in the basement of her Chicago home with the
$3,000 loan. The first year, working with her husband, she had sales of
$50,000 and never looked back. In 1994, the Pampered Chef was
among Inc. magazine’s 500 fastest-growing privately held companies in
the United States, and Christopher has been recognized by Working
Woman magazine as one of the top 500 women business owners.
Doris Christopher started her business with a passionate belief that
sitting down together at mealtime brings families together in a way that
few other experiences can match. That philosophy has shaped and
guided the Pampered Chef from the beginning, and it is at the core of
the sales approach: a friendly, hands-on pitch to housewives that links
the quality of family life to the quality of kitchen products.
Many of the company’s “kitchen consultants,” as they are called, are
stay-at-home moms, and most of the sales are conducted in their homes
at “kitchen shows.” These are cooking demonstrations where guests see
products and recipes in action, learn quick and easy food preparation
techniques, and receive tips on how to entertain with style and ease. The

Buying a Business

49

products are professional-quality kitchen tools and pantry food items;
some 80 percent of the products are exclusive to the company or can
only be bought from TPC representatives.
Today, the Pampered Chef has 950 employees in the United States,
Germany, the United Kingdom, and Canada, and its products are sold
by over 71,000 independent consultants during in-home demonstrations. Over one million kitchen shows were held throughout the United
States in 2002, producing sales of $730 million. And the only debt the
company has ever incurred is the original $3,000 seed money.
In 2002, Doris Christopher realized that in case she either keeled
over or decided to slow down, the Pampered Chef needed a backup
plan. So, on the advice of her bankers at Goldman Sachs, she approached
Warren Buffett. That August, Christopher and her then CEO, Sheila
O’Connell Cooper, met with Buffett at his headquarters in Omaha. A
month later, Berkshire announced it had bought the company, for a price
thought to be approximately $900 million.
Recalling that August meeting, Buffett wrote to Berkshire shareholders, “It took me about ten seconds to decide that these were two
managers with whom I wished to partner, and we promptly made a
deal. I’ve been to a TPC party and it’s easy to see why this business is a
success. The company’s products, in large part proprietary, are wellstyled and highly useful, and the consultants are knowledgeable and enthusiastic. Everyone has a good time.”10


Buffett is often asked what types of companies he will purchase in the
future. First, he says, I will avoid commodity businesses and managers
that I have little confidence in. He has three touchstones: It must be the
type of company that he understands, possessing good economics, and
run by trustworthy managers. That’s also what he looks for in stocks—
and for the same reasons.

INVESTING IN STOCKS
