
* As mentioned in the commentary on Chapters 2 and 4, Treasury InflationProtected Securities, or TIPS, are a new and improved version of what Graham is suggesting here.

212

The Intelligent Investor

than by individuals. The poorer-quality ones almost always fluctuate over a wide range, percentagewise, not too differently from
common stocks. We can offer no other useful remark about them.
Table 16-2 below, p. 406, gives some information on the price
changes of lower-grade nonconvertible preferreds between December 1968 and December 1970. The average decline was 17%, against
11.3% for the S & P composite index of common stocks.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 8

The happiness of those who want to be popular depends on
others; the happiness of those who seek pleasure fluctuates
with moods outside their control; but the happiness of the wise
grows out of their own free acts.
—Marcus Aurelius

DR. JEKYLL AND MR. MARKET
Most of the time, the market is mostly accurate in pricing most stocks.
Millions of buyers and sellers haggling over price do a remarkably
good job of valuing companies—on average. But sometimes, the price
is not right; occasionally, it is very wrong indeed. And at such times,
you need to understand Graham’s image of Mr. Market, probably
the most brilliant metaphor ever created for explaining how stocks
can become mispriced.1 The manic-depressive Mr. Market does not
always price stocks the way an appraiser or a private buyer would
value a business. Instead, when stocks are going up, he happily pays
more than their objective value; and, when they are going down, he is
desperate to dump them for less than their true worth.
Is Mr. Market still around? Is he still bipolar? You bet he is.
On March 17, 2000, the stock of Inktomi Corp. hit a new high of
$231.625. Since they first came on the market in June 1998, shares
in the Internet-searching software company had gained roughly
1,900%. Just in the few weeks since December 1999, the stock had
nearly tripled.
What was going on at Inktomi the business that could make Inktomi
the stock so valuable? The answer seems obvious: phenomenally fast

1

See Graham’s text, pp. 204–205.
213

214

Commentary on Chapter 8

growth. In the three months ending in December 1999, Inktomi sold
$36 million in products and services, more than it had in the entire
year ending in December 1998. If Inktomi could sustain its growth
rate of the previous 12 months for just five more years, its revenues
would explode from $36 million a quarter to $5 billion a month. With
such growth in sight, the faster the stock went up, the farther up it
seemed certain to go.
But in his wild love affair with Inktomi’s stock, Mr. Market was overlooking something about its business. The company was losing
money—lots of it. It had lost $6 million in the most recent quarter, $24
million in the 12 months before that, and $24 million in the year before
that. In its entire corporate lifetime, Inktomi had never made a dime in
profits. Yet, on March 17, 2000, Mr. Market valued this tiny business at
a total of $25 billion. (Yes, that’s billion, with a B.)
And then Mr. Market went into a sudden, nightmarish depression.
On September 30, 2002, just two and a half years after hitting
$231.625 per share, Inktomi’s stock closed at 25 cents—collapsing
from a total market value of $25 billion to less than $40 million. Had
Inktomi’s business dried up? Not at all; over the previous 12 months,
the company had generated $113 million in revenues. So what had
changed? Only Mr. Market’s mood: In early 2000, investors were
so wild about the Internet that they priced Inktomi’s shares at 250
times the company’s revenues. Now, however, they would pay only
0.35 times its revenues. Mr. Market had morphed from Dr. Jekyll to Mr.
Hyde and was ferociously trashing every stock that had made a fool
out of him.
But Mr. Market was no more justified in his midnight rage than he
had been in his manic euphoria. On December 23, 2002, Yahoo! Inc.
announced that it would buy Inktomi for $1.65 per share. That was
nearly seven times Inktomi’s stock price on September 30. History will
probably show that Yahoo! got a bargain. When Mr. Market makes
stocks so cheap, it’s no wonder that entire companies get bought
right out from under him.2

2

As Graham noted in a classic series of articles in 1932, the Great Depression caused the shares of dozens of companies to drop below the value of
their cash and other liquid assets, making them “worth more dead than
alive.”

Commentary on Chapter 8

215

T H I N K F O R YO U R S E L F
Would you willingly allow a certifiable lunatic to come by at least five
times a week to tell you that you should feel exactly the way he feels?
Would you ever agree to be euphoric just because he is—or miserable
just because he thinks you should be? Of course not. You’d insist on
your right to take control of your own emotional life, based on your
experiences and your beliefs. But, when it comes to their financial
lives, millions of people let Mr. Market tell them how to feel and what to
do—despite the obvious fact that, from time to time, he can get nuttier
than a fruitcake.
In 1999, when Mr. Market was squealing with delight, American
employees directed an average of 8.6% of their paychecks into their
401(k) retirement plans. By 2002, after Mr. Market had spent three
years stuffing stocks into black garbage bags, the average contribution rate had dropped by nearly one-quarter, to just 7%.3 The cheaper
stocks got, the less eager people became to buy them—because they
were imitating Mr. Market, instead of thinking for themselves.
The intelligent investor shouldn’t ignore Mr. Market entirely. Instead,
you should do business with him—but only to the extent that it serves
your interests. Mr. Market’s job is to provide you with prices; your job
is to decide whether it is to your advantage to act on them. You do not
have to trade with him just because he constantly begs you to.
By refusing to let Mr. Market be your master, you transform him into
your servant. After all, even when he seems to be destroying values,
he is creating them elsewhere. In 1999, the Wilshire 5000 index—the
broadest measure of U.S. stock performance—gained 23.8%, powered by technology and telecommunications stocks. But 3,743 of the
7,234 stocks in the Wilshire index went down in value even as the
average was rising. While those high-tech and telecom stocks were
hotter than the hood of a race car on an August afternoon, thousands
of “Old Economy” shares were frozen in the mud—getting cheaper and
cheaper.
The stock of CMGI, an “incubator” or holding company for Internet

3

News release, The Spectrem Group, “Plan Sponsors Are Losing the Battle
to Prevent Declining Participation and Deferrals into Defined Contribution
Plans,” October 25, 2002.

–12.7
–45.5
–25.1
–39.1
–62.5

metal & plastic packaging
fast food
discount retailer
gambling equipment
trucking
apparel

Ball Corp.

Checkers Drive-In Restaurants

Family Dollar Stores

International Game Technology

J B Hunt Transportation

Jos. A. Bank Clothiers

23.8

Wilshire 5000 index (total stock market)

Sources: Aronson + Johnson + Ortiz, L.P.; www.wilshire.com

139.1

Wilshire Internet Index

–23.5

snuff tobacco

UST Inc.

–46.9
–33.2

defense & aerospace
home furnishings

Lockheed Martin

Pier 1 Imports

–16.3

–43.7

industrial uniforms

Angelica

1999

Business

Company

FIGURE 8-1 From Stinkers to Stars

–10.9

–55.5

21.6

63.9

58.0

50.0

21.9

136.1

33.0

63.9

19.2

1.8

–11.0

–46.2

32.2

70.5

39.0

57.1

38.0

42.3

41.1

66.2

55.3

19.3

Total Return
2000 2001

–20.8

–45.0

1.0

10.3

24.7

201.6

26.3

11.2

5.0

2.1

46.0

94.1

2002

778

315

1,241

2,059

1,453

2,665

1,294

3,127

1,476

1,517

2,359

1,328

Final value
of $1,000
invested
1/1/1999

Commentary on Chapter 8

217

start-up firms, went up an astonishing 939.9% in 1999. Meanwhile, Berkshire Hathaway—the holding company through which Graham’s greatest
disciple, Warren Buffett, owns such Old Economy stalwarts as CocaCola, Gillette, and the Washington Post Co.—dropped by 24.9%.4
But then, as it so often does, the market had a sudden mood
swing. Figure 8-1 offers a sampling of how the stinkers of 1999 became the stars of 2000 through 2002.
As for those two holding companies, CMGI went on to lose 96% in
2000, another 70.9% in 2001, and still 39.8% more in 2002—a cumulative
loss of 99.3%. Berkshire Hathaway went up 26.6% in 2000 and 6.5% in
2001, then had a slight 3.8% loss in 2002—a cumulative gain of 30%.
CA N YO U B E AT T H E P R O S AT T H E I R O W N G A M E ?
One of Graham’s most powerful insights is this: “The investor who
permits himself to be stampeded or unduly worried by unjustified market declines in his holdings is perversely transforming his basic advantage into a basic disadvantage.”
What does Graham mean by those words “basic advantage”? He
means that the intelligent individual investor has the full freedom to
choose whether or not to follow Mr. Market. You have the luxury of
being able to think for yourself.5
4

A few months later, on March 10, 2000—the very day that NASDAQ hit its alltime high—online trading pundit James J. Cramer wrote that he had “repeatedly” been tempted in recent days to sell Berkshire Hathaway short, a bet that
Buffett’s stock had farther to fall. With a vulgar thrust of his rhetorical pelvis,
Cramer even declared that Berkshire’s shares were “ripe for the banging.” That
same day, market strategist Ralph Acampora of Prudential Securities asked,
“Norfolk Southern or Cisco Systems: Where do you want to be in the future?”
Cisco, a key to tomorrow’s Internet superhighway, seemed to have it all over
Norfolk Southern, part of yesterday’s railroad system. (Over the next year, Norfolk Southern gained 35%, while Cisco lost 70%.)
5
When asked what keeps most individual investors from succeeding, Graham had a concise answer: “The primary cause of failure is that they pay too
much attention to what the stock market is doing currently.” See “Benjamin
Graham: Thoughts on Security Analysis” [transcript of lecture at Northeast
Missouri State University Business School, March, 1972], Financial History
magazine, no. 42, March, 1991, p. 8.

218

Commentary on Chapter 8

The typical money manager, however, has no choice but to mimic Mr.
Market’s every move—buying high, selling low, marching almost mindlessly in his erratic footsteps. Here are some of the handicaps mutualfund managers and other professional investors are saddled with:
•

•

•

•

•

With billions of dollars under management, they must gravitate
toward the biggest stocks—the only ones they can buy in the
multimillion-dollar quantities they need to fill their portfolios. Thus
many funds end up owning the same few overpriced giants.
Investors tend to pour more money into funds as the market rises.
The managers use that new cash to buy more of the stocks they
already own, driving prices to even more dangerous heights.
If fund investors ask for their money back when the market drops,
the managers may need to sell stocks to cash them out. Just as
the funds are forced to buy stocks at inflated prices in a rising
market, they become forced sellers as stocks get cheap again.
Many portfolio managers get bonuses for beating the market, so
they obsessively measure their returns against benchmarks like
the S & P 500 index. If a company gets added to an index, hundreds of funds compulsively buy it. (If they don’t, and that stock
then does well, the managers look foolish; on the other hand, if
they buy it and it does poorly, no one will blame them.)
Increasingly, fund managers are expected to specialize. Just as in
medicine the general practitioner has given way to the pediatric
allergist and the geriatric otolaryngologist, fund managers must
buy only “small growth” stocks, or only “mid-sized value” stocks,
or nothing but “large blend” stocks.6 If a company gets too big, or
too small, or too cheap, or an itty bit too expensive, the fund has
to sell it—even if the manager loves the stock.

So there’s no reason you can’t do as well as the pros. What you
cannot do (despite all the pundits who say you can) is to “beat the
pros at their own game.” The pros can’t even win their own game!
Why should you want to play it at all? If you follow their rules, you will
lose—since you will end up as much a slave to Mr. Market as the professionals are.
6

Never mind what these terms mean, or are supposed to mean. While in
public these classifications are treated with the utmost respect, in private
most people in the investment business regard them with the contempt normally reserved for jokes that aren’t funny.

Commentary on Chapter 8

219

Instead, recognize that investing intelligently is about controlling
the controllable. You can’t control whether the stocks or funds you buy
will outperform the market today, next week, this month, or this year; in
the short run, your returns will always be hostage to Mr. Market and
his whims. But you can control:
•
•
•
•
•

•

your brokerage costs, by trading rarely, patiently, and cheaply
your ownership costs, by refusing to buy mutual funds with
excessive annual expenses
your expectations, by using realism, not fantasy, to forecast your
returns7
your risk, by deciding how much of your total assets to put at
hazard in the stock market, by diversifying, and by rebalancing
your tax bills, by holding stocks for at least one year and, whenever possible, for at least five years, to lower your capital-gains liability
and, most of all, your own behavior.

If you listen to financial TV, or read most market columnists, you’d
think that investing is some kind of sport, or a war, or a struggle for
survival in a hostile wilderness. But investing isn’t about beating others at their game. It’s about controlling yourself at your own game.
The challenge for the intelligent investor is not to find the stocks that
will go up the most and down the least, but rather to prevent yourself
from being your own worst enemy—from buying high just because Mr.
Market says “Buy!” and from selling low just because Mr. Market says
“Sell!”
If you investment horizon is long—at least 25 or 30 years—there is
only one sensible approach: Buy every month, automatically, and
whenever else you can spare some money. The single best choice for
this lifelong holding is a total stock-market index fund. Sell only when
you need the cash (for a psychological boost, clip out and sign your
“Investment Owner’s Contract”—which you can find on p. 225).
To be an intelligent investor, you must also refuse to judge your
financial success by how a bunch of total strangers are doing. You’re
not one penny poorer if someone in Dubuque or Dallas or Denver

7

See the brilliant column by Walter Updegrave, “Keep It Real,” Money, February, 2002, pp. 53–56.

220

Commentary on Chapter 8

beats the S & P 500 and you don’t. No one’s gravestone reads “HE
BEAT THE MARKET.”
I once interviewed a group of retirees in Boca Raton, one of
Florida’s wealthiest retirement communities. I asked these people—
mostly in their seventies—if they had beaten the market over their
investing lifetimes. Some said yes, some said no; most weren’t sure.
Then one man said, “Who cares? All I know is, my investments earned
enough for me to end up in Boca.”
Could there be a more perfect answer? After all, the whole point of
investing is not to earn more money than average, but to earn enough
money to meet your own needs. The best way to measure your investing success is not by whether you’re beating the market but by
whether you’ve put in place a financial plan and a behavioral discipline
that are likely to get you where you want to go. In the end, what matters isn’t crossing the finish line before anybody else but just making
sure that you do cross it.8
YO U R M O N E Y A N D YO U R B R A I N
Why, then, do investors find Mr. Market so seductive? It turns out that
our brains are hardwired to get us into investing trouble; humans are
pattern-seeking animals. Psychologists have shown that if you present
people with a random sequence—and tell them that it’s unpredictable—they will nevertheless insist on trying to guess what’s coming
next. Likewise, we “know” that the next roll of the dice will be a seven,
that a baseball player is due for a base hit, that the next winning number in the Powerball lottery will definitely be 4-27-9-16-42-10—and
that this hot little stock is the next Microsoft.
Groundbreaking new research in neuroscience shows that our
brains are designed to perceive trends even where they might not
exist. After an event occurs just two or three times in a row, regions of
the human brain called the anterior cingulate and nucleus accumbens
automatically anticipate that it will happen again. If it does repeat, a
natural chemical called dopamine is released, flooding your brain with
a soft euphoria. Thus, if a stock goes up a few times in a row, you
reflexively expect it to keep going—and your brain chemistry changes

8

See Jason Zweig, “Did You Beat the Market?” Money, January, 2000, pp.
55–58.

Commentary on Chapter 8

221

as the stock rises, giving you a “natural high.” You effectively become
addicted to your own predictions.
But when stocks drop, that financial loss fires up your amygdala—
the part of the brain that processes fear and anxiety and generates the
famous “fight or flight” response that is common to all cornered animals. Just as you can’t keep your heart rate from rising if a fire alarm
goes off, just as you can’t avoid flinching if a rattlesnake slithers onto
your hiking path, you can’t help feeling fearful when stock prices are
plunging.9
In fact, the brilliant psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky have shown that the pain of financial loss is more than twice as
intense as the pleasure of an equivalent gain. Making $1,000 on a
stock feels great—but a $1,000 loss wields an emotional wallop more
than twice as powerful. Losing money is so painful that many people,
terrified at the prospect of any further loss, sell out near the bottom or
refuse to buy more.
That helps explain why we fixate on the raw magnitude of a market
decline and forget to put the loss in proportion. So, if a TV reporter
hollers, “The market is plunging—the Dow is down 100 points! ” most
people instinctively shudder. But, at the Dow’s recent level of 8,000,
that’s a drop of just 1.2%. Now think how ridiculous it would sound if,
on a day when it’s 81 degrees outside, the TV weatherman shrieked,
“The temperature is plunging—it’s dropped from 81 degrees to 80
degrees! ” That, too, is a 1.2% drop. When you forget to view changing market prices in percentage terms, it’s all too easy to panic over
minor vibrations. (If you have decades of investing ahead of you,
there’s a better way to visualize the financial news broadcasts; see the
sidebar on p. 222.)
In the late 1990s, many people came to feel that they were in the
dark unless they checked the prices of their stocks several times a
day. But, as Graham puts it, the typical investor “would be better off if
his stocks had no market quotation at all, for he would then be spared
the mental anguish caused him by other persons’ mistakes of judg-

9

The neuroscience of investing is explored in Jason Zweig, “Are You Wired
for Wealth?” Money, October, 2002, pp. 74–83, also available at http://
money.cnn.com/2002/09/25/pf/investing/agenda_brain _short/index.htm. See
also Jason Zweig, “The Trouble with Humans,” Money, November, 2000, pp.
67–70.

222

Commentary on Chapter 8

N E W S YO U C O U L D U S E
Stocks are crashing, so you turn on the television to catch the
latest market news. But instead of CNBC or CNN, imagine that
you can tune in to the Benjamin Graham Financial Network. On
BGFN, the audio doesn’t capture that famous sour clang of the
market’s closing bell; the video doesn’t home in on brokers
scurrying across the floor of the stock exchange like angry
rodents. Nor does BGFN run any footage of investors gasping
on frozen sidewalks as red arrows whiz overhead on electronic
stock tickers.
Instead, the image that fills your TV screen is the facade of
the New York Stock Exchange, festooned with a huge banner
reading: “SALE! 50% OFF!” As intro music, Bachman-Turner
Overdrive can be heard blaring a few bars of their old barnburner, “You Ain’t Seen Nothin’ Yet.” Then the anchorman
announces brightly, “Stocks became more attractive yet again
today, as the Dow dropped another 2.5% on heavy volume—the
fourth day in a row that stocks have gotten cheaper. Tech
investors fared even better, as leading companies like Microsoft
lost nearly 5% on the day, making them even more affordable.
That comes on top of the good news of the past year, in which
stocks have already lost 50%, putting them at bargain levels not
seen in years. And some prominent analysts are optimistic that
prices may drop still further in the weeks and months to come.”
The newscast cuts over to market strategist Ignatz Anderson
of the Wall Street firm of Ketchum & Skinner, who says, “My
forecast is for stocks to lose another 15% by June. I’m cautiously optimistic that if everything goes well, stocks could lose
25%, maybe more.”
“Let’s hope Ignatz Anderson is right,” the anchor says cheerily. “Falling stock prices would be fabulous news for any
investor with a very long horizon. And now over to Wally Wood
for our exclusive AccuWeather forecast.”

Commentary on Chapter 8

223

ment.” If, after checking the value of your stock portfolio at 1:24 P.M.,
you feel compelled to check it all over again at 1:37 P.M., ask yourself
these questions:
•
•
•

Did I call a real-estate agent to check the market price of my
house at 1:24 P.M.? Did I call back at 1:37 P.M.?
If I had, would the price have changed? If it did, would I have
rushed to sell my house?
By not checking, or even knowing, the market price of my house
from minute to minute, do I prevent its value from rising over time? 10

The only possible answer to these questions is of course not! And
you should view your portfolio the same way. Over a 10- or 20- or 30year investment horizon, Mr. Market’s daily dipsy-doodles simply do not
matter. In any case, for anyone who will be investing for years to come,
falling stock prices are good news, not bad, since they enable you to
buy more for less money. The longer and further stocks fall, and the
more steadily you keep buying as they drop, the more money you will
make in the end—if you remain steadfast until the end. Instead of fearing a bear market, you should embrace it. The intelligent investor
should be perfectly comfortable owning a stock or mutual fund even if
the stock market stopped supplying daily prices for the next 10 years.11
Paradoxically, “you will be much more in control,” explains neuroscientist Antonio Damasio, “if you realize how much you are not in control.” By acknowledging your biological tendency to buy high and sell
low, you can admit the need to dollar-cost average, rebalance, and
sign an investment contract. By putting much of your portfolio on permanent autopilot, you can fight the prediction addiction, focus on your
long-term financial goals, and tune out Mr. Market’s mood swings.
