value. This pullback created a great opportunity for getting into the stock
at a relatively low-risk price. After the breakout, the saucer’s price range
of $18 to $38 was a thing of the past. The stock was now trading above
$38. It took a few months to get the strength and confidence to soar over
100 percent, but during that period, a savvy trader could have acquired the
stock at a price very close to the initial breakout level (without the misery
of holding a do-nothing stock for many years beforehand).
Some of the most exceptional market gains in history have been enjoyed following the decisive breakout of a stock above a long-established
price range. The more defined and longer the chart pattern, the better it
is for owners of that stock. An extraordinary instance of this is shown in
Figure 10.5 with 3M. (At the time of the breakout, the company was called
Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing.) The age of the price range was substantial, spanning from 1973 to 1986. Once the stock broke above resistance, it hardly ever looked back (except for the crash of 1987, which, interestingly, pushed the stock back to the top of its former trading range and
no lower). The stock moved literally thousands of percent higher after this
breakout.
It is easy to see in retrospect how obvious these patterns are. It seems
that, armed with this knowledge, people would know exactly what to do.
But this is not the case, and it again goes back to human psychology.
When a breakout occurs, a person examining the stock doesn’t have
the benefit of the next 20 years of price history. They can see only what

Rounded Tops and Saucers

245

FIGURE 10.5 The beneﬁts after a breakout can last decades. This shows 3M
Corporation (symbol MMM) moving thousands of percent higher after a handsome
breakout.

has happened so far. Imagine yourself looking at 3M in 1986 just after it
broke above its former resistance level. You would be confronted with a
stock that (1) had done very little for more than a decade and (2) was at a
higher price than anyone had ever paid for it. You might feel foolish to consider paying a premium price for a do-nothing stock. Those already owning
the stock might feel compelled to increase their holdings and add to their
profits, but for newcomers, a stock that has just made a new high price is
seldom tempting because everyone else was able to get the stock before,
when it was cheap.
In retrospect, of course, a person buying 3M in 1986 would indeed be
getting it cheap, because once the stock has moved up thousands of percent, whether you paid $1.25 a share or $1.10 a share doesn’t make much
difference. But at the time, few people want to pay what they see as top
dollar for a stock, and they prefer to wait until the stock gets cheap again.
The fact is, sometimes that second opportunity will never come along.
This, again, is where pullbacks represent a possible entry point for
newcomers to a stock. There is absolutely no guarantee that a stock breaking above its base will provide such an opportunity. The momentum may
simply carry it skyward, giving no one a second chance to get in cheaply.
But if you have a lower tolerance for risk, you may want to acquire only
during a pullback. Using 3M again as an example (Figure 10.6), the pullback took over a year to happen (and then only because there was a major
market crash to provide such a pullback), but the arrow illustrates where

246

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.6 This pullback erased most of the gains enjoyed since the breakout,
but it did not violate the pattern.

more cautious buyers could have acquired the stock at a relatively modest
price as weaker holders of the stock sold it off to prebreakout levels.

PRICE FAILURE
The opposite of a price breakout is a price failure, or breakdown. The rules
are very similar to what you’ve learned about price breakouts, except that
instead of prices moving above resistance, prices are moving below support. If they do so, it is likely they will continue moving substantially lower
as the mass of buyers at the former price range loses hope and sells off the
stock.
Monsanto (Figure 10.7) provides a clear example of this. The price
of the stock had a range of about $27 to $36. Holders of the stock were
surely getting anxious and frustrated that their investment wasn’t really
doing anything. The psychology of stockholders when a stock dips below
support is quite different from when it pushes above resistance; instead of
greed and excitement (which drives more buying and higher prices), there
is fear and panic (which compels selling and lower prices). Just as buying
at higher prices can feed on itself, selling at lower prices can, too.

Rounded Tops and Saucers

247

FIGURE 10.7 Monsanto Corporation (symbol MON) lost about half its value following this fall beneath support.

As with price breakouts, the power of a price breakdown is partly
based on the amount of time that the stock has been trapped within a
certain range. If a person has been holding onto a security for years, and
when that security finally does make a move, it’s a losing move, the typical
holder will vow “Enough is enough” and simply sell the stock out of frustration and despair. Figure 10.8 shows the chart of a company called Hop-In,

FIGURE 10.8 Hop-In Inc. (symbol HPNN) lost almost 100 percent of its value following this huge top.

248

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

which, after falling below its support level, lost virtually all of its value.
Clearly, there are fundamentals at play here, too—any company whose
price could get this ruined had some core problems in its business. But
stock price action often precedes public knowledge of fundamental issues.
The stock action didn’t cause the company’s collapse, but it certainly saw
it coming.

SAUCER BOTTOMS
Let us turn our attention now to saucers, which are the clean, well-formed
version of breakout patterns. It takes years of experience to be able to
swiftly go through charts and spot patterns, but, to use an astronomical
metaphor, the saucer is the Big Dipper of chart patterns—so easy to spot
that just about anyone can do it.
Figure 10.9 shows an actual price chart with a saucer shape drawn below it to emphasize the pattern’s presence. This is about as ideal a saucer
as you will see in the real world. Keep in mind there is no crew of stockholders whose purpose it is to hammer out a well-defined shape on a chart.
These patterns are formed as a consequence of thousands of people pushing millions of dollars around. It is only when mass psychology on a stock
is behaving in such a way as to form a clean pattern that these become
evident.

FIGURE 10.9 The basic saucer formation is illustrated here with the semi-oval
drawn beneath the chart.

Rounded Tops and Saucers

249

FIGURE 10.10 Alvarian (symbol ALVR) looked like it would break out of its saucer
pattern in December, but it took several more months before the stock was actually
ready to move higher.

The ingredients for a potent saucer breakout are:

r A clean pattern—the cleaner and more defined, the better.
r Longevity—the longer the pattern, the better.
r Volume increase after the breakout—the bigger, the better.
A beautiful example of this is Figure 10.10, which is the chart of Alvarian. The horizontal line shows the resistance level. For about the first half
of the chart, the price meanders between about $1.80 and $2.50. The pattern
formed isn’t an absolutely perfect saucer, but it is fairly clean. The length
of the pattern is impressive—more than a year. And best of all, the pickup
in volume after the breakout is superb. You can see on the lower graph
(which shows the volume bars) that volume increases more and more as
the price launches from $2.50 to $15 in less than one year.
An even more impressive example is shown with Figure 10.11, which
had a chart pattern spanning not just one year but more than two. The volume was terrifically higher after the breakout than before. Another interesting aspect of this chart is that after the saucer breakout, an entirely new
pattern took hold—a channel, illustrated by the ascending parallel lines
that bound the stock price as it moved from $10 to five times that amount.
The importance of strong volume after a breakout cannot be overstated. Volume is the fuel that drives prices higher, as it was with the

250

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.11 Building Materials (symbol BMHC) saw its volume explode and its
price go into a steady channel after moving above its saucer breakout.

astonishing ascent of Hansen Natural’s price, shown in Figure 10.12. When
volume is going up at the same time as a price is going up, the market is saying that more and more people are willing to pay increasingly
higher prices. As it does this, media and other attention is focused on
the stock.

FIGURE 10.12 Strong volume is key to a steady ascent in prices, as Hansen (symbol HANS) shows here.

Rounded Tops and Saucers

251

FIGURE 10.13 This close-up of Hansen Natural illustrates that although it took
a few months after the breakout, volume exploded higher once the price ascent was
underway.

In some cases, just as some people are famous for being famous, some
stocks go higher simply because they are known for going higher. This is
sometimes called the greater fool theory, meaning that buyers of the stock
realize they are paying an exorbitant price for it, but they are confident a
fool greater than themselves will be willing to pay an even higher price, as
so many have done before them.
The increase in the price of Hansen Natural Corporation (symbol
HANS) was so amazing that it warrants a closer examination with respect
to the volume change. Looking at Figure 10.13, you can see that the price
broke above its former resistance level of $3.50 after having traded below
that price for many years. Notice that volume did not instantly explode
higher. After a breakout, sometimes the volume soars, and sometimes it
doesn’t. The market may be acting with caution toward a stock such as
this, even after a breakout, simply because it has been so inactive and unexciting for so many years.
The area highlighted with an oval shows when volume of the stock did
finally pick up. There could be many reasons for this—the recommendation
of a popular newsletter or the buy rating of a major analyst who initiates
coverage of the stock. No matter what the reason, the explosion in volume
is going to get just as much attention as the increase in price, since this is
the market’s affirmation that it believes in the new direction of the stock
and is willing to put its dollars behind the movement.

252

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.14 When saucer patterns ﬁrst break out, they are not always as obvious as they are on a long-term chart.

One of the real tricks to recognizing patterns is to be able to do so
before you have much perspective. In other words, looking at a multiyear
chart, most people can easily spot patterns that took place long ago. But
being able to discern a pattern when it actually completes is much more difficult, because often the scale of the chart makes the pattern not very obvious. Look at Figure 10.14 and notice that the price action is relatively messy
(and it’s even messier without the clarity that the horizontal line helps bring
to it). In retrospect, one would see this was a rather clean breakout from a
saucer pattern, but at the time this breakout took place, it would not have
been nearly as easy to discern.
The other challenge with buying breakouts is that once the pattern
completes, the stock might seem too expensive. Figure 10.15 provides a
nice illustration of this. In this instance, the stock struggled for years, finally pushing its way from $7 to $22 before it finally broke above a very
well-formed saucer. Many people at the time would think twice about buying such a stock, since it had already moved up over 200 percent. The paradox is that this is in fact the ideal time to purchase the stock, since it has
already proven itself with the pattern breakout. As is so often the case, it
went on to much higher prices once the pattern completed.
The old saying that history repeats itself is true for technical analysis
(indeed, it’s a significant part of the basis for technical analysis). This applies to patterns as well, particularly within the same stock. If you notice
a particular stock is prone to a certain pattern (be it a saucer, head and

Rounded Tops and Saucers

253

FIGURE 10.15 This stock consolidated for almost two years before pushing
higher, and it had already tripled in price by the time it broke out.

shoulders, or what have you), it is likely you’ll see more than one instance
of that pattern for that stock.
This can be helpful, since as you become acquainted with the price
behavior of a particular stock, you can better anticipate its next move. The
pattern isn’t always the same length each time, as Figure 10.16 shows, but

FIGURE 10.16 Saucer patterns can repeat themselves in the same chart. Here
we see a nearly seven-year saucer breakout, followed by a much smaller one-year
saucer during more recent history.

254

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.17 This stock had a major double bottom before consolidating into
a saucer formation.

its shape and consequences tend to be similar. The longer the pattern, the
more pronounced the consequences.
Let’s take a look at a few more saucers to complete the picture. As
stated earlier, the length of the pattern has a lot to do with how much
force comes afterward. Figure 10.17 has a couple of interesting features.
First, the pattern is nearly six years long (with the breakout price being
$5). Second, another bullish indication takes place during the formation
of the pattern: a double bottom in price, where the price hit about $1.00 in
the first half of 1999 and again during the first half of 2000. This refusal of
the market to sell the stock at any lower prices gave buyers the confidence
they needed to keep moving the price higher. When it did finally break $5,
in spite of having moved up 400 percent already, it proceeded to $30 and
beyond.
Dismissing the idea that a stock is too expensive because it has moved
up a lot in price already is critical to acquiring stocks with major returns.
Stocks don’t go from $1 to $5 overnight. They get there a dollar at a time.
So even when the stock has moved from $1 to $5, you still have ample
opportunity for profit, in spite of the 400 percent move that has passed you
by already.
Whole Foods, for instance (Figure 10.18), was a stock powerhouse for
years. From 1998 through 2001, the stock hammered out a pattern ranging from about $7.50 to $17.50. In late 2001 and early 2002, Whole Foods
pushed away from its basing pattern, only to subsequently ease back to

Rounded Tops and Saucers

255

FIGURE 10.18 Popular grocer Whole Foods (symbol WFMI) formed a beautiful
saucer from 1998 through 2001 before breaking out, pulling back, and then ﬁnally
moving signiﬁcantly higher in price.

the $17.50 price level. As you know, this presented an ideal opportunity to
acquire the stock. The time-consuming and nail-biting pullback was already
finished, and you could purchase the stock knowing that any meaningful
descent was less likely since it was once again at a support level. Sure
enough, the stock marched from $17.50 up into the $80 range within a few
years.
A similar example with a very different kind of retailer can be seen
with Wal-Mart (Figure 10.19). Here again we see the laborious, multiyear
process of the saucer being formed (1993 through 1997), followed by a
breakout, a pullback, and a subsequent ascent. WMT pushed from its
proven support level of $15 to a handsome price of $65 in just a couple
of years.
You’ve seen many examples of multihundred-percent profits that are
possible with saucer patterns. Equally exciting profits can be enjoyed if
we turn this concept upside down and look for topping patterns instead of
basing ones.

ROUNDED TOP PATTERNS
When you are a skilled technician, you can make money in both bull and
bear markets. When the market is going down, most of the investing public

256

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.19 Retail powerhouse Wal-Mart (symbol WMT) exploded higher after
this ﬁve-year saucer pattern was ﬁnished.

is frustrated at not being able to make money. Typically, they stick with
stocks as their values decrease. The skilled use of technical analysis allows you to avoid these losses and actually make profits from the declining
values of stocks.
In the context of this chapter, the pattern most indicative of a looming
price decrease is the rounded top. This is exactly the same in appearance
as the saucer, except that it is turned upside down. In a way, the rules are
turned upside down as well.
With a saucer (or basing) pattern, the buying public is trying to push
prices past a certain level of resistance. Over the course of time—years,
sometimes—a mass of owners are accumulated at a relatively similar price
level, and this creates a floor of support for the price from which it can
move higher.
With a rounded top, a similar situation takes place, but the price falls
below the mass of owners instead of above it. What this means is that as
the price attempts to move higher again, it will be met with a wall of sellers.
Figure 10.20 shows how Terra Industries traded for years just above the $10
level. Once the selling began, there was no turning back. Even though people were buying the stock, they were doing so at lower and lower prices.
The desire of the owners between $10 and $12 to get out of the stock and
cut their losses was simply too strong.
Rounded tops are even more potent when the break below the support
level begins with a gap down. Take the case of Jacuzzi (Figure 10.21). The

Rounded Tops and Saucers

257

FIGURE 10.20 Terra Industries (symbol TRA) was steadily trading at about $10
for many years, but once it cracked beneath support, it had a 90 percent loss in just
18 months.

support price was about $25. In mid-1998, the stock started its trading day
at $20, leaving a $5 gap in price between its last close and its next open.
This would have been terribly demoralizing to all owners of the stock, and
the sell-off was strong. Even if the company had a major turnaround later,
it would have been difficult to overcome the wall of stock owners eager to
get out of the stock at the best price possible. Once a mass of owners has

FIGURE 10.21 Jacuzzi (symbol JJZ) fell from $25 to $2 after it gapped down
beneath a rounded top in mid-1998.

258

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.22 This is what a rounded top looks like shortly after the initial break.

been hit with a loss, you can expect many of them to be thinking the same
thing: “If I can just get out of this at breakeven, I’ll be happy.” So the sellers
are lined up, ready to pounce.
Price movement after a stock sinks beneath a rounded top can be devastating. This can be good for you in two ways: if you are long the stock, it’s
a strong indication that you had better get out; if you have no position in
the stock, you might even consider shorting it or buying puts on it. (Actually, if you’re long the stock, you would be wise to set a stop-loss order just
beneath the support level so that you needn’t monitor the stock throughout
the trading day.)
A stock’s break beneath support can be fast, as illustrated in Figure
10.22, in which the stock fell by a third in just one day. However, piercing
support is often just a precursor of more declines to come.
For an example of this, examine the chart for OMG in Figure 10.23.
The support level for this stock was about $42.50. It had already fallen
from $72.50 (and it should be noted here that just as you should not shy
away from a stock because it has gone up too much in price when it breaks
above resistance, you should likewise not assume that a stock has finished falling in price when it breaks beneath support, just because it has
already fallen a lot). The stock traded for over a week just beneath its former support line. This would give owners of the stock ample opportunity
to get out, as well as give newcomers to the stock an opportunity to sell
it short.

Rounded Tops and Saucers

259

FIGURE 10.23 OM Group (symbol OMG) fell so swiftly after this rounded top that
some might think the symbol stood for Oh My God.

When the stock started to collapse, it didn’t take long to lose virtually
all of its value. Support had been broken, and there was no turning back.
The selling kept feeding on itself, and what used to be a $70 stock was now
a $4 stock. Those who recognized the rounded top formation would have
had plenty of opportunity to spare themselves losses (had they been long)
and even make money (had they been short) with this insight.
You’ll recall that when a stock pushes above its saucer pattern, it sometimes gives people a second opportunity to buy into the stock at attractive
prices by pulling back in price. The rounded top has this property as well
(but, again, in reverse). Let’s take a moment to think about the psychology
behind this phenomenon.
Look at Figure 10.24 and imagine the point of view of the people who
purchased Solectron (symbol SLR) in 1999 and 2000. The stock was bouncing between $30 and $50. Within this range, some people had profits (such
as those who bought at around $30), and others had losses (like those who
acquired it at $50). So there was a mixed bag of winners and losers at these
price levels. Everyone wants a profit, and nobody wants a loss.
Now imagine the situation in March 2001 as the stock sank beneath its
$30 support level. Some people started to panic and the selling mounted,
because at this point all the buyers from $30 to $50 had lost money. The
stock rapidly lost half of its value, and the selling finally abated at $15.
This is when the pullback begins. Others begin to take an interest in
this stock, which is having a half-off sale (it used to be $30, and now it is

260

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.24 Solectron (symbol SLR) fell from $30 to $2 once it failed to hold
above its support level.

only $15), so buyers start to nibble at it. As the stock begins to recover
to $20 and then to $25, interest in the stock increases. But the balance
between sellers and buyers starts to equalize as the stock approaches $30,
and as technicians we know the reason why: because we are now at the
lower boundary of that mass of buyers who purchased in the $30 to $50
price range. All those people who bought at about $30 now see a reprieve
from their misfortune of having a losing stock (keep in mind, they were
staring at a 50 percent loss only weeks before), and they rush to push the
Sell button on their browsers. The selling starts anew.
As you can tell from the graph, the waves of selling and buying continue until the stock is virtually worthless. The sell-offs indicate when the
sellers are overwhelming the buyers, and the recovery periods show when
buyers believe they are getting a bargain on a stock that has bottomed out.
This plays itself out until all the selling is completely exhausted.
A very similar story happened to Lucent Technologies (symbol LU),
which benefited from the Internet mania of the late 1990s by being a
provider of network and communications products (Figure 10.25). The
stock got up to about $85 with a huge mass of buyers between $50 and $85.
In the summer of 2000, all networking stocks weakened, and LU fell underneath its $50 support level. One thing to note in this graph is that stocks do
not collapse instantly: it took a full two years for LU to fully unwind and
fall, ultimately, to about 55 cents. There was plenty of time to profit from
selling this stock short or owning puts on it.
