
www.pdfdummies.com

277

278 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
The probability of a trade generating a profit isn’t an objective number that
you can determine scientifically at the start of a trade. You can estimate the
chance of any particular trade being successful by subtracting the margin of
error from the historical success rate from your backtests, assuming that you
did a very large backtest. (See Chapter 4 for a discussion of backtests.) The
margin of error is a statistical concept that programmers are just starting to
include in technical analysis software. Say that a particular set of indicatorbased rules delivered 80 percent profitable trades over a large number of
hypothetical trades on historical data. Your margin of error is 20 percent,
meaning that the rule-based trade delivers a loss 20 percent of the time.
Math whizzes say that if a technique works 80 percent of the time on, say, Blue
Widget over a gazillion trials, it should work the same (or nearly the same) on
Pink Widget. In other words, the probability of the outcome is a function of the
statistics — and independent of the quality or character of the security. Nonmathematicians have a hard time swallowing this one. You can show identical backtest results for Blue Widget and Pink Widget, but feel in your bones
that you should increase the margin of error judgmentally when trading Pink
Widget. Don’t dismiss instincts like this one. Maybe Pink Widget has lower
liquidity or some other characteristic that didn’t throw up a hairball in the
backtest but is still vulnerable to doing it someday.
Developing a positive expectancy of gain by having your indicators pass successive tests is not the same thing as having found a “high probability trade.”
There is no such thing as a high-probability trade. Trades can go wrong because
of events that you cannot foresee or control. To speak of high-probability trades
is to buy into the huckster and con man mindset. The only time to use the highprobability label is when you fix the stop and target at trade entry. The high
probability applies to the stop as well as the target.

Enhancing positive expectancy by entering
gradually and exiting at once
Figure 16-5 discusses the trade in terms of a single purchase and sale. In
practice, you can enhance profitability by scaling into the trade (Step 3 of
the trading plan outline). To scale into the trade means to add to the position
as each confirmation appears. Say you have $5,000 to place on this security. You start by placing a portion of that capital ($1,000) when the first or
second indicator signals buy. Then you place additional lots of $1,000 as each
benchmark is reached, until you have 100 percent of the capital allocated to
the trade. One clear place to add more to the trade is at Point 7, where the
price tests support and bounces off it to the upside.
In Figure 16-5, the price breaks below the support line and also crosses below
the 20-day moving average, and the two indicators in the top and bottom windows turn downward. Chances are this up move is over. You exit as shown.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 16: Combining Techniques
Notice that you scaled into the trade but exited all at once. This chart doesn’t
show a trailing stop-loss line, but in practice, this trend was fairly long lasting, and a trailing stop, if hit, would still have resulted in a nice gain.

Evaluating Efficient Entries
and Ruthless Exits: Setups
Setup trading is a form of swing trading that’s very popular today. A setup is
a particular configuration of bars, usually with one or two other confirming
conditions like a pattern or an indicator, that delivers an expected outcome
in a high proportion of trades. The opening range breakout I describe in the
“Standing the Test of Time: Simple Ideas” section earlier in the chapter is an
excellent example of a setup. Candlestick trading can be considered setup
trading, too (see Chapter 8).
Setups usually have catchy names (like pinball and coiled spring). Do these
setups work? If you identify the setup correctly, yes, the price does often
behave in the predicted manner. Unfortunately, statistics on exactly what
percentage of the time they do work don’t exist, but experienced setup traders say that setups work often enough that early entry gives you an edge.
Each setup identifies a specific market condition that can be explained in
terms of market psychology. Setup analysis is promiscuous, borrowing from
bar reading, pattern identification, and indicators. Setups are effective tools
when you can read the supply and demand dynamics on the chart — you
can imagine what traders must be thinking, such as the predictable burst of
buying after a test of support. In general, you’re counting on the normal swing
of Newtonian action-reaction and the principles of support and resistance.
One benefit of setup trading is that you can be out of the market until you
spot a setup situation. You take no risk when you’re out of the market. Some
setup trades are intraday, where you enter and exit the trade on the same
day. Other setup trades are more long lasting because they lead to authentic
trends that you stick to until your exit rules or stop is hit. In the next section,
I describe some aspects of trading setups.

Starting off early
A setup identifies the conditions that precede and accompany a price move,
giving you a head start in entering a trade. When you correctly identify the
setup, the price goes in your direction immediately. And when a strong move
begins, the first few days can account for 25 percent or more of the total
move. That’s the thrust or impulse aspect of new moves.

www.pdfdummies.com

279

280 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
The key to setup trading is early identification of a trading opportunity and
early entry into the trade. As a general rule, your goal as a setup trader is to
take a profit bite out of a move without necessarily having a position over the
entire move.
Entering early in setup trading is in stark contrast to trend-following, where
you wait until the move has proved itself according to some definition of trendedness before you take a position. In setup trading, you enter a position on the
same day or the next day as the chart event, whereas in trend-following,
you may not enter until several periods (usually days) later.
Efficient entries are the hallmark of setup swing trading, but being quick on
the trigger doesn’t imply that the trader is a wild-eyed risk taker. Quite the
opposite. Risk management is the key feature of setup swing trading and thus
appropriate for beginners. You must
✓ Never give up profits by sitting out a retracement (as you often do when
trend-following).
✓ Absolutely, positively use stops and keep them updated.

Exiting the setup game
For the most part, you do not scale into and out of setup trades. You determine
the amount to trade only once. The next part of the trade — the exit —
borrows a page from the professional playbook: Ruthless stops. The playbook
offers the following tips:
✓ If the setup is a dud — it fails or you have not identified it right — you
need a stop at a level of loss that you can tolerate. (See Chapter 5 on
stops.) All good traders use stops but if you have a problem obeying
your stops, setup trading might be for you. You go broke fast without
stops, and recognizing that, force yourself to use them.
✓ If the setup succeeds, you keep moving your stop upward to secure
each new level of gain as it occurs. Generally you hold until the price
moves against you by some specified amount. Sometimes setups are so
short lived that an initial stop is all you need and you are not in the trade
long enough to use a trailing stop. Setup trading can be hit and run.

Working hard while trading like a pro
Here’s the catch: Not every setup works every time, and you have to adopt
the professional’s attitude to a losing trade — get out of the trade and move
on to the next one. Amateurs sometimes feel an emotional attachment to
their securities — pros don’t.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 16: Combining Techniques
In the pros’ world, the only thing that counts is making money. If a security
doesn’t offer a good setup today, they abandon it for a new one without a
backward look. If your job required you to make a specific sum of money
trading every day, you’d feel hard hearted toward securities that fail to offer
setups, too.
Other drawbacks to using setups include
✓ A setup that you like may not appear every day or even every month. With
a small universe of securities, you’d have to memorize a dozen setups if
you want to be in the market most or all of the time. If you like only one or
two setups, you have to monitor a large universe of securities.
✓ If you focus on setups to the exclusion of all the other concepts in technical analysis, you’re at a loss for what to do when setups don’t appear.
✓ To find your favorite setups, you have to scan a list of securities, and
the best setups may appear in securities that you wouldn’t touch with a
bargepole on a fundamental or value basis.
✓ Setups require intense concentration and often the ability to trade
actively during market hours. If you have a day job, this task can be
impossible to do. And remember, active stop management is critical to
success, meaning that you really should be out of the market altogether
when you go on a vacation or business trip. War stories about hair-raising
losses usually involve not having placed a stop and learning about some
market-moving event only after arriving in an exotic location.

Reading promotions carefully
Because many professionals use setups to make trading decisions, some
trading system vendors play off this nugget of information to claim that they
have a “magic secret” that’ll get you trading like a pro. The secret identifies
“high-probability trades,” and sometimes the vendor promises that “You
can’t lose!” Sometimes setups are called power strategies, which is more
promotional than anything else.
Be wary of such promotions. For one thing, vendors who use exaggerated
claims aren’t showing respect for your brainpower or common sense. Razzledazzle ads may intend to deceive and bamboozle rather than to share wisdom.
Keep in mind that
✓ Pros don’t have any secret indicators or techniques. All the trading techniques and tricks, including setups, are available to you in books, magazines, newspapers, Web sites, and seminars.
✓ As for claims that you can’t lose — don’t be silly. Of course you can lose.
In fact, you will lose. The point is to lose little and gain big. You don’t
need to spend thousands of dollars on a program or seminar to grasp
the principle of the five-step trading plan.

www.pdfdummies.com

281

282 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
✓ If trading discipline is a problem for you, trading psychologists and
coaches can help — but discipline is a set of personal habits that you
can’t acquire from anyone else — you can only build it internally. The
heart of “trading like a pro” is the trading discipline, not the indicator.
Some reputable technical traders offer follow-along setup trading in seminars
or online, for a fee, in which you can see the price action on the chart and
hear the trader’s commentary every few minutes. What you find out from participating in such a training course has less to do with identifying the setup
and more to do with sharing the pro’s attitude toward exploiting a promising
situation, but knowing how to retreat from a loser — without regret.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 17

Considering a Trading System
In This Chapter
▶ Introducing trading systems
▶ Going over some problems you may encounter
▶ Abiding by the rules
▶ Deciding whether or not to buy a system
▶ Selecting a system that works for you

T

he technical-based trader uses indicators and trading rules to plan as
many decisions as are possible. To remove human judgment entirely,
some technical traders go whole-hog and design trading systems. A strict,
fully mechanical trading system automates the trading process by making
every decision a rule-based decision. You have no discretion over any aspect
of any trade.
By the time you enable your computer to execute the trades as well as determine them, you have built a robot. Robo-trading or algorithmic trading is all
the rage now that computing power has grown so enormous. Even a modest
robot can have 5,000 (or 50,000) lines of code for just the indicators, and
that’s before applying trading rules to generate the buy/sell signals.
But should you build a trading system? The straightforward answer is “no.”
For nearly everyone, building (or buying) a trading system is a bad idea. To
build one, you must have advanced mathematical and computational skills.
Plus, you need literally thousands of hours to devote to it. A complete trading
system can take years of full-time work to develop (or hundreds of thousands
of dollars to have custom built). Third, after you get started, it’s hard to stop.
You can always find one more contingency you want to cover or one more
technique to try out. And even if you have the scientific mind-set to do this
complex work, you may not have the right mentality to place the trades in
real time. The technical landscape is littered with engineers turned system
designers who can’t trade their way out of a paper bag.

www.pdfdummies.com

284 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Next, consider that you change. Your risk appetite changes. Your patience in
dealing with complexity may go down (or up). Finally, the market changes. By
this I mean that until traders can make indicators instantly adaptive to changing volatility, the human mind is still a faster and more accurate computer
than a computer. Where robots do excel is in speed of execution, which can
be critical in trading on news releases and in arbitrage models.
Having just poured cold water on the idea of building a system, why include
this chapter at all? Two reasons. First, building a system forces you to examine indicator effectiveness and reliability in a strict and fact-based way. It
also opens the door to refining your money-management rules, which often
yields as much or more profit than replacing indicators or adjusting indicator
parameters. Second, the process is a scientific one. You create a hypothesis,
you test it, and you get results that can be evaluated to refine the hypothesis
for another round of tests. The scientific process is disciplined. If you aren’t
scientifically trained or oriented, having a system is invaluable to help you
discard sloppy thinking, unwarranted assumptions, and general bias.

Defining a Trading System
The term trading system has different meanings to different people. Systematic
trading can be as simple as a single indicator and a stop-loss rule (for more
on these topics see Chapters 4 and 16). In fact, most folks in the technical
analysis field now refer to any trading regime as a system, even when it
doesn’t meet the strict requirement of full automation. In this chapter, I
speak of a trading system in the strictest sense — every decision is dictated in
advance by the indicators and trading rules that you set down.
A trading system is built, block by block, by accumulating trading rules to
convert indicators or other data inputs into buy/sell signals. A trading system
becomes a robot when it executes the trades as well as determines them.
These decisions include position size and other aspects of the trading plan.
Instead of laboriously figuring out how many shares of Blue Widget to buy or
sell depending on your changing risk preference and market volatility (see
Chapter 16), the machine does it for you. Instead of selecting from among a
menu of indicators and trading rules to reenter after a stop or target is hit,
the machine does it for you.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 17: Considering a Trading System

Super systems
Algorithmic trading is the fusion of technical
analysis with efficient order entry, and banks
and fund managers initially used this method
to get an advantage in execution speed. One
subset consists of “high-frequency” traders
whose machines can place trades at literally
the speed of light (or just under it), whereas the
human trader may take as long as five or ten
seconds to make a trading decision after the
release of news or the appearance of a trading
opportunity.
Information input needs to be as fast as output
(the trade orders). Data and news vendors, for
a special price, make information available to
big institutions fractionally faster than to the
general public, too. The innate fairness of this
fact is under question today. Algo trading may
account for as much as 75 percent of all securities trading in the U.S. Does this mean the trading game is rigged against the little guy? If you
want to do lightning-fast arbitrage, yes. If you
are trend-following, maybe not. You can find
any number of equally valid ways to trade the
same security.
The same problems arise in algo trading as in
any system. Computer programming is deeply
specific. If the program fails to include every
contingency, it doesn’t have a brain that automatically falls back to some kind of default
mode. Data errors caused a “flash crash” in
May 2010, when the Dow fell 998 in under an
hour and some $40 stocks were priced at $1.
Experts doubt that this type of occurrence due
to data error is the last.
When a trade goes bad in some unprecedented
way, humans have a fallback — they exit. But
computers don’t watch TV or read newspapers, so if the trade goes bad, it may have no
programmed instructions on what to do until
after the event starts being reflected in prices.
Markets are notoriously slow to respond to

event shocks. This is one time the human is
faster.
The idea of automating trading is not innately
wrong. After all, the equivalent of robots can fly
an airplane and even land it. But the mechanical and electronic contingency planning underlying avionics is vast and has taken decades,
and superlative as it is, would still not be able
to land a very large plane on the Hudson River
after a bird strike. At a guess, engineers are
working on it.
Algo trading is newer and presumably less far
advanced than avionics, although the big institutions aren’t disclosing information on their
top-secret systems. We can draw inferences,
though. First, big institutions have made big
investments in algo trading that are delivering a big payoff. In theory, you could duplicate
the effort in every way except high-frequency
trading (unless you’re willing also to pay for
advance information) and market making —
offering a two-way price to any comer for any
size trade.
The second deduction is that vendors of automated systems or robots have almost certainly
not put hundreds of million of dollars into the
design. If they had, they wouldn’t be promoting it to you for $500 or $5,000. It would literally
be worth more than that. If the system were a
fabulous design, they would sell it to a big institution for millions. A third flaw in retail-level
systems and robots is that the designer has
embedded into it his own trading philosophy,
by which I mean choice of indicators and risk
appetite. Risk appetite is deeply personal, as I
discuss in Chapter 16. The robot designer may
be willing to lose, say, $3 in an $8 initial buy
whereas your stop would be half that, or $1.50.
Buying somebody else’s system is always going
to disappoint.

www.pdfdummies.com

285

286 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Meeting the designers
Books, articles, and Web sites abound on the
topic of technical trading systems, but who are
these gurus and system designers behind it
all? Usually they’re self-trained “experts” (and
a surprising number are drop-outs). They have
mastered one or more of the software packages designed solely for technical analysis.
Sometimes they program their own software.
System designers are college math professors,
engineers, medical doctors, economists, historians, musicians, and practitioners of dozens of
other lines of work. They run the gamut from brilliant, insightful, and inspiring to self-important,
argumentative, and petty (just like any other field).
System designers are usually adept at math and
computer programming, although often they’re

not very good traders, as they themselves may
admit. This reality isn’t really surprising because
math and computer programming are complex and intricate, while trading can be mindbogglingly simple. Some designers start with
programming and apply it to markets. Some start
with markets and use programming as a tool. It’s
amusing and intriguing that many technical traders barely passed high school algebra but take
home high six-figure profits, while many knowit-all system designers barely scrape by.
Why pay attention to system designers if they’re
not successful traders? Because you never
know when you’ll get a “Eureka!” moment and
discover one indicator or one rule that makes all
the difference to your own trading performance.

