
Trendline Breaks
The breaking of a well-established trendline shows that the dominant market
crowd has lost its power. You have to be careful not to anticipate trading signals- most traders lose money when they jump the gun.

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

92

I

Figure 21-3.

When Trendlines Accelerate

I

The stock market rose slowly but steadily from its 1987 bottom. You
could buy each time prices touched their shallow uptrendline (1). The
uptrend accelerated in 1988, and at point A, a new uptrendline ( 2 ) had
1 to be drawn. When the new, steeper trendline was broken, it indicated
that the bull move was over. The market offered, as it sometimes does,
an excellent shorting opportunity at point 8, when it pulled back to its
old uptrendline before crashing.

'

A trendline is not a glass floor under the market-one crack and it is
gone. It is more like a fence that bulls or bears can lean on. They can even
violate it a bit without toppling it, the way animals shake a fence. A trendline
break is valid only if prices close on the other side of a trendline. Some
traders insist that a trendline has to be penetrated by two or three percentage
points of price ($%$I2 in the case of $40010~.gold).
After a very steep uptrend is broken, prices often rally again, retest their
old high, and touch their old uptrendline from below (Figures 20-2, 21-3).
When that happens, you have a near-perfect shorting opportunity: a combination of a double top, a pullback to an old trendline, and perhaps a bearish
divergence from technical indicators. The reverse also applies to downtrends.

21. TRENDLINES

93

Trading Rules
1. Trade in the direction of the slope of a trendline. If it points up, look
for buying opportunities and avoid shorting. When the slope is down,
trade from the short side and avoid buying.
2. A trendline provides support or resistance, When prices rise, place buy
orders at the uptrendline and protective orders below. Reverse the procedure in downtrends.

3. Steep trendlines precede sharp breaks. If a trendline is steeper than
45", place your stop right at the trendline and adjust it daily.
4. Prices often retest their latest extreme after breaking a steep trendline.
A pullback rally to an old high on falling volume and with indicator

divergences provides an excellent shorting opportunity. A decline to
an old low after a downtrendline is broken provides a low-risk buying
opportunity.
5. Draw a channel line parallel to a trendline and use it as a target for

profit taking.

Trendline Channels
A channel consists of two parallel lines that contain prices (Figure 21-4). If
you draw an uptrendline across the bottoms of reactions, you can draw a
channel line parallel to it across the tops of rallies. When you draw a downtrendline across the tops of rallies, you can also draw a channel line parallel
to it across the bottoms of declines.
Channel lines, like trendlines, should be drawn across the edges of congestion areas, leaving out the extreme highs and lows. The presence of a
channel line reinforces the validity of the trendline itself. The validity of
channel lines depends on how many times they were touched by prices.
A channel line marks the area of bulls7 maximum power in an uptrend and
bears7 maximum power in a downtrend. The wider the channel, the stronger
the trend. It pays to trade in the direction of the channel's slope, going long
in the lower quarter or half of a rising channel and selling short in the upper
quarter or half of a falling channel. Profits should be taken at the opposite
channel wall (see also Section 45).

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

94

+ 388
:: ""I, gIII'l11111 t\ J, I/,,{
::Iu\&
1 '

t

Figure 21-4.

$'y

..

278

Jun
Trendline Channels and Preliminary Trendlines

The downtrendline 1, drawn across rally peaks, identifies a bear market
in corn. A channel line 2 is drawn across the lows, parallel to the trendline. The channel line helps track the maximum power of bears in a
downtrend. The best shorting opportunities are in the upper half of a
falling channel, while the best buying opportunities are in the lower half
of a rising channel.
When prices break out above their downtrendline, channels can help
you draw a preliminary uptrendline. First, draw a new channel line 3 to
connect the last two rally tops. Then draw line 4 parallel to it, touching
the latest bottom. This is the new preliminary uptrendline.
At the right edge of the chart, corn is trending higher. It is expensive-near its upper channel line. If you want to go long, place an order
to buy in the vicinity of the new uptrendline 4.

A Preliminary Trendline

Normally, a trendline touches at least two points on a chart. There is a littleknown technique for drawing a preliminary trendline thro~ighonly one point
(Figure 21-4).
When prices break their downtrend and rally above it, you can assume
that the downtrend has ended and a new uptrend may begin. Connect the two
latest peaks - this is the channel line of the new uptrend. Draw a line parallel

22. GAPS

95

to it through the latest low. This preliminary uptrendline, drawn parallel to a
channel line, tells you where to expect the next bottom. It often points to
excellent buying opportunities. This procedure tends to work better at bottoms than at the tops.
More on Trendlines

When prices break their uptrend, measure the vertical distance from the
trendline to the latest top and project it down from the breaking point. If the
crowd can become optimistic enough to swing prices so many dollars above
the trendline, then it is likely to become equally pessimistic and swing prices
the same distance down from the trendline. Reverse this procedure in downtrends. This method gives you the minimum target for a new move, which is
often exceeded.
Trendlines can also be applied to volume and to indicators. The slope of
a trendline of volume shows whether more or fewer people are becoming
involved in the market. A rising trendline of volume confirms the current
price trend. A falling trendline of volume shows that the market crowd is
refusing to follow the current price trend. Among technical indicators, the
Relative Strength Index (see Section 31) is especially well suited for trendline analysis. It often breaks its trendlines in advance of prices, providing an
early warning of a trend change.

22. GAPS
A gap is a chart pattern that consists of two adjacent bars, where the low of
one bar is higher than the high of the other bar (Figure 22-1). It shows that
no trades took place at a certain price, only at higher and lower levels.
Webster's Dictionary defines: "Gap: 1. a hole or opening, as in a wall or
fence, made by breaking or parting; breach. 2. an interruption of continuity
in space or time; hiatus; lacuna."
Gaps occur when prices jump in response to a sudden imbalance of buy or
sell orders. A scary piece of news often triggers gaps. Gaps on daily charts
show reactions to events that took place while the market was closed. Had
the news come out during trading hours, a gap might have occurred only on
intraday charts and perhaps have led to a wider daily range.
For example, a strike at a major copper mine is bullish for copper. If the
news comes out in the evening, the shorts become frightened and want to

96

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

cover. They flood the pit with buy orders before the opening bell. Floor
traders respond by opening copper above the previous day's high. The smart
money, incidentally, has probably bought copper before the strike was
announced. Smart money tends to put on trades when markets are quiet, but
amateurs tend to jump on the news.
Gaps show that the trading crowd is spooked, that losers are getting hurt
and dumping their positions. When you know that bulls or bears are hurting,
you can figure out what they are likely to do next and trade accordingly.
Some gaps are valid; others are phony. Valid gaps occur when the market
skips a price level. Phony gaps occur when a financial instrument trades in
another market while the market you analyze is closed. For example, daily
charts of Chicago currency futures are full of phony gaps. Currencies trade
in Tokyo, London, and elsewhere while the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is

22. CAPS

Figure 22-1.

97

Gaps

Cover this chart with a sheet of paper and slide it slowly from left to right.
A. A breakaway gap. Sell short and place a stop a few ticks above the
gap's upper rim.
6 . An exhaustion gap-prices pull back into it the next day. The downtrend is over. Cover shorts immediately.
C. Another exhaustion gap, marked by a lack of new highs after the gap.
Several days of churning offer good shorting opportunities with a stop
above the high.
D. A continuation gap in a downtrend. Go short, with a stop a few ticks
above the gap's upper rim. Prices hit that stop a few days later-no
method is fail-safe.
E. An exhaustion gap, closed two days after it opened. Cover shorts
immediately.
F. A common gap in the midst of a congestion area, closed the next day.
No action recommended.
G. A breakaway gap. Go long and place a protective stop a few ticks
below the gap's lower rim.
H. A continuation gap. Add to longs and place a protective stop a few
ticks below the gap's lower rim. The gap at the right edge of this chart
could be either a continuation or an exhaustion gap. Relatively quiet
volume suggests continuation. If you buy, place a protective stop a
few ticks below the lower rim of this gap.

closed. When the exchange reopens, its prices gap simply to reflect price
changes overseas.
All gaps can be divided into four major groups: common, breakaway, continuation, and exhaustion. You need to identify them because each tells a different story and calls for different trading tactics.

Common Gaps

Common gaps are rapidly closed-prices return into the gap within a few
days. Common gaps usually occur i n quiet trendless markets. They are seen
i n futures contracts for late delivery, in thinly traded stocks, and at sold-out,
low-volume market bottoms.

98

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Common gaps show no follow-through - no new highs after an upside
gap or new lows after a downside gap. Volume may slightly increase on the
day of a common gap, but the following days show a return to average volume. The lack of new highs or lows and indifferent volume show that neither
bulls nor bears have strong feelings about the market. Common gaps are the
least useful of all gaps for trading.
Common gaps occur more often than other gaps. It takes very little to create them in a dull market. A Comex floor trader at one of our seminars spoke
of how he could push gold up or down $2 an ounce on a quiet day. He was
known as a big trader and if he suddenly began bidding for 20 contracts at a
time, other floor traders stepped back, figuring he knew something. Gold
would gap up, and the trick for him was to sell before that gap was closed.
An ex-dividend gap is a common gap that occurs in the stock market on the
day a dividend becomes payable. For example, if the dividend is 50 cents, then
each share is worth 50 cents less after that dividend is paid. This is similar to a
drop in the price of a cow after it delivers a calf. Once the calf is born, the price
of the cow falls by the amount of the calf's price because it is no longer
included with the cow. Ex-dividend gaps were common in the old days. Today,
the average daily range of a dividend-paying stock is greater than the amount of
its dividend, and the ex-dividend drop seldom results in a gap.

Breakaway Gaps

A breakaway gap occurs when prices leap out of a congestion zone on heavy
volume and begin a new trend. A breakaway gap can remain open for weeks
or months, and sometimes years. The longer the range that preceded the gap,
the longer the subsequent trend.
An upside breakaway gap is usually followed by new highs for several
days in a row, and a downside breakaway gap is followed by a series of new
lows. There is a sharp increase in volume on the day of the breakaway gap
and for several days after that. Volume on the day of the gap may be twice as
high as the average volume for the previous few days.
A breakaway gap marks a major change in mass mentality- it reveals a
great pressure behind the new trend. The sooner you jump aboard the new
trend, the better.
Most gaps are common gaps that are quickly closed. Professional traders
like to fade them - trade against gaps. You have to be careful because if you
do it mechanically, sooner or later a breakaway gap will clobber you. It takes
deep pockets to hold a losing position for months, waiting for a gap to close.

22. GAPS
Continuation Gaps

A continuation gap occurs in the midst of a powerful trend, which continues
to reach new highs or new lows without filling the gap. It is similar to a
breakaway gap but occurs in the middle of a trend rather than in the beginning. Continuation gaps show a new surge of power among the dominant
market crowd. The inflationary bull markets in commodities in the 1970s
had many of them.
A continuation gap can help you estimate how far a trend is likely to
carry. Measure the vertical distance from the beginning of a trend to the gap,
and then project it from the gap in the direction of the trend. When the market approaches that target, it is time to begin taking profits.
Volume confirms continuation gaps when it jumps at least 50 percent
above the average for the previous few days. If prices do not reach new
highs or new lows for several days after a gap, you are probably dealing with
a treacherous exhaustion gap.

Exhaustion Gaps

An exhaustion gap is not followed by new highs during uptrends or new lows
during downtrends-prices churn and then return into the gap and close it.
Exhaustion gaps appear at the ends of trends. Prices rise or fall for several
weeks or months, and then gap in the direction of the trend. At first, an
exhaustion gap looks like a continuation gap-a leap in the direction of the
trend on heavy volume. If prices fail to reach new highs or new lows for several days after the gap, it is probably an exhaustion gap.
An exhaustion gap is confirmed only when prices reverse and close it.
This gap is like the last spurt of a tired athlete. He springs away from the
pack but cannot sustain the pace; as soon as others close in on him, you
know that he will lose the race.

Trading Rules

1. Common gaps do not offer good trading opportunities, but if you must
trade, fade them. If prices gap up, sell short as soon as the market
stops reaching new highs and place a protective stop above the high of
the past few days; cover shorts and take profits at the lower rim of the

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

1 00

gap. If prices gap down, go long as soon as the market stops reaching
new lows and place a protective stop below the low of the past few
days; place an order to sell and take profits at the upper rim of the gap.

2. If a market gaps out of a long trading range on a burst of volume and
continues to make new highs or lows, you are probably dealing with a
breakaway gap. If prices have gapped to the upside, buy and place a
protective stop at the lower rim of the gap. A valid breakaway gap
almost never gets closed. Reverse the procedure in downtrends.
Waiting for a pullback when a new trend has just begun may leave you
on the sidelines.
3. Trading a continuation gap is similar to trading a breakaway gap - buy
early and place a protective stop at the lower rim of the gap. Reverse
the procedure in downtrends. Tighten your stops when a trend
approaches its target as projected by the continuation gap.
4. A valid breakaway or continuation gap must be confirmed by a series
of several new highs or lows. Otherwise, you may be dealing with an
exhaustion gap. If the market refuses to reach new highs or lows in the
direction of the gap, exit your trade and re-evaluate the market from
the sidelines.

5. Exhaustion gaps offer attractive trading opportunities because they are
often followed by violent reversals. When you identify an upside
exhaustion gap, sell short and place a protective stop above the latest
high. Once prices begin to slide, weak bulls will start bailing out. Stay
short as long as prices continue to reach new lows and cover the day
after prices fail to make a new low. Reverse the procedure in downtrends. Because of high volatility, exhaustion gaps are easier to trade
using options, especially buying puts at the tops.
More on Gaps

An island reversal is a combination of a continuation gap and a breakaway
gap in the opposite direction. An island reversal looks like an island, separated from the rest of price action by a gulf in which no trading took place. It
begins as a continuation gap, followed by a compact trading range with high
trading volume. Then prices gap in the opposite direction and leave behind
an island of prices. This pattern occurs very seldom, but it marks major
reversal areas. Trade against the trend that preceded an island.

23. CHART PATTERNS

101

It pays to watch for gaps in related markets. If gold shows a breakaway
gap but silver and platinum do not, then you may get a chance to position for
a "catch-up move" in a market that has not yet become frenzied.
Gaps can serve as support and resistance levels. If greater volume
occurred after an upside gap, it indicates very strong support. If greater volume occurred before the gap, then support is less strong.
Technical indicators help identify types of gaps. The Force Index (see
Section 42) is based on price and volume. If Force Index shows only a minor
change on the day of a gap, it is probably a common gap. When Force Index
reaches a record high or a low level for several weeks, it confirms breakaway and continuation gaps.
Intraday charts show many opening gaps, when prices open outside the
previous day's range. When there is an imbalance of public buy and sell
orders before the opening, floor traders open markets higher or lower. If outsiders want to buy, floor traders sell to them at such a high price that the
slightest dip will make them money. If customers want to sell, floor traders
will take merchandise off their hands- at a price that is low enough to profit
from the slightest bounce. Professionals play it cool - they know that crowds
seldom stay excited for long and prices tend to pull back into yesterday's
range. They sell above that range or buy below, waiting to unwind their positions and take profits when the opening gap is closed.
If you trade the S&P 500 futures, remember that their opening gaps are
almost always closed. If the S&P 500 futures open higher, they almost
always sink during the day and touch their previous day's high. If they open
lower, they almost always rally during the day and touch their previous day's
low. Savvy day-traders tend to sell short higher openings and buy lower
openings. This is not a mechanical method-you have to buy or sell only
after indicators tell you that the force behind the opening gap has been spent
and the market is ready to close the gap.

23. CHART PATTERNS
The patterns you see on your chart or computer screen are the trails left by
bulls and bears. A chartist is a hunter who follows subtle signs, visible only
to those who know what to look for. Chart patterns can help you decide
when a trend is likely to continue or to reverse.
There are two main groups of patterns: continuation and reversal.
Continuation patterns include flags and pennants. They suggest trading in

102

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

the direction of the current trend. Reversal patterns include head and shoulders, inverse head and shoulders, and double tops and bottoms. They indicate it is time to take profits on existing positions. Some patterns can serve
as either continuation or reversal formations. Triangles and rectangles are
notorious for doing that double duty.
When several chart patterns point in the same direction, their signals are
reinforced. For example, if an uptrendline gets broken when a head-andshoulders top is being completed, they both confirm that the uptrend is ending. When different patterns give conflicting messages, their signals cancel
one another, and it is better not to trade.

Head-and-Shoulders Tops

A healthy uptrend moves up in steps. Most rallies reach higher peaks than
the preceding rally and declines stop at a higher level than the previous
decline. When an uptrend fails to reach a higher high or a decline falls below
the previous low, it shows that bulls are losing their grip.
Head-and-shoulders tops mark the ends of uptrends (Figure 23-1). The
"head" is a price peak surrounded by two lower peaks, or "shoulders." A
neckline connects the lows of declines from the left shoulder and the head.
The neckline does not have to be horizontal-it may be flat, rising, or
falling. A downsloping neckline is especially bearish-it shows that bears
are becoming stronger.
When prices fail to rally above the head, they confirm that a head-andshoulders top is developing. The right shoulder may be higher or lower than
the left and may be shorter or longer. The decline from the right shoulder
breaks the neckline. When that happens, the uptrend is dead.
After breaking the neckline, prices sometimes pull back to it on low volume. This feeble rally offers an excellent shorting opportunity, with a logical
stop just above the neckline.
Head-and-shoulders tops often have typical volume patterns. Volume is
often lower on the head than on the left shoulder. It is even lower on the right
shoulder. Volume tends to increase when prices break the neckline. When
prices pull back to it, volume is very thin.
A head-and-shoulders pattern provides an approximate target for the new
downtrend. You can obtain it by measuring the distance from the top of the
head to the neckline and projecting this down from the neckline.

267
263
258
253
218
243
238
233
228
548460
411345
274230
137115
0
Figure 23-1.

Head and Shoulders

An uptrend remains healthy as long as each new rally reachhigh. Rising volume confrim-when
prices reach the
d(H) and flashes a warning to tighten stops on long positions. The
decline from the head breaks the uptrendline and signals that the
uptrend is over.
The head, in this case, i s an "island reversal" (see "Gaps," Section
22)-a very bearish pattern. Volume shoots up ominously during the
decline from the head. The right shoulder (RS) is much smaller than the
left-another sign of weakness. Low volume on the right shoulder also
points to a good shorting opportunity.
The decline from the right shoulder breaks the neckline. This completes the .head-and-shoulders pattern. There i s an excellent shorting
opportunity when prices pull back to the neckline from below on low
volume. The distance from the top of the head to the neckline (A) provides a target for the decline (B). At the right edge of the chart, hold shorts
because prices continue to fall on rising volume and have not reached
their target; place a protective stop at the top of the past 5 days' range.
*
