
Figure 10-78

477 䊏
Candlesticks for Traders

Figure 10-79

Finally, here are a few of the complex (three to five days) patterns
with their accuracy percentages. The disproportionate number of
reversal patterns is typical. It is interesting that almost all reduce to
some variation of a Hammer line (see Figure 10-79).
Trading Tip

The Three Line Strike reminds traders not to bite too hard on big
one-day reversals, but if the stock was at support, closing the bearish
trade and or starting a bullish one on the bounce is totally appropriate. Knowing the pattern would then dictate waiting to see if it pulled
back to test support again. Worst case, the trader gets to add to the

䊏 478

Chapter Ten

trade if it bounces and switch to a bearish continuation if it drops on
through. Win-win.
Summary for Family Ties
Like the illumination that charts brought to the mental darkrooms of
ticker tape reading, candlesticks have broadened the trader’s vision
of market temperament and pattern recognition. However, as stated
at the very beginning, understanding and effectively utilizing candlesticks is a far cry from knowing a few names and searching to find
“the good ones.” New black-belts in any martial art find that they
have worked very hard and progressed to an important milestone. In
fact it is the point where their instructors inform them that their journey is about to begin. Their efforts have properly prepared them to
now really learn the art.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Conclusions
Successful analysis of the stock and futures markets is not an easy
task. Most participants prepare themselves no better than they would
for a game of cards. One must first learn how these markets work,
then learn about the many different kinds of analysis that are available, such as, fundamental and technical analysis. On a smaller scale,
the field of technical analysis offers a host of varying techniques:
Japanese candlestick analysis is one of these.
This book emphasizes that candlestick analysis should be used
with other analysis methods. At the risk of sounding contradictory, I
would like to warn that too many methods can only confuse and hinder. It reminds me of the saying that the person with a watch always
knows what time it is, but the person with two watches is never sure.
Let me say it succinctly and clearly! Candle pattern analysis should
always be used with other confirming techniques, such as the filtering technique described in Chapter 9 and/or the techniques outlined
by Ryan Litchfield in Chapter 10 involving support and resistance
areas on charts.
It has been shown that candle pattern analysis can enhance the use
and timing of popular technical indicators. Filtered candlesticks con-

䊏 479 䊏

䊏 480

Chapter Eleven

sistently outperform a host of technical indicators and usually candle
patterns by themselves. The combination of technical indicators and
techniques is not new; in fact, it is the method of analysis most successful traders use. Adding candle patterns to the arsenal will surely
further improve trading results.
Over 7 million days of data is strong evidence to support the statistics in the Pattern Detail Information Boxes. The average % Wins
ranged from 64% to 41%, with only 5 patterns above 59%. Is a
%Win of 58% good enough to not require confirmation? I don’t
think so; that is why I state time and time again that candle patterns
need to be used with other technical techniques. The Japanese literature was void of specifics and kept candle patterns out of the specific
definition arena—a little light on details and lots of generalizations.
Don’t get caught up in the hype and cheerleading about Japanese
candlesticks; use them to enhance other technical methods. Their
short-term nature will almost always improve the other techniques.
The use of candlestick charting is clearly a more visibly enhanced
method of viewing price data. Anyone who would prefer bar charts
is just afraid of change and cannot justify it other than stubbornness.
I’m sure that with the passing of time, new and different analysis
techniques will surface. Some will gain in popularity; some will go by
the wayside. Any analysis technique that has a substantial basis for
its method will usually survive. I am convinced that candlestick
charting and candle pattern analysis will be a survivor.

Appendix A: Interview
with Japanese Trader
Mr. Takehiro Hikita
Mr. Takehiro Hikita has graciously provided me with a large amount of
insight into the candle pattern philosophy. I have never met anyone so
devoted to the detailed study of a concept as he. He started using candlestick analysis many years ago. In fact, all of his charting was done by
hand until personal computers became available.
During a trip to Japan in January, 1992, I studied the candle philosophy and interpretation with Mr. Hikita. I also maintained a log
of our conversations, from which I have selected appropriate questions for this interview.
Occasional editing was done to assist in clarifying his answers,
definitely not to change the meaning. It became quite obvious to me
that using English as a second language resulted in a completely honest and direct response; with no effort to be clever or entertaining. I
found this to be quite refreshing and decided that you might also.
1. How and when did you first become interested in investing and
trading?
I believe it was when I was around 31 years of age, that is over 25
years ago. It was, however, once terminated and I stayed out of the
market for about 2 years losing money, more than enough at that time.
䊏 481 䊏

䊏 482

Appendix A

2. When did you realize that a form of technical analysis was better
that fundamental analysis?
It was when I started trading again and I was around 41 years of age,
after leaving the company for some reason. Beginning with candlestick pattern analysis, I studied and researched all different kinds of
Japanese analysis techniques with real trading, and was extended
later on the method available in the States. My starting to trade again
was with the policy to do so based on the technical analysis and no
more guesses and fundamental analysis to make a living. I am fortunately still in the business of trading.
Speaking of this story a little further I started subscribing to Commodities (now called Futures) and purchased many publications such
as Commodity Trading Systems and Methods written by Kaufman
and Wilder’s publications. My first use of a calculator was the programmable Texas Instruments product on Wilder’s method. Then the
Casio’s programmable calculator for me to build in my own method,
as I became serious. Then to make the daily analysis much easier, I
purchased the IBM-5100 with 32K memory; it was 1977.
In 1979, I learned the Apple II came out on the market which has a
graphic capability. I then immediately purchased it by importing
directly from the States. In 1980, I joined CompuTrac and attended
their first TAG Conference in New Orleans. My Stock & Commodities magazine subscription started then.
3. Did you always use candle charting for your analysis? If not,
when did you start suing candle charts?
It was from the very beginning, as far as taking a look at the market
in general, to know how the market is acting. The candlestick charting method is the only one available in Japan to record the history of
the price activity in graphic form. It is just like the bar chart in the

483 䊏
Appendix A

States. Regardless of whether I liked it or not, it was what was used
then.
But, the candlestick pattern analysis is another subject, rather than
the charting itself. My interest on how to read the pattern better was
probably few years later. I first started trading after reading the first
issue of Shimuzu’s book in 1965, the original of The Japanese Chart
of Charts translated by Nicholson.
4. Are candles used in Japan today as widely as bar charts are used
in the United States?
As already mentioned, there is no other method than candlestick
charting to show a market record and activity in Japan. Yes, it is
being used just like the bar chart in the States. The pattern recognition is another subject within the chart analysis.
5. Is the word candlestick a Western term? If so, what is candle
charting and analysis called in Japan?
There is generally nothing but the candlestick charting to show the
trend and market activity, and any other are classified as the analysis
since they are rather clear to know the pinpoint to take an action, like
the Point and Figure chart. Speaking of the chart, we generally call
it Hi Ashi/Daily Charts, Shu Ashi/Weekly Chart, and Tsuki Ashi/
Monthly Chart. The Japanese word for candle is roshoku.
For your information, Ashi means Leg or better say Foot, and the
foot has an inside meaning of the past record, that is probably from
the foot stamp that shows the past movement and activities, not only
as a market term but in general. I then feel the Candlefoots is better
to be called in English. It is, however, alright as lone as understandable and sounds smooth to people’s ears.

䊏 484

Appendix A

6. Do you trade stocks, futures, or both?
Yes, I trade both, I trade actively the futures but not the stocks. My
trading stock is a long-term basis, never sell. This is in order to hedge
from inflation, while trading the futures is to make money in the
short term.
There are other reasons. It is easier to find a pivot in the futures,
especially to find a pinpoint to short and I like to sell, rather than go
long, which has a false start often, compared to going short. Not only
that, but it will be only one-third of the time needed for movement to
gain the same price difference in the case of short, compared to long.
7. Have you found that candles work better with stocks, futures, or
does it matter?
Again, the candle charts and candle pattern analysis should be separated. The candlestick is only the chart itself, but the candlestick patterns are the analysis based generally on the Sakata’s Five Law, or
somehow originating from it. There are two applications in the law,
one for daily and the other for a weekly chart, which has a different
definition. The daily candlesticks pattern work better on the futures.
It is again because of speed. The futures has a short trend cycle white
the stocks is longer.
8. Which candle patterns seem to work best for you? Can you list
your 10 favorite patterns?
Your question is too straightforward, even though it might be scientific approach to research, so it is awfully difficult to answer it. You
have to understand that the candle pattern analysis is originating
from man’s experience in trading, and that is a mix of market tendency with the human psychology expressed in the pattern. There is
no scientific logic at all.

485 䊏
Appendix A

Approaching from a statistic viewpoint and supposing there were
100% perfect patterns, if it comes once a year, or about one every
three years, nobody can keep watching to see it and catch it. It must
be based on such a daily analysis, repeating tedious business. There
is, also, no guarantee that a pattern that showed 100% success in the
past will work well repeatedly in future. In statistical speaking, the
number of the sample is the important factor, and so it cannot be
compared with others in a different number of sampling.
I would like to see a research report that will be able to do by your
software, or will be done by somebody else. Again, there will be all
different results from each software, even using exactly the same
data, because of the definition used by every software program. They
will each be a little bit different in defining the patterns, along with
the definition of filtering to define it. So any such research report
should be with a note within this program and within that program,
not as a candle pattern itself. If is a matter of the pattern quality
inside the software rather than the system quality.
In conclusion, I should say it always depends on how it is used, in
conjunction with others, and market conditions such as how many
new highs or new lows are included, but not by the candlestick pattern itself. Again, the candle pattern is one of the analysis tools.
9. Which candle patterns do you think are not very good? How
about a list?
Again, my answer will be the same as the above explained. It depends
upon the market condition and the price level and so on.
10. Do you trade or make timing decisions based solely on candle
patterns or do you use them in conjunction with other technical
indicators?

䊏 486

Appendix A

Of course I use the candles pattern in conjunction with other technical indicators. As you know there is no perfect technical analysis
method by itself, and again the candlestick pattern is also one of
them covering some part of the 360 degrees that must be defended.
The daily candlestick pattern analysis is, however, good with futures
as one of the timing tools. Again, there is nothing that covers all the
degrees needed for technical analysis.
It is my intention to make a mark in trading by the number of contracts in opening positions. Depending upon the market condition,
that requires the guts, too, which is another of the factors required.
One contract each time without the accent will never let you make
money. This is one reason why I am not interested in any of the valuable factors of optimizing automated trading systems. They seem to
be only playing the game for fun, so I don’t like it. Everybody who
wants to make money should be aware of no easy money anywhere
in the world, unless you are lucky or originated from a son of a king.
Author’s Note: Mr. Hikita is referring to trading multiple contracts
when the candle signals are supported. Also, he stressed the importance of using the candle pattern signal to assist in opening and closing of position, not necessarily for reversing positions only.
11. Which indicators have you found that work well with candle
patterns?
I have to emphasize, this time, that it depends upon the market condition and the price level which indicator is good to use with the candle patterns. I feel, however, that stochastic %D works fairly well in
general, if you can correctly count the cycles and confluence/convergence on different cycles generated by %D. And, pinpointing tops
and bottoms using a combination of the stochastic oscillator seems
good.

487 䊏
Appendix A

12. Candlestick analysis is growing rapidly in the United States. Do
you think that it is just a fad or do you think candle analysis is
here to stay?
I suppose it is not a fad and will stay long in the States. Because this
way of expression of the market has much advantage in comparing
it to the bar charts, so that it is easier to understand the daily price
change. There is also another good point. For instance it has a open
price mark, which we understand is an important factor to read the
market. Also, it is easy to know by one quick look at the candle
which way the market moved during the day. Since each pattern
has a deep meaning similar to Gann analysis, it will last a long
time within traders who are interested in the philosophy behind the
patterns.
13. What advice would you offer to Western traders abut candlestick analysis?
To understand the candle patterns you should understand the philosophy inside and behind each pattern. Since it is not a perfect technique, as is the same case with others, it is also important not to
depend solely on the pattern itself, but use it in conjunction with the
others based on a logically established method. The candle pattern
analysis is one of the analysis methods that was built up by human
impressions and expressed by image form the combination of the
pattern based on history. Beyond a maximum possible technical
analysis, there is another world of discipline of mental power, that is
to establish your philosophy.
The candle patterns must be believed in. If you get signal, you must
execute or follow the market very closely. Stay in touch with each
candle signal. If you become disconnected, the psychology behind
candle pattern will not work well.

䊏 488

Appendix A

Once you establish your trading policy, whatever you can believe
based on the above explanations, you will not make a big mistake.
You will be aware of mistakes in advance within an acceptable level
of damage, as long as you are employing a proper trend analysis. If
you have this policy, you will then not be disappointed by any accident and will be able to understand the way the market is wrong,
instead of you and your policy, in the case of the market being
against you.

FINAL NOTE
As you can see from this interview, Mr. Hikita thinks that the separation of candlestick charting and candle pattern analysis is important. Also, one cannot forget the underlying psychology behind each
candle pattern. These are insights into the minds of the traders and
speculators that move the market every day.
Mr. Hikita always referred to his trading analysis as dancing with
the trend. This concept is not new to technical analysis. However,
many traders must graduate from the school of bitter experience
before they realize its importance.

Appendix B: Derivative
Charting Methods
Candlestick charting has produced a number of derivative charting
and analysis methods. The appeal of candlestick charts, as a method
of plotting market data, is that they visually help to interpret the
market. Your brain can quickly assimilate the information because it
is displayed so consistently well. A new charting method, called CandlePower charting, adds a new dimension to candlestick charts: volume. CandlePower is a trademark of N-Squared Computing, now
North Systems, Inc., the originator of the concept.

CANDLEPOWER CHARTING
CandlePower Charting is another visually appealing charting technique that combines the power of Japanese candlesticks and volume.
Most charting software packages have chosen to use the term CandleVolume instead of CandlePower for this charting method.
Typical charting (whether bar or candlesticks) shows the price

䊏 489 䊏

䊏 490

Appendix B

action on the vertical scale and time on the horizontal scale (see Chapter 1). Volume is usually depicted as a histogram plot under the prices.
Two significant pieces of information are generated each time a transaction occurs between a buyer and a seller. One of these, price change,
we tend to react to emotionally, and the other, volume, we largely
ignore. Volume is certainly a more valuable tool to market analysis
than is usually acknowledged. Richard Arms claims that price tells us
what is happening and volume tells us how it is happening. Joseph
Granville built an entire career analyzing and writing about volume.
Volume, during most phases of the market, will precede prices.
This is a hotly contested remark, but watching both price and volume
can only enhance your timing and decision making. Simply said,
when price and volume are increasing, it is considered bullish. Likewise, when prices and volume are decreasing, it is considered bearish.
Figure B-1

As shown in Figure B-1, the body of a CandlePower day, just like
a candlestick, is made up of the difference between the open and
close. The color of the body and the shadows also follow the same
convention used in Japanese candlestick charting. The difference is

491 䊏
Appendix B

that the width of the body is a reflection of the volume for that day.
A day with large volume will be a wider candlestick body than a day
with less volume. On a chart, it is easy to pick the largest volume
day by finding the widest body. Likewise, the day with the smallest
volume will be the thinnest body.
Many candle patterns can have added importance when volume is
introduced. For instance, a bullish Engulfing Day will be even more
bullish if the second day also is accomplished by larger volume. A
Morning Star pattern can be judged more successful if there is excessive volume on the last day.
Examples

Figure B-2

䊏 492

Appendix B

In Figure B-2, the CandlePower chart on Avon products (AVP), notice how the upmove contains large white candle lines. These wide
lines show that the upmove is fully supported by volume. Once the
large white days dry up, the move has probably run its course.
The large black day in the chart of Bell South (BEL) shows a classic volume blow-off day (Figure B-3). After a good upmove, the volume starts to dry up. Then, in one day, prices explode to the upside,
but close near their lows on very large volume. A few days into the
decline, a three-day rally is terminated with a gap down. Then the
decline continues.

Figure B-3

493 䊏
Appendix B

In Figure B-4, the chart of Citicorp (CCI), notice how each turning
point in the market is accomplished by large volume. The market
bottomed with a large black day, then rallied. The rally stopped with
a large white day, then went sideways until the next large white day.
From there it gapped up twice, followed by two days of indecision
(Spinning Tops), each with large volume. Here again, Spinning Tops
with large volume support the indecision on the marketplace. Large
amounts of stock changed hands, but no side took the leadership.
The bottom reversal toward the end of December on the chart on
Litton (LIT) shows continually large-volume days (Figure B-5). In

Figure B-4

䊏 494

Appendix B

Figure B-5

fact, if it were not for the small white Spinning Top day, a Morning
Star bullish reversal pattern would have represented the bottom.
Here is another example where volume increasing throughout a pattern will add to its significance.
Figure B-6, the last example of CandlePower charting, shows more
data (volume maximum has been reduced), so the richness of the
charting method can be fully appreciated.

495 䊏
Appendix B

Figure B-6

CONDENSED CANDLEPOWER CHARTING
Another twist is added to CandlePower charting with Condensed
CandlePower charting. In this approach, the time element is returned
to the horizontal axis. The variable-width candlestick bodies are still
displayed accurately, but they overlap. Each new day starts at a uniform distance (time) interval. This method of charting displays more
data at once, while still giving the large-volume days visibility. Individual candle patterns are more difficult to see, though.

䊏 496

Appendix B

Figure B-7

Areas of volume congestion can be easily spotted using condensed
CandlePower Charting. Trendlines used on this type of chart would
also reflect the volume component.
The data used for the Condensed CandlePower chart in Figure
B-7 is the same as in the last example of CandlePower Charting. This
was done intentionally, so you could easily see the difference in charting methods.
