
rrr es

B. From the list above, choose the four criteria needed for a shooting
star:

11. Why does a hanging man need extra bearish confirmation?

a. Because of its close near the high of the session

b. Because of a small real body

c. Because of its long lower shadow

d. Both a and c
12. What does a hanging man need for confirmation?

a. Ahigher high during the next session

b. During the next session, a close under the hanging man's close

c. During the next session, a close above the hanging man’s upper

shadow

d. During the next session, an opening under the hanging man's open
13. Which candles have one-sided shadows?

a. High wave candles


Single Candie Lines 35

14.

15.

16.

17.

b. Shooting stars

c. Hammers

a. Both b and e

A shooting star has a real body.
a. black

b. white

c. either black or white

d. There is no real body, as the shooting star must also be a doji.
Pick two criteria for a shooting star:

a. Downtrend and a long upper shadow

b. Uptrend and long lower shadow

c. Uptrend and long upper shadow

4d. Downtrend and long lower shadow

If we combine the shadows of a shooting star and a harmmer, we would
havea

a. tall white candle.
b. tall black candle.
¢. high wave candle.
a. doji.

When you see a small real body at a prior price resistance area, it indi-
eates that

a. market participants are undecided about whether they will pay a
higher price for this security; some holding long positions may choose
to take profits.

b. it's a national holiday.
¢. a continuation pattern 1s in force.
d. the bulls are in control.

When a stock in a strong uptrend slows, and then retraces in an orderly
fashion, then forms a candle with a small real body, it could mean

a. you can take that chart off your watch list.
b. the recent downtrend may be losing force.

¢. you should watch for the next session's possible bounce and possible
long entry, as the uptrend may resume.
4. you should enter a short position on that stock.


Single Candie Lines ST

x X x
VV SS
1 2 3 4
EXGIBIT 2.4 Question 22

Use Exhibit 2.5 to answer questions 23 and 24.
23. What candlestick signals are these lines?
a. Haromers
b. Shooting stars
c. Hanging man lines
d. High wave candles
24. Which line ts a sell signal?
a. None of them
b. Line 1
c. Line 2
a. Line 3

123
EXBIBIT 2.5 Questions 23 and 24

25. In Exhibit 2.6, which of these ts (are) shooting stars?

a. Land2 Ce |
b. 2and3 4.4
1 2 3 4

EXBIBIT 2.6 Question 25


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

26. In Exhibit 2.7, which of these 1s (are) hammers?
a3
b. 3and4
c. All
d. land2

EXBEBIT 2.7 Question 26

Answers for Chapter Two, Section One: Spinning Tops and
High Wave Candles

1. b. Candle charts illustrate the action between the bulls and bears during
that session. A long lower shadow showing on a day's candlestick means
the market sold off during the session. By the end of the session, how-
ever, it bounced off the lows. This means that one of two scenarios un-
folded: Either the bears retreated, or the bulls came back into the market
with enough force to overcome the bears.

2. ¢. The Japanese nicknamed a diminutive real body a spinning top. A spin-
ning top warns that the market may be losing its momentum. For in-
stance, if the market is at, or near, a new high—especially after a steep
advance—the emergence of a spinning top could be a signal that the bulls
are having trouble continuing their ascent. This signal cautions that the
prior move ts stalling,

One session's small real body doesn't turn the trend from down to up.
Still, a series of spinning tops in the same support area shows that the
bears were unable to sustain those lows into the end of the sessions.
This could lay the foundation for a potential rally. The same concept
would be true with a series of spinning tops at a resistance area. Such a


Single Candie Lines 39

scenario would show that each time the market climbed to that price re-
sistance, the bulls were not able to maintain the highs into the close. This
would be a warning signal to those holding long positions.

. b. The spinning top (aka a small real body) is not dependent on the color

of the real body nor on the length of the shadows.

. ¢ A eandle with a long upper and lower shadow 1s called a high wave

eandle.

a. Ahigh wave candle shows that the market ts in a standoff between the
bulls and the bears When a high wave candle emerges after a downtrend
or an uptrend, the Japanese say the market has lost its sense of direction.
This lack of market orientation means that the prior trend is in jeopardy.

a. The hammer, with its long, lower shadow and a close near or at the
high, is easily understood to be a bullish signal. The term hammer derives
from the fact that the market is hammering out a base. It also means that
a bottom 1s so solid it does not break, even when a hammer knocks away
at it. A hammer gives a potent signal when it appears after a significant
downtwmn or in an oversold market. In other words, the hammer is a po-
tential bottom reversal indicator. As such, it needs a downtrend to re-
verse. Since the hammer is most useful after a significant downturn, it
should be noted that there may be selling on a rally from the hammer.
Therefore, the first bounce after the hammer may fail, and the market
may return to test the hammer's support.

a. The hammer rust have a small real body at the top end of the trading

range. This shows that the market initially sold off during the session,
then bouneed back by the session's end.

8. d. The color of a hammer's real body can be either black or white.
9. ¢. Three aspects differentiate the hanging man from the hammer: trend,

10.

extent of the move before the candle line, and confirmation.

(A.) D, @. g, h. The hammer can be recognized by four criteria:

* The real body 1s at the upper end of the trading range. The color of the
real body 1s not Important.

« Along lower shadow that should be at least twice the height of the real
body.

* It should have no, or a very short, upper shadow.

* The market should be in a downtrend.


12.

13.

14.

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

(B.) a, ¢, g. The shooting star can be recognized by four criteria:

* The real body is at the bottom end of the trading range. The color of
the real body is not important.

A long upper shadow that should be at least twice the height of the real
body.

It should have no, or a very short, lower shadow.

* The market should be in an uptrend.

d. The hanging man has a long, lower bullish shadow and a small real
body at or near the top end of the trading range. As such, this candle line
shows that the market sold off during the session but by the end of that
session had bounced back to close at or near the highs. Although the
small real body of the hanging man could give a little hint that the bulls
are losing some momentum, its long lower shadow nonetheless keeps the
trend pointing north. Thus, we would need bearish confirmation before
tuming negative on the hanging man line.

b. This confirmation is close beneath the hanging man’s real body. The
reason is that if the market closes lower the next day, those who bought
on the close of the hanging man day (and many trades occur at the close)
are now left “hanging” with a losing position. This is why I would also like
to see the hanging man at an all-time high, or at least at the high in the
context of a significant move. In this scenario, the longs entering on the
hanging man session are in their position at new highs, thus making them
more nervous. Consequently, those longs might decide to back out of
their now losing position. That could cascade into more selling,

d. A one-sided shadow means that an extended shadow appears on the
top or bottom of the real body. Therefore, a candle line with along lower
shadow (if it meets other criteria) is a hammer. The candle line with a
long, one-sided shadow above its real body would be a shooting star.

¢. The real body of the shooting star can be either black or white. Even if

the shooting star had a white real body, it would still be a close near the
low of the session.

. ¢. Beeause the shooting star 1s potentially a bearish reversal signal, it

must appear in the context of an uptrend. A shooting star should also
have an upper shadow at least two times the height of the real body.

16. ¢. Combining a shooting star’s long upper shadow and a hammer’s long

lower shadow above and below a short real body would produce a can-
die line fitting the definition of a high wave candle.


Single Candie Lines 41

17.

19.

21

22.

24.

a. A small real body, whether alone or integrated into a two- or three-
eandle pattern, indicates indecision as to whether a higher price will be
paid for this security.

b. When a stock in a strong uptrend and retraces in an orderly manner,
you can watch for a small real body as a possible clue that the retrace-
ment is losing force.

c. The hammer and the hanging man have the same shape. What differ-

entiates one from another is that for a hammer the prior trend must be
down and for a hanging man, up.

. b. Ahammer comes after a decline and has a long lower shadow, small

real body (black or white) near the top end of the trading range, and lit-
tle or no upper shadow. All these lines met these criteria.

. ¢. Although a classic hammer ts a potentially bullish reversal signal, this

exhibit shows us the importance of putting candles in context of the pre-
ceeding price action. In this example the market is making consecutively
lower lows and lower closes and lower highs. This keeps a shortterm
downtrend intact. However, the multiple hammers are reflecting that the
market is rejecting low price levels as it descends. Consequently, the
market's downtrend keeps us from buying, but the potentially bullish
applications of the hammer keep us from selling. Therefore, the best
strategy in this scenario would be to stand aside.

b. In scenario 2 we see a hammer confirming a prior low and therefore a
potential support area. This raises the probability that the market will
bounce from this area. Scenarios 1 and 4 would not be hammers, since a
hammer must come after a downtrend. Scenario 3's hammer may be
potentially bullish because the market 1s oversold, but the odds of a turn
with the hammer are better with the hammer in scenario 2 that 1s con-
firming support.

. ¢. Candlestick lines with long lower shadows and small real boxiies of the

top end of the trading range, during an uptrend, are hanging man lines.
a. Although these are all potentially bearish hanging man lines, the bear-
ish confirmation of such a line comes with a close under the hanging
man’s real body. Since no such close occurred, we did not get any sell
signals.

. ¢. Some requisites for a shooting star include an uptrend, a small real

body in an ascending trend, and little or no lower shadow. The only
scenario that meets these criteria is scenario 1.


42 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

26. a. A hammer ts a candle line with a long lower shadow (at least twice the
height of the real body) and a small real body at the top end of a trading
range, with little or no upper shadow. A hammer must also come after a
downtrend. Scenario 3 meets these criteria. Scenario 1 does not have a
lower shadow long enough, scenario 2 has an upper shadow that is too

long, and scenario 4 comes after an uptrend instead of the necessary
downtrend.


SECTION TWO
The Dangerous Doji

doji. The doji plays an important role in candle charting techniques. When

it appears in the context of an uptrend, especially in a zone of prior re-
sistance, it can signal a significant trend shift, or reversal. Naturally, candles
subsequent to the doji's appearance confirm the potential tum.

In fact, the dojt's ability to convey the market's message ts echoed in a let-
ter I recetved from a medical doctor. He wrote, “As a physician, I can most
appreciate the simplicity and effectiveness of candlestick charting. Like a
stethoseope, simplistic in design, but powerful in diagnosis, candlestick
charting has shown me a form of technical analysis well suited to diagnosing
the health of my stocks.”

| n this section we'll focus on the powerful single candle line known as the

In this section you will Team... .

* The definition of a doji

* How to identify different types of doji

* The importance of doji when they appear in uptrends and downtrends
* How to interpret a doji when it forms in a box range

hev terms to watch for:

Doji

Dragonfly doji
Gravestone doji
Northern doji
Southern dojt

43


dd THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

GETTING STARTED

The Japanese place great significance on the power of the doj. Especially in
the context of a market experiencing a mature uptrend, this candle line,
either alone or included in a two- or three-candle pattern, warns you that a
trend shift may be in the offing.

The doji is a session In which the opening and closing prices are the
same; therefore, it resembles a cross. Like the spinning top, the doji indicates
a market in complete balance between supply and demand. Since a doji ses-
sion represents a market at a juncture of indecision, it can often be an early
warning that a preceding rally could be losing steam.

The ideal doji forms with the same opening and closing price, but this
rule is flexible. When the opening and closing prices are only a few ticks
from each other you can still consider the candle line as a doji.

Maybe you've heard the old saying, “The stock market hates uncertainty.”
The doji is synonymous with uncertainty. Consider the doji a warning that
the framework built by the bulls may soon falter or crumble.

While doji are extremely valuable at calling market tops (especially after
a long, white candle), they sometimes lose signal potential when defining
market bottoms. The doji's possible negative influence at trend tops comes
from its warning that the market ts indecisive. As such, a close over the doji’s
high could be a signal that the bulls have regained a foothold.

Although a doji’s appearance in a rally might signal an exhausted market,
a doji's emergence in a downtrend may not portend a bottom. Other Western
indicators, and certainly price environment, must confirm a market turning
into a base. Why? Remember that a doj) indicates indecision. Indecision and
uncertainty in an oversold market may just be a resting place before another
downtum resumes.

Depending on the placement of the open and close price on the session,
some doji have nicknames. These doji are still reversal indicators, but they
hint at more positive or negative outcomes. A few of these specially named
doji are the dragonfly doji, the gravestone doji, the Northern doji, and the
Southern doji. Exhibit 2.8 illustrates these spectal doji lines.

334

The pronunciation of doji is doh’ gee. The plural of doji is doji.

KEY POINT



Single Candle Lines 45

Long-legged doji Dragonfly doji Gravestone doji

A 7
| ‘t

Northern doji Southern doji
EXBIBIT 2.8 — Doji

The dragonfly doji forms with the open and elose near, or at, the high of
the candle. This candle ernits bullish implications. It's long lower shadow
shows that the market fell sharply during the session, but buying pressure
pushed the price back up to close at, or very near, the session's high. If
you're thinking this doji resembles a hammer, but without the real body, you
are correct.

Pay attention when you see the dragonfly doji emerging during declines
that have become oversold. Normally doji in declines are not important, but
the dragonfly doji ts an exception.

The bearish counterpart to the dragonfly doji 1s the gravestone doji, also
shown in Exhibit 2.8. The gravestone doji's open, low, and close all reside at
the bottom of the candle. From the shape of this doji you can understand its
name: It looks like a tombstone.

KEY POINT

The doji is more influential when it is arare occurrence. If numerous doji have formed
on a particular chart, do not view the development of a new doji as meaningful.



THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

SIDE LIGHT

AJapanese proverb says, “Don't climb a tree to catch a fish.” The gravestone doji has
an ominous sound to its name and portends a potential uptrend reversal, but don't
give it more import than it has. Even though its extended upper shadow and close at
the low amplifies a trend change, candle signals don’t forecast the scope of a possi-
ble decline. Remember, candle signals give you early reversal or change signals, but
they don't predict future price targets. So, even if there are numerous gravestone
doji, it doesn't perforce mean the market will fall that much steeper. It just means that
the odds of a tum are greater than they would be with one gravestone doji.

The gravestone dojt's strong point ts in calling top reversals. Imagine an
uptrend becoming overbought, rising on white real bodies. Perhaps a glance
at the chart tells you that recent resistance at this same price level is also in
place. Now, the gravestone doji appears. The market opens, rises to a much
higher price (shown by the extended upper shadow), then falls to the low of
the session to close. For the moment, at least, the bears have won control. If
the next candle falls to the downside, the signal is complete.

Naturally, if the candle that forms after a gravestone doji rises above tt
and culminates In a long white real body, or other positive candle line, the
potential trend reversal signal given by the gravestone doji is negated.

To differentiate between doji appearing in a rally and those materializing
in a decline, I refer to the former as Northern doji and the latter as Southern
doji. A doji with long upper and lower shadows Is called a long-legged doji.

Like a pivotal word In a sentence, the doji gives optimum signals when
taken in the context of a prior trend, when they confirm other technical indi-
eators or patterns, and during consideration of follow-through action.

ws}

When the market is rising and overbought, and then a doji appears after a tall, white
candle, the Japanese say that the market is tired. What an appropriate way to view
doji. A doji’s emergence may not foretell an immediate price reversal. It may only sug-
gest that the market is vulnerable and susceptible to change. A trader can use the
highest high between the doji and the prior candle as resistance. If the market closes
above that area, the Japanese say the bulls are refreshed.

KEY POINT



Single Candle Lines 47

In Section Three, we'll finish our discussion of single candle lines by ex-

ploring the messages displayed by bullish and bearish belt-holds and their
long real bodies. We'll also talk about the psychology that underpins these
eandile lines “with an attitude.”

CHECK VOLR UNDERSTAADING

Questions for Chapter Two, Section Two:
The Dangerous Doli

A doji is a session

a. in which the open and close are the same.

b. that creates a candle line with only an upper shadow.
¢. in which the open and the low are the same.

d. that develops a candle with a very long lower shadow.
What does a doji signal?

a. The market action ts one-sided.

b. The bears have taken control.

c. The bulls and bears are in a stalemate.

4. The bulls are in control.

. If a spinning top has a very small real body, it has the same implications

asa

a. doji.

b. long, black real body.

c. long, white real body.

d. None of the above.

For a dragonfly doji, the represents the open, high, and close.
a. low of the session

b. middle of the session

c. high of the session

d. midway point of the real body

The doji in arally is a sell signal.
a. sometimes

b. always


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

¢. never

d. None of the above

For a gravestone doji, the is the open, low, and close.
a. low of the session

b. middle of the session

¢. upper 10% of the session

d. midway point of the real body

. As ahammer's real body gets smaller, it will ultimately become a(n)

a. dragonfly doji.

b. inverted hammer.
¢. gravestone dojl.
d. hanging man.

As a shooting star's real body gets smaller and smaller, it will ultimately
become

a. adragonfly doji.

b. ahammer.

«. agravestone dojl.
4d. None of the above.

A spinning top ts to a long real body as a(n) is to a spinning
top.

a. inverted hammer

b. bullish belt-hold line

¢. bearish belt-hold line

d. doji

A doji in an uptrend ts called a

a. gravestone doji.

b. dragonfly doji.

¢. Southern doji.

d. Northern doji.

Northern doji are most effective when
a. the doji ts In the middle of a trading range.

b. the market 1s very overbought.


Single Candie Lines 49

c. the doji appears at a resistance area.
d. Both bande
12. Use Exhibit 2.9 to answer the following questions by filling in the blanks:
(A) Which is a gravestone doji?
(B) Which ts along-legged doji?_
(C) Which is a dragonfly doji?_

io

EXHIBIT 2.9 Question 12

13. Exhibit 2.10 shows a doji Ina downtrend. Should you pay attention to this
doji?
a. Yes, because the doji is confirming a support level.
b. No, because doji in downtrends are not important.
c. No, because the doji works best in neutral trading environments.
d. Yes, because doji work well in short-term downtrends.

\ ¥ Doji

Support level a
EXBEBIT 2.10 Question 13

14. Exhibit 2.11 shows doj) following a tall white candle. Assuming this is a
daily chart, at what price would the market have to get above to be con-
sidered a bullish breakout?

a. A close over 2
b. A close over 3
¢. An intraday move over 3
d. A close over 4


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

EXGEBIT 2.11 Question 14

15. Match the patterns shown in Exhibit 2.12 with their candlestick terms.

/| ‘ a

t ; %

4 5 6
EXGEBIT 2.12 Question 1S

Candlestick Name Agure Number

a. Hanging man

b. Shooting star

c. High wave candle
d. Hammer

e. Northern doji

f. Southern doji

Answers for Chapter Two, Section Two: The Dangerous Doji

1. a. The doji reflects a market in a state of transition and 1s, consequently,
one of the more important individual candle lines. A doji session has a
horizontal line instead of a real body, because a doji is formed when the


Single Candie Lines sy |

session's open and close are the same. Stay especially cautious when
you see a doji materialize after a tall white candle In the context of a sig-
nificant uptrend. This is true whether the doji is within the prior long
white real body or above it. A doji means that the bulls are failing to sus-
tain the upside drive. In this scenario, the market 1s considered tired by
the Japanese, hence susceptible to a correction.
