
The Scope for Financial Alchemy

305

results they achieve. Try to propound an unformulated hypothesis and you get a hit-or-miss result. By contrast, when you
deliberately formulate your hypotheses, you can consistently outperform the market ave~ages-provided your specific predictions
are not too far off the qark. Treating the market as a mechanism
for testing hypotheses seems to be an effective hypothesis. It produces results that are better than a random walk.
This conclusion validates the approach I have taken over a
strictly scientific one. If we abide by the methods of natural science, we arrive at the random walk theory. The hypotheses that
are being tested have to'be disregarded because they do not constitute facts and what we are left with is a jumble of haphazard
price fluctuations. On the other hand, if we look at the situation
from the inside, from the vantage point of a participant, we discover a process of trial and error. It is not easy to make sense of
the process: many people participate with only a vague idea of
what is going on, and I must confess that the sensation of being
on a random walk is not unfamiliar to me. My attempts at formulating conjectures about the future work only intermittently;
oftentimes all I get is white noise. But when I succeed in formulating a worthwhile conjecture the results can be very rewarding,
as Phase 1 of the experiment demonstrates; and even if my perceptions are flawed, as was often the case in Phase 2, I have a
criterion that I can use to identify my mistakes: the behavior of
d
the market.
The real-time experiment has shown how greatly my decisionmaking process is influenced by the market action. At first sight
this seems to contradict my original contention that markets are
always wrong. But the contradiction is more apparent than real.
Markets provide the criterion by which investment decisions are
judged. Moreover, they play a causal role in shaping the course of
events. The information is more readily available than events in
the real world; hence the market action offers the most convenient
feedback mechanism by which one's expectations can be evaluated. One need not regard the market as always right in order to
use it in that capacity. Indeed, if one believes that the market is
always right there is little to be gained from having a feedback
mechanism because the prospect of outperforming the market becomes a matter of pure chance,
As I shall argue in Chapter 17, the contention of classical economic theory that the market mechanism assures the optimum

306
t

t

Evaluation

allocation of resources is false; its true merit is that it provides a
criterion by which the participants can recognize their own misconceptions. But it is important to realize what kind of criterion
the market provides: far from being always right, it always incorporates the prevailing bias. If participants labor under the misapprehension that the market is always right, the feedback they get
is misleading. Indeed, the belief in efficient markets renders markets more unstable by short-circuiting the corrective process that
would occur if particpants recognized that markets are always
biased. The more the theory of efficient markets is believed, the
less efficient the markets become.
How good are financial markets in predicting real-world developments? Reading the record, it is striking how many calamities
that I anticipated did not in fact materialize. The financial markets must have come to reflect the same concerns; otherwise my
false expectations could not have proven so rewarding. This
raises an interesting possibility. Perhaps some of the developments I predicted were preempted by the very fact that they were
anticipated by the market and the market provoked a reaction that
prevented them from happening. This seems to hold true of the
collapse of the banking system and of the collapse of the dollar,
and also of the "bull market of our lifetime," which was to be
followed by a crash 1929 style. The monetary authorities became
so concerned about the excessive buoyancy of financial markets
that in the end they refused to supply the excess liquidity that
would create a speculative bubble. Their action was neither deliberate nor unanimous. In the U.S., Volcker was opposed to providing excess liquidity but he was defeated in the Open Market
Committee and had to appeal to Germany to join in a round of
interest rate reductions. When Secretary Baker pushed for another
round, the Germans balked and the resulting row almost wrecked
the Group of Five process. The Japanese devised their own medicine but by the time it took effect the speculative bubble was
sufficiently developed to precipitate a more or less full-scale bust
in the Japanese stock market. No wonder that I had difficulty in
recognizing the premature demise of the bull market of a lifetime! * It is possible that the United States will continue to create
excess liquidity, but I consider it unlikely that it will cause a
speculative bubble because confidence has been too badly shaken.
* Written before the revival of the bull market in January 1987

The Scope for Financial Alchemy

307

It is more likely that investors would flee to liquidity and gold.
When I finally recognized that markets can preempt the catastrophes they predict, I concluded that we live in an age of selfdefeating prophecies.
The collapse of oil pdces does not seem to fit the argument
because it actually occuirred; but that may be attributed to the
fact that either I or the authorities have misjudged its dire consequences. I expected shch severe repercussions on the banking system and on the economy as to make a levy on imported
oil indispensable, while we seem to have gotten along fine without it. In the end, it was left to OPEC to pull itself together.
The present arrangement is 30 more permanent than the Group
of Five process; the drama has yet to be played out in both
cases.
This line of argument opens up a fascinating vista. I may have
discovered not just a reasonably effective way of operating in
financial markets but an actual model of how the financial markets operate in the real world. Models currently in use are based
on the misconception that markets can only foreshadow events,
they cannot shape them. My approach recognizes that financial
markets can also precipitate or abort future events. Following this
line of argument, it is possible that we have indeed been teetering
on the verge of both a deflationary spiral and a free fall of the
dollar-not to mention all sorts of other financial calamitiesand we have been saved from them only because &the danger
signals emitted by the financial markets. In other words, financial
markets constantly anticipate events, both on the positive and on
the negative side, which fail to materialize exactly because they
have been anticipated. No wonder that fi~anciallmarkets get so
excited in anticipating events that seem quite harmless in retrospect! It is an old joke that the stock market has predicted seven
of the last two recessions. We can now understand why that
should be so. By the same token, financial crashes tend to occur
only when they are unexpected.
This last point should not be overstated. There are many events
that actually occur in spite of the fact that they were widely anticipated. The collapse in oil prices is a case in point; the outbreak
of the Second World War was another. It has become fashionable
to be a contrarian, but to bet against prevailing expectations is far
from safe. It will be recalled that, in the boom/bust model, events
tend to reinforce prevailing expectations most of the time and

308
I

Evaluation

contradict them only at the inflection points; and inflection points
are notoriously difficult to identify. Now that the contrarian viewpoint has become the prevailing bias, I have become a confirmed
anti-contrarian.

THE QUANDARY OF THE
SOGIAL SCIENCES

We are now in a position to appreciate the predicament of the
social sciences. Scientific method is based on the presumption
that a successful experiment corroborates the validity of the hypothesis that is was designed to test. But in situations with thinking participants, experimental success does not assure the truth
or validity of the statements that are being tested. The real-time
experiment is a case in point: inconclusive and occasionally patently false predictions were crowned by financial success. Admittedly, the experiment was not a scientific one; I went to great
lengths to emphasize its alchemical character. ButAhe very fact
that alchemy can succeed raises questions about scientific
method; and the fact that scientific theories do not seem to be able
to produce superior results compounds the predicament. I shall
argue that social science is a hlse metaphor and we shall be better
off if we recognize it as such.
Scientific method works whenever scientists have an objective
criterion at their disposal by which the truth or validity of their
statements can be evaluated. The scientists' understanding is
never perfect; but the objective criterion allows misunderstandings to be corrected. Scientific method is an interpersonal process
in which the contribution of each participant is subjected to the
critical appraisal of all others. Only when all the participants are
guided by the same criterion is the critical process capable of
producing results that qualify as knowledge. That is why the
availability of an objective criterion is indispensable to the success of scientific method.

310
I

I

Evaluation

The role of an objective criterion is filled by facts. Statements
that correspond to the facts are true; those that do not are false.
Unfortunately, the facts are not always as dependable as this simple statement makes them out to be. They can serve as an objective criterion only when they are totally independent of the
statements that relate to them. That is the case in natural science
where one fact follows another irrespective of what anybody
thinks. But it is not the case in social science where events incorporate the participants' bias. It should be emphasized that the
interference comes not only from scientists but also from participants. Indeed, if the participants' thinking did not play a causal
role in shasir,g ths course of events no observer could influencs
the course of events by making statements about it and the situation of the social scientist would be no different from that of the
natural scientist. It is the participants' thinking that creates the
problems.
The structure of events that have no thinking participants is
simple: one fact follows another in an unending causal chain. The
presence of thinking participants complicates the structure of
events enormously: the participants' thinking affects the course
of events and the course of events affects the participants' thinking. To make matters worse, participants influence and affect each
other. If the participants' thinking bore some determinate relationship to the facts there would be no problem: the scientific
observer could ignore the participants' thinking and focus on the
facts. But the relationship cannot be accurately determined for
the simple reason that the participants' thinking does not relate
to facts; it relates to events in which they participate, and these
events become facts only after the participants' thinking has made
its impact on them. Thus the causal chain does not lead directly
from fact to fact but from fact to perception and from perception
to fact with all kinds of additional connections between participants that are not reflected fully in the facts.
How does this complex structure affect the ability of an observer to make valid statements about the course of events? His
statements must also be more complex. In particular, they must
allow for a fundamental difference between past and future: past
events are a matter of record, while the future is inherently unpredictable. Explanation becomes an easier task than prediction-as
the real-time experiment illustrates. Generalizations do not apply
to the future with as much force as to the past, and the beautiful

The Quandary of the Social Sciences

311

symmetry that characterizes the deductive-nomological (D-N)
model of science is destroyed. This goes against the grain of scientific generalizations, which are supposed to be timelessly valid.
It is possible to establish universally valid generalizationswitness the ones I proposed about freely fluctuating exchange
rates-but they cannot be used to predict the course of events.
What is worse, the facts ldo not provide an adequate criterion by
which the validity of gelieralization can be judged because there
is more to the subject matter than facts. The fact that a prediction
turns out to be true does not necessarily validate the theory on
which it is based and, conversely, a valid theory does not necessarily generate predictions that can be checked against the facts.
Indeed, the sequence of social events cannot be properly understood if we confine our attention to facts. The participants' thinking is an integral part of the situation they participate in; to treat
such a situation as if it were composed exclusively of facts distorts the subject matter. The D-N model of scientific method,
which we reviewed briefly in Chapter 1, is based on a strict segregation of facts and statements. Thus we are forced to the conclusion that the D-N model is not applicable to the study of social
events.
It would be a mistake to equate the D-N model with scientific
method. Even the theory of science recognizes other models, notably statistical or probabilistic ones and laws relating to an ideal
case as in economic theory. Moreover, the practic;~of science
differs significantly from its theory and a study of these differences has given rise to further refinements in the theory of science
since the D-N model was originally developed. Nevertheless, the
D-N model embodies the ideal that scientific method strives for:
universally valid generalizations that can be used for prediction
and explanation with equal force and are amenable to testing.
Natural science has so many accomplishments to its credit that it
can dispense with theoretical models and pursue its investigations wherever they may lead; but social science, exactly because
it has been less successful, is in greater need of the prestige that
the D-N format can impart. To abandon the D-N model is to give
up what is most valuable, persuasive, and attractive in science.
But that is only half the story. When the course of events is
influenced by the participants' bias, future events are open to
manipulation by observers in a way that is not possible in natural
science. That is the point I was trying to make by speaking of

312
I

t

Evaluation

alchemy. Since alchemy is unable to influence natural phenomena, the social sciences face a problem that has no parallel in the
natural sciences. The critical process that is the foundation of
science works smoothly only when the participants share the
same objective. The avowed purpose of science is the pursuit of
truth; but when the subject matter is open to manipulation, participants may be more interested in changing the course of events
than in understanding it. The fact that they can enhance their
influence by claiming scientific status for their views undermines
the critical process even further.
How can scientific method protect itself against subversion?
The first step is to recognize the danger. That requires the repudiation of the "doctrine of the unity of science." People participate in science with a variety of motivations. For present
purposes we may distinguish between two main objectives: the
pursuit of truth and the pursuit of what we may call "operational
success." In natural science, the two objectives coincide: true
statements work better than false ones. Not so in the social sciences: false ideas may be effective because of their influence on
people's behavior and, conversely, the fact that a theory or prediction works does not provide conclusive evidence of its validity.
Marxism provides an outstanding example of the first kind of
divergence; and my own prediction of the "bull market of a lifetime" of the second.
The divergence between truth and operational or experimental
success undermines scientific method in more ways than one. On
the one hand, it renders scientific theories less effective; on the
other, it allows nonscientific theories to achieve operational success. What is worse, an alchemical theory can profit from assuming a scientific guise.
We cannot remove the first two limitations because they are
inherent in the subject matter; but we can protect against the
third. All we have to do is to recognize the limitations of scientific
method when it comes to dealing with social situations. This is
what I propose to do by declaring social science a false metaphor.
That means that the methods of natural science do not apply to
the study of social events. It emphatically does not mean that we
ought to abandon the pursuit of truth in the study of social events.
To try to argue about motivations would be totally counterproductive. Every contribution must be considered on its merit and
not on the basis of its intentions, otherwise the critical process

The Quandary of the Social Sciences

313

which is at the heart of the scientific method would turn to shambles. It is noteworthy that two schools of thought that insisted on
judging contributions by their source rather than on their merit,
namely, Marxism and psychoanalysis, were also the most successful in subverting scikntific method.
The only way to protect against subversion is to establish a
special convention for the study of social phenomena. Instead of
demanding that contribdtions be cast in the D-N mold in order to
qualify as scientific, theories of the D-N type would be treated as
a form of social alchemy. The convention would not automatically disqualify every theory, prediction, or explanation that
claims scientific status but it would put the burden of proof on
them to justify their claim. It would prevent the abuse of scientific
method for alchemical purposes and allow theories, like mine,
that do not produce unconditional predictions to qualify as valid
contributions. The convention is necessary because without it the
arguments I am presenting here would have to be repeated in each
and every case, and that would be impractical to say the least. Try
to convince a Marxist that Marxism is not scientific!
I happen to be passionately interested in the pursuit of truth,
but I am also fully cognizant of the need to attain operational
success in order to get a hearing for my views. As I admitted
earlier, that consideration was a major driving force behind the
real-time experiment. My success in the stock market has had the
liberating effect of allowing me to speak my mind> am in the
fortunate position of not needing operational success as a scientist, having been able to attain it as a participant.
But people in the academic professions are not so lucky: they
compete directly with natural scientists for status and funds. Natural science has been able to produce universally valid generalizations and unconditional predictions. In the absence of a
convention to the contrary, social scientists are under great pressure to come up with similar results. That is why they produce so
many scientific-looking formulas. Declaring social science a false
metaphor would liberate them from having to imitate natural science.
Apart from academia, there are many fields where participants
can obtain operational success by claiming scientific status for
their views. Financial forecasting is one; politics is another. The
history of ideas is littered with examples. Marxism is the political
creed that has used a scientific guise most deliberately, but lais-

314
I

I

Evaluation

sez-faire policies also derive their intellectual force from a scientific theory-namely, the theory of perfect competition-and
Freud was just as determined to claim scientific status as Marx.
I have no grounds for impugning the motivations of others.
After all, I have just as overwhelming a desire to see my views
accepted as everybody else, and I am marshaling whatever arguments I can to support my views. Moreover, in my previous incarnation as a securities analyst I often espoused views that I knew
to be distorted for the sake of their operational effect, so that I am
no holier than anyone else.
The question is not one of motivation but of operational effect.
A csnsideratisn c.f the stnciure of social evzntz she;v:s that all
predictions are contingent on the participants' decisions. Yet the
pursuit of operational success often drives people to try to compete with natural science by making more unconditional predictions. This has the operational effect of endangering the pursuit
of truth in the study of social phenomena. As long as the doctrine
of the unity of science prevails, there is a direct conflict between
the pursuit of truth and the pursuit of operational success. It can
be resolved only by renouncing the doctrine.
I have managed to claim exemption from the rigorous requirements of the D-N model by renouncing the doctrine of the unity
of science. I went even further: I asserted that the pursuit of truth
prohibits unconditional predictions. Does that mean that the
kinds of conjectures I produced are the best that can be hoped
for? Certainly not. The real-time experiment is best regarded as
an amateur effort that ought to be improved upon when the appropriate professional skills are developed.

PART FIVE

FREE MARKETS VERSUS REGULATION

It is almost redundant to criticize the concept of equilibrium any
further. In the first chapter, I asserted that the concept is a hypothetical one whose relevance to the real world is open to question.
In subsequent chapters I examined various financial markets as
well as macro-economic developments and showed that they exhibit no tendency towards equilibrium. Indeed, it makes more
sense to claim that markets tend towards excesses, which sooner
or later become unsustainable, so that they are eventually corrected.
Equilibrium is supposed to ensure the optimum-allocation of
resources. If markets do not tend towards equilibrium, the main
agrument that has been used in favor of the market mechanism
loses its validity: we have no grounds for believing that markets
optimize anything.
This may sound like a startling conclusion, but it falls far short
of that. The concept of an optimum is just as alien to a world in
which participants function without the benefit of perfect knowledge as the concept of an equilibrium, and for the same reason:
both concepts presuppose perfect knowledge. So it is not at all
surprising if both of them are shown to have little relevance to
the real world.
There are other arguments that can be advanced in favor of the
market mechanism. Indeed, an interesting line of argument seems
to emerge from the discussion in Chapter 15. I interpreted financial markets as a process that is somewhat akin to scientific
method-that is to say, a process of trial and error in which the
