
NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

251

Variations on the Present Value Model
Of course, as we have noted, the basic notion of efficient markets does not
necessarily require that discount rates be constant or that returns not be
forecastable. A more general form of efficient markets would allow discount
rates to depend on the time-varying one-period rate of interest:
3

k

1
D t + k.
1
r
(
+
t + j + ϕ)
k =0 j =0

Pt = E t (P t*r) = E t / %

(2)

Or, in a model proposed by LeRoy (1973) and Lucas (1978) and developed by
Grossman and Shiller (1981) and Hansen and Singleton (1983), it could depend
on consumption, using the marginal rate of substitution between consumption
in successive periods as a discount rate:
3

k

Pt = E t (P t*C) = E t / % M t + j Dt + k,

(3)

k =0 j =0

where Mt is the marginal rate of substitution in consumption between t and
t + 1, which is (assuming constant relative risk aversion A), ρ(C t /C t +1)A, and
Ct is real per capita consumption at time t.
Figure A.2 shows the actual stock price in the United States and the perfect foresight stock price corresponding to each of the three measures.12 One
again, the figure reveals that there is little correspondence between any of
these measures of ex post rational price and actual stock price. People did not
behave, in setting stock prices, as if they knew the future of these variables
and reacted rationally to this knowledge. Moreover, if we assume that they
did not actually have knowledge of the future, then one is led to wonder why
the actual stock prices varied through time as much as, or more than, the
perfect foresight prices did.
There are continuing attempts to modify the consumption-based model to
improve its fit—see Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Lars Peter Hansen, in
his Nobel Lecture (2013)—but not yet any model that could be set alongside
Figure A.2 here as an inspiring vindication of efficient markets theory.
John Campbell and John Ammer (1993) did a variation decomposition (along
lines developed in Campbell 1991) of unexpected excess returns using time
series methods and U.S. postwar data. The decomposition is based on the log
linearization of the present value relation used in Campbell and Shiller (1988b).
The time- t + 1 innovation E t + 1 − E t in the excess return over the risk-free rate
12 The parameter  was estimated to make the average r +  equal the average real return on
t
the stock market 1871–2013. The parameter A was set at four and r at one. The one-year interest
rate is pieced together from various sources as described in Shiller (1989, 2005) and real per
capita consumption is from the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts.

252

APPENDIX

5000
Actual real stock price (P)

Price

P* r (Dividends discounted
with actual future interest rates,
equation 2)

500

P* (Dividends discounted
with constant discount rate,
equation 1)

P* C (Consumption-discounted
dividends, equation 3)
50
1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

Figure A.2
Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index along with Three Present Values
of Subsequent Real Dividends Accruing to the Index, 1871–2013
All three present values assume real dividend growth 2003–13 will continue
forever after 2013. The three present values differ from each other only in the
assumed time series of discount rates.

e t +1 can be shown, with a terminal stationarity condition, as a tautology, to
be the sum of three innovations:
e t + 1 − E t e t + 1 = ( E t + 1 − E t ) * / ρ j ∆ d t + 1 + j − / ρ jr t + 1 + j
3

3

j =0

j =0

− / ρ jet +1+ j 4 .
3

j =1

Using this decomposition and a vector-autoregressive model in difference
form, with post–World War II stock market returns, Campbell and Ammer
found that excess returns innovations have a standard deviation that is two
or three times greater than the standard deviation of innovations in future
dividend growth. Aggregate stock market fluctuations have therefore been
dominated by fluctuations in predicted future returns, not by news about
future dividends paid to investors.13
13 These results have been criticized by Goyal and Welch (2003, 2008); Chen and Zhao (2009);
and Chen, Da, and Zhao (2013). They have been rebutted by Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho
(2010) and Engsted, Pedersen, and Tanggaard (2012).

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

253

Interpretations of Return Predictability
Sociologists offer a possible interpretation of these results, an interpretation
reflecting a body of thought that goes back more than a hundred years. The
market fluctuates as the sweep of history produces different mindsets at different points of time, different zeitgeists. Émile Durkheim (1893) spoke of the
“collective consciousness” that represents the shared beliefs, attitudes, and
moral judgments characterizing a historical period. Maurice Halbwachs (1925)
spoke of the “collective memory,” the set of facts that are widely remembered
at any point of time but that are forgotten eventually if word of mouth and
active news media do not perpetuate their memory. News media tend to slant
their stories toward ideas of current interest, rather than useful facts that readers no longer find interesting.14 Surely simple forgetting of past experiences
affects popular judgments. How many people today could give any account
of the financial panic of 1907, or of the housing boom of the late 1940s? One
could stop anyone on the street in those times and get a ready account; now
almost everyone would betray blank ignorance. When a bubble is building,
the suppression of some facts and embellishment of others (as in the strategy
of victorious college debaters) occurs naturally through the decay of collective
memory, when media and popular talk are no longer reinforcing memories
of them, and the amplification of other facts through the stories generated by
market events.
It is hardly plausible that speculative prices make effective use of all
information about probabilities of future dividends. It is far more plausible
that the aggregate stock market price changes reflect inconstant perceptions:
changes to which Keynes referred with the term “animal spirits,” changes
that infect the thinking even of most of the so-called smart money in the
market. Keynes anticipated this in his 1921 Treatise on Probability, which
asserted that probabilities are not precisely measurable in the sense that
decision theory supposes, that there are always ambiguities. He said that
because of these fundamental ambiguities, there is, in financial transactions,
inevitably an “element of caprice.”15 Critical decisions are made on impulse
rather than calculation. One may have done calculations of probabilities,
but one usually does not fully believe one’s own calculations and proceeds
on gut feeling.
In an early behavioral finance paper of mine, “Stock Prices and Social
Dynamics” (1984), I proposed yet another expected present value model for
consideration as a model of stock prices, though it is one that we cannot plot
back to 1871 as we did with the three expected present models shown and
14 See Shiller (2000) and Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005).
15 Keynes (1921: 23).

254

APPENDIX

plotted above, because it depends on a time-varying factor that is not objectively quantifiable, at least for now. I have been attempting to measure a stock
market factor like this with survey techniques, of individual and institutional
investors, but only since 1989. There are other surveys of investor sentiment
as well, but the results are hardly definitive. My surveys of individual and
institutional investors starting in 1989,16 as well as my surveys with Karl E.
Case of homebuyers starting in 1988,17 are being continued by the Yale School
of Management.
Thirty years ago I called this as-yet-unmeasured factor the “demand for
stocks by ordinary investors,” but today let us call it animal spirits, At . At
represents the demand for stocks per outstanding share at time t on the part
of everyone who is not smart money, people not really paying attention, not
systematic, not engaged in research, buffeted by casually encountered information. They are certainly the majority of investors, and suppose, to take this
model to an extreme, that their opinions reflect nothing more than changing
fashions and fads, idle talk, and overreaction to irrelevant news stories. At is
likely to be sluggish through time (usually people don’t all change their naive
opinions en masse on a dime).
The core idea here was that there are also smart money investors, who are
not subject to illusion but have to be wary of investing in the stock market.
They must be wary not only because future dividends are not known with
certainty, but also because the ordinary investors are somewhat unpredictable, and their erratic behavior could cause price changes that might produce
losses in the market for the smart money if they invest too much in it. For
these smart money investors, information is constantly coming in about
the likely future values of At , and, as with all genuinely new information,
this new information is uncorrelated and unpredictable through time. I
supposed that the demand per share for stocks by the smart money equals
their rationally expected excess return on the stock market over and above
an alternative riskless return r, which I took for simplicity’s sake to be constant through time, the difference divided by a constant risk factor . The
two demands, the demand of the ordinary investors plus the demand of
the smart money, must add up to one for the markets to clear. Solving the
resulting rational expectations model forward leaves us with our fourth
present value model:18

16 http://som.yale.edu/faculty-research/our-centers-initiatives/international-center-finance/

data/stock-market-confidence. Greenwood and Shleifer (2013) examine the relation to stock
price data of investor sentiment indices from six different survey sources, including mine.
17 Case and Shiller (1988, 2003); Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012).
18 This is equation (3) in Shiller (1984), with slight changes in notation.

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

255

3

1
(Dt + k + ϕAt + k).
k +1
k = 0 (1 + r + ϕ)

Pt = E t (P t*A) = E t /

(4)

If ϕ= 0, smart money dominates; this collapses to equation (1) above. As 
goes to infinity, smart money drops out, it collapses to Pt = At , and ordinary
investors completely determine the price. It is the intermediate case that is
interesting. In this intermediate case, price may have low predictability from
day to day or month to month, consistent with efficient markets theory, even
if animal spirits dominate the broad movements in Pt. Long slow swings
in At may produce long slow swings in stock prices (perhaps the so-called
multiyear “bull” and “bear” markets) even though day-to-day movements in
stock prices are nearly uncorrelated through time. The price is responding to
news about animal spirits, not just news about future dividends. Event study
tests, described above, testing market reaction over time to news about, and
subsequently the reality of, such events as stock splits, may come out as beautifully supporting efficient markets, for much of the effect of the event on both
dividends and animal spirits will be incorporated into price as soon as the
event becomes news to the smart money, not when the event actually happens.
There is another important argument widely used for efficient markets,
the argument that a model like (4) with an intermediate  cannot represent a
stable equilibrium because the smart money would get richer and richer and
eventually take over the market, and  would go to zero. In fact this will not
generally happen, for there is a natural recycling of investor abilities: the smart
money people usually do not start out with a lot of money, and it takes them
many years to acquire enough wealth to influence the market; meanwhile they
get old and retire, or they rationally lose interest in doing the work to pursue
their advantage after they have acquired sufficient wealth to live comfortably
on. The market will be efficient enough that advantages to beating the market
are sufficiently small, uncertain, and slow to repay one’s efforts that most smart
people will devote their time to more personally meaningful things, like managing a company, getting a PhD in finance, or some other more enjoyable activity,
leaving the market substantially to ordinary investors. Genuinely smart money
investors cannot in their normal life cycle amass enough success experience to
prove to ordinary investors that they can manage their money effectively: it
takes too many years and there is too much fundamental uncertainty for them
to be able to do that assuredly, and by the time they prove themselves, they may
have lost the will or ability to continue (Shiller 1984, Shleifer and Vishny 1997).

Individual Stocks
These conclusions about the aggregate stock market, however, do not carry
over fully to individual stocks. Paul Samuelson has asserted that the market is

256

APPENDIX

micro efficient but macro inefficient. That is, individual stock price variations
are dominated by actual new information about subsequent dividends, but
aggregate stock market variations are dominated by bubbles.19

Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2002), using methodology analogous to that of Campbell
and Ammer, concluded that for individual stocks the variance of expected
return news is approximately one-half of the variance of cash-flow news. For
market-adjusted individual stock log returns (log return minus cross-sectional
average log return) the variance of the expected return news is only one-fifth
of the variance of cash-flow news. Thus bubbles and their bursts cannot have
more than a minority impact on the returns of individual stocks, and most of
the variation in their returns comes from news about the future payouts the
firms will make.
In a 2005 paper I wrote with Jeeman Jung, which looked at long-span data
sets of stocks that had survived without significant capital changes for over
half a century, we reached similar conclusions. To give a visual impression
of how well the efficient markets theory works for individual firms, we felt
that we could display how successfully dividend growth could be predicted
from the dividend-price ratio. Simple efficient markets theory suggests that
firms with relatively low dividend price ratios should eventually, in future
years, show higher dividend increases as a fraction of today’s price. To make
such a visual diagram in such simple terms, we sought out long-lived firms
(though such a procedure risks a selection bias).
We found all firms on the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)
tape that remained alive and for which there was uninterrupted data from
1926 to 1976. There were only forty-nine such firms, giving us 2,499 firmyear observations 1926–76. Each point on the scatter in Figure A.3 shows
/ k24= 0 ∆(D1+t+rk)/kPt, the present value of future changes in dividends for the next
twenty-five years (measured in dollars, and discounted by the historical
D
average stock market return) divided by current dollar price, against Pt -1,
the current dividend divided by current price. Efficient markets with a constant discount rate, equation (1), implies, if there is not a problem with our
truncation of the present value at twenty-five years, that a regression line
through these points should have a slope of minus one and a constant term
equal to the constant discount rate. In other words, if markets are efficient,
t

19 Samuelson went on to say, “Modern markets show considerable micro efficiency for the
reason that the minority who spot aberrations from micro efficiency can make money from
those occurrences and, in doing so, tend to wipe out any persistent inefficiencies. In no
contradiction to the previous sentence, I had hypothesized considerable macro inefficiency,
in the sense of long waves in the time series of aggregate indexes of security prices below
and above various definitions of fundamental values” (from a private letter from Paul
Samuelson to John Campbell and Robert Shiller).

257

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

160

Present value of dividend change/price (%)

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

–20
–40
–60

Dividend /price (%)

Figure A.3
Present Values of Future Changes in Dividends Plotted against the
Dividend Price Ratio for Forty-Nine U.S. Individual Stocks, 1926–76
Source: Jung and Shiller (2005).

then a high dividend price yield for a particular stock today occurs only if
people have a real reason to expect dividends to decline, and so demand to
be compensated today for that future loss if they are to hold the stock today.
Similarly, low dividend yield stocks must be those for which there is genuine
evidence that dividends will rise in the future, eventually compensating
today’s investors for the low dividend return they are receiving.
The estimated slope of a line fitted through this scatter is -0.5, far from
the ideal -1.0 but negative as expected. The dividend-price ratio predicts
subsequent dividend changes in the right direction for these firms. Zero-­
dividend firms (which one can see strung out along the vertical axis) tended
to have appropriately high subsequent dividend growth relative to price.
The rightmost observation, which corresponds to the firm Schlumberger in
1931—a firm that had tried to maintain its dividend despite falling fortunes
in the Great Depression—had a dividend payment that was 40% of its current price. ­People in the market then apparently figured out that the firm
could not continue to pay such a dividend, that there would not be another
significant dividend for a very long time, and reflected that knowledge in the

258

APPENDIX

approximately 40% dividend-price ratio. They were right to do this, as we see
after the fact. In individual firms there is sometimes a lot of action in the ratios,
and the action in fact often reflects real knowledge about future cash flows.
That is an example of the kind of idiosyncratic knowledge about individual
firms that makes the efficient markets model a useful approximation of reality for individual firms.20

Real Estate Prices
The market for real estate is larger in valuation than that of the entire stock
market. According to the Financial Accounts of the United States, in 2013 the
value of real estate owned by households and nonprofit organizations was
$21.6 trillion, while their holdings of corporate equity shares, whether directly
or indirectly, had a market value of only $20.3 trillion.21
And yet, when I first collaborated with Karl Case in joint work on real estate
prices, in the 1980s, we found that hardly any scholarly research had been done
on the efficiency of real estate markets. The state of knowledge about these
markets was abysmal. Under the influence of a widely held presumption at
that time that all markets must be efficient, many economists, at least in their
popular pronouncements, seemed then to assume that real estate markets
must be efficient too. This presumption seemed to us quite probably wrong,
based on anecdotal evidence suggesting that real estate prices are not at all well
approximated by a random walk, as is the case for stocks, but often tend to go in
the same direction, whether up or down, again and again for years and years.
Case and I decided to try to test the efficiency of this market for singlefamily homes, but quickly discovered the importance of a stumbling block
that had inhibited research: individual homes sell extremely infrequently, with
the interval between sales for individual homes measured not in minutes, as
with stocks, but in years or decades. One cannot do any of the most popular
tests of efficiency with such data. No runs tests or event studies would ever
be possible with individual homes, and so tests of market efficiency would
have to be based on indices.
There were some home price indices of sorts available then, but they had
serious problems. There was a median sales price of existing homes, published
by the National Association of Realtors, but it often appeared to jump around
erratically. It was just the median price of whatever homes were selling at the
20 Ang and Bekaert (2007) conclude that the dividend yield’s ability to predict dividends is not

robust over sample periods or countries, but do not include individual stock data in their study.
21 U.S. Federal Reserve Board, Z.1, Financial Accounts of the United States, table B.100 (Balance

Sheet of Households and Nonprofit Organizations) and table B.100.e (Balance Sheet of
Households and Nonprofit Organizations with Equity Detail), December 9, 2013.

NO B E L P R I Z E L E C T URE : S P E CUL ATIVE AS S E T P RIC ES

259

moment, and it was not controlled for any change in the composition of sales.
Moreover, it appeared that different kinds of homes sold in different months.
It had a very strong seasonal component, which we suspected arose because
people who sold in the summer, in phase with the academic year and the job
market, typically had bigger or higher-quality homes, which had higher prices.
There was also at that time a “Price of New Homes Sold,” also called
“Constant Quality Index,” produced by the U.S. Census Bureau, that was a
more sophisticated hedonic index, holding constant such things as square
feet of floor space and number of bedrooms, but again it was obviously not
trustworthy for testing market efficiency through time, since it was based on
different homes every quarter, whatever and wherever homes had just been
built that quarter.
So Case and I constructed our own “repeat sales” home price index based
on an inspiration of his (Case 1986) and then on a method we devised that
inferred price changes only from the change in prices of individual existing
homes (Case and Shiller 1987, 1989, 1990). We showed how a quarterly index
could be computed even if homes sell much less frequently than quarterly.
We discovered that Case’s inspiration was largely anticipated by Bailey, Muth,
and Nourse (1963), but we had a number of improvements, taking better
account of heteroscedasticity. Later, I made the index arithmetic and value
weighted, as are the most prominent stock price indices (Shiller 1991). With
my former student Allan Weiss we founded Case Shiller Weiss, Inc., in 1991,
and we were the first to produce repeat sales indices in real time for regular
publication, and we applied these indices to produce automated valuation
models for single-family homes (Shiller and Weiss 1999a). Our indices are now
produced by CoreLogic, Inc., and the major indices are managed by Standard
& Poor’s Corporation.
A plot of our quarterly national index corrected for CPI inflation is shown
in Figure A.4, along with the Census Constant Quality Index, also converted
to real terms.
Simply producing these data and looking at a plot, as shown in Figure A.4,
yields some surprises. First of all, the home price data are generally extremely
smooth through time, except for a small amount of seasonality. Home prices do
indeed go through years of price increases and then years of price decreases.
So the random walk model of home price behavior is just not even close to
being true for home prices (Case and Shiller 1988). Home prices might seem
to be described as in accordance with model (4) above, with the parameter
 extremely large, so that the smart money, who might go in and out of the
market quickly in response to news, is hardly a factor.
Second, while it was not apparent when we first computed these indices,
these data make clear from today’s vantage point that there was a huge boom
in home prices after 2000 that was not very visible from the Census Constant
