
Socially Based Variations in Attention
The human brain is structured to have essentially a single focus of conscious
attention at a time and to move rapidly from one focus to another. The sensory experience that comes to us from our environment is vastly complicated,
and the brain manages to filter out almost all of this complexity to produce
a sense of the here and now—an interpretation of what is most important

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

189

at present—and a sequence of thoughts that weave in this interpretation.
Thus, for example, when one is sitting in an airport waiting to board one’s
plane, one’s attention constantly returns to the theme “waiting to board”
and organizes many thoughts and observations around it, as if it were the
essence of current reality. One usually does not study the weave of the carpet
or the smudges of dirt on the windows, or ponder the shape of the letters
on the information screen, though in principle one could. These details are
typically beyond our consciousness, even though we are receiving, and
processing, sensory information about them.
The ability to focus attention on important things is one of the defining
characteristics of intelligence, and no one really understands how the brain
does it. Failure to focus attention on the proper things is also one of the most
characteristic of human judgment errors. The mechanism for focusing attention that has evolved in the human brain, although remarkable, is still far
from perfect.
If one looks back on some of the most significant errors one has made in
life, one is likely to find that these often arose from a failure to pay attention
to details. One would have responded instantly and changed one’s actions
had someone repeatedly demanded attention and pointed out certain key
facts. Thus, in understanding errors that people have made in the past, it is
important to consider what it was that they were not paying attention to.
One of the mechanisms that the brain has evolved to direct attention
properly is a socially based selectivity. We pay attention to many of the
same things that others around us are paying attention to. This social basis
for attention allows individuals who recognize the importance of some
information to bring it to the attention of other members of the community,
and it creates a view of the world and an information set that are common
to the community. Such a view and information set allow the community
to act well in concert. At the same time, the social component of attention
does not work perfectly, and it may cause errors to be made in common by
the entire group, because the common focus of attention pushes aside attention to details that individuals might otherwise notice. As with individual
attention, the phenomenon of social attention is one of the great creations
of behavioral evolution and is critical for the functioning of human society,
but it is also an imperfect creation.
The social attention mechanism generates a sudden focus of the attention
of the entire community on matters that appear to be emergencies. Thus, to
return to the epidemic model, the infection rate may suddenly and dramatically increase. A sudden major move in the stock market is one of those events
that pushes aside all other conversation.
This social basis for attention, operating by word of mouth and facilitated
by media transmission of ideas, can generate attention focuses that spread

190

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

rapidly across much of the world. With a substantial fraction of the human
minds on the planet suddenly grabbed by the market, it should not be at all
surprising that markets on opposite sides of the globe move together, even if
the fundamentals in different countries do not suggest any reason for such
co‑movement.

People Cannot Explain Changes in Their Attention
Furthermore, people often find it very difficult to explain what made them
decide to take a certain course of action; the original attentional trigger may
not be remembered. This is a principal reason why changes in speculative
asset prices, which very quickly reflect changes in attention, often seem so
inexplicable.
Price changes themselves may be an attention grabber, even among
professional investors. In a study of institutional investors’ choice of individual stocks, John Pound and I produced a list of stocks whose prices
had increased rapidly within the preceding year and that also had high
price‑earnings ratios. We then obtained a list of institutional investors who
had reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission that they had
bought one of the stocks (the experimental group) and compared this with
a list of institutional investors in a random sample of stocks (the control
group). We asked respondents on both lists if they agreed with the following statement regarding their stock (the rapid‑price‑increase stock for the
experimental group or the random stock for the control group): “My initial
interest was the result of my, or someone else’s, systematic search over a
large number of stocks (using a computerized or similar search procedure)
for a stock with certain characteristics.”20 Since these were investment
professionals, it is perhaps not surprising that 67% of the random sample,
the control group, said they agreed with this statement. But, among the
experimental group, the investors in the rapid‑price‑increase stocks, only
25% agreed. Since attentional triggers are often poorly remembered, we
cannot expect them to tell us that the price increase stimulated their interest,
but our experimental design shows that the price increase, or associated
events, did play a role in attracting their attention. The important point is
that most of the investors in rapid‑price‑increase stocks themselves say that
they were unsystematic in their decision making.
When variations in attention are important causes of changing behavior,
we cannot expect people to tell us the reasons for their changed behavior.
People usually cannot easily explain what drew their attention to something, and so they cannot explain their own behavior. A 1931 experiment
by psychologist N.R.F. Maier will illustrate. Maier presented his subjects
with the challenge of tying two cords together: cords that were suspended

HER D B E H AV I O R A ND E P ID E MICS

191

from the ceiling far enough apart that one could not reach them both at the
same time unless they were somehow brought together. Subjects were given
a number of tools with which to attempt this task and were asked to see
how many different ways they could invent to tie the two cords together.
One way to complete the task was to tie a weight to the end of one of the
cords, set it swinging like a pendulum, grab the end of the other cord with
one hand, and then catch the swinging cord with the other hand. When the
experimenter himself set one of the cords swinging, many subjects quickly
came up with this idea. But when asked how they had hit upon the idea, only
a third of them mentioned having seen the swinging cord. The swinging
cord merely changed the focus of their attention, and most subjects could
not see the connection between their actions and the stimulus that had given
them the idea.21
By analogy, a stock market boom can start for no better reason than that
some factor, like the swinging cord, calls attention to the market. In the context of the present stock market situation, such events as spotting an ad for a
mutual fund or the receipt of election forms for an employer’s 401(k) plan may
be the swinging cord. But we will never learn about the importance of these
stimuli from most of our subjects by simply asking them. Even if people recall
the stimuli, they will not be able to tell us how they affected them.

The Story So Far
This chapter concludes the essence of my argument that irrational exuber‑
ance is at work in producing the ups and downs of the stock and real estate
markets. We began in Part One with lists of precipitating factors that gave
rise to recent booms in the stock market, the bond market, and the market
for homes. We saw that the effect of these factors is sometimes amplified
via feedback loops and naturally occurring Ponzi schemes, aided by the
lubricant of the news media as sometime promoter of market exuberance.
We saw evidence of strangely high investor confidence and undiminished
expectations for the market at the time of the Millennium Peak in the stock
market in 2000, confidence that faded or only partly persisted despite the
bursting of the Ownership-Society Bubble.
We then considered, in Part Two, the cultural components of exuberance,
the varying degrees of social attention to new era theories, and the tendencies of these new era theories both to react to the market and to stimulate it
temporarily. In Part Three, we have stepped back and examined some of the
basic psychological factors that allowed the changes described in the earlier
parts to exert their effects. Chapter 9 showed how trivial and barely visible
psycho­logical anchors may ultimately determine market levels, and how
investor overconfidence can strengthen the pull of these anchors. The present

192

PSYC HOLOGIC AL FAC TOR S

chapter has attempted to resolve the essential puzzle of the current market
situation: that we see newly high valuations but cannot detect a cause for those
valuations that is associated with rational public thinking.
In the remainder of the book, I place the theory of irrational exuberance
into a broader context. In the next part, I consider some influential arguments
against the notion that anything irrational is going on. In the concluding
chapter, I turn to the ultimate questions that this exuberance poses for policy:
individual, institutional, and governmental.

Part Four

Attempts to
Rationalize Exuberance

Eleven

Efficient Markets,
Random Walks, and Bubbles

T

he theory that financial markets are efficient forms the leading intellectual basis
for arguments against the idea that markets are vulnerable to excessive
exuberance or bubbles. Extensive academic research has been widely seen as
supporting this theory.
The efficient markets theory asserts that all financial prices accurately reflect
all public information at all times. In other words, financial assets are always
priced correctly, given what is publicly known, at all times. Price may appear to
be too high or too low at times, but, according to the efficient markets theory,
this appearance must be an illusion.
Stock prices, by this theory, approximately describe “random walks”
through time: the price changes are unpredictable, since they occur only
in response to genuinely new information, which by the very fact that it is
new is unpredictable. The efficient markets theory and the random walk
hypothesis have been subjected to many tests using data on stock markets, in studies published in scholarly journals of finance and economics.
Although the theory has been statistically rejected many times in these
publications, by some interpretations it may nevertheless be described as
approximately true. The literature on the evidence for this theory is well
developed and includes work of the highest quality. Therefore, whether or
not we ultimately agree with it, we must at least take the efficient markets
theory seriously.

195

196

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

Basic Arguments That Markets Are Efficient
and That Prices Are Random Walks
The idea of efficient markets is so natural that it has probably been with us for
centuries. Although the term efficient markets apparently first became widely
known through the work of University of Chicago professor Eugene Fama
(who was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences with me in
2013, despite our different views on some basic issues) in the late 1960s, the
theory itself preceded this name by many years.1 It was clearly mentioned
in 1889 in a book by George Gibson titled The Stock Markets of London, Paris
and New York. Gibson wrote that when “shares become publicly known in an
open market, the value which they acquire may be regarded as the judgment
of the best intelligence concerning them.”2
The efficient markets theory has been a fixture in university economics
and finance departments ever since the 1970s. The theory has commonly
been offered to justify what seem to be elevated market valuations, such
as the 1929 stock market peak. Professor Joseph Lawrence of Princeton
concluded in 1929 that “the consensus of judgment of the millions whose
valuations function on that admirable market, the Stock Exchange, is that
stocks are not at present over‑valued. . . . Where is that group of men with
all‑embracing wisdom which will entitle them to veto the judgment of the
intelligent multitude?”3
The most simple and direct argument for efficient markets theory comes
from the observation that it seems to be difficult to make a lot of money by
buying low and selling high in the stock market. Many seemingly capable
people try but fail to do this with any consistent degree of success. Moreover,
one observes that in order to make money one must compete against some of
the smartest investors, the so‑called “smart money,” who trade in financial
markets looking for the same opportunities. If one thinks that an asset is either
under‑ or overpriced, one must then reflect on why it remains so despite the
efforts of the smart money to make a profitable trade.
If the smart money were able to find ways to make profits by buying low
and selling high, then the effect of such smart money would be, according
to the efficient markets theory, to drive asset prices to their true values. They
would be buying underpriced stocks and thereby tending to bid their prices
up. They would be selling overpriced stocks and thereby tending to bid their
prices down. Moreover, if there were substantial mispricing of securities, then
their profits doing this trading would tend to make the smart money into rich
people, thereby increasing their influence on the market and increasing their
power to eliminate mispricing.
Unfortunately, this argument for the efficient markets hypothesis does not
tell us that the stock market cannot go through periods of significant mispricing

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

197

lasting years or even decades. The smart money could not make money rapidly
by exploiting such a profit opportunity, and there would be considerable un­­
certainty about when the mispricing would end. If indeed one knew today that
the market would do poorly over the next ten or twenty years, but did not know
exactly when it would begin to do poorly and could not prove one’s knowledge
to a broad audience, then there would be no way to profit significantly from
this knowledge. There is therefore no substantial reason to think that the smart
money must necessarily eliminate such stock mispricing.
But this limitation of the efficient markets theory is often overlooked. The
assumption is made that the same efficient markets theory that says that it
is difficult to predict day‑to‑day changes implies that one cannot predict any
changes.

Reflections on “Smart Money”
At its root, the efficient markets theory holds that differing abilities do not
produce differing investment performance. The theory claims that the smartest
people will not be able to do better than the least intelligent people in terms
of investment performance. They can do no better, because their superior
understanding is already completely incorporated into share prices.
If we accept the premise of efficient markets, not only is being smart no
advantage, but it also follows immediately that being not so smart is not a dis‑
advantage either. If not‑so‑smart people could lose money systematically in
their trades, then this would suggest a profit opportunity for the smart money:
just do the opposite of what the not‑so‑smart money does. Yet according to
the efficient markets theory, there can be no such profit opportunity for the
smart money.
Thus, according to this theory, effort and intelligence mean nothing in
investing. In terms of expected investment returns, one might as well pick
stocks at random—the common metaphor of throwing darts at the stock
market listings to choose investments. It is ultimately for this reason that so
many people have thought that they do not need to pay any attention at all to
whether any given stock is or is not overpriced, and why they have felt they
could ignore the unusual valuation of the market at the time of this writing,
or at the height of the stock market boom in 2000.
But why should the very smartest people set all prices, as efficient markets
theory implies? Many apparently less‑intelligent or less well‑informed people
are buying and selling—why should they not have an impact on prices?
One notion, referred to previously, is that the smartest money has already
mostly taken over the market through its profitable trading and has now
set prices correctly; the less‑intelligent investors are holding so little as to
be in­­significant forces in the market. This is an easy argument to dismiss.

198

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

First of all, if this is the reason the smart money dominates, then it must
have been the case that there were profitable trades for them; otherwise, they
could not have used their intelligence to take over the market. But if there
were profitable trades, then there must still be profitable trades, since smart
money investors retire from the business and must be replaced. One cannot
argue that smart money took over the market 100 years ago and that ever
since they have dominated the market, since those smart traders of yore are
all dead now.
Another piece of evidence that has been offered in support of the efficient
markets theory is that professional investors, institutional money managers, or
securities analysts do not seem to have any reliable ability to outperform the
market as a whole, and indeed they often seem to underperform the market
once account is taken of transactions costs and management fees. This result
may seem puzzling, since one would think that professional investors are more
educated about investing and more systematic than individual investors. But
perhaps the result is not as puzzling as it at first seems. Individual investors get
advice from professional investors, and they can also observe (albeit with some
time lag) what professional investors are doing. So there may be no significant
difference between the success of professional investors and the market as a
whole, even if their analysis is very valuable to others. Individual investors
with substantial resources tend to be educated and intelligent people, too.
Moreover, some studies have documented that professional analysts’ advice
is indeed worth something, if it is acted upon swiftly enough.4
Ultimately the reason that studies have not found stronger evidence that
people who are smarter tend to make more money is that there is no good
way to measure how smart investors are. Institutional investors as a group
are not necessarily smarter than individual investors as a group. We do not
have databases giving the IQ scores of investment managers to enable us to
compare their performances with their scores, and even if we did, it is not
clear that the available intelligence tests would measure the right abilities.
One study, by Judith Chevalier and Glenn Ellison, did come close to acquiring data about investment managers’ intelligence, even though they did not
have access to their individual test scores, by tabulating the average Scholastic
Aptitude Test (SAT) scores of the colleges the investment managers attended.
They did indeed find some evidence that firms whose managers attended
higher‑SAT colleges performed somewhat better, even after controlling for
other factors.5
Another approach to testing whether smarter people can make money
by trading stocks relies on persistence of investing success. If we have data
on individual trades, and if some people are smarter than others at trading,
then we should find that some people persistently lose money, while others
persistently make money. In effect, we can measure a trader’s investing

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

199

intelligence by his or her own past successes, and then see how this compares
with subsequent successes.
It has been found that mutual funds trading success is only moderately
persistent through time.6 But mutual funds are organizations, not individuals.
The problem has been that, at least until recently, comprehensive databases of
trades that identify individual traders through time have not been available.
One recent study, however, was able to use data on all day traders on the
Taiwan Stock Exchange that consistently identified individuals for a five-year
period. The study found substantial persistence of trading success.7 It also
found that most day traders did not make enough money from their trades
to offset their trading costs, but a small number of them consistently did.
Unsuccessful day traders tended to drop out through time; successful ones
tended to trade very heavily.
These studies do not settle the issue of intelligence and investing success. Yet, from the available evidence, I see no reason to doubt the thesis that
smarter and more hard-working people will, in the long run, tend to do better
at investing.

Examples of “Obvious” Mispricing
Despite the general authority of the efficient markets theory in popular thinking, one often hears examples that seem to offer flagrant evidence against
it. There are in fact many examples of financial prices that, it seems, cannot
possibly be right. They are regularly reported in the media. In the 1990s stock
market boom, many of these examples were Internet stocks; judging from their
prices, the public appears to have held an exaggerated view of their potential.
For example, consider eToys, a firm established in 1997 to sell toys over the
Internet. Shortly after its initial public offering in 1999, eToys’ stock value was
$8 billion, exceeding the $6 billion value of the long‑established “brick and
mortar” retailer Toys “R” Us. And yet, in fiscal 1998, eToys’ sales were $30
million, while the sales of Toys “R” Us were $11.2 billion, almost 400 times
larger. And eToys’ profits were a negative $28.6 million, while the profits of
Toys “R” Us were a positive $376 million.8 In fact, Toys “R” Us, like other
established toy retailers, had already created its own website. Despite some
initial difficulties getting its site launched, Toys “R” Us was seen by many as
having a longer‑run advantage over eToys in that dissatisfied purchasers of
toys on the Internet could go to one of its numerous retail outlets for returns
or advice. In addition, customers who were already shopping at one of those
outlets would naturally gravitate to the Toys “R” Us website when making
online purchases. Despite these publicly aired doubts, investors loved eToys.
But it didn’t take long for the doubters to be proven right: eToys.com filed for
bankruptcy and was delisted from NASDAQ in March 2001. The final step
