This policy will be based on the percentage of earnings that should
be retained in the business for maximum growth. For younger and rap-
idly growing companies, it may be that no dividends at all will be paid
for so many years. Then when assets have been brought to the point
where the depreciation flow-back is greater, from 25 to 40 per cent of
profits will be paid out to stockholders. For older companies this pay-
out ratio will vary from company to company. However, in no case will
the rough percentages govern the exact amount paid out; this would
make each year’s dividend different from that of the year before. This is
Just what stockholders do not want, since it makes impossible independ-
ent long-range planning on their part. What they desire is a set amount
approximating these percentages and paid out regularly—quarterly,
semiannually, or annually, as the case may be. As earnings grow, the
amount will occasionally be increased to bring the pay-out up to the
former percentage. This, however, will only be done when a) funds are


The Hullabaloo about Dividends 121

otherwise available for taking advantage of all the good opportunities
for growth that the management is uncovering and b) there is every rea-
son to believe that this new regular rate can be maintained from this
time on, after allowing for all reasonable probabilities of a subsequent
downturn in the business or the appearance of additional opportunities
for growth.

The managements whose dividend policies win the widest approval
among discerning investors are those who hold that a dividend should
be raised with the greatest caution and only when there is great proba-
bility that it can be maintained. Similarly, only in the gravest of emer-
gencies should such dividends be lowered. It is surprising how many
corporate financial officers will approve the paying of one-shot extra
dividends. They do this even though such unanticipated extra dividends
almost always fail to leave a permanent impact on the market price of
their shares—which should indicate how contrary such policies are to
the desires of most long-range investors.

No matter how wise or foolish a dividend policy may be, a corpo-
ration can usually in time get an investor following which likes the par-
ticular policy, provided that the corporation follows the policy consis-
tently. Many stockholders, whether it is to their best interests or not, still
like a high rate of return. Others like a low rate. Others like none at all.
Some like a very low rate combined with a small regular annual stock
dividend. Others do not want this stock dividend, preferring the low
rate by itself. If a management selects one of these policies in line with
its natural needs, it usually builds up a stockholder group which likes
and comes to expect the continuation of such a policy. A wise manage-
ment wishing to obtain investment prestige for its stock will respect that
desire for continuity.

There is perhaps a close parallel between setting policy in regard to
dividends and setting policy on opening a restaurant. A good restaurant
man might build up a splendid business with a high-priced venture. He
might also build up a splendid business with an attractive place selling
the best possible meals at the lowest possible prices. Or he could make
a success of Hungarian, Chinese, or Italian cuisine. Each would attract a
following. People would come there expecting a certain kind of meal.
However, with all his skill, he could not possibly build up a clientele if
one day he served the costliest meals, the next day low-priced ones, and
then without warning served nothing but exotic dishes. The corpora-
tion that keeps shifting its dividend policies becomes as unsuccessful in


122 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

attracting a permanent shareholder following. Its shares do not make the
best long-range investments.

As long as dividend policy is consistent, so that investors can plan
ahead with some assurance, this whole matter of dividends is a far less
important part of the investment picture than might be judged from the
endless arguments frequently heard about the relative desirability of this
dividend policy or that. The large groups in the financial community
that would dispute this view fail to explain the number of stocks that
have offered no prospect of anything but below-average yield for years
ahead, yet which have done so well for their owners. Several examples
of such stocks have already been mentioned. Another typical investment
of this type is Rohm & Haas. This stock first became publicly available
in 1949, when a group of investment bankers purchased a large block
held by the Alien Property Custodian and reoffered it publicly. The
public offering price was $41.25. At that time the stock was paying only
$1.00 in dividends, supplemented by stock dividends. Many investors
felt that in view of the low yield the stock was unattractive for conser-
vative investment. Since this date, however, the company has continued
to pay stock dividends, has raised the cash dividend at frequent intervals
although the yield has remained very low, and the stock has sold at well
over 400. The original owner of Rohm & Haas has received stock div-
idends of 4 per cent each year from 1949 through 1955, and 3 per cent
in 1956, so his capital gain has been well over ten-fold.

Actually dividend considerations should be given the least, not the
most, weight by those desiring to select outstanding stocks. Perhaps the
most peculiar aspect of this much-discussed subject of dividends is that
those giving them the least consideration usually end up getting the best
dividend return. Worthy of repetition here is that over a span of five to
ten years, the best dividend results will come not from the high-yield
stocks but from those with the relatively low yield. So profitable are the
results of the ventures opened up by exceptional managements that
while they still continue the policy of paying out a low proportion of
current earnings, the actual number of dollars paid out progressively
exceed what could have been obtained from high-yield shares. Why
shouldn’t this logical and natural trend continue in the future?


Five Don’ts for Investors

1. Don’t buy into promotional companies.

Close to the very heart of successful investing is finding companies
which are developing new products and processes or exploiting new
markets. Companies that have just started or are about to be started are
frequently attempting to do just this. Many of them are formed to
develop a colorful new invention. Many are started to participate in
industries, such as electronics, in which there is great growth potential.
Another large group is formed to discover mineral or other natural
wealth—a field where the rewards for success can be outstanding. For
these reasons, young companies not yet earning a profit on their oper-
ations may at first glance appear to be of investment value.

There is another argument which frequently increases interest. This
is that by buying now when the first shares are offered to the public,
there is a chance to “get in on the ground floor.” The successful com-
pany is now selling at several times the price at which it was originally
offered. Therefore why wait and have somebody else make all this
money? Instead why not use the same methods of inquiry and judg-
ment in finding the outstanding new enterprise now being promoted as
can be used in finding the outstanding established corporation?

From the investment standpoint, I believe there is a basic matter
which puts any company without at least two or three years of com-
mercial operation and one year of operating profit in a completely dif
ferent category from an established company—even one so small that
it may not have more than a million dollars of annual sales. In the


124 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

established company, all the major functions of the business are cur~
rently operating. The investor can observe the company’s production,
sales, cost accounting, management teamwork, and all the other
aspects of its operations. Perhaps even more important, he can obtain
the opinion of other qualified observers who are in a position to
observe regularly some or all of these points of relative strength or
weakness in the company under consideration. In contrast, when a
company is still in the promotional stage, all an investor or anyone else
can do is look at a blueprint and guess what the problems and the
strong points may be. This is a much more difficult thing to do. It
allows a much greater probability of error in the conclusions reached.

Actually, it is so difficult to do that no matter how skillful the
investor, it makes it impossible to obtain even a fraction of the “batting
average” for selecting outstanding companies that can be attained if
judgment is confined to established operations. All too often, young
promotional companies are dominated by one or two individuals who
have great talent for certain phases of business procedure but are lack-
ing in other equally essential talents. They may be superb salesmen but
lack other types of business ability. More often they are inventors or pro-
duction men, totally unaware that even the best products need skillful
marketing as well as manufacture. The investor is seldom in a position
to convince such individuals of the skills missing in themselves or their
young organizations. Usually he is even less in a position to point out
to such individuals where such talents may be found.

For these reasons, no matter how appealing promotional companies
may seem at first glance, I believe their financing should always be left
to specialized groups. Such groups have management talent available to
bolster up weak spots as unfolding operations uncover them. Those who
are not in a position to supply such talent and to convince new man-
agements of the need of taking advantage of such help will find invest-
ing in promotional companies largely a disillusioning experience. There
are enough spectacular opportunities among established companies that
ordinary individual investors should make it a rule never to buy into a
promotional enterprise, no matter how attractive it may appear to be.

2. Don’t ignore a good stock just because it is traded
“over the counter.”

The attractiveness of unlisted stocks versus those listed on a stock
exchange is closely related to the marketability of one group as against


Five Don’ts for Investors 127

securities of interest to stockholders in that locality. These are compiled
by close contact with the over-the-counter houses most active in trad-
ing each of these securities. Unlike those furnished by the stock
exchanges, these quotations are not the price ranges within which trans-
actions took place. They cannot be, for there is no central clearing house
to which transactions are reported. Instead these are bid-and-ask quota-
tions. Such quotations supposedly give the highest price at which any
of the interested financial houses will bid for each of these shares and
the lowest offering price at which they will sell them.

Close checking will nearly always show that the reported quotations
on the bid or buy side are closely in line with what could be obtained
for shares at the moment the quotation was furnished. The sales or ask
side is usually higher than the bid by an amount several times greater
than the equivalent stock exchange commission for shares selling at the
same price.'his difference is calculated to enable the over-the-counter
house to buy at the bid price, pay its salesmen an appropriate commis-
sion for the time spent in selling the security, and still leave a reasonable
profit after allowing for general overhead. On the other hand, if a cus-
tomer, particularly a large customer, approaches the same financial house
with a bid to buy this stock so that no salesman’s commission is
involved, he can usually buy it at the bid price plus just about the equiv-
alent of the stock exchange commission. As one over-the-counter deal-
er expressed it,““We have one market on the buy side. On the selling side
we have two. We have a retail and a wholesale market, depending part-
ly on the size of the purchase and partly on the amount of selling and
servicing that is involved.”

This system in the hands of an unscrupulous dealer is subject to
obvious abuse. So is any other system. But if the investor picks the over-
the-counter dealer with the same care he should employ in choosing
any other specialist to serve him, it works surprisingly well. The average
investor has neither the time nor the ability to select his own securities.
Through the close supervision dealers give the securities they permit
their salesmen to offer, he is receiving in effect something closely resem-
bling investment counsel. As such it should be worth the cost involved.

From the standpoint of the more sophisticated investor, however,
the real benefits of this system are not in regard to buying. They are in
regard to the increased liquidity or marketability which it produces for
those unlisted stocks he may desire to own, Because the profit margin
available for dealers in such stocks is large enough to make it worthwhile,


128 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

a great many over-the-counter dealers keep a regular inventory of the
stocks they normally handle. They usually are not at all reluctant to take
on additional 500- or 1000-share lots when they become available.
When larger blocks appear in their favorite issues, they will frequently
hold a sales meeting and put on a special drive to move the shares that
may be available. Normally they will ask a special selling commission of
a point or so for doing this. However, all this means that if an over-the-
counter stock is regularly dealt in by two or more high-grade over-the-
counter dealers, it usually has a sufficient degree of marketability to take
care of the needs of most investors. Depending on the amount offered,
a special selling commission may or may not be required to move a large
block. However, for what is at most a relatively small percentage of the
sales price, the stock which the investor desires to sell can actually be
converted into cash without breaking the market.

How does this compare with the marketability of a stock listed on a
stock exchange? The answer depends largely on what stock and on what
stock exchange. For the larger and more active issues listed on the New
York Stock Exchange, even under today’s conditions a big enough auc-
tion market still exists so that in normal times all but the largest blocks
can be moved at the low prevailing commission rates without depressing
prices. For the less active stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange,
this marketability factor is still fair, but at times can sag rather badly if reg-
ular commissions are depended on when large selling orders appear. For
common stocks listed on the small exchanges, it is my opinion that this
marketability factor frequently becomes considerably worse.

The stock exchanges have recognized this situation and have taken
steps to meet it. Nowadays, whenever a block of a listed stock appears
which the exchange thinks is two big to market in the normal fashion,
permission may be given for the use of devices such as “special offer-
ings.” This simply means that the offering is made known to all mem-
bers, who are given a predetermined larger commission for selling these
shares. In other words, when the block is too large for the brokers to
handle it as brokers, they are given commissions large cnough to reward
them for selling as salesmen.

All this narrows the apparent gap between listed and unlisted mar-
kets in a period such as the present, when more and more purchases
are being handled by salesmen rather than by brokers who just take
orders. It does not mean that from the standpoint of marketability a
well-known, actively-traded stock on the New York Stock Exchange


Five Don’ts for Investors 129

has no advantage over the better over-the-counter stocks. It does
mean that the better of these over-the-counter stocks are frequently
more liquid than the shares of many of the companies listed on the
American Stock Exchange and the various regional stock exchanges.
[ imagine those connected with the smaller stock exchanges would
sincerely disagree with this statement. Nevertheless, I believe an
unprejudiced study of the facts would show it to be true. It is why a
number of the more progressive of smaller and medium-size compa-
nies have in recent years refused to list their stocks on the smaller
exchanges. Instead they have chosen the over-the-counter markets
until their companies reach a size that would warrant “big board’—
that is, New York Stock Exchange—listing.

In short, so far as over-the-counter securities are concerned, the
rules for the investor are not too different from those for listed securi-
ties. First, be very sure that you have picked the right security. Then be
sure you have selected an able and conscientious broker. If an investor is
on sound ground in both these respects, he need have no fear of pur-
chasing stock just because it is traded “over-the-counter” rather than on
an exchange.

3. Don’t buy a stock just because you like the “tone”
of its annual report.

Investors are not always careful to analyze just what has caused them to
buy one stock rather than another. If they did, they might be surprised
how often they were influenced by the wording and format of the gen-
eral comments in a company’s annual report to stockholders. This tone
of the annual report may reflect the management’ philosophies, policies,
or goals with as much accuracy as the audited financial statement should
reflect the dollars and cents results for the period involved. The annual
report may also, however, reflect little more than the skill of the compa-
ny’s public relations department in creating an impression about the
company in the public mind. There is no way of telling whether the pres-
ident has actually written the remarks in an annual report, or whether a
public relations officer has written them for his signature. Attractive pho-
tographs and nicely colored charts do not necessarily reflect a close-knit
and able management team working in harmony and with enthusiasm.
Allowing the general wording and tone of an annual report to influ-
ence a decision to purchase a common stock is much like buying a


130 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

product because of an appealing advertisement on a billboard. The prod-
uct may be just as attractive as the advertisement. It also may not be. For
a low-priced product it may be quite sensible to buy in this way, to find
out how attractive the purchase really is. With a common stock, howev-
er, few of us are rich enough to afford impulse buying. It is well to
remember that annual reports nowadays are generally designed to build
up stockholder good will. It is important to go beyond them to the
underlying facts. Like any other sales tool they are prone to put a cor-
poration’s “best foot forward.” They seldom present balanced and com-
plete discussions of the real problems and difficulties of the business.
Often they are too optimistic.

If, then, an investor should not let a favorable reaction to the tone
of an annual report overly influence his subsequent action, how about
the opposite? Should he let an unfavorable reaction influence him?
Usually not, for again it is like trying to appraise the contents of a box
by the wrapping paper on the outside. There is one important excep-
tion to this, however. This is when such reports fail to give proper
information on matters of real significance to the investor. Companies
which follow such policies are usually not the ones most likely to pro-
vide the background for successful investment.

4. Don’t assume that the high price at which a stock
may be selling in relation to earnings is necessarily an
indication that further growth in those earnings has
largely been already discounted in the price.

There is a costly error in investment reasoning that is common enough
to make it worthy of special mention. To explain it, let us take a ficti-
tious company. We might call it the XYZ Corporation. XYZ has qual-
ified magnificently for years in regard to our fifteen points. For three
decades there has been constant growth in both sales and profits, and
also there have been enough new products under development to fur-
nish strong indication of comparable growth in the period ahead. The
excellence of the company is generally appreciated throughout the
financial community. Consequently for years XYZ stock has sold for
from twenty to thirty times current earnings. This is nearly twice as
much for each dollar earned as the sales price of the average stock that
has made up, say, the Dow Jones Industrial Averages.


Five Don’ts for Investors 131

Today this stock is selling at just twice the price-earnings ratio of
the Dow Jones averages. This means that its market price is twice as high
in relation to each dollar it is earning as is the average of the stocks com-
prising these Dow Jones averages in relation to each dollar they are
earning. The XYZ management has just issued a forecast indicating it
expects to double earnings in the next five years. On the basis of the
evidence at hand, the forecast looks valid.

Whereupon a surprising number of investors jump to false conclu-
sions. They say that since XYZ, is selling twice as high as stocks in gen-
eral, and since it will take five years for XYZ’s earnings to double, the
present price of XYZ stock is discounting future earnings ahead. They
are sure the stock is overpriced.

No one can argue that a stock discounting its earnings five years
ahead is likely to be overpriced. The fallacy in their reasoning lies in the
assumption that five years from now XYZ will be selling on the same
price-earnings ratio as will the average Dow Jones stock with which
they compare it. For thirty years this stock, because of all those factors
which make it an outstanding company, has been selling at twice the
price-carnings ratio of these other stocks. Its record has been rewarding
to those who have placed their faith in it. If the same policies are con-
tinued, five years from now its management will bring out still another
group of new products that in the ensuing decade will swell earnings in
the same way that new products are increasing earnings now and oth-
ers did five, ten, fifteen, and twenty years ago. If this happens, why
shouldn’t this stock sell five years from now for twice the price earnings
ratio of these more ordinary stocks just as it is doing now and has done
for many years past? If it does, and if the price-earnings ratio of all stocks
remain about the same, XYZ’s doubling of earnings five years from now
will also cause its price to have doubled in the market over this five-year
period. On this basis, this stock, selling at its normal price-earnings ratio,
cannot be said to be discounting future earnings at all!
