What Execution Methods Will I Be Using? What Parameters?
This is where I decide my primary execution method. Am I scaling in? Am I scaling out? Am I getting all in and all out? What is my risk/reward ratio? This is a lengthy
part of the plan, as I will write down sample plays for all my categories. I’m not going to do that with all my plays here, but I will spell out my parameters for gap
plays.
For all of my intraday plays, I will get in all at once and scale out as the position goes my way. The target on the first half of my play will be small, the equivalent of
1 to 2 ES points or 10 to 20 YM points. Once I have this initial profit, I will give the second half more room to play out. For my swing plays, I will get in all at once
and get out all at once, trailing my stop to protect any gains.
For five-minute squeeze plays on YM , I will get in all at once, using 10 contracts per $100,000. I will use a mechanical target of 10 points on the first half for
choppy days, and 20 points on the first half for more volatile days, as determined by the volume on the ES on a five-minute chart (Chapter 6). If the target on the first
half is hit, I will move my stop up to breakeven. I will stay in the trade until one of four things happens:
• M y stop is hit.
• I get a reading of 800 ticks in the opposite direction from my trade.
• There is a reading of 1,000 ticks in the direction of my trade.
• The squeeze loses momentum.
I do this for each of my plays, so that there is no question as to how they should be executed. This is crucial because it ties in directly with the next portion of the
plan.

How Am I Going to Track and Rank My Trades?
This is where I detail how I am going to track each of the setups I trade and how they are working. I track this information in Excel, which calculates a running average.
I will track all my trades and rate them as follows:
5. Target hit
4. Out at a different price from target, but profitable
3. Out at breakeven
2. Out at a different price from stop, but a losing trade
1. Stop hit
I will add up my daily score and divide by the number of trades to get an average. This provides a “grade point average” on the different setups and how they are
doing. I separate the trades based on the specific setup that is being used. At the end of the month, I will have an average for each setup and an overall cumulative
average. This will help me to weed out the setups that aren’t working. For example, I may have something at the end of the month that reads, “Gap plays: 4.24;
squeeze plays: 3.57; pivot plays: 3.87.” By looking at this, I can see trends in these setups and potentially drop setups that aren’t working or allocate more funds to
setups that are working. It is imperative that traders do two things well in order to do this. First, they have to spend 10 minutes a day keying their trades into an Excel
spreadsheet or into a journal. Second, they have to follow their setups the same way each and every time. This brings me to an important rule regarding my trading
plan:
Any trade I take that does not fall into a specific setup or chart pattern that I have outlined, I will label as an “impulse play.”

This includes plays in which I took a specific signal to get in, but I got out of the trade too late or too early because I wasn’t paying attention or because I was
feeling hopeful or scared or whatever. This is a weakness, and if I succumb to this temptation, I must track it and see the impact it has on my trading. I know from past
experience that the results of my “impulse plays” over time are poor, and this reminder keeps me from taking these trades. However, I do not want to get lax, and I will
continue to write down these trades and track them if I do take them. I will make notes on these trades. Did I jump in too soon? Did I miss a fill? Did I chase? I have
found that by tracking these things, I’m also holding myself accountable. The more I keep tracking my trades, the fewer impulsive trades I take and the fewer overall
amateur mistakes I make.
To this end, I also grade my trades on how well I followed the setup. I will give a trade a 5 if I followed the setup to the letter—whether or not it makes money.
Any trade that is not a 5 is an impulse play. You have to be brutally honest with yourself here. If you aren’t, you’re only hurting yourself and anyone who depends
on your trading income.
I will also note any overall trends in my trading. How many days did I start off losing but ended up on the plus side? How many days did I start off strong, only to
give it all back? What was going on that day in terms of interruptions, phone calls, family stuff, and the like? I know from past experience that I get in trouble when I
start off strong and start to go for “bigger trades with house money.” I will keep track of any days in which I let greed get the best of me, then work on reducing the
number of those days.
481

What Are My Drawdown Rules?
If I am down by 15 percent for the month, I will cut my position size in half for the rest of the month. If I am down by 20 percent for the month, I will stop trading
for the rest of the month. If I hit a 30 percent total drawdown, it is time for a six-week break from trading. M y daily drawdown maximum for intraday trading is $3,000
per $100,000. If at the end of the day I have exceeded this level, I am on probation the next day. If I exceed $3,000 per $100,000 again that week, I am done for the rest
of the week. This is my punishment for breaking my trading rules.
I have to point out that many hedge funds and money managers are much more conservative than this when it comes to drawdowns and annual targets. A monthly
drawdown of more than 5 percent can be devastating for a hedge fund’s business, and an annual gain of 20 percent, year after year, opens the floodgates to billions and
billions of dollars for any fund. I have a couple of comments on that.
First off, the day-trading strategies discussed in this book are not going to work for a $400 million fund. There is nowhere near enough liquidity to enable a fund to
get into and out of the markets with that much money in that short a time frame. M any funds, however, will allocate a portion of their $400 million to take advantage
of the intraday trading opportunities I describe in this book. Out of $400 million, how much would they allocate? M aybe a million. That is ¼ of 1 percent of the entire
fund.
I bring this up because people need to treat their trading account for what it is—a high-risk way to make a living. M ost of a trader’s funds should be kept in
conservative vehicles—things like bonds or funds run by conservative money managers. Only a portion of total funds should be allocated to an aggressive trading
account designed to generate monthly income.

What Are My Profit Rules?
M y target daily average goal for intraday trading is $500 per day per $100,000. This is conservative and achievable, and it adds up quickly. I will focus on generating
five $2,000 per $100,000 days per month. This means that I don’t have to trade every day. I know from past experience that my best trading days are Tuesday,
Wednesday, and Thursday. Therefore, I will focus more on trading on these days. If I am up more than $2,000 per $100,000 before noon, I will continue to trade until
I have a losing trade, at which point I will stop for the day. If I have a day in which I make $5,000 per $100,000, I will take the next day off to escape those feelings of
euphoria that cause traders to do stupid things like double up on positions or trade without a stop. I will stop trading for the rest of the month at $20,000 per
$100,000. I will track my daily equity curve through using an Excel spreadsheet.
I will withdraw 50 percent of my trading profits at the end of each quarter. I will never add money to an account that is down, and I will never meet a margin call. I
will add money to an account that has proved itself with positive returns. The reason I will withdraw profits is because this is the best way to protect them. It is with
these profits that I get to invest in more real estate, buy more gold coins, pay for a family vacation, and fund my projects. It also is a reminder that the numbers on the
screen are real and represent real cash.

What Is My Office Setup Going to Be Like?
I have a separate apartment a few miles from my house that I have set up specifically for trading. M y computer setup is in the living room. One of the bedrooms has a
computer in it, and I can go in there and shut the door if I need privacy (as when I’m trying to write a book). The privacy is not only from people, but from the
markets. It’s good to take a break. The other bedroom is set up for an office for my assistant. The apartment next door houses the TTM team, and we recently added
another apartment because we needed the space. I’m sure the apartment complex manager is wondering why I need three apartments. We may need to get “real office
space” soon. I have AT&T U-Verse (fiber), which is an awesome broadband connection, and I have cable broadband as a backup. M y goal this year is to get two
people to help me with my actual trading as I continue to expand the markets I watch, and to program more of my trading setups to generate mechanical signals. I have
had my trading office located in “regular” office space, but I found the solicitors and the general banter too distracting for trading. Also, when other people in the office
building found out that I had quote screens all over the place, they started stopping by to check out what the markets were doing. This was fine the first few times, but
then it got real annoying, real quick. In contrast, in the apartment, I’ve got a full kitchen, and it’s still okay to work in a robe. And best of all, there are no unwanted
interruptions.

What Are My Rewards If My Trading Is Going Well?
This is where I establish goals that motivate me to stick to my plan. I know that if I stick to my plan, my trading has a better chance of succeeding. And if I succeed, I
get to reward myself.
If I hit 60 percent for the year, I will take the next four weeks off. If this occurs in the fourth quarter, I will take the rest of the year off. I could go for more money,
but it’s enough. For 2005, I want to spend two weeks in northern Italy and Switzerland. I want to take four long weekends where I go to a beach and do nothing. I
want to visit Australia, Hong Kong, Taipei, and Tokyo this year, whether on business or for pleasure. I like to watch movies, and I would like to upgrade my home
theater system. I have a farm in southwest Nebraska, and I would like to buy another section of farmland in that area. I realize that I need to focus on the setups and
not focus on the money needed for the rewards. If I focus on the money, I will lose. If I focus on the setups, I will win.
Updating this in 2011, I did visit all of those areas and bought some more farmland. Going forward, I’m not interested as much in “buying stuff” as I am in “saving
time.”

Are There Any Groups, People, or Organizations
I’d Like to Help Out This Year?
I used to send money to the Salvation Army, but I don’t really feel any impact when I donate money to big charities. I would rather help out individuals. I also do a lot
of work with www.DreamsForKids.org, which is doing amazing work with children. There is a school in Austin that I would like to help out so they can expand.

What Are My Specific Plans for Staying “On Plan”
Throughout the Year?
482

This is where I add any notes I have gained from my own experiences to help me stay profitable in my trading.
After you have a $5,000 per $100,000 day, escape any feelings of euphoria by taking the next day off and doing something that humbles you, like playing golf or
flying a plane or sparring with a black belt in tai kwon do. Do not trade the S&Ps between 12:00 noon and 2:00 p.m. unless you are managing an existing position (do
not initiate any new trades). Between 8:30 a.m. eastern and 10:30 a.m. eastern, leave your instant messaging service off, do not check e-mail, and do not answer
phones. In the trading room, let people know that you will not answer questions during this time. M inimize the trading room window so that you do not read what is
going on in the room. You can talk about what you are looking at and what you are doing over the microphone. If people have questions, they will have to wait. If they
don’t like that, they can leave. Do not trade anything during the overnight S&P session. Better yet, don’t watch it, either. If you quit early because you had a 20
percent month, get away physically so that you cannot trade. Go to Cape Cod if it is summer or go skiing if it is winter. Do not trade after 12 noon on Fridays. Focus
on trading lighter or not trading at all during the last three days of options expiration. Review your performance during this time and consider this as your time off
during the month. For the past year, the market has seemed to do absolutely nothing during this time. Focus heavily on the first two trading weeks of the month. After
the first two trading weeks are over, take the next two trading days off and get away from the markets. Give your brain a rest. Take off the entire week of
Thanksgiving. Take off the last two weeks of the year. Plan your vacations in August so that you won’t be missing anything.

What Am I Doing About My Physical Health?
This portion of the book deserves a thorough update, not because I need to change any of the information, but because I want to expand it. The comments and
reactions to this portion of the book have been remarkable. It’s a topic that people don’t think about until it’s thrown in their face. Since I wrote this, I’ve found a few
additional useful pieces of information that I’ve incorporated into my life. I’ve had some issues I’ve had to deal with regarding health, and that led me onto a path of
being a guinea pig and talking to all kinds of doctors and trying all kinds of different things in order to be as highly functioning as possible. As one of my doctor-clients
recently told me, “Look, you can be average or you can be great. The difference is 300 minutes per week.” That 300 minutes refers to vigorous cardio activity. It’s the
difference between a body that is functioning at optimum levels versus one that is just getting by. That is direct from a 68-year-old surgeon who practices what he
preaches (he walks for an hour a day on a treadmill at an incline, 5 days per week). He sees the results day in and day out of his many patients who don’t follow that
advice. For him, it’s both sad and motivating. Something so simple to do, yet so hard to maintain. Let’s take a look.
Your ability to trade effectively and consistently is directly related to your physical well-being. You sharpen your mind through physical activity and plenty of
exercise, as well as healthy eating. I’m going to share with you my recent health experiences. I debated whether to include this or not, as this is a book on trading, not
on health kicks. And, of course, I’m certainly not a doctor. However, I do feel strongly that optimum health is important for a trader, so I’ll talk about my recent
experiences and you can take the information for what it’s worth.
I’ve always been health-conscious, though I certainly go through “less healthy” periods of time. I try to work out regularly, watch what I’m eating, not drink too
much alcohol or caffeine, and take vitamins. When I was 34, I took a couple of physical fitness tests and detailed exams, and was surprised by the results. First off, my
cardiovascular health and flexibility were rated as excellent. This means that my running and aerobic activity over the years were keeping me in good shape. That was
where the good news ended. I then discovered that my body fat percent was much higher than I thought, and I would need to lose 20 pounds of fat. This was a total
surprise. Second, I discovered that I had an extremely low pH level, which means that my body was highly acidic. I then went on to find out the many pleasant things
that are associated with having a continuous low pH/high acidic reading in the human body. Some of you will know what this means, while others of you won’t. I’m
going to condense this as much as possible and share it, so that people who are interested can research this for themselves, form their own opinions, and make their
own decisions regarding their health. I swear on my unborn child that this is not going to lead into a multilevel marketing pitch.
In a nutshell, a low pH level (high acidity) is the root cause of more than 50 percent of all diseases leading to hospitalization, including all the killers like heart disease
and cancer, and of psychological diseases as well. M ore specifically, it causes plaque to form on artery walls, and it causes imbalances in the brain that lead to
insomnia, anxiety, and impairment of memory. It also leads to calcium deficiencies, as calcium is pulled from the bones to fight the high acidic levels in the body, and
these lead to weakened or collapsed vertebrae, poor posture, and back pain. A high acidic reading in the body leads to dysfunction of the digestive system causing
indigestion, gaseousness, bloating, and abdominal cramping. Because of this, not enough nutrients get absorbed from the food we eat, and the entire body can experience
malnutrition. This also causes undigested foods to ferment in the intestines, causing toxicity. High acidity also interferes with the basic functions of the colon, causing
constipation and many other unpleasant side effects. The list goes on and on, with the immune system, the respiratory system, the urinary system, and the glandular
system all being affected by a low pH level (high acidity) in the body.
I had no idea about any of this until I was told about it, and I was admittedly obstinate with the doctor when he was telling me about this. Did I have cancer? No.
Were my bones weak? No. He assured me that in time this would become a problem, but he did pinpoint an immediate problem, and that was with my digestive
system. He asked me if I had to take antacids frequently because of heartburn. “Yep,” I answered. He also asked, rather delicately, I might add, if, upon emerging from
the bathroom after “doing my business,” I noticed a strong, almost embarrassing odor. This applied equally to any gas I might be passing into the atmosphere. “Uh,
yeah, that happens sometimes,” I said. He smiled and told me that this was due to the high acidity in my system, which caused the digestive system to falter and not
fully digest the food I was eating—which also was the cause of my extra 20 pounds of fat.
Before I embarrass myself further, let’s jump into the next obvious question. What causes high acidity? Not surprisingly, it’s the foods we eat—mostly the ones
that are manufactured and come in cans or boxes. Even more so, it is based on what we drink. Sodas, regular or diet, are the worst culprit. I used to suck down three or
four Diet Cokes a day. I love sodas. Unfortunately, the more doctors I’ve talked to, the more convincing the argument has been that sodas are killers, just like
cigarettes. Believe me, that is something I never thought would be coming out of my mouth. I stopped cold turkey and haven’t had one since.
With respect to diet, I found it amusing that many of the things I thought were healthy were responsible for my current condition. In the mornings, I would pour
soy milk on my cereal. Well, while soy is good for you, processed soy is like drinking soda, and most cereals are highly acidic because of the high proportion of refined
flour in them. For lunch, I would have a sliced turkey sandwich, soup, and a diet soda. Well, the turkey is bad because packaged lunch meats carry nitrates that ruin a
person’s stomach. The bread was bad because of the refined flour, and of course the soda was bad. For dinner I would have something similar to what I had for lunch.
To top it off, I also found out that all of the vitamins I took were worthless because they were synthetic. This applies to every vitamin a person takes that lists
ascorbic acid for vitamin C, which is pretty much every vitamin. What about all the health benefits that you read about and hear in the media? It’s called marketing.
Anyway, here is the list of foods by category, regarding overall health for the body. Foods that promote a healthy pH level are listed first, and the “killers” are listed
at the bottom.
1. Eat all you want
483

• Raw fruits
• Raw vegetables (or lightly steamed)
• Brown rice
• Selected herbs
• Unprocessed fruit and vegetable juices
• Whole grains
• Ezekiel bread (also referred to as flourless)
• Drink one ounce of water for every two pounds of body weight each day.
2. Eat with some moderation—one part for every three parts from item 1

• Clean meats, cooked rare
• Roast fish
• Eggs
• Raw dairy
• Unrefined molasses
• Raw nuts and seeds
3. Occasionally

• Processed cheese
• Commercial pizza
• Commercial butter
• Real ice cream (no gum)
• Canned foods
• Alcohol
• Coffee
• Pasteurized dairy
4. Not in this lifetime

• Soft drinks
• French fries
• Doughnuts
• Potato chips
• Refined protein powders
• M argarine
• M ayonnaise
• Hydrogenated oil snacks (salty snacks)

484

• Diet soft drinks
• NutraSweet/aspartame
• Processed soy (soy milk, soy cheese, soy protein isolate, soy lecithin)
• White bread
Things like fast food aren’t just “fattening,” they wreak havoc on your system. They’re toxic, in fact. How does one mass-produce a food product like meat that can
be served fast in under a minute? Very disgustingly. If you aren’t convinced, watch the documentary Food, Inc. I haven’t set foot in a fast-food place since, and I
won’t let my kids eat that crap either. There is a great saying I heard from a doctor that went something like, “If you won’t feed it to your dog, then don’t feed it to
your kid.” Calm children are the result of healthy foods. Of course, this applies to us adults as well.
Admittedly, eating the foods from the first group on a regular basis took some getting used to—that is, until I discovered a Vitamix blender. One of the best pieces of
advice I received from a nutritionist was to have a “green shake” every day. Take one cup of fresh fruit, one cup of water, and one large handful of green leaves
(spinach, kale, lettuce, or something similar), throw it in the blender, then drink it. Okay, it doesn’t taste very good at first, but I got used to it, and I eventually added
other things like goji berries and cacao nibs. This drink is amazingly simple and amazingly healthy. It keeps the brain alert, flushes toxins from your body, and keeps
your pH levels high. And best of all, I don’t have to endlessly chew salads. Instead of using a juicer, which makes a mess of all the pulp, I’ll just take my Vitamix,
throw in a whole apple, a carrot, some frozen peas, a large handful of spinach, pour in some fresh, clean water, and just mix it together. Again, we aren’t going for a
best-tasting-drink contest here. We are going for awesome health. And to top it off, this drink is very high in fiber. As you will notice soon after you start drinking it.
Why is fiber important? Fiber absorbs waste and pushes it out of your body. If you aren’t getting enough fiber to push the waste out through your colon, then the
waste will try to get out of your body in other ways. Through sweat. M ucus. Zits. All very pleasant. Eating a large bunch of green leaves every day is about the best
thing you can do for yourself.
I love cereal, but now in the mornings I eat oatmeal with fruit, and later in the day I’ll have a green shake, sometimes with whey or even pea-based protein powder. I
love deli sandwiches and sodas, but now for lunch I eat a Greek salad with grilled chicken and water. For dinner I’ll have vegetables, salad, and either chicken or fish.
For snacks throughout the day, instead of grabbing something from the vending machine, I’ll have an apple with almond butter or a handful of raw almonds that have
been soaking in water. And, believe it or not, cooking eggs (local if you can get them) in real butter is a lot better for you than cooking them in oil. M ost oils turn rancid
when they are heated. Avoiding rancid oils is one of the keys to health. These oils are also found in many favorite foods, such as chips, crackers, and so on. Essentially,
anything that needs to be preserved on a shelf in a box needs to be doused in oils, which then turn rancid. What about stink? Don’t worry, the rancid smell is covered
up with perfumes. Nice. If you want a cookie, then make them at home.
M y challenges today aren’t food-based, and this stems more from my travel schedule. I still drink alcohol, but only on Fridays and Saturdays, and then only two
drinks (except when I’m working on a book—sorry, liver!). Every once in a while, I will do a cleanse and not drink any alcohol for 60 days. I can say without a doubt
that I always feel much better when I’m off the weekend juice.
The biggest challenge for me is caffeine, and I go through periods where I cut back on it slowly and then wean myself off it, reducing my consumption over the
course of a couple of weeks. When I do this and adjust, I always notice that I have more energy because I start drinking so much water. The biggest change during the
trading day is that instead of sucking on sodas and coffee and having my energy move up and down like a stochastic on a five-minute chart, I drink six bottles of water
(16.9 ounces each) a day, and my energy level stays high and constant. The transition was difficult, but after four weeks of doing it, I couldn’t imagine going back to
my old habits—that is, until I got on a plane for a two-week trip to Asia with the CM E Group. The jet lag knocked me over and I needed a caffeine IV before a talk,
and it was all over.
I found that caffeine helped prevent “brain fog” during the day and also helped me out when I felt general fatigue. I asked my doctor about this, and he did some
blood tests. He discovered that my adrenals were shot and my thyroid function was on the low side. This is a common thing among people who just feel “fatigued”
throughout the day. For my particular blood test results, he said that I needed an adrenal rebuilder to help repair the adrenal glands. Adding some bile salts and milk
thistle for a healthy liver got me on the road to feeling better and more alert. Your adrenals get worn out when you eat sugar, refined carbohydrates, caffeine, and
alcohol, all of which put stress on these glands. Sound familiar? These are also acidic foods. It’s a big circle. When you eat and drink healthy, it really makes an impact.
Although I don’t eat sugar or refined carbs, those beverages snuck back in and didn’t help. It was time to go back to the heavy water diet. As I’m writing this, I’ve been
off caffeine for about 2 months. I find that if I start eating processed foods like bread, I get tired and crave caffeine. But when I eat foods that are healthy and alive, then
I have more energy than I know what to do with.
I’m including this information because it was a real eye-opener for me, and a big key to my improved health. One side benefit to all this, besides feeling better and
sleeping better, was that I lost the extra 20 pounds I was carrying in five months, without increasing the amount of exercising I was doing. It was just a matter of eating
foods that helped the functions in my body instead of harming them.
One thing our doctor did to jump-start my wife and me was put us on a 21-day cleanse. There are many of these available. The one we did was called the “Standard
Process Purification Product Kit,” which is available on Amazon. It flushes out toxins, cleans out the liver, and, over the course of eating extremely healthy foods for
21 days, erases cravings for the crap food. The first few days are tough (I nearly licked smeared egg off my kid’s face), but the body adapts quickly. M y wife dropped
