
22

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

cash generation to pay for enormous debt obligations, and raised
the average cost of acquisitions.
Value-enhancing acquisitions are hard enough to find without
the added burden of higher average costs for all of them. Indeed,
most acquisitions are value-decreasing, Buffett says. Finding the
best value-enhancing transactions requires concentrating on opportunity costs, measured principally against the alternative of buying
small pieces of excellent businesses through stock market
purchases. Such concentration is alien to the manager obsessed
with synergies and size, but a vital part of Berkshire's double-barreled investment approach.
Berkshire has additional advantages in acquisitions: a high
quality stock to pay with and a substantial amount of managerial
autonomy to offer once a deal is done-both rare in an acquiring
company, Buffett says. Buffett also puts his money where his
mouth is, reminding prospective sellers that Berkshire has acquired
many of its businesses from family or other closely-held groups,
and inviting them to check with every previous seller about Berkshire's initial promises measured against its later actions.
ACCOUNTING AND TAXATION

Buffett's essays provide an entertaining and illuminating tutorial on understanding and using financial information. In dissecting significant aspects of generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP), Buffett shows both their importance and limits in understanding any business or investment. Buffett demystifies key topics
that highlight the important differences between accounting earnings and economic earnings, between accounting goodwill and economic goodwill, and between accounting book value and intrinsic
value. These are essential tools for any investor's or manager's valuation toolbox.
The most basic point to understand about accounting is that it
is a form. As a form, it can be manipulated. Buffett shows just
how severe the manipulation can be with a satire written by Ben
Graham in the 1930s. The advanced bookkeeping methods Graham presents enable his phantom US Steel to report "phenomenally enhanced" earnings without cash outlays or changes in
operating conditions or sales. Except in its lampooning spirit, Graham's illustration of accounting chicanery is not all that different
from what is often seen coming out of corporate America.
Buffett emphasizes that useful financial statements must enable a user to answer three basic questions about a business: ap-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

23

proximately how much a company is worth, its likely ability to
meet its future obligations, and how good a job its managers are
doing in operating the business. Buffett laments that GAAP conventions make these determinations difficult, and indeed almost
any accounting system will be hard pressed to furnish completely
accurate answers given the complexities of business. Acknowledging the monumental difficulty of inventing an accounting system
superior to GAAP, Buffett articulates a range of concepts that go a
longer way toward making financial information useful to investors
and managers.
Consider a concept Buffett calls "look-through earnings."
GAAP investment accounting calls for using the consolidation
method for majority-owned equity, which means full reporting of
all line items from the investee's financial statements on the parent's. For equity investments from 20% to 50%, GAAP calls for
reporting the investor's proportionate share of earnings of the investee on its statements; for investments of less than 20%, GAAP
provides that only dividends actually received by the investor be
recorded, rather than any share of the investee's earnings. These
accounting rules obscure a major factor in Berkshire's economic
performance: the earnings generated by its investee companies are
an enormous part of Berkshire's value, but would not be reported
on its financial statements prepared using GAAP.
Recognizing that it is not the size of an equity investment that
determines its value, but how the undistributed earnings are
deployed, Buffett develops the concept of look-through earnings to
gauge Berkshire's economic performance. Look-through earnings
add to Berkshire's own net earnings the undistributed earnings in
investee companies, less an incremental amount for taxes. Lookthrough earnings are not different from GAAP earnings for many
businesses. But they are for Berkshire and probably are for many
individual investors. Accordingly, individuals can adopt a similar
approach for their own portfolios and try to design a portfolio that
delivers the highest possible look-through earnings over the long
term.
The difference between accounting goodwill and economic
goodwill is well-known, but Buffett's lucidity makes the subject refreshing. Accounting goodwill is essentially the amount by which
the purchase price of a business exceeds the fair value of the assets
acquired (after deducting liabilities). It is recorded as an asset on
the balance sheet and then amortized as an annual expense, usually

24

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

over forty years. So the accounting goodwill assigned to that business decreases over time by the aggregate amount of that expense.
Economic goodwill is something else. It is the combination of
intangible assets, like brand name recognition, that enable a business to produce earnings on tangible assets, like plant and equipment, in excess of average rates. The amount of economic goodwill
is the capitalized value of that excess. Economic goodwill tends to
increase over time, at least nominally in proportion to inflation for
mediocre businesses, and more than that for businesses with solid
economic or franchise characteristics. Indeed, businesses with
more economic goodwill relative to tangible assets are hurt far less
by inflation than businesses with less of that.
These differences between accounting goodwill and economic
goodwill entail the following insights. First, the best guide to the
value of a business's economic goodwill is what it can earn on unleveraged net tangible assets, excluding charges for amortization of
goodwill. Therefore when a business acquires other businesses,
and the acquisitions are reflected in an asset account called goodwill, analysis of that business should ignore the amortization
charges. Second, since economic goodwill should be measured at
its full economic cost, i.e., before amortization, evaluation of a possible business acquisition should be conducted without regard to
those amortization charges as well.
Buffett emphasizes, however, that the same does not hold for
depreciation charges-these should not be ignored because they
are real economic costs. He makes this point in explaining why
Berkshire always shows its shareholders the results of operations
with respect to acquired businesses net of any purchase price adjustments GAAP requires.
It is common on Wall Street to value businesses using a calculation of cash flows equal to (a) operating earnings plus (b) depreciation expense and other non-cash charges. Buffett regards that
calculation as incomplete. After taking (a) operating earnings and
adding back (b) non-cash charges, Buffett argues that you must
then subtract something else: (c) required reinvestment in the business. Buffett defines (c) as "the average amount of capitalized expenditures for plant and equipment, etc., that the business requires
to fully maintain its long-term competitive position and its unit volume." Buffett calls the result of (a) + (b) - (c) "owner earnings."
When (b) and (c) differ, cash flow analysis and owner earnings
analysis differ too. For most businesses, (c) usually exceeds (b), so
cash flow analysis usually overstates economic reality. In all cases

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

25

where (c) differs from (b), calculation of owner earnings enables
one to appraise performance more accurately than would analysis
of GAAP earnings, or cash flows affected by purchase price accounting adjustments. That is why Berkshire supplementally reports owner earnings for its acquired businesses, rather than rely
solely on GAAP earnings figures, or cash flow figures.
A final example of Buffett's specialized toolkit is intrinsic
value, "the discounted value of the cash that can be taken out of a
business during its remaining life." Though simple to state, calculating intrinsic value is neither easy nor objective. It depends on
estimation of both future cash flows and interest rate movements.
But it is what ultimately matters about a business. Book value, in
contrast, is easy to calculate, but of limited use. So too with market
price, at least for most companies. Differences between intrinsic
value and book value and market price may be hard to pin down.
They can go either way, but there will almost certainly be
differences.
GAAP has enough trouble. Yet two groups of people make it
worse: those who try to overcome GAAP requirements by stretching their accounting imagination, and those who deliberately employ GAAP to facilitate financial fraud. The former is especially
hard to deal with, as Buffett suggests in illustrating how debate on
accounting for retiree benefits and stock options revealed the parochialism of many executives and accountants. For example, criticizing the view against treating stock options as expenses when
granted, Buffett delivers this laconic argument: "If options aren't a
form of compensation, what are they? If compensation isn't an expense, what is? And, if expenses shouldn't go into the calculation
of earnings, where in the world should they go?"
Parochial positions on accounting can be economically disastrous, as the debate over accounting for retiree health care benefits·
attests. Until 1992, businesses that promised to pay for health care
services to retired employees were not required by GAAP to record the associated obligation as a liability on their balance sheets.
It thus made it easy to make such financial commitments, and
many businesses made far more generous commitments to cover
retiree health benefits than they would have had they been required to report the obligation. One consequence was a wave of
bankruptcies, as businesses failed to meet their mounting and maturing obligations.
One clear lesson from Buffett's discussions of financial information is that accounting has inherent limits, even though it is ab-

26

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

solutely essential. Despite enormous managerial leeway in
reporting earnings and potential abuse, financial information can
be of great use to investors. Buffett uses it every day, and has allocated billions of dollars doing it. So it is possible to make important investment decisions on the basis of available financial
information if one exercises knowledgeable judgment. That judgment may include making adjustments to determine look-through
earnings, owner earnings, and intrinsic value, and to show the real
costs of stock options or other obligations that GAAP does not
require to be recorded on the financial statements.
Bringing this collection full circle, the concluding essays note
the obvious but often overlooked tax advantages of long-term investment. Linking life's two certainties, the final essay includes
one of Buffett's many jokes about his personal longevity: if enjoying life promotes longevity, he is jeopardizing Methuselah's record (969 years). At the symposium featuring this collection,
someone asked what effect Buffett's death would have on Berkshire stock. Another answered, "a negative effect." Without missing a beat, Buffett quipped: "It won't be as negative for the holders
as it will be for me."
The prominence of accounting discussions in Buffett's essays
underscores that accounting policy and accounting decisions matter. That position is supported by Graham-Dodd fundamental valuation analysis. Yet it conflicts with modern finance theory's view
that efficient markets will pierce accounting conventions to produce prices equal to values, and it also goes against the grain of
what many MBA and JD students have been taught in the past few
decades.
Buffett's essays can reeducate a generation of students, and
continue the education of others. That is important because the
gospel of modern finance theory that swept America in the past
thirty years is still commonly preached. A lemming-like willingness to follow the crowd endures. Entailing the destruction of both
leadership and independent thought, that weakness is the intellectual foe in the struggle Buffett's essays wage for intelligent and focused investing. While the battle remains to be won, this
compendium is intended to aid in the quest.

PROLOGUE 1

In some ways, our shareholder group is a rather unusual one,
and this affects our manner of reporting to you. For example, at
the end of each year about 98% of the shares outstanding are held
by people who also were shareholders at the beginning of the year.
Therefore, in our annual report we build upon what we have told
you in previous years instead of restating a lot of material. You get
more useful information this way, and we don't get bored.
Furthermore, perhaps 90% of our shares are owned by investors for whom Berkshire is their largest security holding, very often
far and away the largest. Many of these owners are willing to
spend a significant amount of time with the annual report, and we
attempt to provide them with the same information we would find
useful if the roles were reversed.
In contrast, we include no narrative with our quarterly reports.
Our owners and managers both have very long time-horizons in
regard to this business, and it is difficult to say anything new or
meaningful each quarter about events of long-term significance.
But when you do receive a communication from us, it will
come from the fellow you are paying to run the business. Your
Chairman has a firm belief that owners are entitled to hear directly
from the CEO as to what is going on and how he evaluates the
business, currently and prospectively. You would demand that in a
private company; you should expect no less in a public company.
A once-a-year report of stewardship should not be turned over to a
staff specialist or public relations consultant who is unlikely to be
in a position to talk frankly on a manager-to-owner basis.
We feel that you, as owners, are entitled to the same sort of
reporting by your managers as we feel is owed to us at Berkshire
Hathaway by managers of our business units. Obviously, the degree of detail must be different, particularly where information
would be useful to a business competitor or the like. But the general scope, balance, and level of candor should be similar. We
don't expect a public relations document when our operating managers tell us what is going on, and we don't feel you should receive
such a document.
In large part, companies obtain the shareholder constituency
that they seek and deserve. If they focus their thinking and communications on short-term results or short-term stock market con1 [1979. Footnotes throughout indicate the year of the annual report from which
essays are taken.]

27

28

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

sequences they will, in large part, attract shareholders who focus
on the same factors. And if they are cynical in their treatment of
investors, eventually that cynicism is highly likely to be returned by
the investment community.
Phil Fisher, a respected investor and author, once likened the
policies of the corporation in attracting shareholders to those of a
restaurant attracting potential customers. A restaurant could seek
a given clientele-patrons of fast foods, elegant dining, Oriental
food, etc.-and eventually obtain an appropriate group of devotees. If the job were expertly done, that clientele, pleased with the
service, menu, and price level offered, would return consistently.
But the restaurant could not change its character constantly and
end up with a happy and stable clientele. If the business vacillated
between French cuisine and take-out chicken, the result would be a
revolving door of confused and dissatisfied customers.
So it is with corporations and the shareholder constituency
they seek. You can't be all things to all men, simultaneously seeking different owners whose primary interests run from high current
yield to long-term capital growth to stock market pyrotechnics, etc.
The reasoning of managements that seek large trading activity
in their shares puzzles us. In effect, such managements are saying
that they want a good many of the existing clientele continually to
desert them in favor of new ones-because you can't add lots of
new owners (with new expectations) without losing lots of former
owners.
We much prefer owners who like our service and menu and
who return year after year. It would be hard to find a better group
to sit in the Berkshire Hathaway shareholder "seats" than those
already occupying them. So we hope to continue to have a very
low turnover among our owners, reflecting a constituency that understands our operation, approves of our policies, and shares our
expectations. And we hope to deliver on those expectations.

I.

CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

Many annual meetings are a waste of time, both for shareholders and for management. Sometimes that is true because management is reluctant to open up on matters of business substance.
More often a non-productive session is the fault of shareholder
participants who are more concerned about their own moment on
stage than they are about the affairs of the corporation. What
should be a forum for business discussion becomes a forum for theatrics, spleen-venting and advocacy of issues. (The deal is irresistible: for the price of one share you get to tell a captive audience
your ideas as to how the world should be run.) Under such circumstances, the quality of the meeting often deteriorates from year to
year as the antics of those interested in themselves discourage attendance by those interested in the business.
Berkshire's meetings are a different story. The number of
shareholders attending grows a bit each year and we have yet to
experience a silly question or an ego-inspired commentary.2 Instead, we get a wide variety of thoughtful questions about the business. Because the annual meeting is the time and place for these,
Charlie and I are happy to answer them all, no matter how long it
takes. (We cannot, however, respond to written or phoned questions at other times of the year; one-person-at-a-time reporting is a
poor use of management time in a company with 3,000 shareholders.)3 The only business matters that are off limits at the annual
meeting are those about which candor might cost our company real
money. Our activities in securities would be the main example. 4
A.

Owner-Related Business Principles 5

1. Although our form is corporate, our attitude is partnership.
Charlie Munger and I think of our shareholders as owner-partners,
and of ourselves as managing partners. (Because of the size of our
shareholdings we are also, for better or worse, controlling partners.)
We do not view the company itself as the ultimate owner of our business assets but instead view the company as a conduit through which
our shareholders own the assets.
2 [Subsequent letters sometimes report on the turnout at prior annual meetings. The
turnout went from 12 at the 1975 meeting to approximately 7,500 at the 1997 meeting, with
steady increases since 1984 averaging about 40% annually.]
3 [As of 1996, Berkshire Hathaway had 80,000 shareholders.]
4 [Two introductory paragraphs, 1984.]
5 [1996 Owner's Manual-originally 1983, and annually from 1988-96.]

29

30

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[VoL 19:1

Charlie and I hope that you do not think of yourself as merely
owning a piece of paper whose price wiggles around daily and that
is a candidate for sale when some economic or political event
makes you nervous. We hope you instead visualize yourself as a
part owner of a business that you expect to stay with indefinitely,
much as you might if you owned a farm or apartment house in
partnership with members of your family. For our part, we do not
view Berkshire shareholders as faceless members of an ever-shifting crowd, but rather as co-venturers who have entrusted their
funds to us for what may well turn out to be the remainder of their
lives.
The evidence suggests that most Berkshire shareholders have
indeed embraced this long-term partnership concept. The annual
percentage turnover in Berkshire's shares is a small fraction of that
occurring in the stocks of other major American corporations, even
when the shares I own are excluded from the calculation.
In effect, our shareholders behave in respect to their Berkshire
stock much as Berkshire itself behaves in respect to companies in
which it has an investment. As owners of, say, Coca-Cola or Gillette shares, we think of Berkshire as being a non-managing partner in two extraordinary businesses, in which we measure our
success by the long-term progress of the companies rather than by
the month-to-month movements of their stocks. In fact, we would
not care in the least if several years went by in which there was no
trading, or quotation of prices, in the stocks of those companies. If
we have good long-term expectations, short-term price changes are
meaningless for us except to the extent they offer us an opportunity
to increase our ownership at an attractive price.
2. In line with Berkshire's owner-orientation, most of our directors have a major portion of their net worth invested in the company. We eat our own cooking.
Charlie's family has 90% or more of its net worth in Berkshire
shares; my wife, Susie, and I have more than 99%. In addition,
many of my relatives-my sisters and cousins, for example-keep a
huge portion of their net worth in Berkshire stock.
Charlie and I feel totally comfortable with this eggs-in-onebasket situation because Berkshire itself owns a wide variety of
truly extraordinary businesses. Indeed, we believe that Berkshire
is close to being unique in the quality and diversity of the businesses in which it owns either a controlling interest or a minority
interest of significance.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

31

Charlie and I cannot promise you results. But we can guarantee that your financial fortunes will move in lockstep with ours for
whatever period of time you elect to be our partner. We have no
interest in large salaries or options or other means of gaining an
"edge" over you. We want to make money only when our partners
do and in exactly the same proportion. Moreover, when I do
something dumb, I want you to be able to derive some solace from
the fact that my financial suffering is proportional to yours.
3. Our long-term economic goal (subject to some qualifications mentioned later) is to maximize Berkshire's average annual
