LONG-TERM
SECRETS
TO
SHORT-TERM
TRADING

LARRY WILLIAMS

PDF PACKED BY TRADERMAN
(IT WASN’T ME THAT MADE THE SCAN, I ONLY
PUT IN A MORE PLEASANT FORM.
THANX TO THE GUY THAT MADE THE SCAN)

Contents
Introduction You Are Already a Commodity Trader

1

Chapter 1
Making Order Out of Short-Term Chaos

9

How 1 Learned about the Market

9

Charting the Market

11

The Nonrandom Market

14

Understanding Market Structure

15

Chapter 2
It's a Question of Price and Time

23

All You Will Ever Need to Know about Cycles

23

The Natural Cycle of Range Change

27

Where the Trend Is with You-The Second Power Play
Price Pattern

36

Chapter 3
The Real Secret to Short-Term Trading

45

It Is All about Time

46

Chapter 4
Volatility Breakouts
The Momentum Breakthrough

57

Simple Daily Range Breakouts

61

A Look at Volatility in the S&P 500

66

Separating Buyers from Sellers to Find Volatility
Using Market Swings to Follow Volatility

71

Results

72

One Step Further

73

Chapter 5
The Theory of Short-Term Trading

75

What Is Wrong about the Information Age

78

E. H. Harriman's Rule of Making Millions

79

Chapter 6
Getting Closer to the Truth

81

The Market Is Not a Coin Flip

82

Monthly Road Maps

89

Chapter 7
Patterns to Profit

93

The Common Element

94

The Questions to Ask

99

My Smash Day Patterns

101

How to Use Smash Day Patterns

104

Specialists' Trap

108

A Vital Note-This Works on Shorter Time Frames as Well

113

Oops! This Is Not a Mistake

113

S&P Oops! Trading

119

Chapter 8
Separating the Buyers from the Sellers

121

Greatest Swing Value

123

Stock Index Trading with Greatest Swing Value

124

Some Pointers

128

Chapter 9
Short-Term Trading from a Quote Screen

131

How a Quote-Screen Trader Makes Money

132

Swing Points as Trend Change Indication

134

The Three-Bar High/Low System

136

A New Indicator for Short-Term Traders: Will-Tell

138

Will-Spread and the S&P 500 Stock Index

141

Chapter 10
Special Short-Term Situations

147

Month-End Trading in Stock Indexes

147

Target Months

148

Making It Better

149

Month-End Trading in the Bond Market

149

Getting Specific

152

Better and Better

153

A Time to Sell as Well

154

Chapter 11
When to Get Out of Your Trades

157

Chapter 12
Thoughts on the Business of Speculation

159

What Speculation Is All About

160

It's about Time

161

Trade Management

161

Essential Points about Speculation

162

Chapter 13
Money Management-The Keys to the Kingdom

171

Most Traders Use a Hit-and-Miss Approach

172

Approaches to Money Management-One Is Right for You

173

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly of Money Management

175

Looking in New Directions, Drawdown as an Asset

178

Back to Ryan and Ralph

183

Chapter 14
Thoughts from the Past

185

Chapter 15
Just What Does Make the Stock Market Rally?

233

Logic 101

234

These Words Are My Bond

234

A Look at Data A and Data B

235

Let's Break Some Bad Habits

237

How to Break Bad Habits

238

Comments on Setting Stops-Dollar Loss and Unpredictability

240

Chapter 16
Closing Comments

245

It Is just Like Life

245

Index

249

Introduction

You Are Already a
Commodity Trader

Whether you know it or not, you have been trading commodities all your life. Sure, you may have
never traded a contract of Pork Bellies, but you have almost certainly traded a possession like a car, house,
or antique for someone else's money or possession. If you have never done that, for sure you have traded
time for money. You have traded your time as a teacher, lawyer, pipe fitter, or ditchdigger for someone
else's money. So, you are halfway there. you just never knew it!
When we trade our time, we are actually trading our time plus our skills. That is why a brain surgeon
gets more per hour than a knee surgeon. That is also why an outstanding quarterback gets more than a
tackle and surgeon combined. He has a greater career risk. It is not that one skill is inherently more
valuable than the other, it is that one is more difficult to come by and carries higher risk. This characteristic
generates more dollars for the person selling his or her time and skills.
There is no intrinsic value to Michael Jordan's dribbling and shooting skills, but the owner of the
Chicago Bulls saw an opportunity to make a great deal of money with those seemingly valueless skills by.
packing stadiums and getting television revenues. Thus, something of “no value” may have great value.
At a trading seminar, I once demonstrated this point by, placing a personal check of mine in a scaled
envelope and then added it to 14 similar envelopes in a clear plastic bag. The attendees each had the
opportunity to reach in and draw out an envelope. The person who drew the one with the $5,000 check
would be allowed to keep it.
The bag contained 14 worthless envelopes, but suddenly they had value Although all but one were
empty, there was a 1 in 15 chance of Winning $5,000; thus each envelope, or opportunity to take out an
envelope. Was worth $333.33. Once the participants began taking envelopes out of the bag,

1

2
those empty, worthless envelopes gained in value. After all, once five empty envelopes were removed, there
was now a 1 in 10 chance and the value had risen to $500. When just two envelopes were left in the bag,
people in the audience were willing to pay $2,500 to dip their hand in and pull out an envelope! Suddenly,
what was worthless had great value!
That is your first lesson in becoming a more aggressive commodity trader. Value, like beauty, is in the
mind of the beholder. As a trader, the lesson is never to second-guess what value really is: it is what the
market will pay. It (the market or collective judgment of other traders) may not pay that value for long, but
price is King, it is what is. I learned long ago not to argue with what is.
In 1974, I reached a value judgment that the price of Cattle would skyrocket so I began loading up,
taking my first position at 43 cents a pound. I "knew the value" of Cattle; at this price, it was way under
value offering a sure trade. So, as price drifted to the 40-cent area, I bought more. After all, if 43 cents was
cheap, 40 cents was even better.
At 38 cents, where price next went, I had a steal, and being no dummy, I stole some more, only to see
price plummet to 35 cents, then 30 cents, and finally 28 cents-where, dear reader, I was tapped out. My
resources were limited; this move cost me about $3 million, all in less than 30 days.
Two months later, the price of Cattle soared to over 60 cents a pound. But I was not there-a sure-thing
trade had set me back dearly and helped contribute to rumors, afloat still today over a quarter of a century
later, that I blew out trading, despite a few successes I will get to later in this book.
Reflecting on this experience over the years has enabled me to formulate two important rules. The first
is that value is ephemeral: it can be anything, and anything can and will happen trading commodities, or
stocks for that matter.
The second rule, which carries greater weight is that although market trend and direction are major
concerns, knowing how to deal with Your resources has the highest priority. After all, had I marshaled out
my resources on the Cattle trade so I could have ridden through the bad times, I would have made a
respectable killing.
You never know when the markets will do what you think they are supposed to do. Many times, like
God, the market does not deny, it just delays. Serious traders weave protection against this delay into the
fabric of their program. There is no greater rule to learn than that of money management. All the horror
stories you have heard about commodity trading are true. Good people have been totally wiped out by doing
the wrong thing. That wrong thing has never been the market, nor the fact the trader made a bad call. Indeed,
every successful trader will have bad calls, losing trades. And lots of them

3

The wipeouts you have heard about, every single one of them, have come from placing too large a bet
on a trade or holding on to a losing position too long. The sooner you learn to master your defeats, the
sooner you will be on your way to amass the wealth possible in this business. It is your failures, not your
successes that kill you in this business. Failures do not build character, they destroy your bank account.
The foundation to all your success is in the preceding paragraph. Psychics may or may not be able to
predict the market, value may or may not prevail. The world of speculation is about predicting the future
and that is difficult at best. The fabled United States military complex, which had supposedly bankrolled
the brightest of the bright, and thousands of intelligence officers, was not able to predict the fall of the
Berlin wall' So how can you and I hope to do better?
Our inability to see the future very well is proven yearly by such august sports magazines as Sports
Illustrated. In 1997, their oracles predicted Penn State would be the number one football team, ranking
Michigan number 18. By the end of the season, Michigan was number one and Penn State floundering.
Washington was supposed to be number three, but was beaten by lowly Washington State, a team not
mentioned in any top 20 list, that went on to win the Pac 10 championship and almost upset Michigan in
the Rose Bowl'
People who make their living looking into crystal balls are destined to eat a lot of broken glass.
But take heart: although neither you nor I can divine the future, especially price action, we can learn
to control our losses. That is a certainty, based on math, that will provide the building blocks for your
successes. Each and every one of them.
For years, I chased the prophets of profit, those financial soothsayers who claimed they, or their
indicators, could reveal the future. Eventually, I realized that God does not want us to see the future. It is
as simple as that.
If we could see "out there," we could all be millionaires many times over. We would bet the ponies,
spin the roulette wheel, and roll dice, except of course, no casino would back the other side of an
unwinnable wager. Besides, how thoroughly boring life would become if we could know today how every
day of our future would be. Who would want to live that way-- Where's the joy of discovery, the magic of
the unknown, the thrill of victory, the challenge of overcoming limitations?
If we were all be rich from our powers of foresight, who would work for us, grow wheat, raise cattle?
There would be no phone company, no movies, and no television, as no one would need to work. Worse
yet, who would hire us?
Like I said, God with infinite wisdom, does not want us to know much about the future and for sure
very little about the future of futures.

4
Would-be speculators think this is a game of knowing the future, of knowing that which cannot be known. It
is not. This is a game of developing strategies with winning advantages, getting the odds on your side,
working those odds, and staying alert to any potential changes in the game including new players or new
ideas and concepts.
The word speculate comes from the Latin specular, meaning "to observe," as in spectacle (your
glasses). We are not like gamblers, who enter a game they cannot win over time. All they can do is hope
chance will run their way, not that of the house. We speculators observe how things should happen in the
future, but because we know there are no guarantees, we protect our position with appropriate preservation
of capital techniques, so we can win at our game.
The art of speculation requires one part observation tossed together with one rather large dose of
preservation.
My Most Important Market Belief
Based on my research and experience, I have developed a powerful and profitable belief system:
I believe the current trade I am in will be a loser ... a big loser at that.
This may sound pretty negative to all you positive thinkers, but positive thinking can give way to
thinking you will win-a surefire formula for buying and selling too many contracts and holding on too long.
After all, if you are positive things will work out, you are certain to hold for a bounce or turn that never
comes.
I look at it this way, if you get all pumped up and glossed over with positive beliefs about your market
success, your conviction will lead you to mismanage losing trades. That is why belief systems are so
important to a trader. If your belief system tells you the current trade will be a winner-and it isn't-the need to
confirm that belief in your mind will literally force you to let losses run, to stay with losers, something no
successful trader ever does. An outrageously positive belief that the next trade or two will turn your account
around or make a small fortune for you is most dangerous.
Now let's look at my belief that the current trade I am in will be a loser, that I have no pact with God for
success on this trade. Indeed, I genuinely believe the market is not precisely perfect. Keep in mind the data
for this belief overwhelmingly supports it; 75 percent of mutual fund managers do not outperform the Dow,
80 percent of short-term traders lose their risk capital. On a personal note, many of my own trades do not
make money, and I can positively guarantee many of yours will not succeed.

5
No major loss I have ever had, and I have had more than my fair share of them, has been the market's
"fault." "They" were never out to get me. I got myself by believing my current trade would be a winner so
I did not follow the rules of the game.
I agree with those who say you are only as powerful as your belief system because that belief will give
you the power of taking an action with more certainty and less hesitation. We act out what we believe:
those mental beliefs are the scriptwriters for our play of life.
Adopt my belief that the current trade will most likely not work out and you sure as heck will protect
yourself with stops. You will control disasters, taking the first lifeboat possible instead of going down with
a sinking ship.
Adopt my belief that the current trade will most likely not work out and you sure as heck will not load
up on a trade, banking on it to ball out all your problems. A tiny loss can wipe you out when you have
taken a very large position or number of shares or contracts.
Positive beliefs about future results cause us to take on undue risk. Doing that in a game where the
odds are unfavorable to begin with is a sure invitation to disaster.
The Beginning of My Career as a Speculator
I ride rodeo because Im too lazy to work and too honest to steal.
-Freckles Brown, World Champion Bull rider
My career as a speculator began in the seventh grade when a kid named Paul Highland showed me
how much money could be made flipping coins, matching quarters or odd man out for the shiny silver
dollars we lugged around in our Levies. Growing up in Billings, Montana, was an excellent precursor to
speculation. Flipping quarters was my start; sure I lost some, but if there was anything I understood, other
than my art classes and playing football, it was that there was plenty of real easy money to be made
gambling for quarters and dollars.
It may well be that everything I needed to know about speculation I learned in jr. high. It took a while,
but I finally figured out that Paul and Virgil Marcurn were taking my money by teaming up. One would
control his coin so a head came up, the other a tails so I could not win. Later they split the proceeds, and I
had my first lesson on market manipulation.
I did not call the police or any authorities. I handled it in my own way, and to this day distrust the
bureaucrats that are supposed to right such wrongs. They don't, at least not in time to help you or me.
Jack McAferty was the toughest kid in Billings. Fact is he was the toughest kid in the entire state of
Montana and that's saying a lot considering the number of cowboys, roughnecks, and miners we had in

6
the Treasure State. When a big guy hits you on the arm it hurts. When Jack, who was not a big guy, socked
you on the arm your bone ached. He had unbelievable power, which served him well in every single fight I
ever saw him in. No one came close. Fighting became his way of life and jack was killed by an L.A.
policeman, supposedly on a freeway chase. The truth, however, is that Jack, a real ladies man, had been
dating the cop's wife.
Most the guys who were coin-matching speculators would not play with Jack. Usually he would pay
off, give you his quarter, but if he decided not to, what was your choice? Threaten him and get the living
crap beat out of you' . Ah, another lesson in speculation, choose your partners and business associates
carefully.
Years later, we took a $5,000 account to over $40,000 trading a Cattle system Richard Ulmer
developed. This happened at a brokerage firm owned by George Lane, a guy who claims he is the originator
of the widely followed Stochastics Index. Well, George did not invent Stochastic, and I did not get my
$40,000 from the brokerage. The regulators closed old George up and just before they did the funds were
drained from my account!
Another thing I learned from jack was that strong people do not respect weak ones. I had put up with
enough of Jack's reneging on our coin flips so when he decided not to pay up and kept his quarter, I blasted
him in the stomach as hard as I could. Astonished, he glared at me, asking, "Why the hell did you do that?
You know I'm going to clean your clock now."
All I could say was, "Well go ahead and do it, I'm just tired of you not playing by the rules. I know
you're going to break every bone in my body and you'll get a lot of pleasure out of that, but it won't compare
to how I feel knowing I stood up to you."
jack shot back, "I like that, I respect you," handed me the quarter I had just won, and walked away. We
became pretty good friends after that, but we never matched coins again.
Everyone in Montana works hard. Certainly, my dad worked as hard as anyone, putting in over 40
hours a week at a refinery, then more hours on weekends at Doc Zinc's sulfur refinery. And as if that wasn't
enough, he would stay up late at night reading books, taking courses on electronics so he would be more
valuable to Conoco, his career employer. The gambit of hard work and loyalty paid off-he got promoted.
One of the advantages of having a father working at the refinery was that his kids could get summer
jobs there if they were in college. I did that, too, and it reinforced my strong desire to not do what these guys
did: work. They worked long hours, ever-changing shift work. One week, you went to work at 3:30 P.m., the
next week at 11:30 P.m., and the following week you might pull the 3:30 shift or start at 7:30 A.M. There
was neither rhyme nor reason to the schedules that I could see. All I saw was the unending hours of

7
voluntary servitude in a hot, stench-filled noisy refinery, a place where nothing made sense to me.
There must be a million valves in an oil refinery and I am certain they all turn on and off the same
way. My problem was I could never figure out which way was the right way. That was frustrating, not only
because it showed my ineptitude, but also because it also reflected on my father, who had all this
mechanical stuff down pat. There really was nothing mechanical he could not fix. If I were to have a
open-heart surgery, I would trust him more than a doctor.
Dad knew how to build things (our house, delicate cabinetry for mom) and knew how to fix things-in
part, I am sure, because we did not have money to pay to get things fixed. Poor people develop more skills
than rich people.
My ineptness also held me up to ridicule when people compared me with my older brother, who just
naturally knew what to do at the refinery, and seemingly got along well with the older men. My general
laziness coupled with a desire to be alone and a total inability to do anything well, but draw, caused me to
feel inadequate. My initial response to find self-esteem came from sports. But that sense of approval only
lasts through the game. I would lay awake in bed dreaming, scheming about a way to have a better life,
wondering how the few people with really big houses achieved success. I was not content; what I wanted
was a way out.
Flipping coins seemed reasonable; making fake driver's licenses (for $5 each, birth certificates for
$20) paid a lot better. My limited artistic talents made more money and let me work by myself. It also
included a healthy dose of risk. I liked knowing that I was doing something the average person couldn't or
wouldn't; and for sure, I was not going to find that kind of satisfaction in what I saw at the time as my
father's humdrum existence. My dad did everything by the book and followed all the rules-with one
exception.
When deer season came, the rulebook went out the window. We killed enough deer, antelope, and elk
to feed our family for the year. We used the same deer tag or license three or four times. When it comes to
survival, I learned there are no rules: people must take risks, even my Pops. What did I like most about
those hunting trips, bagging my deer or taking the chance of getting caught with too many deer, fish, or
other game? I have often thought about that. In their own way, they are both thrilling-my speculative career
began on a roll.
Really good speculators like thrill, indeed they seek it, as some sort of intellectual rush.
Maybe that is why I liked selling newspapers on the street corners after school or Christmas cards and
garden seeds door to door to pick up spending money. I was at risk, never knowing if I would make a sale,
but I also might make some decent money for just being there, talking, and showing some stuff.

8
I had seen enough hard work to know I did not covet it. Like rodeo riders, I was "too lazy to work” and
had been raised "too honest to steal." Hence going to college or joining the Navy after high school seemed
to be the right direction, and it was one my mom and dad encouraged. They always told us to do better, that
there was an easier life, and college was the door to that life.
In 1962, I asked someone what the "most active" list of stocks in the newspaper meant. I was hooked
when he replied, "Well, see that stock for General Motors was up 1 1/2 for the day? Had you bought it
yesterday, you would have made $150 today."
$15 0 in one day!
Wow, this sure beat flipping quarters! Back then, $150 was more than guys at the refinery made in a
week. This looked easy, and the winnings were staggering. My only two questions were, how did one get
started and where had I been all my life? There was an instant affinity between me and what looked like easy
money!
That affinity led to the greatest challenge of my life, something I have worked hard at just about every
day since 1962. Really, my only "time off" from the markets occurred when I ran for the United States
Senate in 1978 and 1982. Other than those two interruptions I have spent every day of my life "working,"
much to my father's pleasure, I am certain, but it has never resembled work at the refinery or jobs in and
after college.
From this experience, I believe three motivators are found in the heart of a successful speculator: an
intense desire to make a lot of money, a longing or yearning to show somebody else up, and an internal
discontent with how things are. Great big chunks of unrest seem to be an important asset for a speculator.
Although most people seek balance in their life, I have never found that very healthy; no great achievements
were ever made by perfectly normal people. Sometimes I think about living a more balanced life. That
thought usually lasts a couple of seconds. I guess my unrest will never go away, but if my lifestyle tells us
anything, it is that unrest fans the flames of a speculator's internal fires.
I would probably trade the markets without wanting profits if it "proved" my worth to the world, to an
old girlfriend, to my parents, my brother, or even someone I cannot identify or dredge from the recesses of
my mind. Saying I am ego-driven may be correct, but it is not about bragging, it is about showing them I can
overcome.
It is about letting the world know I found a way out.
If these words have resonance for you, cinch up your seat belt, you are going on the ride of your life.
