The fact that they do not work that well for significant
periods of time, however, is one very compelling reason why it
is dangerous to rely too heavily on the moving average tech-
nique. In certain trending markets, the moving average can’t be
beat. Just switch the program to automatic. At other times, a
nontrending method like the overbought-oversold oscillator is
more appropriate. (In Chapter 15, we’ll show you an indicator
called ADX that tells you when a market is trending and when
it is not, and whether the market climate favors a trending
moving average technique or a nontrending oscillator
approach.)

Moving Averages As Oscillators

One way to construct an oscillator is to compare the difference
between two moving averages. The use of two moving averages
in the double crossover method, therefore, takes on greater sig-
nificance and becomes an even more useful technique. We'll see
how this is done in Chapter 10. One method compares two expo-
nentially smoothed averages. That method is called Moving
Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD). It is used partially as
an oscillator. Therefore, we’ll postpone our explanation of that
technique until we deal with the entire subject of oscillators in
Chapter 10.


214 Chapter 9

Some Pros and Cons of the Moving Average

One of the great advantages of using moving averages, and one of
the reasons they are so popular as trend-following systems, is that
they embody some of the oldest maxims of successful trading.
They trade in the direction of the trend. They let profits run and
cut losses short. The moving average system forces the user to
obey those rules by providing specific buy and sell signals based
on those principles.

Because they are trend-following in nature, however, mov-
ing averages work best when markets are in a trending period.
They perform very poorly when markets get choppy and trade
sideways for a period of time. And that might be a third to a half
of the time.

The fact that they do not work that well for significant
periods of time, however, is one very compelling reason why it
is dangerous to rely too heavily on the moving average tech-
nique. In certain trending markets, the moving average can’t be
beat. Just switch the program to automatic. At other times, a
nontrending method like the overbought-oversold oscillator is
more appropriate. (In Chapter 15, we’ll show you an indicator
called ADX that tells you when a market is trending and when
it is not, and whether the market climate favors a trending
moving average technique or a nontrending oscillator
approach.)

Moving Averages As Oscillators

One way to construct an oscillator is to compare the difference
between two moving averages. The use of two moving averages
in the double crossover method, therefore, takes on greater sig-
nificance and becomes an even more useful technique. We'll see
how this is done in Chapter 10. One method compares two expo-
nentially smoothed averages. That method is called Moving
Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD). It is used partially as
an oscillator. Therefore, we'll postpone our explanation of that
technique until we deal with the entire subject of oscillators in
Chapter 10.


214 Chapter 9

Some Pros and Cons of the Moving Average

One of the great advantages of using moving averages, and one of
the reasons they are so popular as trend-following systems, is that
they embody some of the oldest maxims of successful trading.
They trade in the direction of the trend. They let profits run and
cut losses short. The moving average system forces the user to
obey those rules by providing specific buy and sell signals based
on those principles.

Because they are trend-following in nature, however, mov-
ing averages work best when markets are in a trending period.
They perform very poorly when markets get choppy and trade
sideways for a period of time. And that might be a third to a half
of the time.

The fact that they do not work that well for significant
periods of time, however, is one very compelling reason why it
is dangerous to rely too heavily on the moving average tech-
nique. In certain trending markets, the moving average can’t be
beat. Just switch the program to automatic. At other times, a
nontrending method like the overbought-oversold oscillator is
more appropriate. (In Chapter 15, we'll show you an indicator
called ADX that tells you when a market is trending and when
it is not, and whether the market climate favors a trending
moving average technique or a nontrending oscillator
approach.)

Moving Averages As Oscillators

One way to construct an oscillator is to compare the difference
between two moving averages. The use of two moving averages
in the double crossover method, therefore, takes on greater sig-
nificance and becomes an even more useful technique. We'll see
how this is done in Chapter 10. One method compares two expo-
nentially smoothed averages. That method is called Moving
Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD). It is used partially as
an oscillator. Therefore, we’ll postpone our explanation of that
technique until we deal with the entire subject of oscillators in
Chapter 10.


Moving Averages 215

The Moving Average Applied to Other
Technical Data

The moving average can be applied to virtually any technical data
or indicator. It can be used on open interest and volume figures,
including on balance volume. The moving average can be used on
various indicators and ratios. It can be applied to oscillators as well.

THE WEEKLY RULE

There are other alternatives to the moving average as a trend-fol-
lowing device. One of the best known and most successful of
these techniques is called the weekly price channel or, simply, the
weekly rule. This technique has many of the benefits of the mov-
ing average, but is less time consuming and simpler to use.

With the improvements in computer technology over the
past decade, a considerable amount of research has been done on
the development of technical trading systems. These systems are
mechanical in nature, meaning that human emotion and judg-
ment are eliminated. These systems have become increasingly
sophisticated. At first, simple moving averages were utilized.
Then, double and triple crossovers of the averages were added.
The averages were then linearly weighted and exponentially
smoothed. These systems are primarily trend-following, which
means their purpose is to identify and then trade in the direction
of an existing trend.

With the increased fascination with fancier and more com-
plex systems and indicators, however, there has been a tendency
to overlook some of the simpler techniques that continue to work
quite well and have stood the test of time. We’re going to discuss
one of the simplest of these techniques—the weekly rule.

In 1970, a booklet entitled the Trader’s Notebook was pub-
lished by Dunn & Hargitt’s Financial Services in Lafayette,
Indiana. The best known commodity trading systems of the day
were computer-tested and compared. The final conclusion of all
that research was that the most successful of all the systems test-
ed was the 4 week rule, developed by Richard Donchian. Mr.


216 Chapter 9

Donchian has been recognized as a pioneer in the field of com-
modity trend trading using mechanical systems. (In 1983,
Managed Account Reports chose Donchian as the first recipient of
the Most Valuable Performer Award for outstanding contributions
to the field of futures money management, and presents The
Donchian Award to other worthy recipients.)

More recent work done by Louis Lukac, former research
director at Dunn & Hargitt and currently president of Wizard
Trading (a Massachusetts CTA) supports the earlier conclusions
that breakout (or channel) systems similar to the weekly rule con-
tinue to show superior results. (Lukac et al.)*

Of the 12 systems tested from 1975-84, only 4 generated
significant profits. Of those 4, 2 were channel breakout systems
and one was a dual moving average crossover system. A later arti-
cle by Lukac and Brorsen in The Financial Review (November 1990)
published the results of a more extensive study done on data from
1976-86 that compared 23 technical trading systems. Once again,
channel breakouts and moving average systems came out on top.
Lukac finally concluded that a channel breakout system was his
personal choice as the best starting point for all technical trading
system testing and development.

The 4 Week Rule

The 4 week rule is used primarily for futures trading.
The system based on the 4 week rule is simplicity itself:

1. Cover short positions and buy long whenever the price
exceeds the highs of the four preceding full calendar weeks.

2. Liquidate long positions and sell short whenever the price
falls below the lows of the four preceding full calendar weeks.

The system, as it is presented here, is continuous in nature,
which means that the trader always has a position, either long or
short. As a general rule, continuous systems have a basic weakness.
They stay in the market and get “whipsawed” during trendless market
periods. It’s already been stressed that trend-following systems do not
work well when markets are in these sideways, or trendless phases.

* See Bibliography


Moving Averages 217

The 4 week rule can be modified to make it noncontinu-
ous. This can be accomplished by using a shorter time span—such
as a one or two week rule—for liquidation purposes. In other
words, a four week “breakout” would be necessary to initiate a
new position, but a one or two week signal in the opposite direc-
tion would warrant liquidation of the position. The trader would
then remain out of the market until a new four week breakout is
registered.

The logic behind the system is based on sound technical
principles. Its signals are mechanical and clearcut. Because it is
trend following, it virtually guarantees participation on the
right side of every important trend. It is also structured to fol-
low the often quoted maxim of successful trading—“let profits
tun, while cutting losses short.” Another feature, which should
not be overlooked, is that this method tends to trade less fre-
quently, so that commissions are lower. Another plus is that
the system can be implemented with or without the aid of a
computer.

The main criticism of the weekly rule is the same one lev-
eled against all trend-following approaches, namely, that it does
not catch tops or bottoms. But what trend-following system
does? The important point to keep in mind is that the four week
rule performs at least as well as most other trend-following sys-
tems and better than many, but has the added benefit of incred-
ible simplicity.

Adjustments to the 4 Week Rule

Although we're treating the four week rule in its original form,
there are many adjustments and refinements that can be
employed. For one thing, the rule does not have to be used as a
trading system. Weekly signals can be employed simply as anoth-
er technical indicator to identify breakouts and trend reversals.
Weekly breakouts can be used as a confirming filter for other tech-
niques, such as moving average crossovers. One or 2 week rules
function as excellent filters. A moving average crossover signal
could be confirmed by a two week breakout in the same direction
in order for a market position to be taken.


218 Chapter 9

Shorten or Lengthen Time Periods
for Sensitivity

The time period employed can be expanded or compressed in the
interests of risk management and sensitivity. For example, the
time period could be shortened if it is desirable to make the sys-
tem more sensitive. In a relatively high priced market, where
prices are trending sharply higher, a shorter time span could be
chosen to make the system more sensitive. Suppose, for example,
that a long position is taken on a 4 week upside breakout with a
protective stop placed just below the low of the past 2 weeks. If
the market has rallied sharply and the trader wishes to trail the
position with a closer protective stop, a one week stopout point
could be used.

In a trading range situation, where a trend trader would
just as soon stay on the sidelines until an important trend signal
is given, the time period could be expanded to eight weeks. This
would prevent taking positions on shorter term and premature
trend signals.

The 4 Week Rule Tied to Cycles

Earlier in the chapter reference was made to the importance of the
monthly cycle in commodity markets. The 4 week, or 20 day,
trading cycle is a dominant cycle that influences all markets. This
may help explain why the 4 week time period has proven so suc-
cessful. Notice that mention was made of 1, 2, and 8 week rules.
The principle of harmonics in cyclic analysis holds that each cycle
is related to its neighboring cycles (next longer and next shorter
cycles) by 2.

In the previous discussion of moving averages, it was
pointed out how the monthly cycle and harmonics explained the
popularity of the 5, 10, 20, and 40 day moving averages. The same
time periods hold true in the realm of weekly rules. Those daily
numbers translated into weekly time periods are 1, 2, 4, and 8
weeks. Therefore, adjustments to the 4 week rule seem to work
best when the beginning number (4) is divided or multiplied by
2. To shorten the time span, go from 4 to 2 weeks. If an even
shorter time span is desired, go from 2 to 1. To lengthen, go from


Moving Averages 219

4 to 8. Because this method combines price and time, there’s no
reason why the cyclic principle of harmonics should not play an
important role. The tactic of dividing a weekly parameter by 2 to
shorten it, or doubling it to lengthen it, does have cycle logic
behind it.

The 4 week rule is a simple breakout system. The original
system can be modified by using a shorter time period—a 1 or 2
week rule—for liquidation purposes. If the user desires a more sen-
sitive system, a 2 week period can be employed for entry signals.
Because this rule is meant to be simple, it is best addressed on that
level. The 4 week rule is simple, but it works.(Charting packages
allow you to plot price channels above and below current prices to
spot channel breakouts. Price channels can be used on daily,
weekly, or monthly charts. See Figures 9.11 and 9.12.)

08/21/97 (TRO398) Treasury Bonds 03/98 03/02/98
Daily Bar Chart szat4
121°28

42041

498924

AT AOS

abla’

20 Day Price Channel
11402
Uhhh \ 1126
bl ‘J

‘ost hhew Dae a

Figure 9.11 A 20 day (4 week) price channel applied to Treasury Bond
futures prices. A buy signal was given when prices closed above the upper
channel (see circle). Prices have to close beneath the lower channel to reverse
the signal.



220 Chapter 9

12/31/93 (*SPX) S&P 500 Stock Index 03/31/98

Monthly Bar Chart —

g

g

4 Month Price Channels

EN rie

q
is]
@@@ 2 2 3%

ss we

Figure 9.12 A 4 month price channel applied to the S&P 500 Index.
Prices crossed the upper channel in early 1995 (see circle) to give a buy signal
which remains in effect 3 years later. A close beneath the lower line is needed
to give a sell signal.

TO OPTIMIZE OR NOT

The first edition of this book included the results of extensive
research produced by Merrill Lynch, which published a series of
studies on computerized trading techniques applied to the futures
markets from 1978-82. Extensive testing of various moving aver-
age and channel breakout parameters was performed to find the
best possible combinations in each futures market. The Merrill
Lynch researchers produced a different set of optimized indicator
values for each market.

Most charting packages allow you to optimize systems and
indicators. Instead of using the same moving average in ail mar-
kets, for example, you could ask the computer to find the moving
average, or moving average combinations, that have worked the
best in the past for that market. That could also be done for daily


Moving Averages 221

and weekly breakout systems and virtually all technical indicators
included in this book. Optimization allows technical parameters
to adapt to changing market conditions.

Some argue that optimization helps their trading results
and others that it doesn’t. The heart of the debate centers on how
the data is optimized. Researchers stress that the correct procedure
is to use only part of the price data to choose the best parameters,
and another portion to actually test the results. Testing the opti-
mized parameters on “out of sample” price data helps ensure that
the final results will be closer to what one might experience from
actual trading.

The decision to optimize or not is a personal one. Most evi-
dence, however, suggests that optimization is not the Holy Grail
some think it to be. I generally advise traders following only a
handful of markets to experiment with optimization. Why should
Treasury Bonds or the German mark have the exact same moving
averages as corn or cotton? Stock market traders are a different
story. Having to follow thousands of stocks argues against opti-
mizing. If you specialize in a handful of markets, try optimizing.
If you’re a generalist who follows a large number of markets, use
the same technical parameters for all of them.

SUMMARY

We've presented a lot of variations on the moving average
approach. Let’s try to simplify things a bit. Most technicians use
a combination of two moving averages. Those two averages are
usually simple averages. Although exponential averages have
become popular, there’s no real evidence to prove that they work
any better than the simple average. The most commonly used
daily moving average combinations in futures markets are 4 and
9, 9 and 18, 5 and 20, and 10 and 40. Stock traders tely heavily
on a SO day (or 10 week) moving average. For longer range stock
market analysis, popular weekly moving averages are 30 and 40
weeks (or 200 days). Bollinger Bands make use of 20 day and 20
week moving averages. The 20 week average can be converted to
daily charts by utilizing a 100 day average, which is another use-


222 Chapter 9

ful moving average. Channel breakout systems work extremely
well in trending markets and can be used on daily, weekly, and
monthly charts.

THE ADAPTIVE
MOVING AVERAGE

One of the problems encountered with the moving average is
choosing between a fast or a slow average. While one may work
better in a trading range market, the other may be preferable in a
trending market. The answer to the problem of choosing between
the two may lie with an innovative approach called the “adaptive
moving average.”

Perry Kaufman presents this technique in his book Smarter
Trading. The speed of Kaufman’s “adaptive moving average” auto-
matically adjusts to the level of noise (or volatility) in a market.
The AMA moves more slowly when markets are trending side-
ways, but then moves more swiftly when the market is trending.
That avoids the problem of using a faster moving average (and
getting whipsawed more frequently) during a trading range, and
using a slower average that trails too far behind a market when it
is trending.

Kaufman does that by constructing an Efficiency Ratio that
compares price direction with the level of volatility. When the
Efficiency Ratio is high, there is more direction than volatility
(favoring a faster average). When the ratio is low, there’s more
volatility than direction (favoring a slower average). By incorpo-
rating the Efficiency Ratio, the AMA automatically adjusts to the
speed most suitable for the current market.


Moving Averages 223

ALTERNATIVES TO THE
MOVING AVERAGE

Moving averages don’t work all of the time. They do their best
work when the market is in a trending phase. They’re not very
helpful during trendless periods when prices trade sideways.
Fortunately, there’s another class of indicator that performs much
better than the moving average during those frustrating trading
ranges. They’re called oscillators and we'll explain them in the
next chapter.




INTRODUCTION

In this chapter, we're going to talk about an alternative to trend-
following approaches—the oscillator. The oscillator is extremely
useful in nontrending markets where prices fluctuate in a hori-
zontal price band, or trading range, creating a market situation
where most trend-following systems simply don’t work that well.
The oscillator provides the technical trader with a tool that can
enable him or her to profit from these periodic sideways and
trendless market environments.

The value of the oscillator is not limited to horizontal trad-
ing ranges, however. Used in conjunction with price charts during
trending phases, the oscillator becomes an extremely valuable ally
by alerting the trader to short term market extremes, commonly
referred to as overbought or oversold conditions. The oscillator can
also warn that a trend is losing momentum before that situation

225


226 Chapter 10

becomes evident in the price action itself. Oscillators can signal
that a trend may be nearing completion by displaying certain
divergences.

We'll begin by explaining first what an oscillator is and the
basis for its construction and interpretation. We'll then discuss
the meaning of momentum and its implications for market fore-
casting. Some of the more common oscillator techniques will be
presented from the very simple to the more complicated. The
important question of divergence will be covered. We'll touch on
the value of coordinating oscillator analysis with underlying mar-
ket cycles. Finally, we’ll discuss how oscillators should be used as
part of the overall technical analysis of a market.

OSCILLATOR USAGE IN
CONJUNCTION WITH TREND

The oscillator is only a secondary indicator in the sense that it
must be subordinated to basic trend analysis. As we go through
the various types of oscillators used by technicians, the impor-
tance of trading in the direction of the overriding market trend
will be constantly stressed. The reader should also be aware that
there are times when oscillators are more useful than at others.
For example, near the beginning of important moves, oscillator
analysis isn’t that helpful and can even be misleading. Toward the
end of market moves, however, oscillators become extremely
valuable. We'll address these points as we go along. Finally, no
study of market extremes would be complete without a discussion
of Contrary Opinion. We’ll talk about the role of the contrarian
philosophy and how it can be incorporated into market analysis
and trading.

Interpretation of Oscillators

While there are many different ways to construct momentum
oscillators, the actual interpretation differs very little from one
technique to another. Most oscillators look very much alike. They
are plotted along the bottom of the price chart and resemble a flat
horizontal band. The oscillator band is basically flat while prices

