
TRADING AS A BUSINESS
Trading is a business and should be approached as such. There are costs
associated with learning to trade and with actual trading. An individual
should carefully look at this before venturing into trading.
Taking a business approach and doing some planning in this area will
help you evaluate the associated costs. We take a look in this section at
some of the costs that are associated with trading. We also look at extending the trading plan to incorporate an annual business plan for those
traders who are ready to move into that area.

Trading Education
Although there are exceptions, learning to trade at a level of profitability to
make a living will require a solid trading education and time. It can require

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Building a Trading Plan

9:34

Char Count=

181

a considerable amount of money to explore many types of trading methodologies before traders find one that suits their personality that they evolve
into their own unique trading style.
It would make sense for traders to formulate a plan around how they
want to approach their education in learning to trade. There are many ways
to explore learning different methods of trading, including:
Ĺ Live workshops and seminars.
Ĺ Trade shows.
Ĺ Books, magazines, and newspapers.
Ĺ Web sites.
Ĺ Live trading rooms.
Ĺ Mentoring and tutoring programs.
Ĺ Newsletters.
It is likely that over the course of a learning curve a beginning trader
will explore several of these categories in combination. The trader should
investigate each and evaluate the cost and possibly plan a budget around
this. For instance, the trader may decide to set aside $3,000 to $5,000 the
first year to use for expenses associated with a trading education. It could
be allocated to attending a live workshop or seminar, joining a live trading
room, studying books, and taking out magazine subscriptions. Each year
the education costs can be reevaluated based on where the trader is in the
learning curve and what education is needed at that point.
If the trader chooses to attend live trading events, there will most likely
be travel costs associated with those events that should also be taken into
consideration.
We are often asked, “How long will it take to learn to trade successfully?” This is not a question that can be answered with any specific time
frame. There are many variables to be considered, such as:
Ĺ The amount of time the trader can commit to learning, studying, and
practicing trading.
Ĺ How well the trader can outline and follow a trading plan.
Ĺ How much previous experience the trader may have; this can either
contribute to or take away from the learning curve if there are bad
habits that need to be broken and relearned.
Experience is one thing that cannot be taught. All elements and components of a proven solid trading methodology can be taught, but experience
must be gained by the individual trader. Traders who have time to experience markets and trading on a regular basis will absorb more experience
than a trader who has limited time. Additional planning a trader could do

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:34

182

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

is develop a time line to a goal and then plan the steps necessary to reach
that goal.
A word of caution here: Each step in the trading education is important and has a purpose and a place. Do not overlook the challenges and
rewards of taking each step. We have not yet come across any “fast road
to profits” system in trading; success will require hard work, perseverance,
and commitment on the trader’s part.

Software, Computer, and Office Costs
Traders must decide what charting program(s) to use that will best suit
their needs. There are many available, and attending trade shows can be an
excellent way to view them and evaluate their performance. This is another
area of expense that any trader must incur and plan for.
Along with a charting program, the trader must also evaluate computer
equipment and make sure to use an appropriate computer system with the
software. This can also add to the initial costs associated with trading. Here
is a list of items to evaluate and plan for as an expense of setting up a
trading business:
Ĺ Computer equipment.
Ĺ Monitors; multiple monitors may be necessary.
Ĺ Software program/programs.
Ĺ Data providers for charting packages.
Ĺ Brokerage/commission costs.
Ĺ Internet access.
Ĺ Telephone equipment.
Ĺ Copy machine.
Ĺ Fax machine.
Ĺ Office supplies.
Traders new to trading should investigate what it will cost them to run
their business on a monthly and annual basis. This will help them gauge
realistically how much they must clear each month/year to make a living in
the trading business.

Annual Business Plan
The end of each year is a time to prepare for the coming year with the
trading plan and a business plan. The trading plan can be reviewed from
the previous year and adjustments made for the coming year. The business
plan will encompass the basic trading plan.
Maybe there were some markets that were not successful, and traders
may reevaluate their approaches to those markets by looking at the

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Building a Trading Plan

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

183

internal data they collected throughout the year in their trading statistics.
An evaluation of the specific trade management of specific patterns may
reveal approaches that can be adjusted.
It is a time to take stock and prepare for the next year’s trading. The
trader can evaluate any changes to the basic approach and specific trade
management issues. Here are some things to evaluate and plan for on an
annual basis:
Ĺ Which markets will be traded in the coming year.
Ĺ A trading plan for each market.
Ĺ Time frames traded.
Ĺ A plan for incrementally adding on shares or contracts.
Ĺ Specific trading issues to study and improve or focus on (e.g., learning a new strategy, improving money management, trader psychology,
etc.).
Ĺ An outline of how the trader will stay on track and focused throughout
the year. This could encompass lifestyle changes or scheduled reviews
of the trading plan to evaluate whether the trader is staying on track.
Ĺ A mission statement for the coming year.
Ĺ A review of trading expenses for the past year and a forecast for the
coming year.
Ĺ Creation of goals and a plan on how to achieve those goals.
This process of trading does not have to be complicated or overwhelming and should be suited to the trader’s experience level. Involving yourself
in this area of trading will sharpen the focus and create a well-thought-out
road map of where and how to reach your goals as a trader.
Traders are continually in a state of uncertainty when involved in and
trading real-time markets. Even on occasions when the trader is very off
the track and not trading according to plan, the trading plan is a tool to get
back to developing good trading habits. Having a well-defined plan is a way
for traders to have some grounding and, in a sense, some security, in that
they can always refocus on the basics and move on from there.

DISASTER PLANS
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange has a slogan: “Where there is no such
thing as no such thing.” This sums up why you need to create some sort of
disaster plan. This part of the trading plan will entail thinking out as many
what-if scenarios as possible. If you encounter an extreme event that you
had not considered, then do the best you can based on the scenarios you
have thought of.

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

184

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

If you trade long enough, it is not a matter of if some type of disaster
will occur, but a matter of when some type of disaster will occur. These
times can either benefit the trader to an extreme or devastate the trader
to an extreme. With any luck, it may be a neutral outcome. Many of the
unexpected occurrences can be dealt with if the trader has thought ahead
and planned for these types of incidents.
Many types of professions train intensively for unexpected and rare
occurrences. Almost anyone in medical fields such as doctors, nurses, and
EMT personnel train for emergencies. Airline pilots and crews are mandated by the federal government to have specific annual hours of recurrent training to handle every imaginable type of unexpected event. Firefighters, police and specialized units of the police forces, as well as military personnel and all of those specialized forces train hour upon hour
to handle stressful on-the-job situations. The approach and reasoning are
really quite simple: If an individual has had the benefit of training, practicing and rehearsing through drills, then in a situation that is sudden
and likely to cause high stress, fear, or anxiety that individual will be
prepared to act. That is very important; trained individuals keep their
wits about them, do not panic, and are able to act under unexpected,
extreme stress.
It will be a great advantage to any trader to take some time to plan for
what-if situations. Unprepared traders have been known to have a “deer in
the headlights” response and literally freeze up both physically and mentally at the precise time they need to take action.
There is a syndrome that people can succumb to under extreme duress
known as “negative panic.” The person goes into a type of shock and is
not able to comprehend what is happening, does not realize there is an
emergency, and can even feel a sense of euphoria that nothing is wrong. It
is our brains’ way of protecting us at times when our systems go through
sudden and severe shocks.
Training yourself to think and act under excessive pressure is part of
trading. Traders take on uncertainty each day they trade and become accustomed to normal trading days and routines. It will be the skilled and
prepared trader who will be able to take action during rarer incidents of
extreme uncertainty.
Some types of unexpected events that have occurred in the past include the Federal Reserve raising or lowering interest rates without notice
during market hours. This can cause markets to move extremely fast and
can catch almost all market participants off guard. The bond and currency
markets can spike more than two full points in a matter of seconds in this
type of environment. A trader who is on the wrong side of that move and
did not use stop-loss protection will surely suffer serious losses as well as
psychological damage.

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Building a Trading Plan

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

185

The attack on the World Trade Center in New York City on September
11, 2001, is an example of an extreme outlier event that closed the markets
for several days. When the markets reopened on September 17, 2001, there
was a panicked sell-off for five days followed by a rally that lasted for several months. On reopening, the market gapped down almost 60 points in
the S&P 500 contract. It is easy to see that anyone who had been long on
the closing was met with large losses on the reopen. (See Figure 13.3.)
Unexpected news announcements, political events worldwide, terrorist actions, and technical meltdowns can all cause the most extreme sudden moves in the markets. Markets do not like uncertainty and will react
violently at times with extreme cases of uncertainty.
One very important trading rule to follow that will help to minimize
damage done by events that are beyond your control is: Never violate
money management rules in position sizing or use of stop-loss orders. In
rare market moves caused by unexpected events, it is quite probable that
your stop-loss order will be filled at a worse price. This is something that is
unavoidable and can and will happen. The best thing to do is to be thankful
you indeed had a stop-loss order, brush yourself off, and keep going.
On the other side of the coin, if you happen to find yourself on the
right side of one of these sudden moves, consider it a gift and take it. These

Figure 13.3 S&P 500 daily chart. The markets closed on September 11, 2001,
and reopened on September 17 with a gap-down open of 60 points in the S&P 500.

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

186

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

moves can reverse as quickly as they originated, and if you find you have a
windfall profit the best thing to do is to take it quickly.
Along with these types of rare occurrences, the trader can plan for
other types of potential disasters. These items involve some thought and
planning ahead of time, but if and when they occur it will be well worth the
additional time spent. We list some of the more common types of things
that can play havoc with a trading day:
Ĺ Power outages. It is good to make sure your cell phone is charged at
all times in case you need to call in orders during a power outage. Telephones and Internet services can frequently go out with electrical outages. It is a good policy if day trading to close out any open positions if
they cannot be properly managed. Some traders have wireless connections on laptop computers and can utilize those during a power outage.
Ĺ Computer crashes. Know in advance what your plan is if you cannot
manage open positions and do not have access to data in the event of
your computer crashing. Technology is not perfect, and it will fail at
the most inopportune time.
Ĺ Order entry errors. Occasionally traders will incorrectly enter the
wrong number of shares of contracts for an order. It is not wise if the
order is beyond your money management plan to try to gain a profit.
Remember, you can gain a larger loss just as easily. Close out the excess number of shares or contracts immediately, and go on with the
trade as planned.
Ĺ Entering incorrect buy or sell orders. Another form of an order entry
error is when a trader enters a buy order instead of a sell order. It is
a very good habit to get into to check what any open position is upon
any order being filled. There are many stories of traders who at the end
of the day thought they had a profit from their trades only to find out it
was a loss because the orders were entered incorrectly and no check
of positions was done.
Ĺ Incorrect information on a statement. Keep good trading records. Occasionally it will happen that something shows up in your account that
you neither bought nor sold. Usually a call to the broker will resolve
this. It is imperative that traders keep good daily records, including
order numbers for each fill. It does not take much time to jot down an
order number, and it is usually the first thing a trading desk will ask for.
Before closing the trading platform each day, the trader should meticulously check to make sure any open orders are correct and that the
profit/loss for the day matches the trader’s records. This in itself will
eliminate many difficulties in resolving errors.
Ĺ Unexpected news announcements/exchange closures. An exchange
closing suddenly happens occasionally and can be due to technical

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Building a Trading Plan

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

187

problems at the exchange or to world events as we saw on September
11, 2001. Occasionally, unexpected news announcements will severely
move a market. It has happened in the past that any orders in a market
at a particular exchange have been canceled. It is possible to hedge
the position by using another instrument at another exchange. As an
example, traders who are open a short position in the S&P E-mini market could go long the Dow futures. At times like these the phone lines
at brokers and trading desks will be very hectic, and it may be difficult
to get through. If it is not possible to hedge the position and the market
reopens at a disadvantage, get out as gracefully as you can and move
on. Remember, these are rare occurrences that you have no control
over, and you do the best you can.
Ĺ Large gap openings. If you hold positions overnight, sooner or later
you will have a market open beyond your stop-loss on a gap opening.
Gap openings happen when there is an imbalance of buyers and sellers
and can occur when some type of news item comes out overnight that
impacts that market or stock. If this happens, it can be handled by
waiting about 20 minutes after the open of that market. If the price
then moves in your favor, place a stop-loss order at the high or low. If
the price continues to move in your favor, you can either trail the stop
or exit around your original stop-loss order if the price reaches it. If the
gap was in your favor, it is wise to take at least part of the windfall and
adjust the stop. Many times news announcements that move a market
suddenly will reverse, and you do not want to be in a position to give
back profits. If the price then continues at a loss, you will be stopped
out at the high or low at which you placed the stop-loss order.
Ĺ High levels of stress or distractions. Each trader has a different tolerance for stress and distractions. There will be times in each person’s
life that an unusual amount of stress or outside distractions will make
it difficult to trade efficiently. Some types of stresses that fit into this
are divorce or relationship problems, death of a loved one, and illness.
Once again, take some time to plan ahead with regard to what actions
are best to take, such as stopping or limiting trading until some balance is restored. It is very easy to lose money trading during times of
excessive stress, and most often taking a break is the best solution.

SUMMARY
Trading is a process of constant refinements and adjustments. Taking time
to outline each part of an overall trading plan will allow traders to make
adjustments as they move forward in their trading.

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

188

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

The actual daily trading plan can be adjusted as a trader sees shifts in
market conditions. Changes with trade management can be made as the
trader becomes more experienced or when conditions warrant. In the long
term, this will help to increase profits and reduce losses when necessary.
Without any type of daily trading plan, it will be almost impossible for a
trader to determine where areas are that need changing and improvement.
The time frame each trader works from will determine how often adjustments are made. It may be necessary to make adjustments and refinements
more frequently on shorter time frames versus longer time frames.
The business plan portion can be reviewed monthly, quarterly, or every
six months to evaluate whether the cost of the trading business is in line
with the plan. At these review points, traders can determine if they are
covering their costs. Any adjustments can be made to this that they deem
necessary. Commissions are a trading expense that traders may want to
evaluate as a cost of their business; they can shop for better commissions
or consult their broker for a lower commission if necessary.
As different scenarios arise that fit under the disaster plan category,
traders can make adjustments as to how to handle those situations. They
may experience a condition that they find an acceptable way of handling,
and should make a note of it for future reference. However, if a situation
arises that they are not prepared for and they need help with solutions,
they can ask other traders how they have handled a similar situation in
the past. It’s very helpful to communicate with other traders and find out
in advance ideas for handling the unexpected. Preparing and planning in
advance which actions to take in all aspects of trading will keep the trader
focused, able to take action, and as calm as possible during both normal
trading and the rare occasions when unexpected incidents occur.
There is no right or wrong way to format each of these segments of
the overall trading plan. Some traders prefer to write out each segment by
hand. Other traders prefer to use spreadsheets or a computer word processing program. It really makes no difference; the important thing is that
the trader considers each aspect as a serious and well-thought-out venture
and takes time to develop the trading plan.
Combining the three segments of an overall trading plan will
strengthen the trader’s confidence, increase trading skills, and help the
trader learn to operate trading as a business.

c14

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

10:26

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 14

Daily Routines

D

eveloping routines is an important part of trading preparation. Each
trader eventually develops his or her own unique routine. We can
think of routines as a checklist for trading. They give us an opportunity to review our past trades, prepare for upcoming trades, and adjust our
focus and mental attitude. Routines can balance us at times of uncertainty
in the markets and keep us in tune with our trading.
In this chapter we cover three areas that traders can use to develop
routines:
1. Trade preparation
2. Mental preparation
3. Physical preparation

There is no right or wrong way to develop a routine, and most traders
find their routines evolve as they evolve as traders.

TRADE PREPARATION
Everyone involved in the process of trading should strive to build good
habits. Weaving one strand a day of good habits will eventually build an
unbreakable cable. Someone who takes the time to prepare for trading is
much more likely to succeed than one who spends little or no time and
shows up just as the market is opening.
189

c14

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

190

10:26

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Trade preparation as a routine can be broken down into trade preparation before the market open, during market hours, and after the market
close. We will start with premarket preparation.

