
As in each of the succeeding years the general level of business
activities worsened relative to the year before, it was obvious what was
to happen to the flotsam and jetsam of small companies that went pub-
lic in the 1928 excitement. One after another of these companies passed
into bankruptcy, with many of the remainder reporting losses rather
than profits. The market for the shares of these firms largely dried up.

There were one or two companies in this group other than Food
Machinery that were fundamentally both sound and attractive. However,
the general public showed no discrimination whatsoever, considering all of
them little more than speculative junk. By the time the market was to reach
its final low in 1932, and again equal that low at the time of closing of the
entire banking system of the country coincidental with the inauguration
of Franklin D. Roosevelt on March 4, 1933, Food Machinery shares were
down to a price of between $4 and $5, with the all-time low being 100
shares at $3%.

FOOD MACHINERY AS AN
INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY

As 1931 unfolded and I cast about seeking an opportunity for my infant busi-
ness, | looked upon Food Machinery’s situation with increasing excitement.


240 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

Recognizing the costliness of my not having taken the trouble to meet
with and judge the managements of the two local companies in which
I had lost such a large percentage of my investment a few years before,
I determined never to make this mistake again. The more I got to know
the Food Machinery people, the greater my respect for them grew.
Because in many ways this company, as it existed in the depths of the
Great Depression, was a microcosm of the type of opportunity I was to
seek in the years ahead. It may be helpful to explain just what it was that
caused me nearly a half century ago to see such a future in this partic-
ular corporation.

Parenthetically and unfortunately, I did not carry my policy of in-
depth field analysis through to its logical conclusion in the immediate
years. I was less diligent in getting to know and to judge managements
that were located in more distant areas.

In the first place, even though Food Machinery was relatively stall,
it was a world leader in size and, I believe, in quality of the product line
in each of the three activities in which it was engaged. This gave the
firm the advantage of scale; that is, as a large and efficient manufacturer
the firm could also be a low-cost producer.

Next, its marketing position was, from a competitive standpoint,
extremely strong. Its products were highly regarded by its customers. It
controlled its own sales organization. Furthermore, its canning machin-
ery lines, with a large number of installations already in the field, had a
“locked up” market of some proportions. This consisted of spare and
replacement parts for the equipment already in the field.

Added to this sound base was the most exciting part of the business.
For a company of its size, the firm enjoyed a superbly creative engi-
neering or research department. The company was perfecting equip-
ment in promising new product areas. Among these were the first
mechanical pear peeler ever to be offered to the industry, the first
mechanical peach pitter, and a process for synthetically coloring
oranges. Oranges from areas which produced fruit with the most juice
was at a competitive disadvantage because the product looked less
attractive to the housewife than other types in which intrinsic quality
was no better. At only one other time in my business life have I seen a
company which, in my judgment, had on the horizon as big a dollar
volume of potentially successful new products in relation to the then
existing size of business as was the case with the Food Machinery
Corporation in the period from 1932 through 1934.


Learning from Experience 24]

By this time, I had learned enough to know that, no matter how
attractive, such matters by themselves were not sufficient to assure great
success. The quality of the people involved in the company was just as
critical. I use the word quality to encompass two quite different charac-
teristics. One of these is business ability. Business ability can be further
broken down into two very different types of skills. One of these is han-
dling the day-to-day tasks of business with above-average efficiency. In
the day-to-day tasks, I include a hundred and one matters, varying all
the way from constantly seeking and finding better ways to produce
more efficiently to watching receivables with sufficient closeness. In
other words, operating skill implies above-average handling of the many
things that have to do with the near-term operation of the business.

However, in the business world, top-notch managerial ability also
calls for another skill that is quite different. This is the ability to look
ahead and make long-range plans that will produce significant future
growth for the business without at the same time running financial risks
that may invite disaster. Many companies contain managements that are
very good at one or the other of these skills. However, for real success,
both are necessary.

Business ability is only one of the two “people” traits that I believe
is absolutely essential for a truly worthwhile investment. The other falls
under the general term of integrity and encompasses both the honesty
and the personal decency of those who are running a company. Anyone
receiving his first indoctrination into the investment world in the period
that preceded the 1929 crash would have seen rather vivid examples of
the extreme importance of integrity. The owners and managers of a busi-
ness are always closer to that business’s affairs than are the stockholders.
If the managers do not have a genuine sense of trusteeship for the stock-
holders, sooner or later the stockholders may fail to receive a significant
part of what is justly due them. Managers preoccupied by their own per-
sonal interests are not likely to develop an enthusiastic team of loyal peo-
ple around them—something that is an absolute must if a business is to
grow to a size that one or two people can no longer control.

As I saw the situation in those dark days of the deep depression, and
as I see it now after all these years, this infant Food Machinery Corpo-
ration was unusually attractive from the “people” standpoint. John D.
Crummey, the president and son-in-law of the original founder of the
John Bean Manufacturing Co., was not only an extremely efficient

operating head and highly regarded by his customers and his employees,


242 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

but also he was a deeply religious man who scrupulously lived up to a
high moral code. The chief engineer of the company was a brilliant
conceptual designer. Also of considerable importance, he was a man
who designed along lines that would give his products worthwhile
patent protection. Finally, to round out the strength of this relatively
small organization, John Crummey persuaded his son-in-law, Paul L.
Davies, who was reluctant to abandon what appeared to be a most
promising career in banking, to join the company to give it financial
strength and conservatism. Actually, Paul Davies at first made this move
so reluctantly that he only agreed to take a one-year leave of absence
from the bank to help his family business over the first rough year of
merger. During that year, he became so interested in the exciting
prospects that lay ahead that he decided to stay permanently with the
company. Later, as its president, he was to lead it to a size and degree of
prosperity that was to dwarf the pleasing accomplishments of the next
few years.

This then was a company that inherently had desirable characteristics
that are only occasionally found among available investments. The people
were outstanding. Yet, small as the company was, it was not just one man
who was making kcy contributions. In relation to competitors, the com-
pany was unusually strong, it was handling its business well, and it had in
the offing enough new product lines with potentials that were large in
relation to the then size of the company. Even if some of these products
did not materialize, the future should be very bright with others.

ZIGGING AND ZAGGING

However, to all this should be added something of equal importance if
an investment is to prove a genuine bonanza. The largest profits in the
investment field go to those who are capable of correctly zigging when
the financial community is zagging. If the future of the Food Machin-
ery Corporation had been properly appraised at that time, the profits
that were to accrue to those who bought the shares in the 1932-1934
period would have been very much smaller. It was only because the true
worth of this company was not generally recognized and Food Machin-
ery was thought to be just another of the many “flaky” companies
which were sold to the public at the height of a speculative orgy that it
was possible to buy these shares in quantity at the ridiculous price to


Learning from Experience 243

which they had sunk. This matter of training oneself not to go with the
crowd but to be able to zig when the crowd zags, in my opinion, is one
of the most important fundamentals of investment success.

I wish I had the command of English to be able to describe ade-
quately the degree of my internal, emotional and intellectual excitement
as I contemplated what this as yet financially unrecognized Food
Machinery Corporation might do for both my tiny personal finances
and for the infant business I was attempting to get started. My timing
seemed right. Like a spring that had been compressed too far and was
starting to recoil, the years from 1933 to 1937 were to see stocks as a
whole advancing slowly at first, and then bursting into a full bloom bull
market, followed by a sizable break in 1938 and a full recovery the fol-
lowing year. With a deep conviction that Food Machinery would vast-
ly outperform the market as a whole, I bought my clients every share
that I was able to convince them to hold. I made the possibilities of this
business the spearhead of my approach in talking to any potential clients
I could reach. | felt that here was just the type of unique, almost once
in a lifetime, opportunity that Shakespeare so well described when he
said, “There is a tide in the affairs of men which, taken at the flood, leads
on to fortune.” In those exciting years when my hopes were high and
both my purse and reputation in the financial community were almost
non-existent, I quoted those exciting words to myself time and time
again to stiffen my determination.

CONTRARY, BUT CORRECT

Much has been written in the literature of investments on the impor-
tance of contrary opinion. Contrary opinion, however, is not enough. I
have seen investment people so imbued with the need to go contrary to
the general trend of thought that they completely overlook the corol-
lary of all this which is: when you do go contrary to the general trend
of investment thinking, you must be very, very sure that you are right.
For example, as it became obvious that the automobile was largely to
displace the streetcar and the shares of the once favored urban railways
began to sell at ever lower price-earnings ratios, it would have been a
rather costly thing just to be contrary and buy streetcar securities only
on the grounds that because everyone thought they were in a declining
stage, they must be attractive. Huge profits are frequently available to


244 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

those who zig when most of the financial community is zagging, pro-
viding they have strong indications that they are right in their zigging.

If a quotation from Shakespeare was a vital force in formulating my
policies on the matter, so also, strangely enough, was a popular song
from World War 1. As one of the very thinning ranks of those who can
still remember how the home front reacted in the stirring days of 1918,
I might point out that in its excitement and enthusiasm for that war the
American public had a naivete then quite different from its grimness
about such matters in World War II, when the horrors of war were more
clearly understood. Firsthand news of the casualties and the filth and the
terror of those in the front lines had not yet permeated the continental
United States in 1918. As a result, the popular music of the day was
filled with cheerful and humorous war songs in a way that happened on
a much smaller scale in World War H, and not at all during the Vietnam
fiasco. Most of these songs came out in the form of sheet music for
pianos. One of these songs, published with a picture of a proud mama
looking down on parading soldiers, had the title, “They’re All Out of
Step But Jim.”

I recognized from the very first that I was running a distinct risk of
being “out of step.” My very early purchases of Food Machinery and a
number of other companies were bought “out of phase,” when their
intrinsic merit was completely unrecognized by the financial commu-
nity. I might be completely wrong in my thinking and the financial
community could be right. If so, nothing would be worse for my clients
or myself than letting my firm convictions about a particular situation
lock up a sizable amount of funds unprofitably for an endless period of
years because I zigged when the financial community had zagged, and
I had been wrong in doing so.

However, while I realized thoroughly that if I were to make the
kinds of profits that are made possible by the process that I have
described as zigging when the rest zags, it was vital that I have some sort
of quantitative check to be sure that I was right in zigging.

PATIENCE AND PERFORMANCE

With this in mind, I established what I called my three-year rule. | have
repeated again and again to my clients that when I purchase something
for them, not to judge the results in a matter of a month or a year, but


Learning from Experience 245

to allow me a three-year period. If I have not produced worthwhile
results for them in that time, they should fire me. Whether I have been
successful in the first year or unsuccessful can be as much a matter of
luck as anything else. In my management of individual stocks over all
these years I have followed the same rule, only once having made an
exception. If I have a deep conviction about a stock that has not per-
formed by the end of three years, I will sell it. If this same stock has per-
formed worse rather than better than the market for a year or two, I
won't like it. However, assuming that nothing has happened to change
my original view of the company, I will continue to hold it for three
years.

In the second half of 1955, I bought a substantial number of shares
in two companies in which I had never previously invested. They proved
to be almost a classic example of the advantages and problems of invest-
ing contrary to the currently accepted view of the financial community.
Looking back, 1955 could be considered the beginning of a period of
almost fifteen years that might be termed the “first Golden Age of elec-
tronic stocks.” 1 am using the adjective “first” so that there can be no
confusion in anyone’s mind with what I believe will be considered the
Golden Age for semiconductor stocks, something which I suspect lies
ahead of us and will be associated with the 1980's. At any rate, in 1955
and immediately thereafter, the financial community was about to be
dazzled by a whole series of electronic companies which were to show
gains that by 1969 had reached truly spectacular proportions. IBM,Texas
Instruments, Varian, Litton Industries and Ampex are a few that come to
mind, However, in 1955, all of that lay ahead. At that time, with the
exception of IBM, all these stocks were considered highly speculative
and beneath the notice of conservative investors or big institutions.
However, sensing part of what might lie ahead, I acquired what for me
were rather sizable positions in both ‘Texas Instruments and Motorola
during the latter parts of 1955.

Today Texas Instruments is the largest world-wide producer of
semiconductors, with Motorola running a close second. At that time,
Motorola’s position in the semiconductor industry was insignificant. It
was no factor at all in causing me to buy the shares. Rather, I became
impressed both with the people and with Motorola’s dominant posi-
tion in the mobile communications business, where an enormous
potential seemed to lie; whereas the financial community was valuing
it as just another television and radio producer. Motorola’s subsequent


246 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

rise in the semiconductor area, resulting at least in part from their
acquiring the services of Dr. Daniel Noble, was all to come later and
was additional icing on the cake not anticipated by me at the time of
purchase. In the case of Texas Instruments, aside from an equally great
liking and respect tor the people,,] was influenced by a quite different
set of beliefs. I saw, as did others, a tremendous future that could be
built out of their transistor business as the complexities of semicon-
ductors were yielding to human ingenuity. I felt that those were peo-
ple who could compete on at least even terms, and probably better than
even terms, with General Electric, RCA, Westinghouse, and other giant
companies despite the opinion of much of Wall Street. A number of
people criticized me for risking funds in a small “speculative company”
which they felt was bound to suffer from the competition of the cor-
porate giants.

After buying these shares, the near-term results in the stock market
were quite different. Within a year, Texas Instruments had increased in
value quite handsomely. Motorola fluctuated in a range from 5 percent
to 10 percent below my cost of purchase. It performed sufficiently
poorly that one of my major clients became so irritated by its market
action that he refused to call Motorola by name. He only referred to it
as “that turkey which you bought me.” These unsatisfactory quota-
tions were to continue for moderately over a year. Yet as awareness of
the investment significance of the communications arm of Motorola
was to seep into the consciousness of the financial community, togeth-
er with the first signs of a turnabout in the semiconductor area, the
stock then became a rather spectacular performer.

While I was buying Motorola, I was doing so in conjunction with
a large insurance company that had let the Motorola management
know that they were also interested in the conclusions of my first visit.
Shortly after the insurance company too had bought a significant
amount of Motorola stock, they submitted their entire portfolio to a
New York bank for appraisal. With the exception of Motorola, the bank
divided their portfolio into three groups: most attractive, less attractive,
and least attractive. They refused to place Motorola in any category,
however, saying this was not the type of company on which they spent
time; therefore they had no opinion about it. Yet one of the officials of
the insurance company told me over three years later that in the face
of this rather negative Wall Street view, Motorola had by that time
outperformed every other stock in their portfolio! If I had not had my


Learning from Experience 247

“three-year rule,” | might have been less firm in holding my own
Motorola intact through a period of poor market action and of some
client criticism.

TO EVERY RULE, THERE ARE EXCEPTIONS...
BUT NOT MANY

Have I ever sold stock because of this three-year rule and then later
wished I had not made this sale because of a subsequent major rise in
the stock? Actually, there have only been a relatively small number of
times when I have made a sale triggered by this three-year rule and
nothing else. This is not because there have been so few times that pur-
chases made by me have failed to provide the major rise which was my
purpose in initiating them. In the majority of such cases, further
insights about the company opened up as I continued to investigate
additional aspects of the situation, and these insights caused me to
change my views about it. However, in those relatively few cases where
it was the three-year rule and only that which caused me to sell, f can-
not recall a single case where subsequent market action caused me to
wish I had held on to the shares.

Have I ever violated my own three-year rule? The answer is yes,
exactly once, and this was many years later, toward the middle of the
1970's. Three years before, I had acquired a moderately substantial
block of shares in the Rogers Corporation. Rogers had expertise in
certain areas of polymer chemistry, and I believed they were on the
way to developing various semiproprietary families of products
which would show quite dramatic increase in sales and not just for a
year or two, but for many years. Yet, at the end of three years the stock
was down, and so were the earnings of the company. Several influ-
ences were at work, however, which made me feel this was one time
to ignore my own standards and to make this “the exception that
proves the rule.” One of these influences was my strong feeling about
Norman Greenman, the company’s president. I was convinced he had
unusual ability, the determination to see these matters through, as
well as something else which I consider of great value to an intelli-
gent investor: the kind of honesty that caused him not to conceal
repeated bad news that could not fail but be embarrassing for him to
tell. He saw to it that those interested in his company understood all


248 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

the unfavorable aspects of what was happening, as well as the favor-
able potentials.

There was another element which influenced me greatly: a major
reason the conypany’s profits were so poor was that Rogers was spend-
ing a quite disproportionate amount of money on a single new product
development seeming to offer prospects of great results. This was divert-
ing both money and people from other potentially exciting new prod-
ucts which were getting less corporate effort. New products of this type
do have magnificent potential. When the painful decision was made to
abandon all the effort on this one particular product, it was not long
before it became quite apparent that several other innovations of great
promise were starting to flower. All this, however, took time. In the
meanwhile, the company’s failure to live up to the hopes of many of
those who had bought the shares caused the stock to drop to levels that
were absurd in relation to its sales, its assets, or any type of normal earn-
ing power. Here seemed a classic example of zigging when the financial
community was zagging. Therefore, three-year rule or no, I sizably fur-
ther increased my holdings and those of my clients, even though a few
of those clients, influenced by the years of waiting and the negative per-
formance, looked at this with a degree of apprehension. As so often hap-
pens in situations of this sort, when the turn came, it came fast. As it
became apparent that the betterment of earnings was not a one- or two-
year matter, but gave strong indications of being but the basis for years
of genuine growth, the stock continued to rise proportionately.
