
CHAPTER 5

Managing the
Risks when Trend
Following
T

he only certainty in trend following is uncertainty. Due to this constant uncertainty it is imperative to manage the risks. We are surrounded by risks. Successful trend followers know that we do not know the future. Given the fact that we are
dealing in uncertainty, we have no choice but to be extremely adamant in our risk and
money management approach.
Larry Hite, a famous successful trend follower from the 1980s, put it very simply:
Trend followers make bets when they trade. If you lose all of your chips, you can’t bet!
In other words, you are out of business!
Many successful hedge funds teach their interns how to play poker. I invested in
Green Light Hedge Fund with David Einhorn many years ago via a fund of funds that
I was involved with. I was fortunate to meet David and learned another one of his
talents besides trading was poker playing. David is not a gambler; however, he would
make low‐risk bets both in his trading and when he played poker. In 2006, Einhorn
finished 18th in the World Series of Poker main event. Contrary to what some say,
successful trend followers are risk adverse.
Trend followers are not cowboys. Every aspect of their trade is calculated with a
well‐thought‐out exact plan. There is no second guessing. Every possibly outcome has
been taken into account.

81

■ Risk of Ruin

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

82

The concept of risk of ruin tackles the issue regarding how much of your trading capital you may lose. You cannot recover from this drawdown or trade your way out. The
size of your position is arguably one of the most critical elements of your success as a
trader. Sound money management lets you survive the bad periods and gives you the
potential to profit in the long run over time. There isn’t a set‐in‐stone rule for position
sizes even though I stress 1 percent. A lot of personal issues, such as the size of your
account, your risk tolerance, and your experience, should all factor into how big a
bet you should make. That said, risk of ruin or the possibility that you’ll blow up your
trading account when you encounter the inevitable rough patch increases dramatically
when you increase your risk per trade. The risk of ruin does increase substantially as
your risk per trade approaches 2 percent or less of your portfolio size. There is no
perfect or ideal portfolio other than one that fits your personality and account size.
You need to develop a portfolio in which you have funded adequately. If you trade too
large for your account, you stand the distinct chance of ruin or blowing up. This is the
worst case and on a lesser level you will experience deep drawdowns and swings in
your portfolio. These wild swings can surely stop you from continuing to trade. This
prevents you from building your equity curve and compounding money over time.
Conversely, if you trade too small, you miss the opportunities the market can offer
you. One needs to have a portfolio of markets and be diversified. As one market zigs
another can zag. There are long periods when markets do not trend. When you trade a
portfolio of markets you open your possibilities of not just trades but also success. The
most practical aspect needs to be introspection of your account size. The more money
you have in your accounts, the more markets you can trade. Clearly the less money
you have in your account, the fewer markets you might/should want to consider or
trade. In order to assist traders the exchanges have created mini contracts. Do not let
the word mini mislead you.You make a mistake on one of these, and you can seriously
hurt your trading account.
Those futures contracts are called minis. You have Mini S&P 500 and Mini NASDAQ versions of the larger size. The tick value of the E‐Mini version of the S&P 500
contract is $12.50 a tick versus $25.00 on the full size. There exist mini contracts
on the currencies such as the Mini Yen. The Mini Yen tick value is $6.25 versus the
full size contract of $12.50.
There exists the direct possibility of encountering a series of consecutive trades
that do not work and being forced to stop trading. Think of risk of ruin as bites out
of an apple. If you are risking 1 percent of your account on a trade, you get to have
100 bites out of the apple. You can quickly fathom the possibility of having 100
trades in a row not working and losing money (not overly likely). If you are risking
2 percent of your account, you get 50 bites of the apple. Think about the possibility
of having 50 trades in a row not working

R = e ^ (–2 * a/d)
Where: R = risk of losing one standard deviation
e = 2.71828, the base of the natural logarithm
a = average, or mean return
d = standard deviation of returns
You can play with the numbers, but the reality is that if you risk more than 1 percent on any trade, you will surly encounter pain in your trading account at some point.
I have seen traders lose 10 percent in a couple of days without proper risk management. My day is filled with speaking with traders as well as testing trading ideas. I even
heard a story of how a professional trader lost 50 percent of his account over a period
of several short days. He was an ex–mutual fund manager and during the volatility in
2008, he froze. He did not follow his plan. Even with all of his experience he did not
accept the risk and felt the market would come back.

83
MANAGING THE RISKS WHEN TREND FOLLOWING

Continuing our thought process, if you risk 3 percent of your account on any trade,
you get approximately 33 bites out of the apple. If you risk 5 percent, you get 20 bites
out of the apple, or 20 trades in a row not working. One last example: If you are risking 10 percent of your account, you only get 10 bites out of the apple. I can promise I
have had close to 10 trades in a row not work over the years. Basically you risked too
much and your trading account is ruined. The concept of risk of ruin accentuates the
reason why I suggest you take approximately 1 percent risk per trade.
The actual calculation takes into account the probability of winning, the probability of incurring losses, and the percentage of an account at risk. I know I oversimplified my apple idea, but I am sure you get the point. You need to believe that
anything can happen. There is a six sigma event out there that can prevent you from
continuing to trade. I vividly remember the stock market crash in 1987. More than
just the stock market, I remember the move in eurodollars. Believe that anything
can happen. I have been trading since 1994 and have executed over the years a large
number of trades. Over this period of time I have personally seen long losing periods (much longer than I would have liked). The longer you expose yourself to trading, as I have, the more likely you will see these events, and they are not unexpected.
If you trade frequently, it is really only a matter of time before you experience a
run of four, five, or even more losers in a row. Consider that this can be not just
losing trades but also losing weeks or even months.You need to be able emotionally,
psychologically, and financially to get through these inevitable periods. You can’t be
so overleveraged that a normal statistical run of losers ruins your account. Many
traders talk about maximum drawdown, as if there is a maximum limit. Your worst
drawdown is always ahead of you.
Following is the math formula of risk of ruin:

■ The Exact Elements of Risk Management

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

84

The elements of risk management relate to one of the most important topics in trading: stop‐loss orders. A stop‐loss order or money management stop is a protective stop
that needs to be placed immediately upon entry. There are those who think they are
comfortable with “mental stops.” However, in the thick of trading these “mental stops”
are not activated. I have heard the excuse that if I place my stop, traders on the floor
will run the stop. I find this an excuse for blaming. Blaming does not make you money
and the market does not care for excuses. In the heat of the moment the mental stop
order must be placed and I have seen traders freeze. They wait, they rationalize, and
they convince themselves with a myriad of reasons why not to take the trade. This is
one of the most common issues I have seen traders blow up. I do not think you want
to be one of the 90 percenters (failed traders). Just one bad trade can implode a trading account that took years to build. Mental stop‐loss orders are an accident waiting
to happen.
The only time I would agree that mental stops might be used is if a large number
of shares or contracts are purchased or sold. However, this is not reality for most
readers, and I strongly suggest once your orders are filled you put in your protective
stop. The stop loss is a protective stop you have placed in the market if your open
trades reaches or exceeds this stop level. The stop-loss order’s purpose is to protect
you against large losses. It is prudent to take a small loss. The stop loss is only an
attempt to mitigate a loss to a preset amount. However, in the real world there exist gaps and limit days, which can and will exceed your stop‐loss order. There are
absolutely no guarantees with stop‐loss orders. Large losses can be detrimental to
both one’s financial account as well as emotional makeup.
I promise you there will be many times your stop losses are hit and the market
completely turns around again. This is reality. The only way to avoid situations like this
is not to trade. If you get stopped out, you need the mental fortitude to put the trade
back on if you get a signal. If you don’t put the trade back on, you will feel terrible if
this trade becomes the trade of the year.You need to be consistent and accept the risks
and that you will have countless losses.
Worse than trying to put in mental stops, there are traders who believe they do not
need to use stops at all. This is the scariest of all. These nonstop traders believe they
have a winning strategy or system. If they have a winning technique, why would they
bother? These nonstop traders soon wake up after a devastating loss in which they let
a small loss compound into a nightmare.

Risk per Trade
Risk management starts on the trade level. Too many traders and even experienced
traders miss the point on how much to risk on a trade. They think in terms of risk

management via a fixed dollar amount or based on their overconfidence of a trade succeeding. Neither of these are traits of successful trend followers.
The greater the confidence, the bigger the risk they are willing to
take. A recent example is John Paulson. He made huge bets in regard to the housing crisis
and benefited substantially. Paulson made billions of dollars. However, in 2011 his huge
bets worked against him and he encountered a drawdown close to the 50 percent range.
As in the example with John Paulson, this way of thinking can lead one to failure or
big drawdowns. Successful trend followers have internalized that any trade is 50/50
and has no guarantee of success.

Overconfidence

The idea of having a fixed dollar amount per trade would
be saying you are willing to risk a fixed $1,000 per trade.The mistake traders make when
they risk a fixed dollar amount per trade is that there will be times they will benefit less
or even lose more when risking a fixed dollar amount per trade due to lack of position
sizing.This is wrong.There are times when you might be able to put on a greater position
due to a low‐risk trade. At times when these trades work even greater returns can be
generated due to position size. Position sizing will be further discussed shortly.
Successful trend followers are methodical. Very little is left to their personal opinions. Therefore considering this, successful trend followers risk the same amount percentage risk on every trade.
Consistency is achieved when trading with an exact plan.
Position sizing is one of the key components in successful trend following.
Exactly how much to buy or sell is based on the dollar size of the trading account and
the volatility of the issue.The volatility is the dollar risk from entry signal to the initial hard
stop exit in case the trade does not work. (Further on I will discuss how to determine the
hard stop.)
The concept of position sizing is shown in the following examples.
You have an entry signal of Buy of share XYZ at $20.00.Your worst‐case exit signal
or hard stop protection is $17.00; you are risking $3.00 to see if the trade works. If
you have a $100,000 account size and you are willing to risk 1 percent or $1,000, you
can put on approximately 333 shares.You divide your 1 percent risk on your account
size or $1,000 divided by $3, which is 333 shares.
You have an entry signal of Buy of share ABC at $15.00. Your exit signal or hard
stop protection is $13.00; you are risking $2.00 to see if the trade works. If you have
a $100,000 account size and you are willing to risk 1 percent or $1,000, you can put
on approximately 500 shares. You divide your 1 percent risk on your account size or
$1,000 divided by $2, which is 500 shares.
As we have already discussed, any trade is 50/50; however, if share XYZ moves
$2.00 you can profit $666. Contrarily, if your share ABC moves that same $2.00,
you make $1,000. This is what can make trend followers who think in terms of
Fixed‐Dollar‐Amount Risk

85
MANAGING THE RISKS WHEN TREND FOLLOWING

position sizing much more successful than others. The goal of position sizing is
to attempt to limit drawdowns and prevent them from becoming so large that it
causes you to stop trading. You need to be both financially and mentally prepared
for the magnitude of drawdowns you are likely to experience.Your greatest drawdown is always ahead of you, not behind your portfolio.
You have an entry signal of Buy of share XYZ at $20.00.Your exit signal or hard stop protection is $17.00;
you are risking $3.00 to see if the trade works. If you have a $100,000 account size and
you are willing to risk 1 percent or $1,000, you can put on approximately 333 shares.
The difference on percentage risk per trade is increased if you are willing to risk
2 percent, and since you are risking $2,000 of your $100,000 account you can put
on 666 shares. If share XYZ moves $2 you profit $1,332 versus $666 on the same $2
move. However, you took on more risk (potential loss of $2,000), and taking larger
risk per trades can increase drawdowns dramatically.
As I have presented to you, most trades do not work with trend following, therefore
you are more apt to lose $2,000 versus the $1,000 initial risk. Deciding on how much
to risk per trade is a personal choice. Many times with new traders greed or a sense of
false security kicks in and they are more apt to risk more per trade. However, after going through drawdowns, this hubris subsides and they learn risking 1 percent can help
them achieve their goals of compounding money over time. There is a trading period
when if you go through a drawdown that is too steep, it can put you out of business.
This is the essence of position sizing and seeking low‐risk trades.
One needs to determine one’s personal comfort level with risk per trade percentage. The bigger the risk per trade percentage, the greater potential returns; however,
there will be bigger drawdowns.
The problem with drawdowns is there is a drawdown out there that
can stop your trading.
I have seen traders take on too much risk, enter a severe drawdown, and stop
trading. I am personally less concerned about the return on investment and more concerned about how much risk I will have to tolerate to achieve my goals of reasonable
returns over time.
I personally risk .75 to 1.25 percent basis points versus my core equity (dollar account size not including open trade equity) on one of my managed account models,
and on my other managed account model I risk a maximum of 1.25 percent of my
total core equity size.
To quantify risk per trade, for example on a $100,000 account, on one model I am
only willing to risk $750 on a trade and on the other model a maximum risk of $1,250.
Core equity is the equity of all my closed positions and my cash positions. Core equity
does not include any open profits. If I were to include my open trade equity I would distort to the upside my true account balance and possibly take on more risk.

Changing the Percentage Risk Changes the Equation

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

86

That is it! I have and believe over time I will be able to continue to
generate reasonable returns only risking these amounts.
If there is more risk than the .75 percent of my core equity and 1.25
percent of my core equity, I pass on the trade.
I know that most of my trades will not work, therefore in order to try to mitigate
inherent drawdowns I simply pass on these trades. I have no fear of missing out or any
greed to think to chase a trade.
Big profits can be pulled out of the markets by taking low‐risk bets. Most traders do
not realize this, and that is why they overbet. It is the same mistake that traders make
thinking that they need a complicated system or methodology in order to make money.
In the upcoming section I will delineate exactly the entry signal and initial exit
signal. From the difference from these two attributes you will able to calculate your
exact risk per trade.
My simple proprietary robust ideas have the propensity over time to compound
money.

Risk per Sector
87
MANAGING THE RISKS WHEN TREND FOLLOWING

Earlier in my career I had no idea of sector correlation. Only through big drawdowns
and losses did I learn the importance of this rule. There is a statistical function of correlation called the correlation coefficient. Markets that trade exactly the same would
have a correlation of 1. Conversely, markets that trade completely the opposite would
have a correlation of –1. In today’s world it seems when we look at our charts on strong
directional days we see a preponderance of a sea of either green or red.This means even
many of the markets that we think are not correlated actually are correlated.
There are severe limitations with the correlation coefficient. It only looks at past
performance and the markets are always in flux. Actually I wrote an article for Futures
magazine demonstrating the fallacy of past correlations. Correlations change and what
occurred in the past is not written in stone. However, it would be fair to say that within a particular sector there are correlations. For example, when gold seems to start
trending it is not unreasonable to see silver start trending. Another example could be
easily found in the grain complex. When you see a move in soybeans, you might see
a run with corn and wheat. In the stock market correlations within sectors are also
prevalent. When the tech sector is strong, you can anticipate the majority of the shares
in that sector will move in unison. Contracts and shares all rise and fall together.When
you trade them all in the context and time and if you are long this is great. On the
other hand and in reality, you will find this to be the opposite and you are increasing
your risk. At times you may achieve nice profits, but in the context of risk control you
will expose your portfolio to increased volatility. There will be sharp swings both up
and down. At times these swings might be too great to handle. There is always a point
at which one goes through a drawdown that is too painful to continue. This is the

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

88

reason we must be aware of correlations in sectors. When I first began, I would get a
signal to buy or sell in the interest rate sector or the grain sector. I would buy five‐year
bonds, 10‐year bonds, 30‐year bonds, gilts, bunds, and name it. The same could occur
in the grains. I would buy soybeans, bean oil, bean meal, corn, and wheat.
What actually happened to me was there were times these trades worked well, but
when they didn’t it was a disaster. Even though I thought I was taking low‐risk trades
with small percentage risks of my account size, these trades were heavily correlated
and I was not taking a low‐risk bet.
I woke up some mornings and all of these trades went against me and I faced a
heavy draw‐down. What I learned from these incidents was to cap my sector risk.
Today part of my risk plan is that I will only allocate 5 percent of my total portfolio to
any sector. Any sector means any stock sector such as tech, retail, and so on, or in the
commodities interest rates, energies, grains, metals, and so forth. Putting it in clear
terms: If my total account size were $100,000, I would have the total number of positions not exceeding a risk of 5 percent or $5,000 in that particular sector.
Personally, I am not only concerned about the return on investment
but how much risk I will have to tolerate to achieve my goals.
Risk per sector is a personal issue. There are others who are comfortable taking
on more risk. They are willing to risk more per trade as well as risk more per sector
level. However, everything has a price. I might generate lower profits but I will have
fewer drawdowns. Contrarily there are those who will generate greater profits and
have greater drawdowns.
There is no free lunch when we trend follow.
Consider when you trade a diversified portfolio of 10‐year bonds, corn, Australian
dollars, and crude oil, it could be expected for them to be somewhat independent
of each other as opposed to just trading 10‐year bonds, five‐year bonds, and 30‐year
bonds. At times it would be expected that the diversified portfolio would have elements rising, some falling, and some actually doing nothing.When one of the elements
trends, it can offset the inevitable losses in the other elements and you smooth out
your equity curve. As I stated above there is no free lunch. All we are trying to do is
smooth out our equity curve and “trying” has a lot of limitations.
What I have seen firsthand is that when traders actually go through the drawdown
they are in shock and can’t handle the drawdown both financially and emotionally. This
is why I want to maintain a more stringent risk approach.

Overall Risk on the Portfolio
Another overlooked aspect of risk management is overall open trade risk on a portfolio.
The more open trade risk, the more potential for increased drawdowns. More so, your biggest drawdowns will probably be after one of your biggest run ups. For this reason when I
invest with other trend following money managers I will only try to buy their drawdowns.
I will not buy their highs and sell their lows like so many traders who do not have a plan.
