
[VoL 19:1

ways. The designated contributions policy is an example of that
intent.
Our new program enabling shareholders to designate the
recipients of corporate charitable contributions was greeted with
extraordinary enthusiasm. . .. Of 932,206 shares eligible for participation (shares where the name of the actual owner appeared on
our stockholder record), 95.6% responded. Even excluding Buffett-related shares, the response topped 90%.
In addition, more than 3 % of our shareholders voluntarily
wrote letters or notes, all but one approving of the program. Both
the level of participation and of commentary surpass any shareholder response we have witnessed, even when such response has
been intensively solicited by corporate staff and highly-paid professional proxy organizations. In contrast, your extraordinary level of
response occurred without even the nudge of a company-provided
return envelope. This self-propelled behavior speaks well for the
program, and speaks well for our shareholders.
Apparently the owners of our corporation like both possessing
and exercising the ability to determine where gifts of their funds
shall be made. The "father-knows-best" school of corporate governance will be surprised to find that none of our shareholders sent
in a designation sheet with instructions that the officers of Berkshire-in their superior wisdom, of course-make the decision on
charitable funds applicable to his shares. Nor did anyone suggest
that his share of our charitable funds be used to match contributions made by our corporate directors to charities of the directors'
choice (a popular, proliferating and non-publicized policy at many
large corporations).
All told, $1,783,655 of shareholder-designed contributions
were distributed to about 675 charities. In addition, Berkshire and
subsidiaries continue to make certain contributions pursuant to local level decisions made by our operating managers.
There will be some years, perhaps two or three out of ten,
when contributions by Berkshire will produce substandard tax deductions-or none at alL In those years we will not effect our
shareholder-designated charitable program. In all other years we
expect to inform you about October 10th of the amount per share
that you may designate. A reply form will accompany the notice,
and you will be given about three weeks to respond with your
designation....

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

51

Our only disappointment with this program in 1981 was that
some of our shareholders, through no fault of their own, missed the
opportunity to participate. The Treasury Department ruling allowing us to proceed without tax uncertainty was received early in
October. The ruling did not cover participation by shareholders
whose stock was registered in the name of nominees, such as brokers, and additionally required that the owners of all designating
shares make certain assurances to Berkshire. These assurances
could not be given us in effective form by nominee holders.
Under these circumstances, we attempted to communicate
with all of our owners promptly (via [an] October 14th letter) so
that, if they wished, they could prepare themselves to participate
by the November 13th record date. It was particularly important
that this information be communicated promptly to stockholders
whose holdings were in nominee name, since they would not be
eligible unless they took action to re-register their shares before
the record date.
Unfortunately, communication to such non-record shareholders could take place only through the nominees. We therefore
strongly urged those nominees, mostly brokerage houses, to
promptly transmit our letter to the real owners. We explained that
their failure to do so could deprive such owners of an important
benefit.
The results from our urging would not strengthen the case for
private ownership of the U.S. Postal Service. Many of our shareholders never heard from their brokers (as some shareholders told
us after reading news accounts of the program). Others were forwarded our letter too late for action.
One of the largest brokerage houses claiming to hold stock for
sixty of its clients (about 4% of our shareholder population), apparently transmitted our letter about three weeks after receipttoo late for any of the sixty of participate. (Such lassitude did not
pervade all departments of that firm; it billed Berkshire for mailing
services within six days of that belated and ineffectual action.)
We recite such horror stories for two reasons: (1) if you wish
to participate in future designated-contribution programs, be sure
to have your stock registered in your name well before September
30th; and (2) even if you don't care to participate and prefer to
leave your stock in nominee form, it would be wise to have at least
one share registered in your own name. By so doing, you can be
sure that you will be notified of any important corporate news at
the same time as all other shareholders.

52

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

The designated-contributions idea, along with many other
ideas that have turned out well for us, was conceived by Charlie
Munger, Vice Chairman of Berkshire and Chairman of Blue Chip.
Irrespective of titles, Charlie and I work as partners in managing
all controlled companies. To almost a sinful degree, we enjoy our
work as managing partners. And we enjoy having you as our financial partners.
In addition to the shareholder-designated contributions that
Berkshire distributes, managers of our operating businesses make
contributions, including merchandise, averaging [between $1.5 million and $2.5 million] annually. These contributions support local
charities, such as The United Way, and produce roughly commensurate benefits for our businesses.
However, neither our operating managers nor officers of the
parent company use Berkshire funds to make contributions to
broad national programs or charitable activities of special personal
interest to them, except to the extent they do so as shareholders. If
your employees, including your CEO, wish to give to their alma
maters or other institutions to which they feel a personal attachment, we believe they should use their own money, not yours.
Berkshire's practice in respect to discretionary philanthropyas contrasted to its policies regarding contributions that are clearly
related to the company's business activities-differs significantly
from that of other publicly-held corporations. There, most corporate contributions are made pursuant to the wishes of the CEO
(who often will be responding to social pressures), employees
(through matching gifts), or directors (through matching gifts or
requests they make of the CEO).
At Berkshire, we believe that the company's money is the
owners' money, just as it would be in a closely-held corporation,
partnership, or sole proprietorship. Therefore, if funds are to be
given to causes unrelated to Berkshire's business activities, it is the
charities favored by our owners that should receive them. We've
yet to find a CEO who believes he should personally fund the charities favored by his shareholders. Why, then, should they foot the
bill for his picks?
Let me add that our program is easy to administer. Last fall,
for two months, we borrowed one person from National Indemnity
to help us implement the instructions that came from our 7,500 registered shareholders. I'd guess that the average corporate program

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

53

in which employee gifts are matched incurs far greater administrative costs. Indeed, our entire corporate overhead is less than half
the size of our charitable contributions. (Charlie, however, insists that I
tell you that $1.4 million of our $4.9 million overhead is attributable to our corporate
jet, The Indefensible.)11

Below is a list showing the largest categories to which our
shareholders have steered their contributions.
(a) 347 churches and synagogues received 569 gifts
(b) 238 colleges and universities received 670 gifts
(c) 244 K-12 schools (about two-thirds secular, one-third religious) received 525 gifts
(d) 288 institutions dedicated to art, culture or the humanities
received 447 gifts
(e) 180 religious social-service organizations (split about
equally between Christian and Jewish) received 411 gifts
11 [Typesetting in original] [The 1986 letter contained the following:}
We bought a corporate jet last year. [Typesetting in original] What you have heard about such
planes is true: they are very expensive and a luxury in situations like ours where little travel
to out-of-the-way places is required. And planes not only cost a lot to operate, they cost a
lot just to look at. Pre-tax, cost of capital plus depreciation on a new $15 million plane
probably runs $3 million annually. On our own plane, bought for $850,000 used, such costs
run close to $200,000 annually.
Cognizant of such figures, your Chairman, unfortunately, has in the past made a
number of rather intemperate remarks about corporate jets. Accordingly, prior to our
purchase, I was forced into my Galileo mode. I promptly experienced the necessary
"counter-revelation" and travel is now considerably easier-and considerably costlierthan in the past. Whether Berkshire will get its money's worth from the plane is an open
question, but I will work at achieving some business triumph that I can (no matter how
dubiously) attribute to it. I'm afraid Ben Franklin had my number. Said he: "So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason
for everything one has a mind to do."
[The 1989 letter contained the following:]
Last summer we sold the corporate jet that we purchased for $850,000 three years ago
and bought another used jet for $6.7 million. [Noting an amusing anecdote of Carl Sagan
about obstacles that impede exponential growth of bacteria-referred to in the Epilogue
below, some readers] wiJI understandably panic: If our net worth continues to increase at
current rates, and the cost of replacing planes also continues to rise at the now-established
rate of 100% compounded annually, it will not be long before Berkshire's entire net worth
is consumed by its jet.
Charlie doesn't like it when I equate the jet with bacteria; he feels it's degrading to the
bacteria. His idea of traveling in style is an air-conditioned bus, a luxury he steps up to
only when bargain fairs are in effect. My own attitude toward the jet can be summarized
by the prayer attributed, apocryphally I'm sure, to St. Augustine as he contemplated leaving a life of secular pleasures to become a priest. Battling the conflict between intellect
and glands, he pled: "Help me, Oh Lord, to become chaste-but not yet."
Naming the plane has not been easy. I initially suggested "The Charles T. Munger."
Charlie countered with "The Aberration." We finally settled on "The Indefensible."

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

54

[Vol. 19:1

(f) 445 secular social-service organizations (about 40% youthrelated) received 759 gifts
(g) 153 hospitals received 261 gifts
(h) 186 health-related organizations (American Heart Association, American Cancer Society, etc.) received 320 gifts
Three things about this list seem particularly interesting to me.
First, to some degree it indicates what people choose to give money
to when they are acting of their own accord, free of pressure from
solicitors or emotional appeals from charities. Second, the contributions programs of publicly-held companies almost never allow
gifts to churches and synagogues, yet clearly these institutions are
what many shareholders would like to support. Third, the gifts
made by our shareholders display conflicting philosophies: 130 gifts
were directed to organizations that believe in making abortions
readily available for women and 30 gifts were directed to organizations (other than churches) that discourage or are opposed to
abortion.
Last year I told you that I was thinking of raising the amount
that Berkshire shareholders can give under our designated-contributions program and asked for your comments. We received a few
well-written letters opposing the entire idea, on the grounds that it
was our job to run the business and not our job to force shareholders into making charitable gifts. Most of the shareholders responding, however, noted the tax efficiency of the plan and urged us to
increase the designated amount. Several shareholders who have
given stock to their children or grandchildren told me that they
consider the program a particularly good way to get youngsters
thinking at an early age about the subject of giving. These people,
in other words, perceive the program to be an educational, as well
as philanthropic, tool. The bottom line is that we did raise the
amount in 1993, from $8 per share to $10. 12
E.

A Principled Approach to Executive Pay 13

When returns on capital are ordinary, an earn-more-by-putting-up-more record is no great managerial achievement. You can
12 [Each annual letter states the approximate percentage of eligible shares that participated in the shareholder-designated contributions program, the dollar amount of the contributions, and the number of recipients. Since 1988, the percentage of shares has always
exceeded 95% and has averaged about 97%; the dollar amount has risen steadily from $5
million in 1988 to $13.3 million in 1996, averaging about $8.4 million annually during that
period; and the number of charities has also risen steadily from 2,319 in 1988 to 3,910 in
1996, averaging about 3,000 annually during that period.]
13 [Divided by hash lines: 1985; 1994; 1991.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

55

get the same result personally while operating from your rocking
chair. Just quadruple the capital you commit to a savings account
and you will quadruple your earnings. You would hardly expect
hosannas for that particular accomplishment. Yet, retirement announcements regularly sing the praises of CEOs who have, say,
quadrupled earnings of their widget company during their reignwith no one examining whether this gain was attributable simply to
many years of retained earnings and the workings of compound
interest.
If the widget company consistently earned a superior return
on capital throughout the period, or if capital employed only
doubled during the CEO's reign, the praise for him may be well
deserved. But if return on capital was lackluster and capital employed increased in pace with earnings, applause should be withheld. A savings account in which interest was reinvested would
achieve the same year-by-year increase in earnings-and, at only
8% interest, would quadruple its annual earnings in 18 years.
The power of this simple math is often ignored by companies
to the detriment of their shareholders. Many corporate compensation plans reward managers handsomely for earnings increases produced solely, or in large part, by retained earnings-i.e., earnings
withheld from owners. For example, ten-year, fixed-price stock options are granted routinely, often by companies whose dividends
are only a small percentage of earnings.
An example will illustrate the inequities possible under such
circumstances. Let's suppose that you had a $100,000 savings account earning 8% interest and "managed" by a trustee who could
decide each year what portion of the interest you were to be paid
in cash. Interest not paid out would be "retained earnings" added
to the savings account to compound. And let's suppose that your
trustee, in his superior wisdom, set the "pay-out ratio" at one-quarter of the annual earnings.
Under these assumptions, your account would be worth
$179,084 at the end of ten years. Additionally, your annual earnings would have increased about 70% from $8,000 to $13,515 under
this inspired management. And, finally, your "dividends" would
have increased commensurately, rising regularly from $2,000 in the
first year to $3,378 in the tenth year. Each year, when your manager's public relations firm prepared his annual report to you, all of
the charts would have had lines marching skyward.
Now, just for fun, let's push our scenario one notch further
and give your trustee-manager a ten-year fixed-price option on

56

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

part of your "business" (i.e., your savings account) based on its fair
value in the first year. With such an option, your manager would
reap a substantial profit at your expense-just from having held on
to most of your earnings. If he were both Machiavellian and a bit
of a mathematician, your manager might also have cut the pay-out
ratio once he was firmly entrenched.
This scenario is not as farfetched as you might think. Many
stock options in the corporate world have worked in exactly that
fashion: they have gained in value simply because management retained earnings, not because it did well with the capital in its hands.
Managers actually apply a double standard to options. Leaving aside warrants (which deliver the issuing corporation immediate and substantial compensation), I believe it is fair to say that
nowhere in the business world are ten-year, fixed-price options on
all or a portion of a business granted to outsiders. Ten months, in
fact, would be regarded as extreme. It would be particularly unthinkable for managers to grant a long-term option on a business
that was regularly adding to its capital. Any outsider wanting to
secure such an option would be required to pay fully for capital
added during the option period.
The unwillingness of managers to do-unto-outsiders, however,
is not matched by an unwillingness to do-unto-themselves. (Negotiating with one's self seldom produces a barroom brawl.) Managers regularly engineer ten-year, fixed-price options for themselves
and associates that, first, totally ignore the fact that retained earnings automatically build value and, second, ignore the carrying cost
of capital. As a result, these managers end up profiting much as
they would have had they had an option on that savings account
that was automatically building up in value.
Of course, stock options often go to talented, value-adding
managers and sometimes deliver them rewards that are perfectly
appropriate. (Indeed, managers who are really exceptional almost
always get far less than they should.) But when the result is equitable, it is accidental. Once granted, the option is blind to individual
performance. Because it is irrevocable and unconditional (so long
as a manager stays in the company), the sluggard receives rewards
from his options precisely as does the star. A managerial Rip Van
Winkle, ready to doze for ten years, could not wish for a better
"incentive" system.
(I can't resist commenting on one long-term option given an
"outsider": that granted the U.S. Government on Chrysler shares
as partial consideration for the government's guarantee of some

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

57

life-saving loans. When these options worked out well for the government, Chrysler sought to modify the payoff, arguing that the
rewards to the government were both far greater than intended
and outsize in relation to its contribution to Chrysler's recovery.
The company's anguish over what it saw as an imbalance between
payoff and performance made national news. That anguish may
well be unique: to my knowledge, no managers-anywhere-have
been similarly offended by unwarranted payoffs arising from options granted to themselves or their colleagues.)
Ironically, the rhetoric about options frequently describes
them as desirable because they put managers and owners in the
same financial boat. In reality, the boats are far different. No
owner has ever escaped the burden of capital costs, whereas a
holder of a fixed-price option bears no capital costs at all. An
owner must weigh upside potential against downside risk; an option holder has no downside. In fact, the business project in which
you would wish to have an option frequently is a project in which
you would reject ownership. (I'll be happy to accept a lottery
ticket as a gift-but I'll never buy one.)
In dividend policy also, the option holders' interests are best
served by a policy that may ill serve the owner. Think back to the
savings account example. The trustee, holding his option, would
benefit from a no-dividend policy. Conversely, the owner of the
account should lean to a total payout so that he can prevent the
option-holding manager from sharing in the account's retained
earnings. 14
Despite their shortcomings, options can be appropriate under
some circumstances. My criticism relates to their indiscriminate
use and, in that connection, I would like to emphasize three points:
First, stock options are inevitably tied to the overall performance of a corporation. Logically, therefore, they should be
awarded only to those managers with overall responsibility. Managers with limited areas of responsibility should have incentives
that payoff in relation to results under their control. The .350 hitter expects, and also deserves, a big payoff for his performanceeven if he plays for a cellar-dwelling team. And the .150 hitter
should get no reward-even if he plays for a pennant winner. Only
those with overall responsibility for the team should have their rewards tied to its results.

14

[See the essay Dividend Policy in Part III.C.]

58

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Second, options should be structured carefully. Absent special
factors, they should have built into them a retained-earnings or carrying-cost factor. Equally important, they should be priced realistically. When managers are faced with offers for their companies,
they unfailingly point out how unrealistic market prices can be as
an index of real value. But why, then, should these same depressed
prices be the valuations at which managers sell portions of their
businesses to themselves? (They may go further: officers and directors sometimes consult the Tax Code to determine the lowest
prices at which they can, in effect, sell part of the business to insiders. While they're at it, they often elect plans that produce the
worst tax result for the company.) Except in highly unusual cases,
owners are not well served by the sale of part of their business at a
bargain price-whether the sale is to outsiders or to insiders. The
obvious conclusion: options should be priced at true business value.
Third, I want to emphasize that some managers whom I admire enormously-and whose operating records are far better than
mine-disagree with me regarding fixed-price options. They have
built corporate cultures that work, and fixed-price options have
been a tool that helped them. By their leadership and example,
and by the use of options as incentives, these managers have taught
their colleagues to think like owners. Such a culture is rare and
when it exists should perhaps be left intact-despite inefficiencies
and inequities that may infest the option program. "If it ain't
broke, don't fix it" is preferable to "purity at any price".
At Berkshire, however, we use an incentive-compensation system that rewards key managers for meeting targets in their own
bailiwicks. If See's does well, that does not produce incentive compensation at the News-nor vice versa. Neither do we look at the
price of Berkshire stock when we write bonus checks. We believe
good unit performance should be rewarded whether Berkshire
stock rises, falls, or stays even. Similarly, we think average performance should earn no special rewards even if our stock should
soar. "Performance", furthermore, is defined in different ways depending upon the underlying economics of the business: in some
our managers enjoy tailwinds not of their own making, in others
they fight unavoidable headwinds.
The rewards that go with this system can be large. At our various business units, top managers sometimes receive incentive bonuses of five times their base salary, or more, and it would appear
possible that one manager's bonus could top $2 million in 1986. (I
hope so.) We do not put a cap on bonuses, and the potential for
