
preaching chastity in a house of ill repute. The speech might rivet the audience to its chairs, but that didn’t
mean that they would go forth and abstain.
Yet some thought they were hearing something important. “This is great; it’s the basic tutorial on the stock
market, all in one lesson,” thought Gates.27 The money managers, many of whom were hunting for cheaper
stocks, found it comforting and even cathartic.
Buffett waved a book in the air. “This book was the intellectual underpinning of the 1929 stock-market
mania. Edgar Lawrence Smith’s Common Stocks as Long Term Investments proved that stocks always
yielded more than bonds. Smith identified five reasons, but the most novel of these was the fact that
companies retained some of their earnings, which they could reinvest at the same rate of return. That was
the plowback—a novel idea in 1924! But as my mentor, Ben Graham, always used to say, ‘You can get in
way more trouble with a good idea than a bad idea,’ because you forget that the good idea has limits. Lord
Keynes, in his preface to this book, said, ‘There is a danger of expecting the results of the future to be
predicted from the past.’”28
He had worked his way back around to the same subject: that one couldn’t extrapolate from the past few
years of accelerating stock prices. “Now, is there anyone I haven’t insulted?”29 He paused. The question
was rhetorical; nobody raised a hand.
“Thank you,” he said, and ended.
“Praise by name, criticize by category” was Buffett’s rule. The speech was meant to be provocative, not
off-putting—for he cared a great deal what they thought of him. He had named no culprits, and he assumed
they would get over his jokes. His argument was so powerful, almost unassailable, that he thought even those
who didn’t like its message must acknowledge its force. And whatever unease the audience felt was not
expressed aloud. He answered questions until the session ended. People began to stand, awarding him an
ovation. No matter how they saw it—a masterful exposition on how to think about investing or the last roar
of an old lion—the speech was by any standard a tour de force.
Buffett had stayed on top for forty-four years in a business where five years of good performance was a
meaningful accomplishment. Still, as the record lengthened, the question always loomed: When would he
falter? Would he declare an end to his reign, or would some seismic shift dethrone him? Now, it seemed to
some, the time had come. It may have taken an invention as significant as the personal computer, coupled
with a technology as pervasive as the Internet, to topple him, but he’d apparently overlooked information
that was freely available and rejected the reality of the approaching millennium. As they muttered a polite
“wonderful speech, Warren,” the young lions prowled, restive. And so, even in the ladies’ room at the break,
sarcastic remarks were heard from the Silicon Valley wives.30
It was not just that Buffett was wrong, as some felt, but that even if he were eventually proved right—as
others suspected he would be—his dour prediction of the investing future contrasted so sharply with
Buffett’s own legendary past. For in his early glory days, stocks were cheap, and Buffett had scooped them
up in handfuls, almost alone in noticing the golden apples lying untouched on the path. As the years passed,
barriers grew up that made it harder to invest, to get an edge, to figure out what others didn’t know. So who
was Buffett to preach at them, now that it was their turn? Who was he to say that they shouldn’t make
money while they could off this wonderful market?
Throughout the rest of the lazy afternoon, Herbert Allen’s guests played one last game of tennis or golf or
headed to the Duck Pond Lawn for a leisurely chat. Buffett spent his afternoon with old friends, who
congratulated him on his triumph of a speech. He believed he had done a convincing job of swaying the
audience. He had not given a speech full of such commanding evidence simply to go on the record.
Buffett, who wanted to be liked, had registered the standing ovation, not the mutterings. But the less
flattering version was how many were not convinced. They believed that Buffett was rationalizing having
missed the technology boom, and they were startled to see him make such specific predictions, prophecies

that surely would turn out to be wrong. Beyond his earshot, the rumbling went on: “Good ol’ Warren. He
missed the boat. How could he miss the tech boat? He’s a friend of Bill Gates.”31
A few miles away at the River Run Lodge later that evening, with the guests at the closing dinner again
arranged according to some invisible plan, Herbert Allen finally spoke, thanking various people and reflecting
on the week. Then Susie Buffett took the stage beside the windows that overlooked the pebbly Big Wood
River and once again sang the old standards. Later the guests returned to the Sun Valley Lodge terrace,
where Olympic skaters axeled and arabesqued in the Saturday night ice show.
By the time fireworks exploded across the sky at evening’s end, Sun Valley ’99 had been declared another
glorious five-day extravaganza. Yet what most people would remember was not the rafting or the skaters; it
was Buffett’s talk about the stock market—the first forecast he had made in exactly thirty years.

3
Creatures of Habit
Pasadena • July 1999

Buffett’s partner, Charles T. Munger, was nowhere to be seen at Sun Valley. The Allen & Co. organizers
had never invited him. Which was fine with Munger, for Sun Valley was the kind of event he would almost
pay not to attend. Its rituals required pleasing too many people.1 Buffett was the one who enjoyed pleasing
people. Even as he took his jabs at the audience, he made sure to remain personally well liked. Whereas
Munger wanted only respect, and didn’t care who thought he was a son of a bitch.
Yet the two, in many people’s minds, were almost interchangeable. Buffett himself referred to them as
“Siamese twins, practically.” They walked with the same lurching, awkward gait. They wore the same sort of
gray suits draped stiffly over their frames, the inflexible bodies of men who have spent decades reading
books and newspapers rather than playing sports or working outdoors. They arranged their graying hair in the
same comb-over, they wore similar Clark Kentish glasses, and the same intensity flickered through their eyes.
They thought alike and had the same fascination with business as a puzzle worth spending a lifetime to solve.
Both regarded rationality and honesty as the highest virtues. Quickened pulses and self-delusion, in their
view, were the major causes of mistakes. They liked to ponder the reasons for failure as a way of deducing
the rules of success. “I had long looked for insight by inversion, in the intense manner counseled by the great
algebraist Carl Jacobi,” Munger said. “‘Invert, always invert.’” He illustrated this with the story of a wise
peasant who said, “Tell me where I’m going to die so I won’t go there.”2 But while Munger meant this
figuratively, Buffett took it more literally. He lacked Munger’s subtle sense of fatalism, particularly when it
came to the subject of his own mortality.
Both men, however, were infected by the urge to preach. Munger described himself as “didactic.” He labored
over occasional speeches on the art of successful living, which struck people as so insightful that they were
hoarded and passed from hand to hand until, finally, the Internet made them accessible to all. He grew so
enthused delivering these speeches that, on a few occasions, he became “self-intoxicated,” as Buffett put it,
and had to be dragged from the stage. In private, Munger tended to lecture either himself or his audience,
making conversations with him like sitting in the back of a runaway stagecoach.
But while he considered himself an amateur scientist and architect and did not hesitate to expound on
Einstein, Darwin, rational habits of thinking, and the ideal distance between houses in a Santa Barbara
subdivision, Munger was nonetheless wary of venturing very far from what he had spent some time to learn.

He dreaded falling prey to what a Harvard Law School classmate of his had called “the Shoe Button
Complex.”
“His father commuted daily with the same group of men,” Munger said. “One of them had managed to corner
the market in shoe buttons—a really small market, but he had it all. He pontificated on every subject, all
subjects imaginable. Cornering the market on shoe buttons made him an expert on everything. Warren and I
have always sensed it would be a big mistake to behave that way.”3
Buffett was in no danger of suffering from the Shoe Button Complex. He feared appearing obnoxious or,
worse, sanctimonious. He believed in what he called the Circle of Competence, drew a line around himself,
and stayed within the three subjects on which he would be recognized as absolutely expert: money, business,
and his own life.
Yet, like Munger, he had his own form of self-intoxication. While Munger chose his speeches selectively but
had trouble winding them up, Buffett could usually conclude a lecture, but found it hard not to start one.
He gave speeches; he wrote articles; he wrote editorials; he gathered people at parties and gave little lessons;
he testified in lawsuits; he appeared in television documentaries and did television interviews and took
journalists along with him on trips; he went around to colleges and taught classes; he got college students to
come and visit him; he gave lessons at the openings of furniture stores, the inauguration of insurance
telemarketing centers, and dinners for would-be customers of NetJets; he gave locker-room talks to football
players; he spoke at lunches with Congressmen; he educated newspaper folk in editorial board meetings; he
gave lessons to his own board of directors; and, above all, he put on the teacher’s robes in his letters to and
meetings with his shareholders. Berkshire Hathaway was his “Sistine Chapel”—not just a work of art, but an
illustrated text of his beliefs, which was why Munger referred to it as Buffett’s “didactic enterprise.”
The two men had been each other’s best audience ever since they first met through mutual friends over lunch
in 1959. After they talked their hosts into exhaustion, they wound up alone at the table, jabbering to each
other. Since then, they had carried on an uninterrupted conversation for decades. Eventually, they could read
each other’s minds, stopped talking, and carried on by telepathy. But by then their other audiences had
expanded to include their friends, business partners, shareholders—indeed, the whole world. People reeled
out of Buffett’s office or away from Munger’s speeches, figuratively smacking their foreheads and saying,
“My God!” at some insight one of them had about a seemingly intractable problem, which now, in hindsight,
seemed obvious. No matter how much either talked, demand for their words only increased. Like most things
in their lives, they found this role easy and comfortable, engraved in their beings by long habit.
But, accused of being a creature of habit, Buffett responded with a wounded look. “I’m not a creature of
habit,” he said. “Now, Charlie—Charlie is a creature of habit.”
***
Munger rose in the morning and set his quarter-inch-thick, old-fashioned cataract glasses on the bridge of his
nose. He climbed into his car at precisely the same time every day, carefully placed his father’s briefcase
—which he now used—on the seat next to him, and drove from Pasadena to downtown Los Angeles.4 He
changed lanes on his left side by counting the cars in his rearview mirror, then watching them pass in the
front to sense when there would be a gap.5 (For years he drove with a can of gasoline in his trunk in case he
forgot to stop for gas, but was finally persuaded to give up this particular habit.) Once downtown, he often
met someone for breakfast at the sandy-brick art deco California Club, one of the city’s venerable
institutions, where he strode automatically to the first table in the dining room after grabbing a clutch of
newspapers from the console table by the third-floor elevator. He tore through the papers like gift wrap on
Christmas morning, until they lay around him in a heap.
“Good morning, Mr. Munger.” The members of the L.A. business establishment genuflected as they passed
by on their way to lesser tables, pleased if he recognized them and chatted for a moment or two.

Munger regarded them through his right eye. His left had been destroyed in a failed cataract operation.6 Now,
while he spoke, his left eyelid hung at half-mast as his head swiveled back and forth across the room, taking
in the scene. The rotating half gaze gave him an aspect of eternal vigilance and permanent disdain.
After finishing his blueberries, Munger repaired to the modest, cluttered office he rented from Munger, Tolles
& Olson, the law firm he had founded in 1962 and retired from just three years later. Tucked away on an
upper floor of the Wells Fargo Center, his domain was watched over by his longtime secretary, the Teutonic
Dorothe Obert. There, surrounded by science and history books, biographies of Benjamin Franklin, an
enormous portrait of aphorist and lexicographer Samuel Johnson, plans and models of his latest real estate
deal, and a hydrocephalic bust of Franklin next to the windows, he felt at home. Munger admired Franklin for
espousing Protestant bourgeois values while living as he damn well pleased. He frequently cited Franklin, and
spent his days studying his works and those of other “eminent dead,” as he put it, like Cicero and
Maimonides. He also administered Wesco Financial, a subsidiary of Berkshire; the Daily Journal
Corporation, a legal publishing company that Wesco owned; and worked on a real estate transaction here and
there. Would-be chatterers—except for family, close friends, or business associates—met with obscure ironic
witticisms and discouragement from Dorothe.
Munger spent much of his time working on four causes. When he chose, he could pitch in with an almost
stunning generosity. However, lacking a soft spot for the people of what he called “Dregsville,” his charity
took the form of a Darwinian quest to boost the brightest. Good Samaritan Hospital, the Harvard-Westlake
School, the Huntington Library, and the Stanford Law School were the beneficiaries. These organizations
knew that Munger’s money and effort would be accompanied by much lecturing and insistence that everyone
do things Charlie’s way. He would gladly pay for dormitories at Stanford Law School, as long as Stanford
made each room exactly so many feet wide, with a window exactly here and the bedroom so many feet from
the kitchen, and provided that the university locate the parking garage where he insisted. He embodied
old-fashioned noblesse oblige, with all sorts of irritating strings attached to the money for the recipients’ own
good, because he knew best.
Even with all this overseeing of others’ activities, Munger often left for the day in time to play a little golf
with his cronies at the Los Angeles Country Club. Then he joined his wife, Nancy, for dinner, sometimes at
the Pasadena house he’d designed himself or, more likely, with a longtime group of close-knit friends, once
again either at the California Club or the L.A. Country Club. He concluded his day by burying his nose in a
book. He vacationed regularly with his eight children and stepchildren and assorted grandchildren, usually at
his cabin on Minnesota’s Star Island, where, like his father, he was an avid fisherman. He hosted dozens of
people on his enormous catamaran, the Channel Cat (described as a “floating restaurant” by one friend, and
used mainly to entertain). In short, despite his idiosyncrasies, Munger was a straightforward family man who
liked his friends, his clubs, and his charities.
***
Buffett liked his friends and his clubs, but had little to do with charities. His life was even simpler than
Munger’s, despite a personality that was far more complex. He spent the vast majority of his time in Omaha,
but his schedule revolved around a series of board meetings and trips to visit friends, orchestrated with an
unhurried regularity, like the phases of the moon. On the days he was in town, he drove 1.5 miles from the
house he’d inhabited for four decades to the office at Kiewit Plaza that he’d occupied for almost as long,
where he sat down behind his father’s desk by eight-thirty a.m. There, he turned on the television to CNBC
with the sound muted before picking up his pile of newspapers, keeping half an eye on the screen while
plowing through a pile of publications on his desk: American Banker, Editor & Publisher, Broadcasting,
Beverage Digest, Furniture Today, A.M. Best’s Property-Casualty Review, the New Yorker, Columbia
Journalism Review, the New York Observer, and newsletters from writers he admired on the stock and bond
market.
After that he digested the monthly, weekly, and daily reports faxed, mailed, and e-mailed by the businesses

that Berkshire owned, a list that grew longer year by year, telling him how many auto policies GEICO had
sold last week and how many claims it had paid; how many pounds of See’s Candies had sold yesterday; how
many prison-guard uniforms had been ordered from Fechheimers; how many jet time-shares NetJets was
selling in Europe and the United States; and all the rest—awnings, battery chargers, kilowatt hours, air
compressors, engagement rings, leased trucks, encyclopedias, pilot training, home furnishings,
cardiopulmonary equipment, pig stalls, boat loans, real estate listings, ice cream sundaes, winches and
windlasses, cubic feet of gas, sump pumps, vacuum cleaners, newspaper advertising, egg counters, knives,
furniture rentals, nurses’ shoes, electromechanical components. All the numbers on their costs and sales
poured into his office, and he knew many of them from memory.7
In his spare time, he pored over reports from the hundreds of companies he hadn’t bought yet. Partly out of
interest, and partly just in case.
If some dignitary made the pilgrimage to Omaha to meet him, he got in his steel-blue Lincoln Town Car and
drove the 1.5 miles through downtown and out to the airport to pick him or her up personally. People were
startled and charmed by the unaffected gesture, although he soon scraped their nerves raw by barely noticing
stop signs, traffic lights, or other cars, weaving around the road while talking animatedly. He rationalized his
distractedness by saying that he drove so slowly that, if he had an accident, the damage would be light.8
He always gave a tour of his office, showing off his totems, the memorabilia that told the story of his business
life. Then he sat, leaning forward in a chair, hands clasped and eyebrows raised sympathetically as he listened
to the visitor’s questions and requests. To each of them Buffett offered off-the-cuff wit, quick decisions on
business proposals, and warm advice. As they left, he might surprise a famous politician or the CEO of some
huge company by dropping in for lunch at McDonald’s before ferrying him back to the airport.
In between the reading, the research, and the occasional meetings, the phone rang all day long. First-time
callers punching in Buffett’s number were shocked to hear a hearty “Hello!” and often stumbled in confusion
when they realized that he answered his own phone. His secretary, the amiable Debbie Bosanek, trotted in
and out of his office with messages from the overflow calls. On his credenza, another phone rang from time
to time. He took these calls instantly, for they were from his trader. “Yello…mmm hmm…yep…how
much…mmm hmm…go ahead,” he would say, and hang up. Then he turned back to the other calls, or to his
reading or CNBC, before leaving promptly at five-thirty p.m. for home.
The woman waiting for him there was not his wife. He was perfectly open about Astrid Menks, with whom
he had lived in an unusual triangular arrangement since 1978. Susie Buffett approved of, and in fact had
arranged the relationship; yet he and Susie both made a great point of saying how very married they were,
their routine as a couple as scheduled and orchestrated as everything else in Buffett’s life. All the while, he
offered no more explanation in public than “If you knew everybody well, you’d understand it quite well.”9
While this was true in its way, it did not help the curious, since almost nobody knew both Susie and Astrid
well, or, for that matter, Buffett himself. He kept these relationships separate, as he kept many of his
relationships separate. By all appearances, however, Astrid and Susie were friends.
Most nights, Buffett ate dinner—something like a hamburger or pork chop—at home with Astrid. After a
couple of hours he turned his attention to his nightly bridge game on the Internet, to which he devoted about
twelve hours a week. While he tapped away, glued to the screen with the background noise of the TV, Astrid
mostly left him to his game, except when occasionally he said, “Astrid, get me a Coke!” Afterward, he
usually talked to Sharon Osberg, his bridge partner and a close confidante, for a while on the phone as Astrid
puttered around the house until ten, when Buffett had his nightly conference call with Ajit Jain, who ran his
reinsurance business. Meanwhile, Astrid went to the market and picked up the early edition of the next day’s
newspaper. While he read it, she went to bed. And that, it seemed, was the simple, ordinary life of a
megabillionaire.

4

Warren, What’s Wrong?
Omaha and Atlanta • August–December 1999

Nearly all of Buffett’s $30 billion plus—ninety-nine percent—was invested in the stock of Berkshire
Hathaway. He had spoken at Sun Valley about how the market’s weighing machine was more important than
its voting machine. But it was the voting machine’s opinion of his stock price that set the altitude from which
he preached. People paid attention to him because he was rich. So when he predicted that the market could
disappoint investors for seventeen years,1 he was standing on the edge of a cliff, and he knew it. If he was
wrong, not only would he be the laughingstock of Sun Valley; in the record books of the world’s wealthiest
men, his personal rank might drop. And Buffett paid close attention to that rank.
Through the late 1990s, BRK (Berkshire Hathaway’s stock symbol) had boosted his profile by outpacing the
market, until it peaked at $80,900 per share in June 1998. That a single share of Berkshire stock cost enough
to buy a small condo was unique among American businesses. To Buffett, the stock price represented an
uncomplicated measure of his success. It had grown in an ascending line since the day he first bought BRK
for $7.50 a share. Even though the market had rocked through the late 1990s, until 1999 an investor who
bought BRK and held on to it would have been better off.
