
The Psychology of Successful Trading

135

He then jerked his thumb at me and said to the students, “It’s so much
better than trading the boring way that Courtney does!”
I use many of those tried-and-true trend-following techniques and my
techniques never allow me to buy the bottom of any move.
The point of this is that my guest lecturer was far more interested in
being right than in making money.
This is one of the critical concepts necessary to become a profitable
trader. You must focus on making money, not on being right. In fact, superanalyst Ned Davis once wrote a slim book called Being Right or Making
Money. Notice that it’s not called Being Right and Making Money. To both
of us, trying to be right is a block to making money.
Trying to be right means that your ego is wrapped up in the outcome
of the trade. You will, therefore, have the tendency to want to hold onto
losers longer than you should. They will become larger than they should
be for you to have trading success. You will not have cut your losses short.
In addition, you will take off winning trades quickly with only small gains
because taking a profit will vindicate you and show that you are right.
A slight twist on this is that many traders feel the need to validate themselves as people. Having a winning trade is a way to validate themselves
and make them feel good about themselves. It shows them that they are
smart and clever because they were able to peg the market.
I once did a session with a new mentoring student of mine. I spent
the first three sessions dealing only with the psychology of trading. His
background is in the mental health profession so he was very self-aware.
Here is his list of what motivates him to trade:
You need to be smart to do this so being successful will validate that
I am a smart person. I don’t have anywhere else to go (quoting the
movie An Officer and a Gentleman). There are no jobs in my small
rural Florida town. Have my wife feel secure and proud of me is the
number one motivator for me to be a trader. Need to feel that I can
be part of the financial world because I have just failed as a stock
broker. I should be able to do this. I would be sexier if I was a good
trader. I like the idea of the freedom and not chained to someone else’s
authority. I’d love to have a skill to teach to one of my nephews. I’m
not the kind of guy who mows lawns. I’d like to have lifestyle freedom
like travel whenever I want. I want my mother and stepfather to be
proud of me. My stepfather made a lot of money trading futures in
’70s and ’80s then lost most of it in ’90s. I want to be better than
his stepfather. I am competing with my stepfather for my mother’s
attention. I am also competing with my brothers.
Whew!

136

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

Trying to be right also creates a tendency to cause overanalysis of a
position. Some traders will overanalyze a position to make sure that they
are right and then end up missing the move. They were never wrong, but
they didn’t make any money.
There are also many people who trade forex because of the image that
it projects. Forex traders are sometimes thought of as rogues. You can
project an image of sophistication if you trade foreign exchange.
There are people who like to discuss their speculative adventures to
their friends and associates or at parties as an image enhancement tool.
They want to show off their knowledge or project an image to others. It
can sound much more impressive to other people if you are sitting around
talking about your last trade in the euro market than what you normally do
for a living.
A final common reason for trading forex is pure greed. But I am differentiating between trying to make money and the greed that is trying to
make a big score quickly. You go to your job every day to make money, but
you buy lottery tickets to make the big score.
Similarly, trading forex to make money is different than trying to make
scads of money quickly. It is this type of greed that fuels the hype on the
Internet and attracts people to those commercials on the radio and TV that
suggest that you can make a huge percent profit in just 10 minutes every
day. It is this greed that fuels the ads in other forex publications that show
pictures of guys on the beach with their cell phone and a piña colada trading forex or posing in front of their Rolls Royce.
There are few endeavors in which you can make millions with just a
small investment and trading forex is one of them. There is no question
that the dream can come true in forex but, realistically, it never will. And
the ways to achieve it being touted by forex promoters are certainly not the
way to achieve it. Still, there are many new forex traders who trade forex
to make a big score quickly.
I suggest that you take a few minutes to ponder why you are trading.
There are no bad answers but it is important that one of the reasons is that
you want to make money. All other reasons are okay. It is important to
understand what makes you tick so that you can design your trading life to
take it into account.

THE PRESSURES OF TRADING
The pressures of trading are extreme. You feel elation when you have a
big winner and depression when you have a big loser. Unfortunately, these
emotions are the enemy. You’ve got to overcome them. Many of the most

The Psychology of Successful Trading

137

successful traders that I have known have ice water running in their veins.
They remain cool and calm no matter what good or bad events are swirling
around them.
Legendary trader Richard Dennis stated that trading is almost against
human nature. We have met the enemy and he is us.
Much of the issue of self-discipline is finding ways to overcome our
natural impulses driven by fear and greed and the other motivations outlined in the beginning of this chapter. Perhaps we need to distract ourselves
from what is really driving us to something more manageable that we can
control.
The pressure of making and losing money creates a lack of objectivity
that clouds your mind and therefore creates dubious trading ideas. The
first goal is to reduce these pressures and help us become calm about our
trading.

WHY DO YOU LOSE?
In my lectures, I ask the audience members to tell me why they lose money
trading forex. I am always fascinated that they know exactly why they lose.
Let me repeat. They know exactly why they lose.
I suggest you stop reading right now and write up a list of reasons why
you lose. Go on, stop reading and start listing!
Back to the lecture. The traders quickly jump up and list off the reasons
why they lose while I write them down. Let me show you the list from the
last lecture:

r Overtrading
r Greed
r Not following system
r No system
r Too tight stops
r Lack of understanding
r Too emotional
r Not paying attention
r Lack of time
r Going against pros
r No goal
r Lack of plan
r Lack of confidence
r No analysis of mistakes
r Lack of capital

138

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

r Compulsion to trade
r Preconceived ideas
Sound familiar? I would imagine that you can find the reason why you
don’t make money somewhere in that list. I know I can find the reasons
why I have gone through losing streaks.
Typically, the audience is firing these reasons at me so fast I can’t keep
up. It is always clear to me that they have thought about why they are losing
and have a pretty clear idea. (Otherwise, why would they be sitting in this
lecture?)
I think that this list can be grouped into three major categories: lack
of self-discipline, lack of knowledge, and lack of capital. Some of the items
fall into two categories.
I can’t say that where I place each of these reasons is the final word.
Some of these reasons flow between different categories. I think that not
having a plan is probably a combination of a lack of discipline and knowledge, but others might argue that it is simply a lack of either of these separately. Ultimately, how the reasons for losing are categorized is almost
irrelevant because what we really want to do is focus on the three main
categories and how to deal with them.
The three main categories are lack of discipline, knowledge, and capital. The latter two are probably the easiest to deal with and lack of discipline is usually the hardest. Why? Because it involves a change in your
character. Money and knowledge can always be acquired, but changing
one’s character is usually extremely difficult.
Let’s talk first about the two lesser problems before going to the issue
of self-discipline. I think you will soon see that self-discipline is the real key
to success in trading because it permeates even the two lesser problems.

ADDRESSING A LACK OF KNOWLEDGE
Frankly, this is the easiest of the three main problems to solve. Knowledge
can be acquired in many ways:

r Reading books
r Reading magazines
r Attending seminars
r Attending classes
r Finding a mentor
r Swapping information with a friend
r Watching video tapes

The Psychology of Successful Trading

139

r Reading blogs
r Reading Web sites
r Just doing it!
It doesn’t really take money to learn. Books are affordable. Blogs are
free. A library card is free.
Virtually all the knowledge you need is available for free at the library.
You don’t need to go to a $3,000 seminar to learn all you need to know to
make significant profits trading forex.
What you do need to know are the basics, such as contract specifications, what is a long and short, and so on. Second, you need to know some
entry and exit techniques if you use technical analysis and you will need to
know something about the underlying currency pair if you are going to use
fundamental analysis.
In many respects, that’s all you need to know. The intellectual knowledge to profitably trade forex is trivial, far less than what you know about
your job.
Take another look at the list above. A lack of knowledge is not really a
lack of knowledge relating to the intellectual knowledge necessary to trade
but is, instead, related to the psychology of trading.
Take a look at some of the audience members’ responses again:

r No system
r Lack of understanding
r No goal
r Lack of a plan
r Lack of confidence
r No analysis of mistakes
r Preconceived ideas
Only the first two are really a lack of intellectual knowledge. The rest
are a lack of psychological knowledge. In fact, you can see that the vast
majority of the items on the list are related more to a lack of self-discipline
or a clear lack of focus.
Yes, of course it is good to be constantly learning more about trading.
The more you know about trading or markets, the more likely it is that
you make money. However, you can see that few people thought that they
needed to know more before they could make money. The lack of knowledge is really the lack of knowledge about oneself or of one’s own trading.
In general, you can see that the audience’s list is really a list of psychological failures. It is a list of things that could create a profitable trading
plan that are not being done. Once again, the audience knew what the problems were but were apparently helpless to do something about it.

140

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

They knew they had no goal, plan, and/or confidence but hadn’t
done anything to correct this potentially fatal flaw in their trading. Why
not? I believe that the answer lies first in the discussion of why people
trade. Perhaps—and this is likely the problem—making money is not their
priority.
But let’s assume that this is not the case and that they really are motivated to make money trading forex. I think then that the problem is a
lack of self-discipline. Once again, they know the problem but have not
conquered it. Solving these kinds of problems requires an insight into the
problem, a plan to solve the problem, and the self-discipline to apply the
solution.
Clearly, people have an insight into the problem or they wouldn’t have
listed it. That means that they now must have a plan and the self-discipline
to put the plan into place. It is beyond the scope of this book to come up
with a plan for each of these problems. However, the issue of self-discipline
will be dealt with in great detail later.

ADDRESSING A LACK OF CAPITAL
A lack of capital means that you are overtrading and risking too much of
your capital on each trade. The lack of capital may be the easiest of all the
problems to solve. You must either raise more capital or risk less on each
trade.
The first solution obviously requires you to either earn and save money
or to allocate more of your current assets to forex trading. The second solution is easy to do as well. However, the problem comes when your account
is very small, such as under $10,000. It’s easy to find lots of interesting
trades when your account has $250,000 but much harder when you only
have $5,000.
A detailed description of money management concepts is beyond the
scope of this book. However, let’s assume that you risk 1 percent of your
equity with every trade. This means that you can only lose $100 on each
trade if you have $10,000 in your account. Clearly, there are few trades that
you can enter and only risk $100.
There are several solutions. First, save and invest more money. The
more money you have in the account, the more you can risk per trade.
For example, using a 1 percent bet size, you could risk $200 on a $20,000
account, $500 on a $50,000 account and so on. There are obviously a lot
more trade opportunities when you can risk $500 than when you risk $100.
A second alternative is to risk more per trade. For example, risk
2 percent or 3 percent of your equity on each trade. This will give you

The Psychology of Successful Trading

141

many more opportunities to make money but it will increase the risk
of ruin.
Sometimes this is the only alternative. You take more risk than you
should in order to play the game. However, the greater the risk you take,
the greater the chance that you get wiped out. It’s sort of like “double or
nothing.” On the other hand, prudent money management means that you
are much more likely to succeed and that you are treating trading forex
like a business.
Do not take this issue of bet size too lightly. I think that it is one of the
most important issues there is in trading forex.
I once had a meeting with a gentleman who was very proud of his forex
trading track record. He said that he had tripled his $1.5 million in the first
quarter of this year. I told him that I was duly impressed but asked him
how long he had been trading. He replied that he had just started at the
beginning of the year. My enthusiasm shrank considerably. Of course, I
was still impressed with him tripling his money but had to ask the obvious
next question: “How much of your bankroll do you bet on each trade?”
He casually replied, “I like to keep the risk to a third or less of my
capital.” My jaw dropped. I literally couldn’t believe my ears. Did he just
say that he bet a third of his total bankroll on each trade? I had to
ask again and he stated that this was the case. He seemed proud of his
conservatism!
Well, I will tell you that he is guaranteed to be wiped out. There is no
way that he will go long before he has three straight losing trades. I know
that I have many of those every year.
The point: You can take greater risk than you prudently should but you
are also increasing your risk of ruin.
A lot of people mistakenly think that they can’t trade forex and only
risk a few hundred dollars per trade. They think they need to risk at least
$500 per trade and, more likely, $1,000 per trade to make money. In general,
I think that this is true.
One of the great things about forex is that it is possible to open forex
trading accounts with just a few hundred dollars. These accounts allow
you to trade mini- and even microaccounts where the trade size is as low
as $1,000 and each pip is worth just ten cents.

ADDRESSING A LACK OF
SELF-DISCIPLINE
In my opinion, a lack of self-discipline is the main reason that people fail at
trading. Almost every reason that people give for failing has a tie with lack

142

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

of self-discipline. Plans, goals, systems, techniques, and knowledge are all
useless if there is no self-discipline to apply them.
It seems to me that everybody agrees that self-discipline is the key to
forex trading success. But no one shows you how to achieve it. I will attempt, in this chapter, to provide techniques for boosting self-discipline
and your forex trading profits.
Why do we lack self-discipline? No one can say for certain but I believe
that our own ego is the primary cause of a lack of self-discipline. We need
to validate ourselves. We need to show that we are a good person. And so
on and so on. Our ego has huge needs that get in the way of trading success.
I’m not saying that the ego is all bad. On the contrary. We need to have
a strong ego to trade again after being beat up in the markets. We have to
feel strong enough to take the psychological pressures of trading and keep
going.
But the ego is also the cause of nearly all long-term trading losses, in
my opinion. It’s not natural to trade. We have to overcome our ego to be
successful yet still allow our ego to motivate us to make money. It is a fine
line between humility and egomania that we are trying to find.
In my career, I have hired many people to be traders for me. Many had
little or no experience. I always looked on their resume for some indication that they had self-discipline. Had they been in the Marines or other
armed forces? Had they been heavily involved in sports or gotten a degree
in something like engineering, math, or physics? All of these are indications
that they may have a lot of self-discipline.
It has been my experience that Marines and athletes are represented
far beyond their normal representation in society in the numbers of successful traders. Why? Because it takes tremendous self-discipline to be
successful in those two areas.
Notice that I do not look for people who know a lot about forex trading
or have MBAs, although it is preferred that they have some knowledge of
forex. I can teach the intellectual knowledge necessary to trade but it is
much more difficult to teach self-discipline. However, that is exactly what
I hope to do in the rest of the chapter.
Unfortunately, self-discipline is not something that can be taught. It
has to come from within. Nobody can create self-discipline for you. This
sounds reflexive: You must have self-discipline to acquire self-discipline.
To a certain extent, this is true. This chapter will not teach you selfdiscipline; only you can do that. However, it is often possible to pick
up techniques or tricks that can boost your self-discipline. You may find
that some of the following techniques provide the impetus toward selfdiscipline. Some may work for you and others will fall flat.
I have used all of the techniques with success for both myself and in
my teaching others to be successful traders. They may work for you. There

The Psychology of Successful Trading

143

is no magic in them. They are simply techniques for trying to enforce selfdiscipline in trading forex. They are designed to help you become a better
trader.
Please note that I am outlining techniques. You can change them to fit
your own needs and desires. Take these ideas and make them your own.
They will work better for you that way.

AN EXAMPLE OF OVERCOMING
THE BIZARRE TWISTS AND TURNS
OF THE MIND
It’s amazing what tricks the mind will play. It’s as if you don’t really want to
make money and you look for strange ways to lose money. A good friend
of mine is a perfect example.
He is arguably the smartest person I know. He has awesome intelligence and is very knowledgeable about many subjects. He decided that he
wanted to be a professional trader. I showed him some techniques and he
took them to another level and created his own mechanical methods. He
got his quote screen all set up and was ready to trade.
I helped him open a futures account with the same broker that I used.
Normally, the broker only handles institutional accounts but he decided to
allow my friend to open an account with only $10,000 as a favor to me. He
also allowed him to trade at institutional commission rates that are roughly
half those charged by retail brokers.
Turns out that my friend proceeded to lose about 60 percent of his
bankroll over the next six months. This was a terrible track record since it
meant that he was losing consistently because he was able to keep his risk
to below a couple of hundred dollars for each trade. That means he had
a lot of losing trades. It was quite remarkable because the system he was
trading had very little discretion and had such a tremendous track record
while being tested.
He went back over the track record of the system during the time
that he was actually trading it. Turns out that he had lost 60 percent
but that the system was profitable. In other words, he was not actually
following the system. He was not executing the trades according to the
signals.
It turns out that he was intimidated by calling an institutional broker
and only putting in a one- or two-lot order. He felt that he was wasting their
time since they were used to dealing in larger quantities and that they were
doing it only as a concession for me. The brokers had never complained but
my friend had projected a problem where none existed. He would hesitate

144

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

before entering a trade and ended up missing many trades and creating a
huge slippage problem.
The solution was obvious! Shift his account to a retail broker that
charged twice as much and gave poorer service!
By shifting his account to a retail broker, he felt that he wasn’t bothering anybody and could go back to focusing on the market instead of his
relationship with his broker. He was getting worse fills and paying twice
as much in commissions but was starting to make money. He had found
the bizarre little problem in his mind that was stopping him from making
money. The good news is that he could easily solve the problem.

TREAT TRADING AS EDUCATION
Rather than think of trading as a means of making or losing money, think
of what you can learn from each trade and from trading in general. Think
of trading as going to university but with a pop quiz every day.
Focus on what you are learning as you go through the trading experience. Every time you exit a position, look at the trade and try to identify
what you learned rather than how much money you made or lost. Ask yourself, did I analyze the commodity correctly? Did I understand the driving
forces that caused it to move? What should I learn before my next trade?
Did I follow my plan? Did I enter the trade well? Did I exit the trade well?
What were my emotions while I entered/exited the trade? What could I
have done better? What did I do well? What did I do poorly?
Your answers should give you some idea of the kinds of questions you
can ask yourself to further your education. The point is to focus like a laser
beam on learning, not on your profit and loss.
Normally, people focus on how much money they made or lost. But,
in a way, that is irrelevant. Money will be made or lost on every trade. The
real issue is whether your bankroll is increasing over a longer period of
time, say a month, a quarter, or even a year. It is highly unlikely that you
will make money over the long run if you do not constantly improve as a
trader, particularly if you are not currently a profitable trader.
I have been a professional trader for more than 20 years and have only
one year that was even close to a losing year. But I still spend a tremendous
amount of time trying to improve my craft.
One of the best techniques for improving trading is to keep a trading
journal. This is a simple book where you enter every day such information
as what trades you are considering, why you are entering the trade and why
exit, and other information about your trades. You should also put your
emotions and reactions in the journal. In particular, you should put down
