
8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 234

• 234 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“The single largest regret I have ever had in my financial life was
not paying enough attention to this rule.”
Livermore agreed with his friend Bradley, the gambler. After timing and money management come emotions. It is one thing to
know what to do; it is quite another thing to have the will to actually do it. This is true of the stock market. This is true of life. Who
knew better than Livermore?
As he explained to his sons, “I believe that having the discipline
to follow your rules is essential. Without specific, clear, and tested
rules, speculators do not have any real chance of success. Why?
Because speculators without a plan are like a general without a
strategy, and therefore without an actionable battle plan. Speculators without a single clear plan can only act and react, act and
react, to the slings and arrows of stock market misfortune, until
finally they are defeated.
“It is my conclusion that playing the market is partly an art
form; it is not just pure reason. If it were pure reason, then somebody would have figured it out long ago. That’s why I believe that
all speculators must analyze their own emotions to find out just
what level of stress they can endure. Every speculator is different;
every human psyche is unique; every personality is exclusive to
that one person. Learn your own emotional limits before attempting to
speculate—that is my advice to anyone who has ever asked me what
makes a successful speculator. If you can’t sleep at night because of
your stock market position, then you have gone too far. If this is
the case, then sell your position down to the sleeping level.
“On the other hand, I believe that anyone who is intelligent,
conscientious, and willing to put in the necessary time can be successful on Wall Street. As long as they realize the market is a business like any other business, they have a good chance to prosper.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 235

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 235 •

“I believe that irresistible forces are at work behind all major
movements in the stock market. This is all the successful speculator needs to know—just be aware of the movements and act upon
that knowledge. It is too difficult to match up world events or current events with the movements of the stock market. This is true
because the stock market moves ahead of world events. The stock
market is not operating in the present or reflecting the present, it
is operating on what is yet to be, the future. The market often
moves contrary to apparent common sense and world events, as if
it had a mind of its own. Remember, it is designed to fool most of
the people most of the time. Eventually, the truth of why it moved
as it did will emerge.
“It is therefore foolish to try to anticipate the movement of the
market based on current economic news and current events, such
as the purchasing manager’s report, the balance of payments, the
Consumer Price Index and unemployment figures, or even the
rumor of war, because these are already factored into the market.
“It is not that I ignored these facts or was ignorant of them; I
wasn’t. The truth is that I voraciously read every newspaper I
could get my hands on, and I had done so since my youth. I was
well aware of world events, political events, and economic events.
But these facts were not facts I could use to predict the market.
After the market moved, its movement would be rationalized by
the pundits in endless post mortems. Later when the dust had settled, the real economic, political, and world events would eventually be brought into focus by historians telling us why the market
acted as it had. But by that time it was too late to make any money.
“Trying to figure out the why of a market move can often cause
great emotional strife. The simple fact is that the market always precedes economic news, it does not react to economic news. A good
earnings statement is issued by a company, and the stock proceeds

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 236

• 236 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

to fall in price. Why? Because the market has already factored in
those earnings.
“One of the problems with looking too deeply into economic
news is that it may plant suggestions in your mind, and suggestions
can be dangerous to your emotional stock market health.
“I once proved this in a golf game with my old friend Ed Kelley, head of United Fruit. We were playing in a threesome with
Walter Chrysler on the Lake Placid golf course behind my home
one weekend. We always played for between one and two hundred
dollars a hole.
“Kelley was the better golfer, a scratch handicap. On the fifteenth hole, I said to Kelley, ‘Ed, you’re by far the best golfer in
our group. Have you ever thought about that big boulder on the
left side of the fairway on seventeen?’
“He answered, ‘Why would I think about that, J.L.? I’ve never
come near it. It’s you that always hits that, isn’t it?’
“ ‘I’ve hit it a few times, yes, but I think today is your day to hit
it, Ed.’
“ ‘Please, J.L.,’ he laughed.
“ ‘No, Ed, suppose you hit it and your ball goes flying off into
the lake.’
“ ‘Impossible. Then I’d look like you,’ he said.
“We played on for a hole with no mention of the boulder. As
we teed up on the seventeenth, I said ‘You know I’m famous for
my hunches, Ed, and I’ve got a feeling, a hunch, you’re going to
hit that boulder today. In fact, I want to make a wager that you do.’
“ ‘J.L., don’t throw your money away, no matter how easy it is
for you to make it. What do you want to bet, a hundred?’ Kelley
said.
“ ‘No, Ed, let’s make it three hundred. Off the boulder and into
the lake.’
“ ‘It’s your funeral, J.L.,’ Kelley said.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 237

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 237 •

“ ‘Maybe it is my funeral, just don’t you forget to miss that
boulder.’ I smiled and stepped back. Ed addressed the ball and took
a mighty swing. The ball arched up like a rainbow and descended
directly onto the rock, careening off like a demented pool ball
directly into the lake.
“ ‘J.L. you jinxed me!’ Kelley yelled. ‘You made me do that. I
never came close to that boulder in my life!’
“ ‘No Ed, it wasn’t me,’ I answered. ‘It was the power of suggestion, the power of the subconscious mind, that made you do
that. I know you’re good at your business, Ed, but be careful if you
ever try to play the market. You get that all the time in the market,
the power of suggestion infiltrating the subconscious. Believe me,
Ed, I’m an expert. I’ve been broke enough times, haven’t I?’
“ ‘J.L., I’m speechless.’
“ ‘Ed, just thank me for the cheap lesson today.’
“ ‘J.L., I have no intention of playing the market. So I don’t
think I’ll thank you for that cheap three-hundred-dollar lesson,’
Kelley said. We all laughed.”
Livermore told his sons that he never understood why people
thought making money in the market was easy. “We all have our
own businesses. I would never ask Kelley to tell me the secrets of
the fruit business or Chrysler those of the automotive business. It
just would never dawn on me. So I can never understand when
people ask me how they could make some fast money in the stock
market.
“I always smile and say to myself, ‘How could I possibly know
how you could make money in the market?’ I always evade the
question; it’s like asking me, how someone could make some
quick money performing brain surgery or defending some person
in a murder case. I believe, from experience, that even attempting
to answer these questions would affect a person’s emotions because

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 238

• 238 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

they would have to take a firm position and defend their thoughts,
which could change the next day, depending on the conditions of
the market.
“But I have always fully understood that I am not the only one
who knows that the stock market is the world’s biggest gold mine,
sitting at the foot of the island of Manhattan. A gold mine that
opens its doors every day and invites anyone and everyone in to
plumb its depths and leave with wheelbarrows full of gold bars, if
they can—and I have done it. The gold mine is there all right, and
every day somebody plumbs its depths, and when the bell rings at
the end of the day they have gone from pauper to prince, or gone
from prince to supreme potentate, or gone stony broke. And it’s
always there, waiting.
“I believe that uncontrolled basic emotions are the true and
deadly enemy of the speculator; that hope, fear, and greed are
always present, sitting on the edge of the psyche, waiting on the
sidelines, waiting to jump into the action, plow into the game.”
He told his sons this was one of the reasons he never used the
words bullish or bearish. These words are not in my vocabulary
because I believe they can create an emotional mind-set of a specific market direction in a speculator’s mind. The words bull and
bear cause a trader to get a fixed mind-set. And there is a good
chance the speculator will blindly follow that trend or direction for
an extended period of time, even if the facts change.
“I have found that well-defined trends do not last for extended
periods of time. When people ask me for a tip, I say the market is
currently in an upward, downward, or sideways trend. Or I tell
them that the line of least resistance is currently up or down, as the
case may be, and that is all I say.
“This leaves me with the flexibility to change my mind, according to market behavior. I never try to predict or anticipate the

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 239

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 239 •

market. I only try to react to what the market is telling me by its
behavior.
“I firmly believe that there are always clues as to what is going
to come next. The clues are buried in the behavior of the market—what the market actually does, the here and now—not what
is predicted that it will do. In a way, you have to be like a detective
and solve the puzzle using the facts that are given. But, like a good
detective, a trader should always look for proof of those facts and
reconfirm them if possible. This requires an unemotional analysis.
“And I am one of the few speculators who has never cared in
which direction a stock was going. I simply go with the line of
least resistance. For me it is simply a market play; the direction of
the stock is not important. In fact, one of the reasons I was noted
as the Great Bear of Wall Street was that so few other speculators
had the courage of their convictions to play the downside, the
negative side of the market.
“When stocks decline swiftly and abruptly, they are being
driven by fear. When they rise, they are being driven by hope. If
people are hoping a stock will rise, they are slower to sell. If they
fear the stock will decline, they are usually quick to dump that
stock. This is why declines produce faster, more abrupt market
action. So traders who play the short side must react to faster, more
drastic market patterns and conditions.
“I believe there are no good stocks or bad stocks; there are only
money-making stocks. So there is no good direction to trade, short or
long; there is only the money-making way to trade. I have observed
that to sell short goes against human nature, which is basically optimistic. And I believe that fewer than 5 percent of speculators trade
the short side. There is also no question that it is extremely dangerous to sell short, because the potential loss is unlimited. It takes
strong control of your emotions to trade on the short side.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 240

• 240 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“I observed early on that the stock market moves up roughly a
third of the time, sideways a third of the time, and downward a
third of the time. Therefore, if you only play the bull side of the
market you are out of the action two-thirds of the time, waiting,
hoping, and wondering. For good or bad, I was never one who
wanted to wait and hope and wonder. I wanted to play the game
and win more times than I lost.
“I am fully aware that of the millions of people who will speculate in the stock market, few will spend their full time involved in
the art of speculation. Yet, as far as I am concerned, it is a full-time
job, perhaps even more than a job, perhaps a vocation, to which
many are called and few are singled out for success.
“By far the hardest emotional battle for a speculator is dealing
with tips. The main reason I moved uptown to Fifth Avenue was
to get out of the reach of everyone who was trying to help me by
giving me ‘sure things’ and ‘inside information.’ Beware of all tips!
“Tips come from all sources. One such tip was passed to me by
the chairman of a major American corporation at a dinner party at
my house in Great Neck.
“ ‘How are things going?’ I asked him.
“ ‘Great. We’ve turned the company around—not that it was
really in trouble, but it looks like clear sailing from here. In fact,
our quarterly earnings are coming out in a week, and they are
going to be terrific.’
“I liked him and believed him, so the next morning I bought a
thousand shares to test it out. The earnings came in just as the chief
executive had said they would. The stock rose nicely, the earnings
continued to rise for the next three quarters, and the stock rose
steadily. I was lulled into a feeling of security as the stock continued to rise. Then it stopped and started plummeting in the opposite direction, like a waterfall.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 241

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 241 •

“I called the chairman and said, ‘This fall in your stock price has
me worried. What’s going on?’
“He answered, ‘I know the price has fallen J.L., but we consider
it nothing more than a natural correction. After all, we have had a
pretty damn steady rise in the price of the stock for almost a year
now.’
“ ‘How’s business?’ I asked.
“ ‘Well, our sales are slightly off, and that news may have leaked
out, I’m afraid. Looks like the bears got hold of that information
and are hammering the stock. It’s mostly short selling, a bear raid,
we think. We’ll drive them out on the next rally, squeeze them a
little, eh J.L.?’
“ ‘Are you selling any of your holdings?’ I asked.
“ ‘Absolutely not! Where would I put my money with more
safety than my own company?’
“Sure enough, I later found out that the insiders were busy selling into the stock’s strength the minute they got wind of the business going into a slump. On the bad news, known only to them,
they were dumping as much stock as the market would take.
“I never got mad. It was my stupidity and greed. I knew that all
key executives were basically cheerleaders and that they must
remain positive, must be bearers of only good news. They could
never tell shareholders or competitors that things were not as rosy
as they appeared. In fact, it always made me smile to listen to their
mendacity. The misstatements, the lies, were just a matter of selfpreservation, an essential part of the job of a chief executive officer at every level of power.
“But it was my self-preservation I was interested in, not that of
the top executives and shareholders of the companies I invested in.
Therefore, after a while—and some substantial lost money—I
never asked insiders about how their businesses were doing.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 242

• 242 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“Why waste my time listening to half-truths, shadowy statements, inaccurate projections, and just plain bold-faced lies? I
could just look at the behavior of the stock. The story was clear
in its action. The truth was in the tape for anyone and everyone
to see.
“I have suggested to people who are interested in the stock market that they carry around a small notebook, keep notes on interesting general market information, and perhaps develop their own
stock market trading strategy. I always suggest that the first thing
they write down in their little notebooks should be: ‘Beware of
inside information—all inside information!’
“There is only one way to achieve success in speculation—
through hard work, persistently hard work. If there is any easy
money lying around, no one is going to try to give it to me, this I
know. My satisfaction always came from beating the market, solving the puzzle. The money was the reward, but it was not the main
reason I loved the market. The stock market is the greatest, most
complex puzzle ever invented—and it pays the biggest jackpot.
“Always remember; you can win a horse race, but you can’t beat
the races. You can win on a stock, but you cannot beat Wall Street
all the time. Nobody can.
“People always talked about my instincts, especially after the
Union Pacific story and the San Francisco earthquake. But I never
thought my instincts were that special. The instincts of a seasoned
speculator are really no different from the instincts of a farmer like
my father. In fact, I consider farmers to be the biggest gamblers in
the world. Planting their crops every year, gambling on the price
of wheat, corn, cotton, or soybeans. Choosing the right crop to
plant, gambling on the weather and insects, the unpredictable
demand for the crop—what could be more speculative? These
same principles apply to all businesses. So, after twenty, thirty, or

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 243

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 243 •

forty years of growing wheat or corn, raising cattle, or making
automobiles or bicycles, a person naturally develops a sixth sense,
an intuition, experienced-based hunches about the business. I
consider myself no different.
“The only way I may have differed from most speculators is that
when I felt I was truly right, dead right, then I would go all the
way, shoot the works, as I did during the 1929 market crash, when
I had a line of 1 million shares of stock out on the short side, and
every rise and fall of a single point meant a million dollars to me.
Even then, my biggest play, it was never the money that drove me.
It was the game, solving the puzzle, beating the market that had
confused and confounded the greatest minds in history. For me,
the passion, the juice, the exhilaration was in beating the game, a
game that was a living dynamic riddle, a conundrum to everyone
who speculated on Wall Street.
“Perhaps it was like combat is to a soldier. It’s a mental high
that’s also visceral. All your senses are pushed to the limit.
“I’ve always told you boys to stay in the business you’re good at,
and I was good at speculating. Over the years I took many millions
of dollars out of Wall Street and invested them in Florida land, aircraft companies, oil wells, and new ‘miracle’ products based on
new inventions. They were all abject failures, disasters. I lost every
cent I ever invested in them.
“Just remember, without discipline, a clear strategy, and a concise plan, a speculator will fall into all the emotional pitfalls of the
market and jump from one stock to another, holding a losing position too long, cutting out of a winner too soon for no reason other
than fear of losing the profit. Greed, fear, impatience, and hope
will all fight for mental dominance over the speculator. Then, after
a few failures and catastrophes, the speculator may become demoralized, depressed, and despondent, and may abandon the market

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 244

• 244 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

and the chance to make a fortune from what the market has to
offer.
“Develop your own strategy, discipline, and approach to the
market. I offer my suggestions as one who has traveled the road
before you. Perhaps I can act as a guide for you and save you from
falling into some of the pitfalls that befell me.
“But in the end, the decisions must be your own.”

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 245

*

chapter thirteen

*

Livermore’s Luck Sours

In war there is no substitute for victory.
General Douglas MacArthur

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 246

• 246 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

THE USUAL FOURSOME WAS GATHERED FOR LIVERMORE’S

usual Monday night high-stakes bridge game: Walter Chrysler, Alfred Sloan, Ely Culbertson, and Jesse Livermore. There was a
knock at the closed library door.
“Come in,” Livermore said.
The butler entered, leading a cow with a big blue bow tied
around her neck. Dorothy followed him in and said, “I hope I’m
not interrupting.”
“No, darling, of course not. Why would you think you were
interrupting by bringing a living, breathing cow into the library
while we’re playing bridge?” Livermore responded.
“J.L., I did it for a reason. It’s your coffee break now, and you’re
always complaining about how the cream is never fresh, especially
for those solitary six o’clock breakfasts. I thought the cow would
help.”
The players broke up laughing. Dorothy and the butler left after
the butler served the coffee. The cow was left behind. The foursome
returned to their bridge hands and started to play, ignoring the cow,
who was just standing there looking around when Chrysler said,
“J.L. I think you better get that bovine out of here before she does
her business on your twenty-thousand-dollar Persian carpet.”
They cracked up again as they watched Livermore get up and
personally escort the cow out of the library, yelling for Dorothy
and the butler.
Dorothy was the perfect foil for Livermore. She was his mirror
image, his perfect match, and he knew it. She was spontaneous, he
was reserved; she blurted out whatever was in her brain, and no
one ever knew what was really in Livermore’s brain. Together they
made larger people of each other, and they both knew it.
Livermore’s greatest years, personally and in the market, were
between 1920 and 1930. He entered the 1930s with great hope,

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 247

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 247 •

but he was faced with increasingly severe personal problems.
Dorothy was drinking heavily and they were fighting constantly.
The boys were always sent away to school and summer camp. They
felt alienated and distant from their parents and, as a result,
shunned them.
Jesse Jr., a remarkably handsome, high-spirited boy, was growing into manhood and starting to get into trouble. He was having
difficulty in school and fighting with both his parents when he was
at home for the summer.
Livermore himself was always attracted to beautiful women.
Showgirls were his Achilles’ heel. He had a magnetic presence
thanks to his power, money, and mysterious ways. Women were
attracted to him like moths to a flame. Showgirls and actresses were
a perfect setup for him. He could date them, go out, have a good
time, then usually forget about them and move on to the next relationship.
But his liaisons were constantly filtering back to Dorothy. She
hated it. She had been 18 when she married him, and she had no
experience with men other than Livermore. She was frustrated
and hurt. He was the love of her life, and she could feel him drifting away from her.
This all manifested itself in payback when Dorothy met a very
handsome treasury agent, a prohibition specialist named J. Walter
Longcope. She had an affair of her own. Longcope was semifamous
for his undercover work in New York City in 1927. Handsome as
a movie star, he had the good looks of a young Gary Cooper.
Longcope was part of a group of revenue agents who posed as
thirsty college students looking for fun. They busted the flamboyant Texas Guinan, a famous woman of the 1920s, who ran one of
the biggest speakeasies in New York.
Longcope was quoted as saying his undercover group spent
$7,000 in expense account money, drinking and dining while
