
Figure 7.34 Oops! buys in a down trend on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday.

120

Figure 7.35 Oops! after the 17th trading day of the month.
That could be, but let me hastily add I first became aware of this "window of opportunity" in 1962 when I
read Art Merrill's classic, The Behavior of Prices on Wall Street. I believe Merrill, a delightful, white-haired
grandfather figure, was the first to note the rally tendency at this time and fully discussed it in his works.
All I have done is add my Oops! entry, a reasonable stop and exit, to a known market bias. To the best
of my knowledge, no one noticed this same pattern or tendency exists in Bonds until 1988 when I revealed it
to my students; so again, we have lots of out-of-sample experience. This is not a conclusion looking for a
promise. Merrill and others, notably Norm Fosback and Glen Parker, have suggested the end-of-the-month
stock rally is due to mutual funds balancing and window-dressing their holdings. Once I discovered that
Bonds rally at this time, I took the position that stocks rally not because of the funds but because of Bonds.
As go Bonds, so go stocks. Always keep in mind Bonds (interest rates) are the dog that wag the tail, which is
stocks.
Virtually any time you have a bullish outlook or bias in the market, Oops! buys are worth taking, just as
Oops! sells are worth taking when you have a bearish outlook. This pattern works wonders, given an
underlying reason. It is the single best pattern I have discovered; enjoy it, treat it with care, use it with
wisdom.

Chapter 8

Separating the Buyers from the Sellers

If it is true there is a buyer for every seller, how can prices move up and down?

Which came first, the chicken or the egg, the buyer or the seller I suppose this is the ultimate Zen
koan that speculators must answer before attaining enlightenment. On the surface, it seems prices should
never vary much if you must have a seller to give shares or contracts to a buyer. Shouldn't they balance
each other out,.
In a perfect world they would but this is an imperfect world and an even more imperfect game of
chance. Reality, as read in your daily newspaper or spoken in quotes from your broker, tells us prices do
move, often wildly. The reason for price changes is not the amount of shares or contracts bought and sold;
after all, they are matched. The reason price fluctuates, is thar one side, the buyer or the seller, blinks.
In other words, one side in this equation wants to establish a position and will pay up, or sell down.
The imbalance that causes price change is. not one of volume but of immediacy, the side that wants it and
wants, it now, is the side that pushes prices higher or lower.

121

122
As mentioned, we can break down the amount of buying and selling that took place in a given day by
using the opening price. This chapter describes the elements of a trading system and approach I used to make
more than $1,000,000 in 1987.
Consider this: each day the commodity opens for trading at a price established by an open outcry based
on the buy and sell orders that have built up overnight.
On March 27, 1998, May Bellies opened at 46.20, traded down to a low at 45.95 and up to a high at
48.60. Buyers were able to "push" prices 2.40 points above the open and .25 points below the opening. We
have two swings here, the upswing of 2.40 points and a downswing of .2 5. Price closed for the day at 48.32
up from the previous day's close at 46.40.
The following charts show the greatest swing values marked off so you can visually see the actual
workings in a real market. Figure 8.1 is of Soybeans in March 1990. Each day you have a buy swing and a
sell swing. The direction of the close ± the open tells us which side won the battle. In this case, after the
open, a selling wave was established and price went down that .25 in Bellies amount; we then closed
higher. If the day after the up close, price moves more than .25 points below the opening, we have a new
"amount" of sellers in the marketplace. Thus a sell signal may be in effect as we have drawn more sellers
in today than yesterday.

Figure 8.1 Soybeans (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

123
We can take this a little further. If I add up all the open to low swings for the past few days, I have an
average of the amount of selling swings that have taken place and suspect that any swing from today's open
that exceeds this average may be indicative of a sell signal.
But hold on, it is a bit more complicated. To really get a handle on the sellers, you need to take this
measure on just days that closed above the opening, as this swing value is the amount price could decline
without triggering a down close day.
By the same token, if you were to add up the swings from the open to the daily highs (on down close
days), you would arrive at the swing values the market could rally without setting off a wave of buying
resulting in an up close.

Greatest Swing Value
I call this concept "greatest swing value (GSV)." It can be used in many profitable ways. The more
work you do with the concept, the more you will appreciate the logic of finding the upswings on down days
and downswings on up days. I categorize these swings as "failure swings": the market could swing that
much, yet not hold it or follow through, and then closed in the opposite direction.
Let's look at some things you could do with these values. You could determine the average failure
swings, say for the past few days, and use that as your entry added or subtracted to the next day's opening.
Or how about taking all the failure swings for X number of days and then take one or two standard
deviations of that value added to the value to trigger your entry?
I will start with a simple and profitable way of using these values for trading the Bond market. My
first step is to create a setup for the trade, as I don't want to trade on just one technical goody all by itself
My setup will be an oversold market: prices have been declining so a rally of some sort should be in the
future, and I am combining this with one of my prized possessions, the TDWs, as discussed earlier.
In this case, the first part of the setup is to have today's close lower than the close 5 days ago,
suggesting Yin may turn into Yang. I also want to limit my buying to only one of 3 days of the week; they
are Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday.
Once that part of the setup exists, I will take the difference from open to the high for each of the past 4
days and divide that by 4 to get the average "buy swing." I want real proof the market is tracking in fresh
ground, new territory, so I will be a buyer above the opening at an amount equal to 180 percent of the
4-day swing value average.

124
The sell signal is a mirror image in that I take the distance from the open to the low for each of the last 4
days and divide by 4 to get the average. This is also multiplied by 180 percent and subtracted from the
opening if the sell setup exits.
The sell setup consists of Bonds closing greater than the close 6 days ago, and for even better
performance, I would also like to see the price of Gold lower than the price of Gold 20 days ago.
Whether long or short, my stop is $1,600. I will take profits on the first profitable opening after being in
the trade for 2 days. The results of this program from 1990 to 1998 are shown in Figure 8.2. As you can see,
they are rather remarkable telling us the importance of setup criteria coupled with the greatest swing value
concept. Frankly, I do not know of any Bond systems being sold by all the technical hot shots that can match
these results.

Stock Index Trading with Greatest Swing Value
The same basic formula works for trading the S&P 500. Again, we will take 180 percent of the 4-day
average buy swing value (the highs minus the opens) and, for sell, the 4-day average swing sell value (closes
minus the lows). As you might suspect, the results can be dramatically improved by demanding Bonds close
higher than 15 days ago for a buy and lower than 15 days ago for a sell. Fundamentals do make a difference;
don't let any frayed cuff chartist or fast-talking technician tell you otherwise. Our TDW filter will be to buy
on Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday. Shorts will be taken any day but Monday. The setup also consists of a
close lower than 6 days ago for a buy, higher than six days ago for a sell, giving us an overextended market
condition.
The results say it all, $105,675 of profits with 67 percent winning trades using a flat dollar stop of
$2,500 and the bailout exit (Figure 8.3). Not as much money was made on the short side, but money was
made; and considering the gargantuan bull market this took place within, the results are pretty good. Proof
comes from the average profit per trade of $427.

Better than It Looks
The results shown may also be considerably better than they appear. This is because my computer
software does not allow us to bring into play a protective stop on the day of entry, that you can use in
real-time trading. Thus our real time trading stop is most likely going to be closer to the market than what
the

125

Figure 8.2 Greatest swing values in the bonds.

computer shows. In real-time trading, I will use a stop at or slightly above or below the open, once I am filled
on a long or short.
If price goes back there, after rallying the percentage of the swing value required to trigger a signal, the
move we were playing for is questionable, we got a momentum run, but it didn't stick. In absence of this
stop, you certainly must have one taking out the low of the day, this would be a sure sign of failure, thus
resulting in less loss than illustrated by the computer printout.

126

Figure 8.3 Greatest Swing value at .80 in the S&P 500.

More Uses for the Concept
Ihave also used this idea to help me when I am confused. If I am in a position and looking for a place
to exit, or maybe want to establish a position but do not have any clear-cut entry points, I will use the GSV
to tell me when the current spate of buying/selling has been reversed. All I need to do is calculate the buy
and sell swing values running the average as a tight stop or entry point.

127
Intraday traders can use this value a bit differently. What many of them want to do (not me, though)
is sell what should be an overbought area and, buy an oversold area. In this case, the GSV will tell you
about how far above the open you can sell, the largest failed value of the past few days, and then you
would place a stop and reverse slightly above that value. You would buy below the open a distance of the
largest failed down swing value, with a stop below that.
Here is a case in point. Table 8.1 shows the daily action of the S&P 500 in March 1998 along with
the sell swing values. Once we arrive at the 4-day average on March 16 and multiply it by 180 percent we
have a buy point (5.50 points) that much below the opening on the 17th with a fill at 1086.70. Table 8.1
shows how it looked.
Your stop on the long should be 225 percent of the 4-day average swing value of 3.57 or 8.00 - the
1092.20 open giving us a stop at 1084.20.
You can always determine the general area where a market should find support and resistance with
the GSV concept. My work suggests contra trend moves of 180 percent with a 225 percent stop work
quite well.
Yet another way I have traded and made money with this idea is to wait for a down close in the S&P
500 on Friday. I then buy Monday at the open plus Friday's high minus Friday's open swing value. I back
this with Bonds closing on Friday greater than they did 15 days ago. The following results show simply
using the bailout exit and a $2,500 stop. Practically speaking, I exit the trade at the open minus the swing
value, unless the swing value is very large. In that case, I admit defeat if price trades below the lowest
price seen in the day prior to going long. The time period here is from 1982 through March 1998. This is
the most successful interday mechanical trading technique I know of.
It does not require a quote machine, any software, or constant phone calls to your broker. Once the
setup is present (Bonds greater than 15 days ago, and Friday closes down), you buy at the next day's open
plus the buying swing value from Friday. Certainly, this takes no great skill, only the willingness
to

Table 8.1 Daily Action of the S&P 500

128

Figure 8.4 Greatest swing value buying on Mondays following a down close.

patiently wait for trades, then the gumption to put them on (see Figure 8.4).
Similar trading strategies can be developed for all markets using the GSV concept; just make certain
you first define valid setups for the buys and sells. My favorite setups are days of the week, highly correlated
data2 streams, seasonals, market patterns, and overbought/sold conditions.

Some Pointers
Over the years, I have tried various time periods to see whether there is any ideal number of days to use
in the calculation. My original thought was that one would want to use a 10-day period to arrive at the best
average; after all, the more observations of swing value variance the more stable the answer should be, or so
I thought. I was wrong on that. In almost all cases, the previous 1 to 4 days produce the best value in trading
or developing systems.
The basics here involve volatility breakouts above or below the opening. The amount of breakout we
are looking for is the amount that contained moves up to this point. Thus a critical element is to only take
buy signals after down days, sells after up days.
Finally, keep in mind this is a "dumb" technique, it knows not when a big trade will come or even
when a winning trade will be delivered on a silver platter. That is why you cannot pick and choose these
trades, you must simply take them, one at a time, as they come out of the hopper. If you pick and choose,
you will invariably pick the losers and walk away from the winners. It is nothing personal, we all do, and the
way to beat this devil is to take 'em all.

129
To my way of thinking, the GSV concept is the most solid and logical approach to volatility
breakouts. This failed swing measure has such great merit that I hope someone else, maybe you, will take
it past the point I have reached. Perhaps the better answer lies in the standard deviation approach
mentioned earlier, perhaps in using the GSV in relationship to the previous day's range. I am really not
certain. What I am certain of is that this is one of the most powerful techniques in my bag of tricks and
perhaps the most durable. It has served me well since I had the insight into the idea in 1977. Fancy math
may improve the results, but it is not necessary to make this work.

Chapter 9

Short-Term Trading from a Quote Screen

The markets can be understood looking backward but must be traded looking forward

What I have shared with you so far is the general way- I trade. I use daily- bar charts to set up patterns
and relationships that usually spur short-term moves of 2 to 4 days. This is my style it may not be yours.
People like the idea of (day- trading as there Is no risk of anything “hapening overnight." Their
fear is a large adverse move may take place from today's close to tomorrow's opening. Their fear is news.
change. and uncontrollable price action. They like the idea that at the end of the day it is all over, win,
lose, or draw. There are no anguishing losses to take home and interrupt your sleep. Make no mistake
about it, all this is true. but for every-thing you get in life you give up something in life. What you give
up when day trading is any opportunity at all to catch a large and sustained move as mentioned earlier.
To most people, the term “short-term trading" means being glued to a quote screen throughout the
market trading day. They envision images of high-pressure guy or girl with a phone in each car, screaming
something, like "Buy Chicago, sell New York.".

131

132
Certainly, this type of trading is hectic, and if you are going to trade this way, you had better make
certain you have the temperament required for the job. I will tell you what I think that temperament is, then
tell you what my quest for this Holy Grail of commodity trading has revealed.
Quote screen traders need three qualities; intensity, the ability to make intelligent choices, and the
capacity to react without any more thinking to the conditions at hand.
If you are the type who needs time to make a decision, or freezes, refusing to take action once a
decision has been made, this is not your game. Winning at this game requires making instant decisions and
immediately reacting; there is no time for pontificating or reconsidering. If you cannot make decisions this
way, you will be slaughtered in a matter of months. It is a game of the quick and the dead. If you are not
quick, you will be dead. It is as simple as that. Shortterm trading of this nature requires the physical ability
to instantly pounce on a market and just as instantly reverse the decision you made just a few seconds ago, if
that is what conditions dictate. It is a good thing the meek inherit the earth because they will never get rich
as day traders.
Following the interday ebb and flow of prices on a screen, day after day after day, requires the ability to
be focused and intense every hour of each trading session. This is not an occupation for daydreamers. If you
cannot maintain concentration, you will get hurt; it is forgetting to do what you should do, not being there
(physically or mentally) at that one critical minute, 60 seconds, that spells the difference between life and
death in your trading. It is not easy work to stay this focused and intense, particularly when your spouse calls
to ask you some mundane question about the garden or plumbing at home, or a close friend calls to chat. Do
you have the guts to tell them you can't talk now, to hang up on a close friend, to refuse to take calls from
your wife or husband, If so you are qualified for the job, if not, better rethink day trading.
I assure you the instant you get distracted by that phone call is the instant the market will have a major
move, catching you off guard. Well, don't say I didn't warn you. Now let's look at the object of this game.
You must also be able to change your view of the future in an instant. This is not a career for hardheaded
people.

How a Quote-Screen Trader Makes Money
A short-term trader has one objective: to catch the current trend of the market. That is it. That is all you
should try to do.
It sounds easy, but trust me-it is far from simple, and for two reasons. The first is that trend
identification is an art and science unto itself, and more abstract art at that.

133
It is a blend of Picasso and Cezanne with a splash of Chagall tossed in for fun. Second, even if you
correctly spot the trend change, your reactive mind may screw things up and blow it for you. This is
especially true if you are long with a loss or nominal profit and suddenly get a sell signal.
Do not confuse day trading with your long-term outlook; that is about something happening in the
future. Day traders don't-can't-care about the future. Your only concern is being in phase with the current
short-term trend. Your mission, should you accept this assignment, is to mimic what the market is doing. If
it is up, you should be long, if down, short. Trying to forecast short-term tops and bottoms is a surefire way
to rapidly deplete your bankroll. You want to be with the trend; it is your only friend.
Since greed is a stronger emotion than fear, your response will most often be to "hold and hope"
which means you bypass the current new trend, holding on to the long position hoping the sell will be
wrong when you should have spun on a dime. Dopes hope, winners are spinners.
My point is we are trying to do two very difficult things, beat the identification of trend changes and
beat our "brains" by outsmarting ourselves. That is the challenge. My first technique for identifying trend
changes comes from the short-term "ringed" high and low concept we went over in Chapter 1. This
concept allows us to identify short-term swing points. A trend change from up to down occurs when a
short-term high is exceeded on the upside, a short-term trend change from down to up is identified by price
going below the most recent short-term low. Figure 9.1 depicts such trend changes in a classic manner,
study it well because reality comes next.

Figure 9.1 Classic patterns of trend change.

134

Swing Points as Trend Change Indication
Here are a couple of pointers on this technique. Although the penetration of one of these short-term
highs, in a declining market, indicates a trend reversal to the upside, some penetrations are better than others.
There are only two ways a short-term high or low is broken. In an uptrending market, the low that is
violated or fallen below will be either a low prior to making a new rally high, as shown at (A) in Figure 9.2,
or a low that occurs after decline of a high that then rallies making a lower short-term high; it then declines
below the low prior to the rally that failed to make a new high, as shown at (B).
The "better" indication of a real trend change is the violation of the low shown at (A).

Figure 9.2 Breaking a short-term high or low.

135
By the same token, a trend reversal to the upside will occur in one of the two following patterns: in
(A) the rally peak prior to a new low is violated to the upside, or in (B) the market makes a higher low, then
rallies above the short term high between those two lows. In this case, again, the (A) pattern is the "better"
indication of a real trend reversal.
With that in mind, look at Figure 9.3, which shows a 15-minute bar chart of the September Bonds in
1989. The major trend moves were adequately captured by this technique.
Figure 9.4 again shows Bonds, this time in April 1998, and again you see how the penetration of
short-term high and low points enables a trader to be in phase with most of the trend moves for a 10-day
time period.
You can use this technique two ways. Some traders may simply buy long and sell short on these
changes in trend. That's a basic simplistic way to use this technique. A more educated approach would be
to take buy/sell signals when confirmed by TDW, TDM, secondary data, and so on, thus filtering our trades
with something other than wiggles and waggles on a chart.
Finally, we may use this indication of trend to tell us we can buy on pullbacks, and sell on rallies in
unison with the underlying trend. If our indication of trend is positive, and there has been a reversal to the
upside, then we can take buy signals from short-term measures or techniques.
