
imperious Oveta Culp Hobby got behind. He thought that she should have a little more empathy for her
paperboy, since she owned her own newspaper, the Houston Post. But he began to worry that she would skip
out on him.
“I paid my own bills monthly, always on time, and I always showed up to deliver the papers. I was a
responsible kid. I got presented with a war bond for perfect service. With the customers, I didn’t want to let
the receivables build up. I tried all kinds of things with Oveta Culp Hobby—leaving notes—and finally
ended up knocking on her door at six in the morning to catch her before she could escape.” Shy in other
ways, Warren was never timid when it came to money. When Mrs. Hobby answered the door, “I handed her
an envelope, and she had to pay me.”
After school, Warren rode the bus back to Spring Valley and jumped on his bike to deliver the Star. On rainy
winter afternoons, he would sometimes come off his paper route and appear on the doorstep of his friends’
homes. He always wore battered canvas sneakers, so full of holes that his feet were swimming to the ankles;
his skin would be pimply with cold inside a soaking-wet oversize plaid shirt. For some reason he never
seemed to wear a coat. Motherly Mrs. Whoever would smile and shake her head at the pitiful sight, bundle
him up, and towel him off while he basked in her warmth.44
At the end of 1944, Warren filed his first income tax return. He paid only seven dollars in taxes; to get it
down to that, he deducted his wristwatch and bicycle as business expenses. He knew that was questionable.
But at the time, he was not above cutting a few corners to get where he wanted to go.
At age fourteen, he had now fulfilled the promise laid out in his favorite book, One Thousand Ways to Make
$1,000. His savings now totaled around a thousand dollars. He took great pride in that accomplishment. So
far, he was ahead of the game, way ahead of the game, and getting ahead of the game, he knew, was the way
to his goal.

10
True Crime Stories
Washington, D.C. • 1943–1945

Bad grades, tax evasion, and running away were the least of Warren’s troubles in junior high. His parents
didn’t know it, but their son had turned to a life of crime.
“Well, I was antisocial, in eighth and ninth grade, after I moved there. I fell in with bad people and did
things I shouldn’t have. I was just rebelling. I was unhappy.”
He started with minor schoolboy pranks.
“I loved print shop. I used to make calculations in print-shop class of the frequency of letters and numbers.
That was something I could do by myself. I could set type, you know, and that sort of thing. I enjoyed
printing up all kinds of things.
“I made up a letterhead from the American Temperance Union, Reverend A. W. Paul, President. I’d write
letters to people on that letterhead saying that for years I’d lectured around the country on the evils of
drink, and in these travels my appearances were always accompanied by my young apprentice, Harold.
Harold was an example of what drink could do to men. He’d stand there on the stage with a pint, drooling,
unable to comprehend what was going on around him, pathetic. Then I said that, unfortunately, young
Harold died last week, and a mutual friend had suggested that you might be a replacement for him.”1

The people with whom Warren felt most comfortable encouraged his antisocial impulses. He and a couple of
new friends, Don Danly and Charlie Tron, took to hanging out at the new Sears store. Near Tenley Circle
where Nebraska and Wisconsin Avenues intersected, the store was an eye-opening swoop of modern design
dropped into the middle of Tenleytown, the second oldest neighborhood in Washington. Letters the height of
a man spelled out SEARS on a curved metal deck several stories above sidewalk level.2 On the roof behind
the Sears sign was hidden a great novelty, an open-air parking garage, which quickly became popular with
high school kids as a place to park and neck. The store had become the hangout for all the junior high kids
too. Warren and his friends rode the H2 bus there at lunchtime or on Saturdays.
Most of the kids liked the dark little lunch counter Sears had installed in the basement, with its mesmerizing
conveyer belt that spit out doughnuts all day long. But Warren, Don, and Charlie preferred Woolworth’s
across the street, even though the police station was on the opposite corner. Woolworth’s sat kitty-corner
from Sears. They could eat lunch and case the joint through the windows.
After their hamburgers, the boys would stroll down the stairs into Sears’s lower level, bypassing the lunch
counter and going straight to the sporting-goods section.
“We’d just steal the place blind. We’d steal stuff for which we had no use. We’d steal golf bags and golf
clubs. I walked out of the lower level where the sporting goods were, up the stairway to the street, carrying
a golf bag and golf clubs, and the clubs were stolen, and so was the bag. I stole hundreds of golf balls.”
They referred to their theft as “hooking.”
“I don’t know how we didn’t get caught. We couldn’t have looked innocent. A teenager who’s doing
something wrong does not look innocent.3
“I took the golf balls and filled up these orange sacks in my closet. As fast as Sears put them out, I was
hooking them. I had no use for them, really. I wasn’t selling them then. It’s hard to think of a reason why
you had this multiplying group of golf balls in the closet, this orange sack that’s just getting bigger all the
time. I should have diversified my theft. Instead, I made up this crazy story for my parents—and I know they
didn’t believe me, but—I told them I had this friend, and his father had died. He kept finding more of these
golf balls that his father had bought. Who knows what my parents talked about at night.”4
The Buffetts were aghast. Warren was their gifted child, but by the end of 1944, he had become the school
delinquent. “My grades were a quantification of my unhappiness. Math—Cs. English—C, D, D. Everything
Xs for self-reliance, industry, courtesy. The less I interacted with teachers, the better it was. They actually
put me in a room by myself there for a while where they would kind of shove my lessons under the door like
Hannibal Lecter.”5
When graduation day came and the students were told to show up in a suit and tie, Warren refused. With that
his principal, Bertie Backus, had had enough.
“They wouldn’t let me graduate with the class at Alice Deal, because I was so disruptive and I wouldn’t
wear clothes that were appropriate. It was major. It was unpleasant. I was really rebelling. Some of the
teachers predicted that I was going to be a disastrous failure. I set the record for checks on deficiencies in
deportment and all that.
“But my dad never gave up on me. And my mother didn’t either, actually. Neither one. It’s great to have
parents that believe in you.”
Yet by the spring of 1945, as Warren was starting high school, the Buffetts had had enough too. By now, it
was no great mystery how to motivate Warren. Howard threatened to take away the source of his money.
“My dad, who was always supportive of me, said, ‘I know what you’re capable of. And I’m not asking you to
perform one hundred percent, but you can either keep behaving this way or you can do something in

relation to your potential. But if you don’t do it, you have to give up the paper routes.’ And that hit me. My
dad was low-key, just sort of letting me know he was disappointed with me. And that killed me probably a lot
more than his telling me I couldn’t do this or that, you know.”

11
Pudgy She Was Not
Washington, D.C. • 1944–1945

The disruption Warren had created in his family’s life undoubtedly made his father’s already challenging
career as a new Congressman no easier. Members of the 78th Congress fraternized under a sort of jolly
monarchy ruled by House Speaker Sam Rayburn, a Texas Democrat who kept five portraits of Robert E. Lee
in his office, all facing south. The House that Rayburn oversaw was a comfortable home for the typical
backbencher, an elbow-grabber who lived for county fairs and the chance to kiss somebody’s grandma, a
beauty queen, or any secretary he could catch. Famed for his artful behind-the-scenes vote-wrangling and
powerful oratory, Rayburn operated a sort of private saloon in the afternoons where he served “bourbon and
branch” water to his favorites.
Naturally, Howard was not among them. Besides the fact that he was a Republican, his idea of a good time
was reading the Congressional Record every night. He never went near a saloon. And yet, in many other
ways, he did fit the profile of the typical Congressman of the era—hailing from a small city, graduate of a
state university, middling student, background in community politics, Rotarian from the middle of the middle
class, not part of the country-club set, and a foe of Communism.
But instead of joining the rest of his peers in what amounted to a club and beginning the climb up the ladder
of power, Howard Buffett quickly gained a reputation as perhaps the least-backslapping Congressman ever to
represent his state. He stayed miles away from the “rubber chicken circuit” of campaign money and
vote-getting events that occupied so many Congressmen, and made it known his vote was not for sale or
barter. He turned down a raise because the people who elected him had voted him in at a lower salary. He
went around with eyebrows lofted at the perks that came with being a Congressman. The subsidized
restaurants, the payrolls padded with friends, relatives, and mistresses, the greenhouse that supplied free
plants, the “stationery store” that sold, at wholesale prices, everything from tires to jewelry—Howard was
shocked by all of it and let that be known.
His long-standing isolationism was shared by a friend, Republican leader Robert Taft.1 But isolationists were
no longer entering Congress; they were leaving or retiring. Moreover, with the country at war and the
government running at a deficit, Howard was obsessed with the quixotic goal of trying to return the country
to the “gold standard.” The United States had dropped the gold standard in 1933. Ever since, the Treasury
had been printing money freely to finance first the New Deal and now the war. Howard feared that someday
the United States might wind up like Germany in the 1930s, when people had to cart wheelbarrows of money
down the street to buy a head of cabbage—the direct result of Germany being forced to deplete its gold stock
to pay reparations after World War I.2 The economic chaos that resulted was one of the major factors that
had led to Hitler.
Certain that the government was going to spend the country into ruination, Howard bought a farm back in
Nebraska to serve as a refuge for the family when everybody else starved. A distrust of government bonds
was so well-entrenched in the Buffett household that when the family held a powwow about giving a savings
bond to somebody for a birthday present, young Bertie, nine years old, thought her parents were trying to put
one over on the guy. “But won’t he know they’re worthless?”3 she asked.

Howard’s rigidity impeded him from doing his job, which was to legislate.
“He would lose these votes in the House, maybe 412 to 3. My dad would be among the three. And it just
didn’t get to him. He was very much at peace. It would have gotten to me—I get mad when I lose. I can’t
ever recall seeing him depressed or despondent. He just figured he was doing the best he could. He went his
own way, and he knew why he was there—for us kids. He had a very pessimistic appraisal of where the
country was going, but he was not a pessimist.”
The way Howard invariably held aloft his principles—instead of working toward Republican Party goals by
joining coalitions—strained relationships with his colleagues and took a toll on the family. Leila cared about
fitting in; other people’s opinions mattered to her. She was also competitive. “Why can’t you be a little more
flexible,” she said, “like Ken Wherry?”—the junior Nebraska senator who was moving quickly up the ranks.
Howard was having none of it. “We believed in him,” says Doris, “but it was hard to see him lose all the
time.” That was an understatement. All the Buffetts admired Howard’s fortitude and credit their father for
teaching them integrity. But each of the children absorbed in their own way a desire to belong that somehow
muted or balanced the family streak of independence.
Her husband’s stance as the lone wolf of the party exacerbated Leila’s irritable mood. Still miserable about
living in Washington, she tried to create a miniature Omaha and spent her free time with the women of the
Nebraska delegation. But that free time was limited, for she no longer had a cleaning lady. She felt put upon.
“I gave it all up to marry Howard,”4 she would say, adding this lament to her stories of how she and Howard
had sacrificed for their ungrateful children’s welfare. But rather than teaching those children to help around
the house, she did everything, because “it was just easier to do it myself.” Feelings of martyrdom made her
angry at the kids a lot of the time, especially at Doris, who was having her own issues about fitting in.
Although strikingly pretty, Doris says she never felt that way, and was insecure about whether she was good
enough for the sophisticated Washington crowd of which she longed to be a part. She was invited to the
French Embassy for Margaret Truman’s birthday party and was added to The Debutante Register, as she
began planning to debut as a Princess of Ak-Sar-Ben*7 with the crowd she would have been graduating with
back in Omaha. Warren made fun of her for her pretensions.
Leila, herself a determined striver who cared deeply about appearances, would pore over every bit of news
about the Duchess of Windsor, a penniless commoner who had been rescued by a prince.5 But, unlike the
duchess, who spent the rest of her life amassing one of the world’s most impressive collections of jewels,
Leila’s ambition and pride wrapped themselves in a self-conscious disdain for ostentation. She pictured the
family as a middle-class Midwestern archetype, a Saturday Evening Post magazine cover, and berated Doris
for being socially ambitious.
Still fourteen years old, Warren became a sophomore at Woodrow Wilson High School in February 1945,
upon his graduation from Alice Deal.6 He wanted to be both “special” and “normal” at the same time. Much
less mature than his classmates, he was being carefully watched by his parents, who were determined to see
him straighten out. His paper routes were the source of his autonomy, such autonomy as he now had. And he
had been reading—as well as throwing—the papers.
“I read the comics, the sports section, and looked at the stock pages every morning before I delivered the
newspapers. I read the cartoon Li’l Abner every morning. I had to know what Li’l Abner was doing every
day. His appeal was that he made you feel so smart. You’d read this thing and think, ‘If I was in that
position…this guy is so dumb.’ Because here was Daisy Mae, this incredible woman who was just nuts about
him, and was always chasing after him, and he just kept passing her up and not noticing her. Every
red-blooded American boy in those days would have been just waiting there for Daisy Mae to catch him.”
Daisy Mae Scragg, the hillbilly heroine of the Appalachian cartoon hamlet of Dogpatch, was a bodacious
blonde whose cleavage burst from an off-the-shoulder polka-dot blouse. The dim-witted strongman Li’l
Abner Yokum spent most of his time trying to evade Daisy Mae’s marital designs on him. But the faster he

ran away, the more deaf he seemed to her attention and longing, the more he spurned her, the harder Daisy
Mae chased him. Even though rich and powerful men wooed her, to Daisy Mae there was but one man on
earth, Li’l Abner.7
Besides elusiveness, Li’l Abner’s only apparent asset was his manly physique. Warren’s poor record with
girls so far suggested that if he ever wanted to attract the interest of a girl like Daisy Mae, he had better do
something to make himself more attractive. Now he developed a new interest, which conveniently gave him
an excuse as well for hiding away down in the basement. The way that Frankie Zick could clean-and-jerk
fifty-pound bags of animal feed for hours at a time at South Omaha Feed had impressed him. He got his
friend Lou Battistone interested and they embarked on a weight-lifting program. At the time, weight training
was not the stuff of serious athletes, but it had many qualities that appealed to Warren: systems, measuring,
counting, repetition, and competing with yourself. In search of technique, he had discovered Bob Hoffman
and his magazine, Strength and Health.
Strength and Health was Hoffman’s attempt to overcome the stigma against weight lifting through aggressive
promotion. It was edited, published, and apparently written largely by Hoffman himself. Ads for his products
appeared on nearly every page. “Uncle” Bob’s technical knowledge, his razzle-dazzle, the man’s unflagging
ability to market himself, were striking.
“He was the coach of most of the Olympic team. He was the head of the York Barbell Company, and he was
the author of the Big Arms and the Big Chest books. The basic thing he sold initially was barbell sets. If you
went to a sporting-goods store then, everything was York barbells. You could buy all these different kinds of
sets.”
Warren got a set of dumbbells and a barbell with a set of plates in increments of one and a quarter pounds
that slipped on and off the bar, which he tightened with a little screwdriver that came with the set. He kept
the weights in the basement and was “always down there clanking. My parents got a big kick out of the
whole thing.”
Sometimes he went down to the YMCA to lift weights among other young men. He and Lou took their hobby
seriously, making insider jokes about the “heavy and light” lifting system and “upright rowing motions.” They
paid close attention to everything Uncle Bob wrote. Hoffman knew how to adapt to the tenor of the times.
Everyone knew about the vicious Jap soldier’s ability to withstand pain and suffering, so he wrote that the
point of lifting weights was to fight the Japanese. He illustrated this with a photo of a vicious Jap soldier,
arched in a backbend from his toes to the crown of his head, lifting a huge set of cement barbells over his
chest, training to beat the Allies. Warren was not lifting weights to fight the Japanese, or, for that matter, to
fight anybody. Everything that Uncle Bob wrote, however, inspired him in his competition with himself.
But while Warren was clanking down in the basement, the Republicans were in hell. Franklin Roosevelt had
managed to win a fourth term as President, ensuring the Democrats another four years in the White House.
At the dinner table, the family listened to much ranting from Howard. Then, on April 12, Roosevelt died of a
cerebral hemorrhage, and his Vice President, Harry Truman, succeeded him as President.
Roosevelt’s death sent most of the country into deep mourning, tinged with fear. Three and a half years into
the war, the country had lost the man who made it feel secure, and it had low expectations of Truman. He
retained FDR’s cabinet and sounded so humble that some thought he might be overwhelmed by the job. But
to the Buffetts, no one could be worse than FDR. The family down the street whose father worked for the
Canadian Embassy came to call on their Congressman neighbor upon the President’s death and pay their
condolences. But when they arrived, Doris says, “Yo, ho, ho, we were celebrating.”8
And to Warren, the death of a President meant another way to make money. Newspapers put out special
editions, and he hustled himself out to the street corner, hawking papers while everybody mourned.
One month later, on May 8, 1945, came V-E Day, the formal end of the war in Europe, following Germany’s
unconditional surrender. Again there were special editions to sell, and Warren echoed his father’s political
convictions as a matter of course. But at the time, he was only passingly interested in these adult concerns,

because his real obsession was weight lifting and Bob Hoffman. He spent most of his free time down in the
basement. A few weeks later, when school was out, he could wait no longer. He had to meet his idol, Uncle
Bob. “He was it. I had to see him in person.”
With their parents’ amused blessing, Warren and Lou took off for York, Pennsylvania, hitchhhiking part of
the way.9
“He had this barbell factory up there in York where they turned this stuff out. It was really more of a
foundry. And he had the whole Olympic team working there. John Grimek was the big bodybuilder. Steve
Stanko held the world’s record then for the clean and jerk: three hundred eighty-one pounds. But this is
before they had super-heavyweight classifications.”
In one sense the visit was demoralizing. “The guys did not bulk up the same way in those days. It blew my
mind that here were these guys that were Olympic champions, but a lot of them were small because they
were in smaller-weight classes. And if you saw them in a foundry, wearing foundry-type clothes, they just
looked like nothing.” But in another sense, the sight of those fairly ordinary-looking men lifted the boys’
aspirations. Maybe success in bodybuilding was within their reach. They saw themselves becoming men,
physical specimens who could impress a woman. “Uncle Bob—when he spoke, it was like God was talking to
us. And when you looked at yourself in the mirror, you saw deltoids and abs and the latissimus dorsi and
everything. You learned every muscle group.”
But the most impressive celebrity in Strength and Health—apart from Uncle Bob himself—was not John
Grimek, the greatest bodybuilder in the world. It was a woman.
“There were not a lot of women in Strength and Health. Pudgy Stockton’s about the only one that ever
made it. I liked Pudgy. She was impressive. We talked about her a lot at school.”
That was more than a slight understatement. Warren and Lou were obsessed with Abbye “Pudgy” Stockton,
a work of art in human flesh—taut thighs rippling as her chiseled arms lofted a huge barbell above her
wind-whipped hair, bikini showing off her tiny waist and perky bosom to all the musclemen and gaping
onlookers at Santa Monica’s Muscle Beach. Five foot one and 115 pounds, she could lift a grown man in the
air over her head and do it without sacrificing any of her femininity. As the world’s “Foremost Female
Physical Culturist,” she wrote “Barbelles,” a column in Strength and Health, and conducted a Salon of
Figure Development, “specializing in bust development, figure contouring, and reducing” in Los Angeles.10
“She had the muscle tone of Mitzi Gaynor and the mammary development of Sophia Loren,” says Lou
Battistone. “She was phenomenal. And we—I have to admit to you—we lusted for her.”
Until now, Daisy Mae had been Warren’s fantasy girl. He would always look for the qualities of Daisy Mae
in a woman. But Pudgy—Pudgy was real.
It was not clear, however, exactly what you did if you had a girlfriend like Pudgy.11 The boys puzzled over
ads for “Bob Hoffman’s guide to a successful happy marriage,” which featured “Premarital examination.
How to examine your wife before marriage to make sure she’s ‘intact,’ as well as courtship, why people
marry, and minor forms of lovemaking.” Just what were the minor forms of lovemaking? they wondered.
Even the major forms were largely a mystery to them; the ads in the back of Strength and Health were the
best the 1940s could do in terms of sex education. Don’t worry, Dad, we’re down in the basement, doing a
little studying for our physics exam.
However, in the end, Warren’s fascination with numbers won out.
“You know, you kept measuring that biceps to see if it’d gone from thirteen to thirteen and a quarter
inches. And you were always worried whether you were loosening up the tape or anything. But I never
improved from looking like the Charles Atlas ‘before’ picture. I think my biceps went from thirteen inches
to thirteen and a quarter inches after thousands of curls.
