
Risk Considerations 177

as volatility increases. But the slope of spread 1 is most severe. It loses its value very
quickly as volatility increases, much more quickly than spreads 2 and 3.

For each of our spreads we might logically ask how high volatility can rise before
we begin to lose money. That is, we might want to determine the break-even volatility,
or implied volatility, for each spread. This is simply an extension of the general definition
of implied volatility: the volatility which would have to occur over the life of an option,
or options, such that a position would show neither a profit nor a loss. It is common
among traders to determine the implied volatility of a spread position, just as they
determine the implied volatility of individual options. We can see from Figure 9-3 that
the implied (break-even) volatilities of spreads 1, 2, and 3 are approximately 17%, 20%,
and 22%, respectively.

From a volatility perspective, spread 3 shows the best risk/reward characteristics.
With each spread we are, in a sense, selling volatility, and we would like to do so at the
highest possible price. Would we rather sell something that’s worth 15% (our volatility
estimate) at 17% (the implied volatility of spread 1}, at 20% (the implied volatility of
spread 2), or at 22% (the implied volatility of spread 3}? The higher the implied volatility
of the spread, the greater the margin for error in our volatility estimate and, conse-
quently, the greater the likelihood of showing a profit. Spread 1 has only a 2-percent-
age-point margin for error, while spread 3 has a margin for error more than three times
greater, at 7 percentage points. Spread 2 falls somewhere in between.

Why are we so concerned about our volatility estimate being too low? A trader
might take the view that he is just as likely to overestimate as underestimate volatility.
If this happens, how will it affect the potential outcome of each spread? Suppose we
decide to do spread 1 and volatility turns out to be 18%, three percentage points higher
than our estimate of 15%. Looking at Figure 9-4 we can see that if this happens we will
lose approximately 1.21. Suppose, however, that there is an equal chance that volatility
will turn out to be 12%, three percentage points lower than our estimate. In Figure 9-5,
where we have extended volatility down to 10%, we can see that in this case we will
make approximately 6.95. In a more extreme case, when volatility turns out to be 20%
we will lose 3.95, But if volatility turns out to be 10% we will make 9.64, For each time
we underestimate volatility and show an unexpected loss, we might assume there will
be an equal number of times when we overestimate volatility and show an unexpected
profit. The end result of all these outcomes will be an average profit of approximately
2.86, the predicted profit of the spread at a volatility estimate of 15%.

Suppose that the average result of doing any one of our spreads, 1, 2, and 3, isa
profit of approximately 2.80. If the outcome in each case is identical, why should it
make any difference which spread we choose? While the end result is certainly an
important theoretical consideration, how the end result comes about may be an equally
important practical consideration.

Every trader knows that there are times when he shows a profit and times when
he shows a loss. No one wins all the time. In the long run, however, a good trader’s
profits will more than offset his losses. For example, suppose a trader chooses a strategy
which will show a profit of $7,000 half of the time, and which will show a loss of $5,000
the other half of the time. In the long run he will show an average profit of $1,000. But


178 Chapter 9
Figure 9-4
4 4
spread 3 “|
(long butterfly)
ay OR ET = -
a
o
4
4] aa
¥ —
2 ——
a
®
2
6 44 spread 2
9 ( shaven dale) (ratio vertical spread)
aa
ke -8-
-10-
-124+— T T T r — — T r T —
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Volatility (%)
Figure 9-5
spread 3
(long butterfly)
n
a
3
C)
Se
a. 7 =
3
— oN,
@ oN
o ae |
oa
J spread 1
6- {short straddle)
spread 2
-B4 (ratio vertical spread)
-10-4 — 1 — T T —
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24

Volatility (9%)



Risk Considerations 179

suppose the first time the trader executes the strategy he loses $5,000 and the trader
only has $3,000? Now the trader will not be able to stay in business for all those times
when he is fortunate enough to show a profit of $7,000. Every trader knows that it is
only over long periods of time that good luck and bad luck even out. No experienced
trader will initiate a strategy where short-term bad luck might terminate his trading
career. This is the reason an experienced option trader will tend to avoid spread 1.

Any financial officer knows that it is much easier to manage a steady cash flow
rather than one that swings wildly. This is equally true for an option trader. He must
sensibly manage his finances so that he can avoid being ruined by the periods of bad
tuck which will inevitably occur, no matter how skillfully he trades.

An incorrect volatility estimate may not be the only risk with which an option
trader must be concerned. Every input into a theoretical pricing model represents a risk
to the trader since an incorrect input may alter an option’s theoretical value. These risks
are reflected in the delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho associated with a spread. We can
summarize these risks as follows:

Deita (Directional) Risk-—The risk that the underlying market will move in one
direction rather than another. When we create a position which is delta neutral, we are
trying to ensure that initially the position has no particular preference as to the direction
in which the underlying instrument will move. A delta neutral position does not
necessarily eliminate all directional risk, but it usually leaves us immune to directional
risks within a limited range.

Gamma (Curvature) Risk—The risk of a large move in the underlying contract,
regardless of direction. The gamma position is a measure of how sensitive a position is
to such large moves. A positive gamma position does not really have gamma risk since
such a position will, in theory, increase in value with movement in the underlying
contract. A negative gamma position, however, can quickly lose its theoretical edge with
a large move in the underlying contract. The consequences of such a move must always
be a consideration when analyzing the relative merits of different positions.

Theta (Time Decay) Risk—The risk that time will pass with no movement in the
underlying contract. This is the opposite side of gamma risk. Positions with positive
gamma become more valuable with large moves in the underlying. But if movement
helps, the passage of time hurts. A positive gamma always goes hand in hand with a
negative theta. A trader with a negative theta will always have to consider the risk in
terms of how much time can pass before the spread’s theoretical edge disappears. The
position wants movement, but if the movement fails to occur within the next day, or
next week, or next month, will the spread, in theory, still be profitable?

Vega (Volatility) Risk—The risk that the volatility which we input into the theoretical
pricing model will be incorrect. If we input an incorrect volatility, we will be assuming
an incorrect distribution of underlying prices over time. Since some positions have a
positive vega and are hurt by declining volatility, and some positions have a negative
vega and are hurt by rising volatility, the vega represents a risk to every position. A trader


180 Chapter 9

must always consider how much the volatility can move against him before the potential
profit from a position disappears.

Rho (Interest Rate) Risk—The risk that interest rates will change over the life of the
option. A position with a positive rho will be helped (hurt) by an increase (decline) in
interest rates, while a position with a negative rho will show just the opposite
characteristics.! Generally, the interest rate is the least important of the inputs into a
theoretical pricing model, and it is unlikely, except for special situations, that a trader
will give extensive thought to the rho risk associated with a position.

So far we have compared only the volatility risk associated with spreads 1, 2, and
3. Is there any other risk with which we ought to be concerned? All of our spreads have
a negative gamma, so they will all be adversely affected by a large move in the
underlying contract. In order to compare the relative gamma risks, we can construct a
graph showing the values of the spreads at varying prices of the underlying contract.
This has been done in Figure 9-6. Again, we assume that each spread has approximately
the same theoretical value under our theoretical assumptions, in this case at the current
underlying price of 49.50.

Figure 9-6

4
8 04 we en en a ~
co]
ma
&B a N
= -24 spread 2 rm
(e) {ratio vertical spread)
o spread 3 \
SS 4! (long butterfly) \
o \
o ‘.
2
F 6 spread 1

(short straddle)
-84
-10 T T T T T
47 48 49 50 51 52 53

Underlying Price

1. Of course, we are only considering the interest rate risk as it applies to the evaluation of options.
Changes in interest rates can also affect the evaluation of an underlying contract, such as a bond, or
even the shares in a company. But that is a separate matter.


Risk Considerations 181

Looking at Figure 9-6 we can see that if the underlying contract makes a large
upward move, spread 3 will be the least affected. It can stand a move up to 52.75
without losing its positive theoretical edge. Spreads 1 and 2 can stand upward moves
to only 51.05 and 51.75, respectively. On the downside, spread 1 is still the riskiest
since it loses all its theoretical edge if the underlying market should make a swift move
down to 47.90. Spread 3 is less risky because it can stand a move down to 47.50. But
the least risky on the downside is clearly spread 2, since it never loses all its theoretical
edge. In the most extreme downward move the theoretical edge of spread 2 will
collapse to approximately zero.

PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Considering the vega and gamma risk, spread 3 seems to have the best risk charac-
teristics. It has a larger margin for error in terms of volatility than either spread 1 or 2.
In terms of underlying price movement it can also stand a larger upward move than the
other two spreads. Only when we consider the possibility of a large downward move
does spread 3 not display the best risk characteristics. In this case spread 2 comes in
first. But spread 3 still looks better than spread 1. In theory, a trader ought to be more
willing to execute spread 3 than either spread 1 or 2. In the real world, however,
practical trading considerations may play a role in the trader’s decision.

Even though spread 3, the butterfly, appears to be the best theoretical choice of the
three, it has some practical drawbacks which may make it an unrealistic choice. Spread
3 is a three-sided spread, as opposed to spreads 1 and 2, which are two-sided. A
three-sided spread will probably be more difficult to execute in the marketplace, and is
likely to cost more in terms of the total width of the bid/ask. Ifa trader wants to execute
the complete spread at one time, as is most common, he may not be able to do so at his
target prices. If, on the other hand, he tries to execute one leg? at a time, he will be at
risk from adverse changes in the market until the other legs have been executed.

Additionally, there is the question of market liquidity. In order to obtain a
theoretical edge commensurate with spreads 1 and 2, it was necessary to increase the
size of the butterfly sevenfold to 70 x 140 x 70, If there is insufficient liquidity in the
May 49, 50, and 51 puts to support this size, it may not be possible to execute the
butterfly in the size required to meet our profit expectations. Alternatively, we may be
able to execute part of the spread at favorable prices, but as we increase the size, the
prices may become less satisfactory. Moreover, for a retail customer the increased size
may entail significantly greater transaction costs,

If trading considerations make spread 3 impractical, we may have to choose
between spreads 1 (the straddle) and 2 (the ratio vertical spread). If that happens, spread
2 is the clear winner. It allows fora much greater margin for error in both volatility (vega
risk) and underlying price change (gamma risk}. A trader who is given a choice between
these two spreads will strongly prefer spread 2.

The choice of spreads may not always be as clear as in this example. The superiority
of spread 3, at least from the theoretical standpoint, was relatively obvious. Sometimes,

2. The options which comprise a spread position are sometimes referred to as the /egs of the spread.


182 Chapter 9

however, one spread may be superior with respect to one type of risk, while a different
spread may be superior with respect to a different risk.

Let’s consider three new spreads, 4 (a ratio vertical spread), 5 (a short time spread],
and 6 (a diagonal spread). The total theoretical edge of each spread, as well as their risk
sensitivities (all taken from the theoretical evaluation table in Figure 9-1), are shown in
Figure 9-7. In order to again focus on the risks associated with each spread, the size of
each spread has been adjusted to yield approximately the same theoretical edge.

Since each spread has a negative vega, we will want to consider the volatility risk
if volatility should turn out to be greater than our estimate of 15%. The sensitivity of
each spread to increasing volatility is shown in Figure 9-8, We can see that spread 4 has
an implied volatility of approximately 18.1%, spread 5 approximately 17.0%, and spread
6 approximately 17.2%. If an increase in volatility is our primary concern, then spread
4 (the ratio vertical spread) seems to offer the best risk characteristics.

In addition to the volatility risk, we can see that spread 4 also has a negative gamma,
so that it will be adversely affected by a sudden large move in the underlying contract.
If we are concerned about the possibility of such a move we may want to determine
exactly how a large move in the price of the underlying contract will affect the value of
the spread. Figure 9-9 shows the sensitivity of each of our spreads, 4, 5, and 6, to a
change in the price of the underlying contract.3

Note that spread 4 has the narrowest profit range of the three spreads, in theory
losing all its theoretical value if the market should immediately drop below 46.50 or rise
above 52.20. On the other hand, spread 6 has very little downside risk and can still
stand an immediate move upward to about 52.30. Ifa trader were worried about the
possibility of a swift fall in the market, he might be willing to give up the extra volatility
cushion offered by spread 4 over spread 6 (18.0% vs. 17.2%) for the additional downside
protection offered by the latter spread. This is reflected in the smaller negative gamma
associated with spread 6 as compared with spread 4.

Finally, we can see that spread 5, while having the least desirable volatility risk,
also has a positive gamma. This means that any large move in the underlying contract
will increase the value of the position. If a trader were worried about the possibility of
a sudden large move in the underlying contract, but were not overly concerned with an
increase in volatility, he might be willing to accept the less desirable volatility risk
associated with spread 5 for the more desirable positive gamma characteristics.

A trader who executes spread 5 will have a positive gamma, so he has no gamma
risk. But he will have a theta risk if the underlying contract fails to move. How great is
the risk? Figure 9-10 shows the sensitivity of all three spreads to the passage of time.
Since spreads 4 and 6 have negative gammas, they can only gain value with the passage
of time. On the other hand, spread 5 loses value as each day passes. Looking at the graph
associated with this spread, we can see that if no movement occurs in the underlying
contract, the spread loses all its theoretical edge after about 18 days. This is the price
one has to pay for the privilege of having a positive gamma.

3. We assume here that the May and July underlying contracts maintain the same approximate
relationship. That is, the July contract Is always 1.0123 times the May contract since 50.11/49.50 =
1.0123. The x-axis in Figure 9-9 is the price of the May contract.


183

Risk Considerations

Ove'I- Ozbo'+ o'9s- oz+ 62+
OO x 0¢- $900- x 0¢c-— 9°8 x Og- pet x Oe- €a+ * Od
990° x OL+ £800'-* 01+ OLX OL+ OZ+ x OL+ LV-xol

oge'l- ogel— o'ogt+ os- oo'e+
£0) x 0S—- 0900°- x 0S— 08 X 0g— Ba- x OS— go+ x OS
990° x OS+ 2800°- x OS+ OEE X OS+ 6c- * OS+ 8t-x 0S

ove'- azgo'+ o2- oz+ oLet
OOF * 0E= $000—* Oo TSX 0G- pet X 0S BEF XOE
Ot" x Og+ 6900'-* 02+ £6 0z+ zSt x OZ+ ba—* 02
woHsod uopisod uo}isod uoptsod e6p3
eBep eIOUL euUeD esa jeayasoayL

seo 2g Aine o2—
seo 8p ABW O}+

sind gp Ain os—
sind gp Aew ost

syjeo 2g Ajnr of-
seo og Ainr o@+

:9 peed

1g peoids

tp peaads

2-6 einBil4



184 Chapter $

Figure 9-8

spread 6
(diagonal spread)

spread 4
(atio vertical spread)

Theoretical Profit & Loss
4

-64
-8 os
| So
spread 5 a
(short time spread) we

SA te

wo

-12 rs T ~~ a a

15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Volatility (2%)

Figure 9-9

10 v

spread 5
84 \ (short time spreed) ao
\ a
NN 4

2 6 NN a
g spread 6 ~ \—
oo 44 (diagonal spread) a “7
s
oa
we
2 ~
3
ro]
a
ct spread 4
e -24 (ratio vertical spread)

-4-

6 T T T TT T T

46 47 48 49 50 54 52 53

Underlying Price (May Futures Contrac)



Risk Considerations 185

Figure 9-10

8
n
8 pread 4 ao
a 2 s|

tio vertical id spread 6

(ratio vertical spread) (diagonal spread) ao
$0 —
o a7
ro
5 4! a \
a
ad
r NS a spread 5

6) Ne (short time spread)

-8-

-10 T T 1 T 1 1

7 14 24 28 35 42 49 56
Time to Expiration (days)

If one has to choose from among spreads 4, 5, or 6, which spread is best? The
situation is not clear-cut, and the answer will probably depend on a trader’s experience
in the market. If he feels that an increase in implied volatility represents the greatest
risk, he will probably choose spread 4. If he feels that a large move in the underlying
contract represents the greatest risk, he will probably choose spread 5. And if he is
willing to settle for partial protection against both volatility and market movement, he
will probably choose spread 6.

As must by now be obvious, the choice of spreads is never a simple matter of right
and wrong. Like all trading decisions, it is a question of risk and reward. While there
are many risks with which an option trader must deal, he will often have to ask himself
which risk represents the greatest threat. Sometimes, in order avoid one type of risk, he
will be forced to accept a different risk. Even if the trader is willing to accept some risk
in a certain area, he may decide that he will only do so to a limited degree. Then he may
have to accept increased risks in other areas.

If given the choice between several different spreads a trader can use a Computer,
as was done in the foregoing examples, to study the risk characteristics of the different
spreads. Unfortunately, it may not always be possible to analyze the choices in such
detail. A trader may not have the necessary computer support at his disposal, or market
conditions may be changing so rapidly that if he fails to make an immediate decision
opportunity may quickly pass him by. Is there any way to make a quick comparison of
spreads without doing a detailed graphic analysis?


186 Chapter 9

One method that traders sometimes use is to think of every spread as a tradeoff
between risk and reward. We might express this tradeoff as a fraction, risk/reward. If
a trader goes into the marketplace, he would like to have the greatest possible reward.
At the same time he would like to have the least possible risk. Indeed, the ideal
tisk/reward fraction would be 0 + o (zero risk, infinite reward}. But 0 + o = 0, so that
if we express the risk/reward characteristics of each spread as a fraction, risk/reward,
then in theory the spread whose fraction is closest to zero has the best tradeoff between
risk and reward.

What numbers should we use to express the risk and reward for a spread? The
reward is what we expect to make when we are right about market conditions. This is
simply the theoretical edge, and we can therefore make the theoretical edge the
denominator of our fraction. What about the numerator, or risk component? Here we
may have to deal with several different numbers since option positions are subject to
many different risks. These risks are represented by the various option sensitivities. The
practical approach is to express the numerator of our fraction with the sensitivity with
which we are most concerned. For example, if a change in volatility is our greatest
concern, we can use the vega of the spread as our numerator. If choosing from among
several different spreads, the spread whose vega/theoretical edge is closest to zero will
have the most desirable risk/reward characteristics. In the same way, if a large price
move is our greatest concern, the spread whose gamma/theoretical edge is closest to
zero will have the most desirable risk/reward characteristics.

Let's try to analyze spreads 4, 5, and 6 using this method. One risk with which we
will certainly have to be concerned is the possibility of a change in volatility. Calculating
the vega/theoretical edge, we have:

Spread 4: -.840/2.70 = -311
Spread 5: —-1.850/3.00 = -.617
Spread 6: ~1.340/2.90 = -.462

From the above calculations we can see that spread 4 has the best volatility
characteristics since its vega/theoretical edge is closest to zero. This is the same
conclusion we reached from Figure 9-8, but without the necessity of doing a detailed
study of each spread.

Note that when we divide the sensitivity of a spread by its theoretical value, the
result is independent of the size of the spread. If we had done spread 4 twice as large
(40 x 60 instead of 20 x 30} this would have doubled the size of both the vega and the
theoretical edge. The resulting fraction would still have been -.311.

What about the risk of a large move in the price of the underlying contract? We do
not need to worry about large price moves in spread 5 since its positive gamma means
that a large move can only enhance the value of the position. However, we might still
want to compare spreads 4 and 6 for gamma risk. Dividing the gamma by the theoretical
edge we have:
