Quick ratio
When you want to size up how well-equipped a company is to handle its
short-term cash obligations, the current ratio does a great job. You can reread how to calculate the current ratio in Chapter 6.
But some might think the current ratio is too lenient. After all, it includes the
value of inventory. Some fundamental analysts think including inventory isn’t
a great idea, since you can’t exactly sell off raw materials very easily to pay
bills. That’s where the quick ratio comes in. It disregards inventory to help
you really see how able a company is at meeting short-term obligations. The
formula is:
Cash and cash equivalents + investments + accounts receivable / current
liabilities
For Cisco, that’s:
2.2 = $5,191+ $21,044 + $3821 / $13,858
That means that the company has $2.20 in assets that are already cash or can
be easily turned into cash to handle liabilities due in a year. That is a very
strong position, given that in the mid-2000s, companies in the S&P 500 had
$1.21 in very close-to-cash assets for every $1 in liabilities coming due in a
year. You want to see this ratio be at least 1, and preferably higher.

Interest coverage ratio
The interest coverage ratio helps you figure out how well a company is able
to afford its interest payments.
This ratio can be calculated in many ways. Generally, you compare the company’s profits before interest costs and taxes to its interest expense, to see
how able it is to pay its bills. It’s similar to how you’re supposed to compare
your monthly gross pay with your monthly mortgage bill to see if you can
afford the house. Too bad more people didn’t do this ahead of the financial
crisis, but I digress.
Just divide EBIT by the company’s interest expense. For Cisco, that’s:
29.6 = $9,445 / 319

13 506455-ch08.indd 132

9/24/09 10:30:59 PM

Chapter 8: Using Financial Ratios to Pinpoint Investments

133

Reflecting the fact it has very low debt, Cisco has a very high interest coverage ratio. It generates nearly $30 in available cash profits to pay for every $1 in
interest due. Most companies, on average, only generated about $15 in available cash profits to pay their interest. The higher the ratio, the better.
Some companies, including Cisco, list their interest expense as a footnote in
their 10-K. After opening the 10-K, using the instructions in Chapter 4, just
search for the words “interest expense” and you’ll turn up the amount.

Getting a handle on a company’s valuation
When you hear investors talk about whether or not a company is cheap,
often times they’re referring to a stock’s valuation. There are dozens of valuation ratios, sometimes called multiples, to help you figure out how pricey a
stock is.
More often than not, the ratio used to measure a stock’s valuation is the
price-to-earnings ratio, or P-E. The P-E is so important, I dedicate the next
section to it. But for now, below are some descriptions of valuation ratios
other than the P-E.

Price-to-book ratio
Many serious fundamental analysts pay closest attention to the price-to-book
ratio. This ratio compares a company’s stock price to its book value, or value
of everything the company owes, free and clear of debt. The formula for
price-to-book is:
Price-to-book = Company’s stock price / (shareholders’ equity / number
of shares outstanding)
To practice, let’s take the day that Cisco reported its fiscal 2008 results on
July 28, 2008. The stock price closed at $21.98. So its price-to-book ratio was:
3.94 = $21.98 / ($34,353 / 6,163)
The higher the price-to-book ratio, the more investors are paying up for the
companies’ assets. The ratio will rise and fall as investors get more confident
or less confident about the company and the stock market.
How do you know if a stock’s price-to-book is high or low? One easy way is
comparing it with the price-to-book of stocks inside exchange-traded funds,
or ETFs, which are baskets of stocks. iShares, for instance, has an ETF that
tracks stocks with high, average and low price-to-book ratios. Stocks with low
price-to-book ratios are called value stocks. And stocks with high price-to-book
ratios are called growth stocks. There’s no set definition of what defines a high
or low book value, and it changes over time.

13 506455-ch08.indd 133

9/24/09 10:30:59 PM

134 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
You can look up the average price-to-book ratios of large value stocks by
entering IVV in the Ticker or Keyword blank at ishares.com. And you can see
the average price-to-book ratios of large growth stocks by entering IVW. In
early 2000, stocks in the S&P 500 had an average price-to-book of 3.1, while
stocks with high price-to-book ratios averaged 3.66. I’ll give you more pointers on how to do this in Chapter 10.

Dividend yield
The dividend yield tells you how much the company is paying out in cash
dividends relative to the stock price. You can calculate a dividend yield by
dividing the amount of dividends a company pays out in a year by its stock
price, and then multiplying by 100. So if a company pays $1 a year in dividends and has a stock price of $25 a share, it has a dividend yield of 4%. To
put this dividend into perspective, remember large companies have paid an
average dividend yield of 3.8% since December 1936, says S&P.
In theory, the dividend yield is the cash payout you receive by holding onto a
stock. Some investors are tempted to automatically buy stocks that pay large
dividend yields. However, dividends can be cut with little notice. In fact, companies with large dividend yields are often those under the most distress.

Earnings yield
A company’s earnings yield tells you how much, as a percentage of a stock’s
price, the company is generating in profit. The earnings yield gives you a way
to compare a company’s profit generation with other investments. To get a
stock’s earnings yield, divide a stock’s earnings per share over the past 12
months by its stock price. When a stock’s earnings yield is well below the
market or that of rivals, it might be a sign the stock is overvalued. I’ll touch
on this topic more in Chapter 10.
The earnings yield is especially valuable when trying to determine if the stock
market is overvalued. You can get this by dividing the earnings generated by
the S&P 500 over the previous 12 months by the value of the S&P 500. When
the yield gets lower than what you can get by putting your money in safer
securities, like government bonds, it’s a warning you’re not getting paid for the
risk you’re assuming.

Getting Familiar With the
Price-To-Earnings Ratio
The granddaddy of all financial ratios must be the P-E. The P-E is an appealing ratio, because it’s relatively easy to understand and can be used to compare the valuations of different companies with each other and to the market
at large.

13 506455-ch08.indd 134

9/24/09 10:30:59 PM

Chapter 8: Using Financial Ratios to Pinpoint Investments

135

How to Calculate the P-E
When people refer to a stock’s P-E, it’s almost as if it’s some sort of number
that’s etched in stone. Nothing could be further from the truth. A stock’s
P-E changes every day along with a stock’s price. The formula is deceptively
simple:
P–E = Stock price / earnings per share
The numerator, the stock price, everyone can pretty much agree on. That’s
set by the stock market and can be looked up. However, the denominator can
be many different things and is subject to some interpretation. And that’s
why there can be several variants of the P-E including the:
✓ Trailing P-E: When you divide a stock’s price by its net earnings per
share over the past 12 months’ earnings, or trailing earnings, you get
the trailing P-E. This is considered one of the most conservative ways
to measure P-E, since it’s based on earnings that have actually been
reported.
Net earnings per share can be measured a few ways, as discussed in
Chapter 5.
✓ Current P-E: When you divide a stock’s price by what it’s expected
to earn in the current fiscal year, that’s the current P-E. Typically, the
forward P-E will be based on several quarters of earnings reported by
the company, plus a few quarters of estimated earnings. This is a fairly
common way to measure a stock’s P-E.
✓ Forward P-E: When you divide a stock’s price by what it’s expected to
earn in the next fiscal year, you’re taking somewhat of a leap. Estimates
can be pretty unreliable going out this far, meaning that investors should
take the forward P-E with a handful of salt.
✓ Operating P-E: When you divide by a company’s operating income, you
are trying to get an idea of what investors are paying for the company’s
profit, excluding unusual and one-time charges. Current and forward P-E
ratios are usually based on operating income, since these rely on estimates. There is usually no way to accurately forecast one-time charges.
✓ As reported P-E: When you divide by a company’s net income, which
includes all charges and one-time items. Reported P-E tends to be higher
than operating P-Es during times of economic stress, since companies
take many charges for restructuring.
If someone is trying to sell you on a stock by pointing to its “low P-E,” be careful you know how it’s being calculated. Future P-Es are infamously too low,
making a stock look cheap, since the denominator may be based on an overly
optimistic estimate.

13 506455-ch08.indd 135

9/24/09 10:30:59 PM

136 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
What a P-E tells you about a stock
One of the beauties of the P-E ratio is its simplicity. With just one number,
you can find out how much investors, on average, are willing to pay for a
claim to $1 of a company’s earnings.
The higher the P-E, the loftier the company’s valuation is. When you see a P-E
get high relative to peers in the same industry, you might begin to wonder
if investors are overvaluing the stock. Similarly, if you see a stock’s P-E fall
below that of its peers, you might wonder if the company can make changes
to its operations to win a higher multiple.
The long-term average P-E of stocks is about 15. If a stock rises above that, you
need to be aware that you might be paying up for the stock. Be sure you’re getting something for that extra price, such as growth. The PEG ratio, discussed
below, explores how to adjust P-E to factor in a company’s growth.

Putting the P-E into perspective
Now that you know how to measure a stock’s P-E, the question is, what does it
mean? The first thing you should do is compare a stock’s P-E against the P-E of
other companies in the same industry. You can calculate the P-Es of industries
yourself, or if you want to save yourself trouble, use Web sites that do it for
you. Reuters (www.reuters.com/finance/stocks) has a powerful ratio calculator. Enter the stock’s symbol in the black, select the “Ratios” option and click
the Go button. You’ll get the stock’s P-E based on trailing earnings, as well as
the P-E for the industry and the S&P 500. This gives you something to compare the stock’s P-E with, without having to do a single division problem.

Taking the P-E to the next level: The PEG
It’s not uncommon for stocks with high P-Es to keep going higher. Many
times, investors are willing to pay higher prices for companies that are growing more rapidly. Much of that has to do with the way the P-E is measured.
Imagine a company, which earned $1 a share, is trading for $20 a share. It has
a P-E of 20, which might seem lofty if the rest of the stock market has a P-E of
15. But what if a year from now, the company’s earnings rise by 30 percent?
If the stock is still $20 a share, that means it would have a P-E of 15, which
would be in line with the market. So in a way, the stock wasn’t all that overvalued because it grows into its valuation.

13 506455-ch08.indd 136

9/24/09 10:30:59 PM

Chapter 8: Using Financial Ratios to Pinpoint Investments

137

The importance of a company’s growth rate is one reason for the PEG ratio.
The PEG compares a stock’s P-E to its expected growth rate. You simply
divide the stock’s P-E by the expected growth rate. You can estimate a company’s growth rate yourself by examining historical increases in revenue and
earnings, as described in Chapter 5. Or you can read analysts’ reports, which
forecast growth, as explained in Chapter 14.
Investors generally consider a stock to be pricey if it has a PEG of 2 or more.
Some investors also find a stock becomes attractive when its PEG falls below 1.
Sometimes, patience can be a virtue when using the PEG. During the severe
market contraction of 2008, even some of the market’s hottest stocks saw
their PEG ratios plummet below 1. Internet darling Google surprised investors when its PEG fell below 1 in early 2009, as its stock price fell to $340,
giving it a current P-E of 16. Meanwhile, the company’s expected growth rate
was 18.4%. Divide the P-E of 16 by the expected growth rate of 18.4, and you
arrive at a PEG of 0.87. Investors who avoided the hoopla and watched the
PEG got a much better valuation on the stock.

Evaluating the P-E of the entire market
One of the most valuable things about the P-E is that it is constantly evolving
as stock prices move. Unlike other fundamental ratios, which are based on fundamental data from previous quarters, the P-E changes as stock prices move.

Table 8-3

P-E of the S&P 500

Year

Trailing P-E

2008

19.7

2007

22.2

2006

17.4

2005

17.9

2004

20.7

2000

26.4

1990

15.5

1980

9.2

1970

18.0

1960

17.8

Source: Standard & Poor’s, based on reported earnings for past 12 months

13 506455-ch08.indd 137

9/24/09 10:30:59 PM

138 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
The P-E of a stock can also be compared against the constantly changing P-E
of the entire stock market. Knowing the P-E of the market is very valuable,
because it lets you see how pricey, or cheap, a company’s stock is compared
with the market. You can get a general warning if the stock market might be
overvalued and headed for a correction if investors are paying lofty amounts
for earnings. Table 8-3 shows you how the P-E of the S&P 500 has changed
over the years:

13 506455-ch08.indd 138

9/24/09 10:30:59 PM

Chapter 9

Mining the Proxy Statement
for Investment Clues
In This Chapter
▶ Expanding your fundamental analysis to include items in a company’s proxy statement
▶ Comprehending how corporate governance works and what it means for your investment
▶ Weighing how to consider if corporate directors may have potential conflicts of interest
▶ Evaluating shareholder resolutions and executive pay

W

hen you think of fundamental analysis, you’re probably focused primarily on the number-crunching aspect of it. And there’s no shortage
of ratios and other quantitative measures to consider when evaluating an
investment.
But fundamental analysis really is as much of an art than a science in many
ways. Even when it comes to interpreting financial results and valuations,
there’s a great amount of judgment that goes into it. And judgment becomes
even more important when considering the proxy statement.
The proxy statement, or proxy, is one of the more interesting financial documents. Interesting financial reports, now there’s an oxymoron for you. But
seriously, inside the proxy statement, companies lay out many of their deep,
dark secrets that just don’t fit into the neat rows and columns of the financial
statements. Some of these details include executive pay, composition of the
board of directors, and even how much the accounting firm is paid to watch
over the financial statements.

14 506455-ch09.indd 139

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

140 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Getting up to Speed with What
the Proxy Statement Is
Every year, public companies hold giant shareholder meetings. Annual shareholder meetings give management the opportunity to lay out the company’s
strategic plan going forward.
The strategic plan is of upmost importance to shareholders because that will
describe what kinds of products and services the company plans to push, and
also how the company plans to finance the production and selling of those
products and services. Certain matters are also brought to a vote during the
shareholder meetings. I discuss the annual shareholder meeting, and ways to
analyze them, in more detail in Chapter 13.
This section unearths the proxy statement, which is the document companies provide to shareholders before the shareholder meeting. The proxy is a
key document that describes in detail the nitty gritty aspects of a company
including its strategic plan and how it will achieve its financial goals.

Uncovering info in the proxy statement
The proxy statement is intended to brief investors on all the matters that
are subject to a vote, in addition to other issues investors must be informed
of. These documents are stuffed full of details that normally aren’t discussed, including sensitive topics of how much executives are being paid.
Fundamental analysts may be focused on the company’s overall financial
performance, but the proxy is worth paying attention to because it provides
information about the:
✓ Management’s experience: Fundamental analysts want to have a good
handle on the people who are running the company. Detailed biographies of the management team are provided in the proxy.
✓ Board of director composition: If you invest in a company, the board of
directors is your watchdog. This group is assigned the task of watching
over the management team and making changes to the people or overall
strategy when needed.
✓ Compensation: Want to know how much a CEO earns? It’s not a secret;
it’s spelled out completely in the proxy.

14 506455-ch09.indd 140

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

141

✓ Conflicts of interest: A conflict of interest occurs when someone in the
role of watching over the company may have a reason not to be very
vigilant. Such potential conflicts must be broken out in the proxy.
✓ Ownership details: You can find out which officers or directors of the
company are also big owners of the company’s stock.
✓ General thinking of other investors: Shareholders may bring matters to
a vote at the meeting. Sometimes these shareholder proposals get onto
the proxy, allowing you to find out some of the concerns of other owners
of the stock.
You may not think the information contained in the proxy is all that critical to
fundamental analysis. After all, who cares what college a CEO went to, as long
as the income statement shows robust profit and growth? And it’s true that
financial results are the crux of fundamental analysis. But getting a complete
picture of a company’s future requires you to take the time to understand the
motives and oversight of the people running it.

Tyco’s telling proxies
If there’s a classic case of how the proxy statement may have been even more telling than
the financial statements, it’s Tyco International.
The sprawling conglomerate dazzled investors
through the early 2000s with stellar financial
results for many years. Analysts and investors were certain the company’s diverse mix
of businesses, ranging from home security to
electrical parts and industrial supplies was an
unstoppable cash-flow machine. And had you
just looked at the income statement, balance
sheet and statement of cash flows, it would
have been hard to find any fault with the company or its management.
But the proxy statements raised more than a
few questions even before regulators called
the company’s management practices into
question. For instance, in Tyco’s proxy filed
on January 28, 2002, the company disclosed it
paid director Frank Walsh $10 million and gave
another $10 million to one of his charitable foundations in connection to his help brokering one

14 506455-ch09.indd 141

of the company’s acquisitions. The only problem
was that Walsh was also a member of Tyco’s
board of directors, which is supposed to oversee the company’s operations. Walsh later pled
guilty to charges of trying to hide the fees he
received.
Meanwhile, the proxy showed CEO Dennis
Kozlowski continued to receive noticeable pay
hikes in 2001, despite declines in Tyco’s stock
price. His pay jumped 36% to $5.7 million that
year, not including 43% higher stock grants of
$30.4 million and stock options valued at $76.4
million, according to a USA TODAY analysis
of 2001 executive pay. And those were just a
few of the alleged excesses at the company.
Kozlowski and another top executive were
accused in 2002 of looting the company of hundreds of millions of dollars and using the company as a “piggy bank.” The stock cratered in
2002, and Kozlowski was convicted of fraud in
2005.

9/24/09 10:31:51 PM

142 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Getting your hands on the proxy
Before online access became so prevalent, you would normally need to contact a company to get a copy of its proxy. Even today, most companies will
mail shareholders a paper copy of the proxy or send it to your brokerage
firm, which would forward the proxy to you. But now, whether you own a
stock or not, it’s pretty simple to just download the proxy for free. The best
way to obtain a proxy statement is by using the Securities and Exchange
Commission’s IDEA database. You can find step-by-step instructions on how
to use the SEC’s IDEA system in Chapter 4.
When using IDEA to access a company’s proxy, just remember that the system
lists the proxy statement under its technical name, the definitive 14A. When
you’re searching for a company’s proxy statement, you’ll want to scroll down
for line item labeled “DEF 14A.” That’s the definitive proxy, and the document
you will work with in this chapter.

Expanding Fundamental Analysis
Beyond the Numbers
The income statement, balance sheet and statement of cash flows are highly
formatted financial statements. You can quickly analyze them by applying
scientific formulas and ratios, discussed in Chapter 8, to get insights and
comparisons.
But the proxy statement is a little less rigorous. Certainly, rules and regulations stipulate what information must be included. But the information is
more textual, in many cases, and less tabular. That means you need to have a
general awareness of what to look for in order to know that it deserves your
attention. You’ll get that insight in this section of the book.

Appreciating corporate governance
If there’s one overarching theme of what to look for in the proxy, it’s corporate governance. Corporate governance is a catch-all term to describe
the safeguards a company has in place to make sure that the management
of the company is acting in the best interest for the shareholders. It’s the
way public companies deal with one of the greatest pitfalls of our financial
system: the agency dilemma.
