
Figure 3.1 is self-explanatory, but here are the key points to understand about candlesticks:
Candles usually have a body and wick (called a shadow) on both ends; however, any of these
individual parts may be missing from a given candle as we'll see below. Together, they cover the
entire price range over the given period the candle represents. The body alone represents the
range between the open and closing price for a given period, and the wicks, or shadows, show
the upper and lower price ranges.
Each candle displays all price information: the high, low, and open and closing prices for a given
period, depending on the chart's time frame. Here are two examples of candle information:
1. Each candle on a one-minute chart covers the opening, closing, and high and low prices
for one minute.
2. Each candle on a daily chart shows this price information for an entire day.
Any good trading platform should provide candlestick charts ranging from one second to one
month.
Body color tells us the price direction for the given period. The most common color coding is
green bodies for higher closes and red for lower ones. In this book, we generally use dark gray
for higher closes and light gray for lower ones, as seen in Chapter 2, Figures 2.3, and 2.7.

Relationship between Body, Wick, and Its Significance
The length of the bodies and the wicks, in absolute terms and relative to each other, can tell us a great
deal about market sentiment over the duration of a given candle. That can be significant for candles
covering longer periods like an entire day, week, or month. As with any technical indicator, candles
and their patterns over shorter durations are less meaningful because price movements within a given

day or less often can be caused by random money flows unrelated to any real market sentiment.
Here's the key to understanding the relationship between wick (or shadow) and body length and the
meaning of an individual candle: The longer the wicks are relative to the body, the greater the
indecision and the greater the back and forth struggle between buyers and sellers, and the more likely
the current trend will cease or reverse. Conversely, the shorter the wicks are relative to the body, the
more decisive the move up or down, and the more likely that the move will continue in the same
direction.
Figure 3.2 represents the Bullish “Marubozu” Type and suggests strong buying pressure. A long
higher close body with few or no shadows shows buyers outnumbered sellers and were in control
during the entire period covered by the candle, steadily pushing price higher. The longer the candle
body, the greater the buying strength.
FIGURE 3.2 Bullish “Marubozu” Chart

Figure 3.3 illustrates a Bearish “Marubozu” Type and suggests strong selling pressure. A long
lower close body with few or no shadows shows that sellers outnumbered sellers and were in control
during the entire period covered by the candle, steadily pushing price lower. The longer the candle
body, the greater the selling strength.
FIGURE 3.3 Bearish “Marubozu” Chart

Figure 3.4 illustrates the Doji Type which is neutral or indecisive, with sellers and buyers evenly
matched. Similarly, small body relative to the wicks suggests the same indecisiveness to a lesser
degree. If the body was red, the sellers were modestly stronger; if green, the opposite is true.
FIGURE 3.4 Doji Chart

Lower Wicks
A relatively long lower wick suggests initial strong pessimism and selling which reversed as buying
increased at the lower bargain price, and short sellers took profits. In other words, a lower price
level was tested and held firm, turning back attempts to drive price lower. A short lower shadow
suggests less indecision, less testing of lower prices, and lighter selling pressure that required few
buyers to reverse it.
If the currency pair closes at its low for the period covered, the candle won't have a lower wick.

Upper Wicks
Conversely, a relatively long upper wick suggests initial optimism or buying pressure that reversed as
sellers stepped in and buyers took profits. In other words, a higher price level was tested and held
firm, turning back attempts to drive price higher. A short upper wick shows less indecision, less
testing of higher prices, less struggle between buyers and sellers.
If the closing price is the high for the period covered, the candle won't have an upper wick.

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE (S/R) BASICS
Before proceeding, you'll need a basic understanding of s/r. We'll deal with these both in greater

depth later, but for now just understand that when we discuss price support or resistance, we mean
exactly what these terms imply. For the sake of simplicity, assume we're referring to long positions,
that is, trades for which the goal is to buy low and sell high. As we'll discuss further on, definitions of
support and resistance are reversed for short positions, so we'll ignore those for now.
Support, as the name suggests, is a price level, trend line, or other indicator that acts like a floor,
preventing price from falling lower. It's where buying tends to occur repeatedly over a given
period. Support draws in new buyers because it's seen as the lowest, bargain price for a given
period. If support is breached for more than a brief period, that usually means market perception
of the asset's value has fallen, and price will continue lower until the next support level. The
stronger the support, the more bearish (pessimistic) the signal if that support level is breached.
Resistance is just the opposite of support. It is a price level, trend line, or other indicator that
acts like a ceiling, preventing price from rising. If resistance is breached for more than a brief
period, that usually means price will continue higher until the next resistance level. The stronger
the resistance, the more bullish optimistic the signal if that level is breached.
Support or resistance (s/r when discussing these together) are rarely exact price points, but rather
are defined zones or areas, with their range depending on a variety of circumstances covered
later.
S/R can be as simple as a price level at which price tends to reverse direction, or it can be made up
of multiple trend lines or other technical indicators (that we'll learn about later) that all converge on
an area and mutually reinforce the s/r zone
The strength of an s/r area depends on various factors, such as age (older is better), how often it has
been tested and held firm, the number and quality of various kinds of s/r indicators that converge on a
given price level, and whether or not it's near a large round-number price level. Let's look at some
real-life examples.
As shown in Figure 3.5, the EURUSD daily chart of June 10 to July 25, 2011, you will see the
following:
A. June 21–22: The pair of long upper wicks (a “tweezers tops” pattern, covered in Chapter 4)
showed strong resistance level around 1.4400, caused by selling pressure from some combination
of those who were long the pair taking profits and short sellers opening new positions. The June
14–15 candles show prior resistance around 1.4400. Round numbers have a psychological
appeal as natural buy or sell points, so certain round numbers tend to become significant s/r
points.
B. June 23: The lack of much upper wick tells us that prices mostly fell from the start of the day.
The long lower wick indicates that the pair managed to recover over half of its losses before the
official close of the day's trading in the New York session. The lower wick shows sellers tested
all the way down to around 1.4130 before buyers stepped in and short sellers took profits. Think
of the long lower wick as a blind man's cane, probing for obstacles.
C. June 23–26: This 1.4130 support level was tested each day as selling continued, but this level
held firm. The June 24 (Friday) candle's lower opening and even longer red body shows
continued firm selling pressure, but roughly equal upper and lower wicks reflect some indecision
about how low to go. The June 26 (Monday) candle is a small light gray (this would be shown in
red) body with small wicks, meaning price direction was mostly straight down but with

weakening selling pressure. This weakening selling pressure was confirmed by the rally that
followed.
D. June 27: A strong reversal as prices rebounded off this support level. The long dark gray (this
would be shown in green) body shows decisive buyer control, with prices closing near the top of
the day's range, and it “engulfs” or retakes the prior two days' losses. Such candles are called
“bullish engulfing” patterns because they “consume” and recoup the prior days' losses.
E. June 30: Long upper wick again serves like a blind man's cane hitting an obstacle as the
market gropes around to locate near-term resistance. Combined with the short dark gray (green)
body near the bottom of the daily price range, which means there was little gain on the day,
suggests the uptrend is weakening, as indeed it was.
F. July 3–4: Taken together, we see that the market opened above the 1.4550 resistance level
twice but couldn't advance. On July 4th, after six straight days of gains and having hit resistance,
sellers began taking control, probing lower before buyers stepped in, but could not prevent a
lower close on the day. In Chapter 4, we'll learn that this kind of candle, with a small body, little
or no upper wick, and a long lower wick relative to the overall candle range is a bearish sign
when it occurs during an uptrend and is confirmed by the next candle closing lower (as was the
case on July 6th). It's called a “hanging man.” Its long lower wick, topped by a small body,
combined with a lower close in the next candle, presents an intuitively clear picture of the market
rejecting higher prices.
G. July 12: This is essentially the same form of candle as on July 4; however, during a downtrend
(and especially after an eight-day long downtrend and close at what was strong long-term support
around 1.4000), this is considered a bullish reversal sign, called a hammer, as sellers probe
lower support but buyers send sellers retreating and recover most of the day's (or any other
period's) losses. In other words, this long lower shadow is a graphic image of the market
rejecting lower prices. Once again, the lower wick may have hit bottom. Like the bearish hanging
man shown on July 4th, this bullish twin hammer required confirmation from the next candle and
got it with the next day's bullish engulfing candle (it engulfed or recouped the prior day's move).
It signaled the start of a move higher over the coming sessions.
H. July 17: The candle had a mere line instead of a body, meaning that the opening and closing
prices were the same or nearly so—price unchanged. The market ruled undecided, a tie between
buyers and sellers. Such candles are called dojis. As signs of indecision, they often suggest a
possible reversal of the current trend. This form of doji, with its prominent lower wick, that
occurs after a downtrend near strong support around 1.4000, suggests a market groping for a
bottom. That was the case, as the following days confirmed this bullish sign and buyers took over
and sent prices higher.
I. July 25: This doji, with equidistant wicks, shows complete indecision or perfect balance
between buyers and sellers.
FIGURE 3.5 EURUSD Daily Chart, June 10 to July 25, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Analyze This!
What do you think happened to the EURUSD after the indecisive doji of July 25 (H)? Consider
the following evidence:
The EURUSD has had five straight days of gains, the last three with increasing strength.
Looking at the month covered by this daily chart, the current price level of 1.4409 has served
as near-term resistance because looking at the far left, middle, and far right sides of the
chart, the pair has failed twice before to make a sustained move above it.
The current price level of 1.4409 is essentially the same as 1.4400. As we'll learn in greater
detail when we study s/r, round numbers tend to serve as natural support or resistance
because humans are psychologically wired to think in terms of round numbers. The more
zeros, the more psychologically significant the number. That's why $4.99 feels cheaper than
$5.00.
July 25 (H) shows a doji candle, a classic sign of indecision.
For the sake of simplicity, we'll ignore the overall bearish fundamental factors that were
behind the July price declines.
So, what do you think happened? Do you think the pair finished the day higher, lower, or the
same? Here's what happened. If you thought the price would pull back, you were right. In
Figure 3.6, after the undecided doji, the pair made a head-fake higher and pulled back (note the
2 candles that follow H). We'll talk more later about these “false breakouts,” why they happen,
and what you can do to protect yourself against being fooled by them.
FIGURE 3.6 EURUSD Daily Chart 20, June 3 to August, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Ideally, your reasons should have gone something like this.
The pair was at a significant near-term resistance level and was showing indecision. The more
likely move is a pullback as long positioned traders take profits from the prior solid run
higher. Markets expect some pullback, so unless new bullish news arrives, the element of selffulfilling prophecy operates. Traders create the reality they expect.

CANDLE CHART TIME FRAMES: LENGTH MATTERS
Before concluding this section on candle charts, you need to know more about chart time frames and
which ones you should use when starting out. As in other areas of life, longer is better.
We mentioned earlier that each candle presents the price action over a specific period, or to use
traders' jargon, a time frame. Most trading platforms' charting modules allow you to view candles
representing time frames ranging anywhere from a second to a month.
As you'll see, the time frame of the chart from which you trade matters. It matters a lot. The short
version—stick to trading off of longer time frame charts, like four hour, daily, weekly, or monthly
candles, until you are successful trading moves over these longer periods. Only then should you even
consider trying to day trade currencies.

Different Time Frames, Different Trading Techniques, and Styles
The following is an overview of the differences in trading techniques and styles:
1. Those trading over short time frame charts, that is, short holding periods and trading off of
charts with candles that form over a matter of minutes or hours:
They rely almost exclusively on TA and especially risk management. In these time frames,
prices move with unpredictable large block trades of big players, most fundamentals except
for news items are irrelevant, and most technical indicators are less reliable, so keeping the
frequent losses low is key.

They actively monitor their positions more closely, so be on the lookout for breaking news
that could change everything. They must make many real-time decisions quickly and must not
let emotions shake them from their trading plan.
They allow only small losses because gains over short periods are smaller than over longer
periods.
They tend to stick to trading highly leveraged spot (cash) market instruments, that is, trading
currency pairs themselves via an online broker's trading platform because they need:
24/5 access in order to catch opportunities that come and go quickly.
High leverage in order to earn adequate profits from the small price moves that occur
over a matter of minutes or hours without needing to commit six-figure sums that would be
beyond the means of most traders.
2. Those holding positions over weeks, months, or years, using charts with daily, weekly, or
monthly candles:
In addition to using technical analysis to plan entries and exits, will add a heavy dose of
long-term fundamental analysis involving the health of the underlying economies of the
currencies they trade, like trends in rates of interest, growth, employment, consumer
spending, and so on. These factors can matter, and because they don't change quickly,
multimonth trends are reliable; they don't reverse often.
Allow larger total pip losses and looser stop losses because of the larger moves that occur
over longer periods, and because riding established, reliable long-term trends requires
looser stop losses.
Don't need to actively watch positions. They can plan trades and enter orders to enter and
exit in advance and thus can monitor trades less frequently.
In addition to directly trading currency pairs with online brokers, they have the option of
trading unleveraged instruments like currency exchange-traded funds (ETFs) or monthly
binary options, or other instruments. They are playing longer-lasting, larger price moves, and
so may neither want leverage (which makes it harder to stay in a position for a long time and
wait out the moves against you) nor need it (because the price moves are large enough
already). As we'll discuss later, that absence of leverage makes it simpler to trade because
you don't need the same degree of risk and money management.

Different Time Frames, Different Trends
The trend, meaning the overall price direction, that you'll see on any chart depends greatly on your
time frame. Seeing a variety of trends nested within longer-term trends is common.
For example, look at this AUDJPY monthly chart shown in Figure 3.7.
FIGURE 3.7 AUDJPY Monthly Chart, October 1, 2007, to June 1, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

During this period risk assets like the AUDJPY were in an overall downtrend. The AUDJPY is a
classic risk pair, meaning that it tends to move in the same direction as other risk assets, like stock
indexes or oil, because the two currencies occupy opposite ends of the hierarchy of risk currencies.
The AUD is the number one risk currency, and the JPY is typically the ultimate safe haven. In times of
optimism or risk appetite, the AUD is usually strong and the JPY is weak, so the pair tends to move
sharply higher. In times of pessimism or risk aversion, it moves firmly downward because the JPY
tends to be strong and the AUD tends to be weak. Remember, pairs move in the direction of the base
currency.
Note how the picture changes for someone viewing a daily chart anytime from September 2010 to
February 20 2011, as shown in the chart in Figure 3.8.
FIGURE 3.8 AUDJPY Daily Chart, July 12, 2010, to February 20, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Although the pair was in a long-term downtrend, embedded within this downtrend was a shorter
term, multimonth uptrend that was tradable even for conservative longer-term (multiweek or month)
forex traders. In particular, note:
By November 2010, the AUDJPY was in an established uptrend because it had formed a series
of both lower highs since August 2010 and higher highs by early November.
As shown in the chart in Figure 3.9, by late December, the pair had formed an ascending channel
(two parallel trend lines) that was formed by three higher highs and two higher lows. As we'll
see later, these upper and lower channel lines are useful indicators of s/r that we use (usually in
combination with other indicators for confirmation) to select low-risk, high-yield entry and exit
points when planning and executing our multiday, weekly, or monthly trades.
FIGURE 3.9 AUDJPY Daily Chart, July 12, 2010, to February 20, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

In sum, the time frame you choose to trade will influence every aspect of your trading. As we'll
discuss in Chapter 5, longer time frames can help put the odds of success in your favor and, when
used properly, will reduce your risk.

IDENTIFYING SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE (S/R) TO
BUY LOW, SELL HIGH, OR VICE VERSA
Here's another useful oversimplification. The whole point of TA is to help us buy low, sell high, or
vice versa when shorting a currency pair. That is, we use TA to more precisely identify the likely low
and high prices for a given period. These become our low-risk entry points and high-yield exit points.

Definitions of S/R Are Reversed for Long and Short Positions
Definitions of s/r can get confused when discussing short positions, so let's clarify this now. Though
definitions of s/r are reversed for long and short trades, they are conceptually the same:
When we're buying (or going long) the pair, the likely low price is support, and the high price is
resistance.
When we're selling (or going short) the pair, the likely high price is support, and the low price is
resistance.
In other words, we define support as the area where you want to open a position because it's the
floor that you hope will support your trade and protect you from losses. Resistance is the area where
you want to close positions because it acts like a ceiling that resists further gains. You always enter
near support (whether that's the high or low price) and sell near resistance (whether that's the
high or low price). Conceptually, s/r are the same regardless of whether you're long or short.
Understand this, and you'll avoid a lot of confusion.

With these definitions of s/r clarified, we can now state the general principle for locating low-risk,
high-yield trade situations.

The General Rule for Identifying Low-Risk High-Yield Trades
Once we know how to use TA tools to identify likely s/r in a given time frame (for example daily,
weekly, or monthly candle charts), we can scan charts for situations where the distance between the
support and resistance is the greatest and where price is approaching support, which allows us a lowrisk entry point to buy or sell the currency pair.
We then:
Place entry limit orders to open positions near support. For long positions, support is near the
likely low, and for short positions support is near the likely high for a given period. We enter
near support because the odds of price moving against us are lower, and if support is breached,
that's a signal to exit while our losses are small.
Place exit limit orders (for taking profits) near resistance. For long positions resistance is near
the likely high, and for short positions it's near the likely low.
There are details and exceptions, but that's what you're seeking when you scan charts looking for
opportunities. Whether you choose to enter slightly before or after price hits support is a judgment
call that is influenced by a variety of factors. For example, if you're more worried about missing the
trade and are confident it will work as planned, or think support is very strong, you might want to
jump in earlier. If you feel the opposite, you'd set your entry limit order a bit below support.
