
The Legend of the Holy Grail

the markets, as most people believe. The metaphor of the “Holy
Grail,” according to scholars like Joseph Campbell, is all about
finding yourself. Similarly, the “Holy Grail” in the markets-the
key to unlocking profits-is all about finding yourself.
To unlock the “Holy Grail,” you need to appreciate your own
ability to think and be unique. People make money by finding
themselves, achieving their potential, and getting in tune with
themselves so that they can follow the flow of the market.
Getting in tune with yourself means finding an inner peace
inside. It means finding a balance between profits and losses. The
Holy Grail is not a magical trading system; it is an inner struggle.
Once you’ve discovered that, and resolved the struggle, you can
find a trading system that will work for you.
Once you have reached a place inside yourself where you can
just be, you’ll understand the keys to this book: (1) the importance
of exits to your profits and your losses; (2) the importance of position sizing to your equity; and (3) the importance of discipline to
making it all work.
I’ve been modeling four keys to making money in the market:
(1) the process of trading; (2) the process of doing trading research;
(3) the process of making position sizing work; and (4) the process of
becoming wealthy. All of these processes are very psychological.
This again illustrates that the search for the “Holy Grail” in the markets is a journey inside of yourself. You must understand this concept in order to complete the journev. You will always have an external struggle with the markets and wgith systems until you master the
internal struggle within yourself. This is the key to the search for
your personal Holy Grail trading system.

SUMMARY
Investors and traders usually go through two stages before they
find the essence of the “holy grail.” First, they need to find someone to tell them exactly what to buy and sell in the market. Second,
they search for someone to tell them how to do it! When neither of
those two processes works, the few remaining survivors move on
to the final stage-putting themselves into a state of mind so they
can find a trading system that is right for them.
The “Holy Grail” is notsome magical source that is the key to

15

NOTES
1. Joseph Campbell (with Bill Moyers). The Power of Myth. New York:
Doubleday, 1988, p. 51.
2. These words are my best recollection of the text of the commercial,
but the actual words were probably somewhat different.
3. My comments about the first lady’s trading simply reflect my
opinion. You can decide for yourself if our first lady really was so
“lucky” when you read Chapter 5 on position sizing.

CHAPTER

4. Malcolm Goodwin, The Holy Grail: Its Origins, Secrets, and Meaning

Revealed (New York: Viking Studio Books, 1994). The book discusses
the mythology of nine different myths about the Holy Grail which
appeared in a 30.year span between AD 1190 and 1220.

2

Judgmental Biases:
Why Mastering the Markets
Is So Difficult for Most People

5. Joseph Campbell (with Bill Meyers). The Power of Myth. See the
Recommended Readings in Appendix I for details.
6. Jack Schwager,
Market Wizards. See the Recommended Readings in
Appendix I for details.
7. Campbell, see endnote 4, p. 274.
8. Van Thap, 71~ Peak Performance Course for Traders and Investors. See
the Recommended Readings in Appendix I for details.

We typically trade our beliefs about the market and once we’ve
made up our minds about those beliefs, we’re not likely to change
them. And when we play the markets, we assume that we are considering all of the available information. Instead, our beliefs,
through selective perception, may have eliminated the most useful
information.

You now understand that the search for the Holy Grail system is an
internal search. This chapter will help you in that search by learning about what might be holding you back. It is your first step:
becoming aware of what holds you back. When you have such
awareness, you also have the ability to change.
Overall, a basic source of problems for all of us is coping with
the vast amount of information we must process regularly. French
Economist George Anderla has measured changes in the rate of
information flow with which we human beings must cope. He concluded that information flow doubled in the 1,500 years between
the time of Jesus and Leonardo DaVinci. It doubled again by the

year 1750 (i.e., in about 250 years). The next doubling only took
about 150 years to the turn of the century. The onset of the computer age reduced the doubling time to about 5 years. And, with
today’s computers offering electronic bulletin boards, CD ROMs,
fiber optics, the Internet, etc., the amount of information to which
we are exposed currently doubles in about a year.
Researchers now estimate that humans, with what we currently use of our brain potential, can only take in 1 to 2 percent of
the visual information available at any one time. And for traders
and investors the situation is at an extreme. A trader or investor,
looking at every market in the world simultaneously, could easily
have about a million bits of information coming at him or her every
second. And since there are usually some markets open around the
world at all times, the information flow does not stop. Some misguided traders actually stay glued to their trading screens, trying
to process as much information as possible for as long as their brain
will permit.
The conscious mind has a limited capacity to process information. Even under ideal conditions, that limited capacity is
between 5 and 9 chunks of information at a time. A “chunk” of
information could be 1 bit or it could be thousands of bits (for
instance, a chunk could be the number 2 or a number like 687,941).
For example, read the following list of numbers, close the book, and
then try to write them all down:
6,38,57, 19, 121,83, 41, 917, 64, 817, 24
Could you remember all the numbers? Probably not, because we
can only consciously process 7 plus or minus 2 chunks of information. Yet we have millions of bits of information coming at us every
second. And the current rate of information availability is now
doubling every year. How do we cope?
The answer is that we generalize, delete, and distort the information to which we are exposed. We generalize and delete most of
the information-“Oh, I’m not interested in the stock market.” That
one sentence takes about 90 percent of the information available on
the markets, generalizes it as “stock market information,” and then
deletes it from consideration.
We also generalize the information we do pay attention to by

deciding, “I’m only going to look at the daily bar charts on markets
that meet the following criteria.. .” We then have our computers
sort the data according to those criteria so that an incredible
amount of information is suddenly reduced to several lines on a
computer screen. Those few lines are something we can process in
our conscious minds.
Most traders and investors then distort the generalized information that remains by representing it as an indicator. For example,
we don’t just look at the last bar. Instead, we think the information
is much more meaningful in the form of a lo-day exponential moving average, or a 14-day RSI, or a stochastic, etc. All these indicators
are examples of distortions. And what people trade are “their
beliefs about the distortion”-which may or may not be useful
beliefs.
Psychologists have taken a lot of these deletions and distortions and grouped them together under the label “judgmental
heuristics.” They are called “judgmental” because they affect our
decision-making process. They are called “heuristics” because they
allow us to sift through and sort out a lot of information in a short
period of time. We could never make market decisions without
them, but they are also very dangerous to people who are not
aware that they exist. They affect the way we develop trading systems and make decisions about the market.
The primary way most people use judgmental heuristics is
to preserve the status quo. We typically trade our beliefs about the
market, and once we’ve made up our minds about those beliefs, zue’re not

likely to change them. And when we play the markets, we assume that we
are considering all the available information. Instead, we may have
already eliminated the most useful information by our selective perception.
Interestingly enough, Karl Popper points out that progress in
knowledge results more from efforts to find fault with our theories, rather than prove them.’ If his concept is true, then the more
we tend to realize our beliefs and assumptions (especially about the
market) and disprove them, the more success we are likely to have
making money in the market.
The purpose of this chapter is to explore how such judgmental heuristics or biases affect the process of trading or invest-

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

ing. First, we’ll cover biases that distort the process of system
development. Most of the biases covered fall into this category.
However, some of them affect other aspects of trading as well.
For example, the gambler’s fallacy affects trading system development because people want systems that don’t have long losing
streaks, but it also affects how the system is traded once it is
developed.
Next, we’ll cover biases that affect how you test trading systems. For example, one gentleman, when exposed to some of this
information, claimed that it is full of controversy and that key elements were left out. Those statements, however, were just projections coming from him. There is no conflict within the material presented in this book-it’s just information. Thus, if you perceive
such controversy, it is because that controversy is commg from you.
In addition, some steps that most people do in system development
are left out, but they are left out intentionally because my research
shows that they are not important or are more of a hindrance (than
a help) to the development of a good system.
Lastly, we cover a few biases that might affect how you trade
the system you’ve developed. Although this is a book about doing
trading system research, the biases included here are important
because you need to consider them when you are doing your
research-before you actually start trading. I’ve deliberately kept
this part of the chapter to a minimum, however, because these
biases are covered in much more detail in my home-study course
for traders and investors.
BIASES THAT AFFECT TRADING SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT
Before you think about trading systems, you have to represent market information in a way that your brain can cope with the available information. Look at the chart in Figure 2-1. It illustrates a typical bar chart-which is how most of you think about the market. A
daily bar chart, as shown in the illustration, takes a day’s worth of
data and summarizes it. That summary includes, at most, four
pieces of information-the open, the close, the high, and the low.
Japanese candlesticks make the information a little more obvious

Figure 2-l A simple bar chart

and also give you visual information about whether the market
generally moved up or down.
Representation

Bias

That daily bar chart is a good example of the first heuristic, which
everyone uses, called the “law of representation.” What it means is
that people assume that when something is supposed to represent something, it really is what it is supposed to represent. Thus,
most of us just look at the daily bar and accept that it represents a
day’s worth of trading. In reality, it’s just a line on a piece of
paper-no more and no less. Yet you probably have accepted that
it is meaningful because:
. You were told it was meaningful when you first started
studying the markets.
* Everybody else uses daily bars to represent the markets.
* When you purchase data, the data are typically in daily bar
format.
* When you think about a day’s worth of trading, you
typically picture a daily bar.

22

PART

1

me Most Important Factor in Your success: YOU!

Each bar on the chart in Figure 2-l only shows you two things.
It shows the range of prices that occurred throughout the day. And
it says a little bit about how prices moved-they moved from the
open to the close (plus some variation for the high and the low).
What doesn’t a typical daily bar show you? A daily bar doesn’t show you how much activity occurred. It doesn’t show you how
much activity occurred at what price. It doesn’t show you when
during the day the underlying commodity or equity was at a given
price (except at the beginning or the end). Yet this information
might be useful to traders or investors. You can get some of this
information by lowering your time frame and looking at 5-minute
bars or tick charts. But wait! Wasn’t the purpose of the daily bar
chart to reduce the information flow so you are not overwhelmed?
There is a lot of other information that might be useful to
traders that is not shown in the daily bar chart. In the case of
futures, did the transactions involve opening up new contracts or
closing out old ones? What kind of people were doing the trading?
Did a handful of floor traders trade with each other all day longtrying to outguess and outmaneuver each other? How much of the
activity was in the form of a single unit (100 shares of stock or a single commodity contract)? How much of the activity was in large
units? How much was bought or sold by large investors ? And how
much was bought or sold by large money managers or portfolio
managers? How much was bought or sold by hedgers or big companies?
And there is a third class of information that is not represented
in the daily bar chart-who’s in the market. For example, how
many people are currently holding long or short positions? What is
the size of their positions? That information is available, but it is
generally not easily accessible. The various exchanges, with the
kind of computers there are today, could store and report information like this each day:
The price moved from 83 to 85. There are 4,718 investors holding
long positions, and the average position size is 200 units. During the
day, long positions increased by a total of 50,600 units. There are 298
investors holding short positions with an average position size of
450 units. Short positions increased by 5 units. The top 100 positions
are held by the following people, and their position is.. [followed by
a listing].

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

23

Perhaps, you’re saying, “Yes, I’d like to know who owns what
and how large their positions are.” Well, if you had that information, would you know what to do with it? Would it be any more
meaningful? Probably not-unless you have some beliefs that
would allow you to trade it.
The daily bar chart also does not give you any statistical probabilities-given that X happens, what is the likelihood of Y? You
can use historical data to determine the likelihood of Y, but only if
variable X (and Y, for that matter) is contained in your data. But
what if X or Y is interesting and not contained in your data?
Finally, there is another, critical type of information that is not
included in a simple daily bar-psychological information about
people’s beliefs and emotions. That information involves the
strength of conviction of the long positions and the short positions.
When would various traders be likely
to liquidate and at what price? How il”‘-, ,: ,,:! ” :
:I:,,
will they react to various news items or j’ pescarythingif~:‘,‘.~T
pricemovements?Andhowmanypeo-

"thafadd@b*%

',

’
ple are sitting outside of the markets ’ Whic&i$~t~~~~t ,F&x:
~~~~~a~~:~~.
with the belief that it is going up or the
‘~1~~~~~~~ , :, :
belief that it is going down? Are they : ,_ @& ,@&you:m$&pl ‘::,
likely to convert those beliefs into mar,&& $&$&& &$.
ket positions and under what condi- j ‘&,.&&‘~~~~ .:,::I
;, I
tions?Andiftheydid,atwhatpriceand
‘..,
“‘,:
,‘,’ :,, : .I
”
how much money are they likely to
have to back their positions? But do you have beliefs that would
help you make money from this information?
Until now, you’ve probably thought that a daily bar chart
really was the market. Remember, all you’re really looking at is a
single line on your computer or chart book. You are assuming that
it represents the market. You might call it a generalization about the
market’s activity on a given day, but that is the best you can call it.
The scary thing is that a daily bar, which is at best summary
information, is typically the raw data that you manipulate to
make your decisions.
I hope that you’re beginning to understand why judgmental
heuristics are so important to you as a trader. Yet all I’ve given you
is one example of one heuristic-the tendency we have to assume
that a bar chart really represents a day’s worth of market activity.

CHAPTER 2

24

You could just trade bar charts. But most people want to do
something with their data before they trade, so they use indicators.
Unfortunately, people do the same thing with market indicators.
They assume they are reality, rather than attempts to represent
something that might occur. RSI, stochastics, moving averages,
MACD, etc., all seem to take on a reality, and people forget they are
just distortions of raw data that are assumed to represent something.
For example, think about the technical concept of support levels on a chart. Originally, technicians observed that once prices
dropped to a certain area on the chart, they seemed to bounce back.
That area was then assumed to be a level at which a lot of buyers
were willing to buy and thus “support” the price of the stock.
Unfortunately, many people treat words like “support level” and
“resistance” as if they were real phenomena rather than simply
concepts that represent relationships that people have observed in
the past.
I’ve previously talked about the representation bias in the
sense that people tend to judge something by what it “looks like”
as opposed to what its probability rate is. This is especially important in terms of using a trading system or trading signal. Have you
considered probability rate information in developing your trading
system or assessing the validity of your signals? That is, do you
consider the percentage of time that your predicted outcome follows your signal? Probably not, because I don’t know one trader in
1,000 who does that--even though I tell people about it constantly.
What this means is that most people don’t even test their systems
or know the expectancy of their systems (see Chapter 6).
Now let’s discuss a few more biases. We’ll determine what
these additional biases might do to your thinking about the markets and to your trading system development.
Reliability Bias
A related bias to the representation bias is to assume our data are
reliable-that they really are what they are supposed to be. With
respect to the daily bar chart, we just commonly assume that it represents a day’s worth of data. It looks like~a day’s worth of data so
that’s what it must be. However, many data vendors combine day

Judgmental Biases

25

T A B L E 2-1

A Personal Story from Chuck Branscomb
‘1 trade a portfolio of 16 futures markets using a system of my design. I use portfolio
trading system sofhvare to run my system code against daily data lo generate
orders each nigh,. The basic entry/exit rules are programmed into a real-time
sofbvare program so that I am alerted whenever I have taken a position in a
market.
‘On July 10, 1995 I had correctly placed all of my entry and exit orders for fhe
podfolio prior to the open. Shortly after the Chicago currency markets opened. the
real-time software alerted me to a long entry in the Canadian dollar. I was shocked
since I hadn’t even generated an order for the Canadian dollar that day. I just
stared a, the screen for a few seconds in disbelief. Having mentally rehearsed
being shocked by an unexpected market occurrence, I automatically fell into my
rehearsal scenario: take a deep breath, relax all my muscles from forehead to toe
while exhaling, and create a systematic process of checking for errors from highest
to lowest probability.
“It took just a couple of minutes to find that the low for the previous day was different
between the data I had downloaded for my portfolio soflware to run against versus
that collected by my real-time software A quick check of the previous day’s
tickdata confirmed my suspicion: the data the portfolio system used was invalid. I
quickly edited the database manually and reran the program. It now generated an
entry order. I glanced at the screen to see that the market had now rallied well
above my entry point. I had feelings of frustration running through me. but I calmly
inputted the information from the program into my portfolio manager spreadsheet
to size the position. Looking at the screen, I saw the market up yet another 5 ticks
now that I had the order ready. My reaction at that point was totally automatic and
focused: Icalled my trade desk and placed an order to enter the position at the
market.
‘This whole process consumed about 10 minutes time during which the Canadian
dollar rallied further and further away from my intended entry price. Fortunately,
mental rehearsal saved me from second guessing what to do. My trading
cbjectives
include not ever missing a trade entry since I have no idea when a
monster move may be evolving. Missing out on a substantial winning trade is far
worse than simply taking a small loss. When Iknew I should be in that market
already, the phone call was an automatic, focused response. For the type of
trading that I do, it was the right thing lo do. I have no use for hoping the market
Will come back to the entry point or second guessing whether to follow through on
the entry
7his occurrence marked the need for me to create a procedure that would force a
disciplined checking of daily data for each futures contract. Up to that point, I
throught
that I did a sufficient job of screening daily data. I had caught many errors
in the past, but I now knew that I needed to create ye, more work for myself each
day to ensure that I can trade my business plan as designed.’

1

CHAPTER 2 Judgmental Biases

data and night data, so is it really a day’s worth of data? And what
about the accuracy of the data?
Seasoned traders and investors know that data reliability is
one of the worst problems that traders can have. Most data vendors
are fairly accurate with respect to daily bar charts, but when you
start using tick data, 5-minute bars, 30.minute bars, etc., accuracy
goes out the window. Thus, if you are testing a system based on 5minute bars, most of your results (good or bad) could have to do with innccurate data rather than real expected results.
Look at the story in Table 2-l about the problems one can have
with data. It’s a personal story from editor Chuck Branscomb that
appeared in one of our newsletters.
Now that you’ve read the story, you can understand how most
people accept a lot more about the market than is true. All is not as
one would expect. And when you think you have a good system,
you could simply have poor data. Conversely, you might think that
you have a bad system when what you really have are poor data.
But let’s assume that you are accepting the fact that daily bar
charts really do represent the market. You wish to accept that generalization and trade it. That’s fine, but let me show you how many
more biases probably creep into your thinking.
Lotto Bias
The lotto bias relates to the increased confidence people have when
they, in some way, manipulate data-as if manipulating the data is
somehow meaningful and gives them control over the market.
Now that you’ve accepted the daily bar chart as your way of representing the market, you must either trade daily bars or manipulate them in some way until you feel confident enough to trade
them. But of course the data manipulation itself often can and will
give you this increased confidence.
A perfect example of how this illusion of control works is the
state-run lottery game called lotto. When you play lotto, you get to
pick some numbers (usually six or seven of them), and if you happen to hit all of them, you become an instant millionaire. People
really like to play the lotto game (even logical people who understand the odds). Why? Because the prize is so big and the risk is so
small (a dollar ticket is small compared with the size of the prize)
