
the oil companies tend to outsource include seismic studies to find the oil

333


334

ENERGY

as well as services related to drilling and maintaining wells. Halliburton,
Schlumberger, and Baker Hughes are some of the giants of oil services.

While the oil companies themselves have long histories of high profitabil-
ity, most oil services firms have had a much tougher time creating value for
shareholders. This is because the services industry tends to be highly competi-
tive, and economic moats are difficult to come by. Unlike the oil producers,
the oil services companies do not reap the benefits created by the OPEC cartel.

The financials show what a tough industry oil services can be. Of the top
four oil services firms we covered at this writing, none had earned above their
cost of capital over the past five-year period. Profitability tends to be only
mediocre in the boom years when oil prices are high, but bottom lines have
tended to dip into the red when prices were low. The net effect has been an
industry that has struggled to create any value for its shareholders.

In addition, the health of the industry tends to be extremely cyclical, with
short-term demand for drilling services and equipment highly volatile and de-
pendent on commodity oil and gas prices. When oil prices are high—as they
were in 2000—Baker Hughes’ phones are ringing off the hook with oil pro-
ducers scrambling to drill more wells so they can get more oil to market while
profits are high. But when oil prices tank to near $10 a barrel—as they did in
1998—demand can quickly evaporate and come to a grinding halt. Budgets
for new drilling are often the first to be cut when oil companies are operating
with lean cash flow. This makes the stocks volatile in the short term as the
markets try to guess the next cyclical movement, while long-term investors are
hampered by the red ink typically created in the cyclical lows.

Luckily, there are some bright spots in the industry because long-run de-
mand for advanced oil services should increase as oil companies have to dig in
more far-flung places and at deeper depths to find and produce from fresh oil
fields. There are also significant opportunities today in newly opened markets
such as Russia and Iraq, where the reserves are large but the production tech-
nology is outdated. Although there will inevitably be some bumps along the
road when oil prices are low, we expect modest long-term sales growth for the
overall oil services field. But it will continue to be difficult for companies in
the services industry to parlay this growth into higher profitability because

profits will likely continue to be competed away.


THE IMPACT OF COMMODITY PRICES

The Impact of Commodity Prices

As you might guess, commodity prices have a huge influence on the industry's
health and how it operates. For oil companies, the amount of oil pumped
from the ground in any given day is largely fixed, but the value of that black
gold is highly variable. In addition, with a large percentage of operating costs
also fixed, the oil business carries a large degree of inherent operating leverage.

Consider an oil company that can get oil from the ground to a refiner at
an average cost of $15 a barrel. This cost is largely fixed, regardless of the price
of crude. If crude is at $18 a barrel, the oil company makes $3 a barrel in profits.
However, if oil takes off to $30 a barrel, the company makes $15 per barrel, or
five times as much as it did at $18 a barrel, even though its revenue has less
than doubled.

Figure 25.1 summarizes how commodity oil prices impact profits. Al-
though other factors can come into play, the fact remains that commodity
prices are the biggest influence on the sector's financial health at any given
moment.

Not all oil, and not all oil companies, are created equal. For example,
some crude in the Middle East can be brought to market for well under $10 a

barrel. Meanwhile, some Canadian oil extracted from oil sands costs twice as

Profitability Levels for Different Segments of Oil industry

Crude Exploration and Pipelines Refining and Combined Profitability
OiIPrice — Production Marketing of All Segments
$55 fo/ aq mal a
$45 7 al 1
$35 a a ce
$25 am . ja 7
915 a a a
$5 Lalla fm a

=[+ =|[+ =|+ =|+

Figure 25.1 How crude ail prices affect the profitability of an ail company’s different segments.
Source: Morningstar, Inc.

335


336

ENERGY

much to produce. When oil prices are high, oil companies can afford to pro-
duce in areas that might otherwise be uneconomical. Beyond dramatically im-
pacting the oil company’s financial statements, commodity prices also greatly
influence how and where oil is produced.

Refining profit margins are much less dependent on commodity prices.
High crude prices raise the cost of the refiners’ raw goods, but some of this
can be passed along to consumers. How much can be passed along is a func-
tion of the health of the global economy, as well as how much or little excess
refining capacity there is at any given moment.

Though such a heavy reliance on commodity prices can make profits of
energy firms highly variable from one quarter to the next, the average long-
term profitability is very handsome. It’s no coincidence that of the seven
global companies that made more than $8 billion in profits in 2001, three were
oil companies. If the long-term economics of the business were not attractive,

the industry would not be as huge as it is today.

Economic Moats in Energy

It’s not easy to create a lasting economic moat in an industry that’s so strongly
affected by commodity prices, but a few energy firms have managed to do so.
Here’s how.

Common Investing Pitfall: Being Faked Out by the Cycle

The energy sector is prone to intense cyclicality. Small changes in available supply
and market demand tend to have an oversized effect on commodity prices and profits.
However, neither cyclical peaks nor valleys tend to last very long. It is important to
realize this before investing in the sector. Otherwise, you might be tempted to sell
when the sectar is doing relatively poarly (when things are about to begin looking up
again) or buy at the peak when the companies are reaping a windfall (when growth is
about to ga into reverse). For example, ExxonMobil might have lacked expensive in
1999 when it traded at more than 20 times trailing eamings that were depressed by
the cyclical lows. However, eamings rebounded sharply, and the stock has outper-
formed the market since then. In general, crude abave $30 a barrel represents a cycli-
cal peak, near $10, a trough.



ECONOMIC MOATS IN ENERGY

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)

By far, the most significant factor today that helps the companies that pro-
duce oil is the OPEC cartel. Though the cartel controls only a bit over a third
of the world’s oil output, the energy markets tend to be highly sensitive to
small disruptions and spikes in supply. This gives OPEC more than enough
power to manipulate commodity prices for the entire industry's benefit,
keeping long-term commodity prices above the long-term costs to produce
the commodities.

In addition, with reserves in OPEC’s member countries far outstripping
current production, it looks as though the cartel’s influence will not be di-
minished soon, even with its member countries tending to slightly cheat on
their quotas. If anything, OPEC’s influence will strengthen over time as
non-OPEC reserves continue to be depleted at a faster rate than OPEC
reserves.

OPEC's goal, at this writing, is to keep oil prices in the $20 to $28 a bar-
rel range. Below this range, profitability starts to suffer. Above $30, volumes
suffer as consumers start to conserve and global economies start to sputter. To
understand just how beneficial it is for energy investors to have OPEC influ-
encing commodity prices, take the cartel’s $20 to $28 target range and con-
sider that most oil companies are profitable as long as oil prices stay above the
mid-teens. The bottom line is that OPEC is highly beneficial to the indus-
ty’s profitability and is one of the primary reasons the oil companies have
been very solid investments.

Though OPEC has been successful at boosting commodity prices, its
power over the market is not absolute. After all, OPEC’s members can each
cut only so much, and cuts don’t always make an immediate impact. More-
over, when oil companies operate in OPEC-member nations, they are occa-
sionally required to limit what they pump to maintain quotas. Still, this is a
small inconvenience relative to the benefits the industry receives from the

cartel’s existence.

Economies of Scale

As in any other commodity industry, economies of scale play a major role in
the profitability of energy companies. While costs upstream (finding and
drilling oil) are largely a function of geology and geography of a company’s

337


338

ENERGY

reserves, keeping costs down can still provide a competitive advantage here.
Downstream (refining and marketing), however, economies of scale are criti-
cally important because it is just about the only meaningful economic moat a
company can build.

The fact that economies of scale play a major role in the industry can
plainly be seen in the financial statements of the oil companies. Profitability
and returns on invested capital are highly correlated to a firm’s size. Larger
companies have greater sway with suppliers, can spread overhead costs over a

bigger base, and can generally ride out cyclical lows better.

Hallmarks of Success for Energy Companies
Oil companies have typically been successful at adding value for their share-

holders. Here are some characteristics we look for in the industry.

Strong Financial Track Record

Over a complete cycle (e.g,, five years), has a company been able to profit?
For an integrated oil company such as ExxonMobil or BP, we want to see
profits even during years when oil prices sag. The year 1998, when crude
neared $10 a barrel, is a good barometer here. For a company that does only
exploration and production and has no refining, dipping into the red during
lean years is not disastrous as long as it can generate oversized profits during
the boom years, such as 2000. The higher the profitability and the longer the
track record, the better.

Clean Balance Sheet

Because they operate in a cyclical sector, it’s important that companies have
the financial wherewithal to make it through the lean times that periodically
hit. This is especially true for companies focused on exploration and produc-
tion. Growing while staying away from debt can be done, as ExxonMobil and
Shell’s essentially debt-free balance sheets prove. A debt-to-equity ratio below

1.0 is preferable.

Reserve Replacement Ratio Greater than 1.0
The reserve replacement ratio is the amount of new oil a company has found

in a period divided by the amount of oil it has produced during that same


RISKS IN THE ENERGY SECTOR

period. Ifa company is pumping more than it’s finding, reserves (which repre-
sent future production) will shrink. It may then need to spend more on explo-

ration or acquisitions of existing fields to maintain revenues.

Shareholder-Friendly Uses of Cash Flow

The energy sector is mature, so steady firms such as the major integrated
companies generate far more cash flow than can economically be reinvested
in the business. Most good oil companies should pay a stout dividend and/or
be repurchasing their shares while still spending on growth opportunities.

Risks in the Energy Sector

As with any sector, investors in energy face a number of risks. Perhaps the
largest risk is the OPEC cartel losing its influence over the commodity mar-
kets. If that happened, long-term profitability would suffer greatly because
commodity prices would float down to a level much closer to production
costs. This could happen if one of OPEC's larger members, such as Saudi
Arabia or Iran, decided to break rank and sell into the market at will. We do
not see this as likely, however, because all the members of OPEC benefit from
the cartel’s existence, and their financial interests are aligned with OPEC's
continued success.

Russia also is a threat to OPEC because it is the country with the largest re-
serves outside the cartel, Russia's output suffered in the 1990s because of the
economic and political upheaval in the country, but its output has been on the
rise in recent years. In 2002, Russia produced more than 8 million barrels a
day, in the same ballpark as Saudi Arabia's output. While Russia’s increased role
as a key oil exporter lessens OPEC’s influence, Russia’s economy is also tied
closely to the fortunes of the oil industry, and the country has shown a willing-
ness to trim supply when prices are low.

There is also significant political risk in the energy industry. With many
operations in numerous politically unstable countries, there is always the
risk that a company will get kicked out, have its taxes raised exponentially, or
otherwise have its assets impaired.

Finally, there is the chance that some technology will be developed in the
future that could alter how the world gets its energy. The dream for cleaner
and cheaper sources of energy will never die, and it will probably be realized

339


3.40

ENERGY

at some point. Luckily for investors in the sector, there is nothing yet on the
horizon that will change the world’s addiction to oil and gas.

Conclusion

Even though there are certainly risks to be considered in the energy industry,
those same risks have existed for decades and have not stopped the industry
from creating hundreds of billions of dollars of value for their shareholders. En-
ergy stocks have generally been outstanding investments for more than a cen-
tury, and we think that this positive environment will persist for the foreseeable
future. Over the long term, energy stocks should provide investors with contin-

ued strong returns, and it is an industry worth getting to know a little better.

Investor's Checklist: Energy

> The profitability of the energy sector is highly dependent on commodity
prices. Commodity prices are cyclical, as are the sector’s profits. It’s better
to buy when prices are at a cyclical low than when they're high and hitting
the headlines.

> Even though the sector is largely cyclical, many energy companies keep
their bottom lines black during the troughs. Look for this characteristic
in your energy sector investments.

>» OPEC isa highly beneficial force in the energy sector because it keeps com-
modity prices above its costs. It is worth keeping tabs on the cartel’s strength.

> Because of OPEC, we view exploration and production as a much more
attractive area than refining and marketing.

>» Working in a commodity market, economies of scale are just about the
only way to achieve a competitive advantage. As such, bigger is generally
better because firms with greater heft tend to be more profitable.

> Keep an eye on reserves and reserve growth because these are the hard as-
sets the company will mine for future revenue.

> Companies with strong balance sheets will weather cyclical lows better
than those burdened with debt. Look for companies that don’t need to
take on additional debt to invest in new projects while also paying divi-

dends or repurchasing shares.


26

Utilities

UTILITIES WERE ONCE considered to be conservative investments. They
were the preferred investments for “widows and orphans” because they were
thought to be a safe way to generate income via dividends. That is no longer
the case today.

Deregulation has changed everything for this former safe haven. Many
utility companies have gone from operating regulated monopolies with guar-
anteed returns to operating in a highly competitive and volatile commodity
market with high fixed costs. Competition in the industry will only increase
as deregulation continues to expand. The rules have changed, and the invest-

ment attractiveness of the entire sector has diminished as a result.

Electricity Primer

Though there are a handful of pure gas and water companies—Nicor and
Philadelphia Suburban are two examples—utilities that provide electric service
dominate the ranks of the publicly traded companies in the utilities sector.

Paul Larson with Pat Dorsey.


342

UTILITIES

The electric utility business can be divided into essentially three parts:
generation, transmission, and distribution. For most of the twentieth cen-
tury, utilities operated as regulated monopolies, and most had all three parts
of the business integrated into one entity. But because of today’s regulatory
environment, many utilities have been forced to separate their operations
into more focused components. Some utilities operating in states that have
not deregulated still operate as essentially integrated entities, while other util-

ities are focused on only one or two of the main functional areas.

Generation
These are the operations that run the power plants themselves: coal/natural
gas/uranium in; electricity out. A 1992 federal law forced utilities to split their
generating assets from the rest of their businesses, which set the stage for
deregulation at the state level. Some states have full competition in electrical
generation with rates set by the free market, while others still have fully regu-
lated wholesale rates. In states with full deregulation, the distribution arm of
the utilities often buys power from third-party providers who are in competi-
tion with their generation arm. In addition, some states such as Pennsylvania
allow customers to choose their generators. A customer could, for instance,
choose to pay a premium and get power purely generated from wind and solar.
Generation is perhaps the area that has the greatest competition today be-
cause electricity is a pure commodity, and the barriers to entry are compara-
tively low and falling. It is also the area that is furthest along in the deregulation
process, opening the door for independent power producers. With competition
heating up and profitability falling, it’s becoming increasingly difficult to make

Transmission

‘Transmission is the business of transporting electricity over long distances—
think tall high-tension/high-voltage wires. Some states have forced the utilities
to sell their transmission assets to third-party operators who operate regional
grids, but often the utilities keep their equity stakes in the transmission com-
panies. Regardless of who operates or owns the grid, rates are regulated, and
there is open access for generators. There was not always open access to the

grid, and this is a cornerstone of deregulation creating more competition.


REGULATION, REGULATION, REGULATION

Transmission operations typically have fairly wide economic moats be-
cause there are huge barriers to entry due to large upfront costs as well as the
NIMBY (not in my back yard) effect. However, with rates and returns regu-

lated, companies have a difficult time creating excess value.

Distribution

Distribution-related companies own and service the final mile of cable that
brings power to the individual homes and businesses. Even in states where
customers can choose their generator, the operators of the final mile still
handle the customer service and billing, in addition to charging for use of
their systems.

Distribution is where utilities have their widest economic moat because
they tend to own monopolies with essentially no alternatives, even in deregu-
lated states. But the natural monopolies here also lend this area to the most
government control. This means the rates customers are charged are regulated
and returns on investment capped, making it difficult for utilities to parlay
their economic moat into excess returns. Without excess returns, creating
shareholder value is an uphill battle.

Regulation, Regulation, Regulation

Just as location is the primary driver of value in real estate, regulation is per-
haps the single most important factor shaping the utility sector. Companies
in the sector face heavy regulation on multiple levels, and the changing reg-
ulatory structure has dramatically altered the competitive dynamics of the
industry.

From an investment perspective, the most important regulation is done at
the state level because the states decide how utilities are structured, what de-
gree of competition will be allowed, and what rates will be charged. Today, the
structures are all over the board—some states still have regulated monopolies
at essentially all levels, while others have portions that operate in totally free
market conditions. Each state has a different structure, and those structures
are in the process of changing.

The next most important level of regulation comes at the federal level.
Through the Department of Energy (DOE) and Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC), the basic ground rules for state regulation are set. It is

343


344 UTILITIES

largely the FERC’s rule makings that got the deregulation ball rolling follow-
ing 1992.

Finally, most utilities also face operating regulations at the federal level.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) wields a great deal of power be-
cause it regulates the levels of emissions power plants are allowed to release to
the atmosphere. This is important because coal-fired plants still represent the
majority of the generating capacity in the country. Those with nuclear-powered
plants also must operate under the watchful eye of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC).

The point to remember is that legislators and regulators have enormous
influence in the sector. No fundamental analysis of a utility company would
be complete without understanding the basics of regulation and how that
regulation affects the company’s operations and its competitive positioning.
It’s not an easy task, making utilities much more complex to analyze than it

might seem on the surface.

Financial Characteristics of Utilities

Most utilities carry a great deal of leverage, both operationally and financially.
On the operations side, most of the costs are fixed, with fuel being the only sig-
nificant variable cost. This operational leverage is not very important because,
beyond normal seasonal patterns, demand for power does not change much
one way or the other over time.

The financial component of their leverage is much more important today.
It is easy to understand why utilities formerly welcomed taking on massive
debt. With regulators capping rates, companies found that their profit margins
and the allowed return on assets were kept positive but comparatively low. An
easy way to increase the return on equity (as well as earnings and dividends per
share) was to crank up the financial leverage.
