
succeeding wave of “margin” calls, half of Davidson’s remaining clients were wiped out, unable to pay their
debts, forfeiting their accounts. Davidson, who had been pocketing an incredible $100,000 a year in
commissions before the crash,23 was soon making about $100 a week selling bonds—and considering himself
well off. “It was a pretty sorry sight,” he recalled of those Depression years, “to see an old friend, married
with children, very successful, and now he has to work to get a nickel for an apple” selling fruit at the corner
of Wall and Broad.
It was through his job selling bonds that Davy happened to call on the Government Employees Insurance
Company. When he found out how GEICO worked, he was instantly captivated.
GEICO sought to make auto insurance cheaper by marketing through the mail without an agent.24 That was a
revolutionary concept at the time. To make it work, GEICO needed a rule that would allow it to avoid the
folks who drive thirty miles over the speed limit after downing half a bottle of tequila at three a.m.25
Borrowing an idea from a company called USAA that sold only to military officers, GEICO’s founders, Leo
Goodwin and Cleves Rhea, had decided to sell its insurance only to government employees because, like
military officers, they were responsible individuals who were accustomed to following the law. Better still,
there were a lot of them. Thus, the Government Employees Insurance Company was born.
Later, the Rhea family had hired Davidson to sell their stock, since they were based in Texas and no longer
wanted to commute. While putting together a syndicate of buyers, he approached Graham-Newman
Corporation in New York. Ben Graham was interested but deferred to his gruff partner, Jerry Newman.
“Jerry thought that to buy something at the offering price was illegal. He said, ‘I never bought anything at the
offering price before; I’m not going to start now,’” Davidson said.
They dickered. Davidson brought Jerry Newman around to investing $1 million for fifty-five percent of the
company, with some modest concessions. Ben Graham became chairman of GEICO, and Newman joined its
board. Six or seven months later, Lorimer Davidson told GEICO’s CEO Leo Goodwin that he would take a
pay cut to work for GEICO, managing its investments. Goodwin consulted with Ben Graham, who agreed.
Hearing this story from Davidson, Warren was fascinated. “I just kept asking questions about insurance and
GEICO. He didn’t go to lunch that day—he just sat there and talked to me for four hours like I was the most
important person in the world. When he opened that door to me, he opened the door to the insurance
world.”
Now, the door to the insurance world is one most people would rather stayed firmly nailed shut. But
insurance was taught in business schools, Warren had studied it at Penn, and there was an aspect of it a little
like gambling that intrigued the oddsmaker in him. He had become interested in an insurance scheme called a
tontine, in which people pool their money and the last survivor gets the whole pot. But tontines were now
illegal.26
Warren had even considered actuarial science—the mathematics of insurance—as a career. He could have
spent decades toiling over tables of mortality statistics, handicapping people’s life expectancies. Besides the
obvious ways this suited his personality—which tended toward specialization; relished memorizing,
collecting, and manipulating numbers; and preferred solitude—working as a life actuary would have let him
spend his time pondering one of his two favorite preoccupations: life expectancy.
However, his other favorite, collecting money, had won out.
Warren was starting to grapple with the fundamental concept of business: How do companies make money?
A company was much like a person. It had to go out and find a way to keep a roof over its employees’ and
shareholders’ heads.
He grasped that because GEICO sold insurance at the cheapest price, the only way it could make money
would be to have the lowest possible costs. He also learned that insurance companies take their customers’
premiums and invest them long before the claims are paid. That sounded to him like getting to use somebody

