
CONCLUSION
By now, traders should have a better understanding of the importance of using the collective
signals of the four trend-related dimensions—pattern, volume, price momentum, and price and
moving averages—as trading guidelines. Generally, trade entries occur when the coherent
signals of these four dimensions are bullish, and trade exits happen when the signals are
bearish. In addition, this chapter has shown how the addition of financial astrology can help
further determine probable price direction and change in trend. But before we proceed to the
chapters covering each of the four trend-related dimensions, here’s a word of caution.
After trading for some time and making some profitable trades, traders may face one
possible danger. Because technical analysis is a rule-based approach, the process becomes
repetitive. Traders may start to get bored with the routine and begin to neglect their trading
rules and methods. Boredom may cause traders to either adopt a complacent attitude or
deviate from their trading methods. They may easily overlook the risks of trading. To overcome
this syndrome, traders need to make every trade with attentive care as if it is their first trade.

CHAPTER 3

Essential Patterns

The price of a stock that has been concluded during a trading period between a buyer and a
seller represents the agreed value of such stock for that time frame only. It is an equilibrium
point at that moment in time. The value will, therefore, be greatly influenced by existing supply
and demand for the stock during that trading period. The existing supply of stocks is the
quantity that sellers intend to dispose of; the existing demand for stocks is the quantity that
buyers intend to buy. It does not depend on the number of sellers or number of buyers. Thus,
when the demand is greater than the supply, price will rise and when the demand is lesser than
the supply, price will fall. Agreed value may fluctuate in a narrow range where substantial
volume during the day is being transacted. This range will then become the accepted value area
or the equilibrium zone. When price moves out of the zone, volatility in price will develop, and
if the breakout from the equilibrium zone is accompanied by higher volume, the price volatility
on breakout will normally be greater. A solid trend may evolve from such breakouts.
Stock prices fluctuate to make the highs and lows of the day. The daily range is the distance
between the high and the low. The weekly range is the range between the weekly (trading days
from Monday to Friday) high and low. Range is an important factor in reading price direction. If
the price moves upward from a low with expanding ranges, this means the buyers are buying
aggressively and overcoming the selling pressure. On an uptrend, if the price begins to increase
with contracting range, this means that the buyers are no longer buying as aggressively as
before, and it is probably a sign of an imminent top. It cautions one to raise a protective stop
closer to the current price.
If the price moves down from its high with a large daily range, it means that the sellers are
selling aggressively and are overpowering the buyers. Generally, the downward movement of
prices with expansion of range is a sign that the downward movement will continue. In all
phases of price movements, volume is a good indicator of the validity of the move. If the price
moves down to a new low with the daily range contracting, this is seen as a sign that the sellers
are not selling as aggressively as before, thereby signaling that a possible bottom may be in the
making. Taking note of these subtle signs will help to understand the flow of the market. While
a narrowing of the daily ranges in a downtrend in price is a warning that the prevailing trend is
slowing down, it does not necessarily mean that the current move has come to an end;
additional confirmation from subsequent market action is needed. When price ranges are
contracting as the price moves up with unimpressive volume, the market is vulnerable to
another downward move. Range expansion and contraction must always be looked at from the
perspective of what ranges are doing now as compared with what they have been doing in the
immediate past.

OPEN
The open refers to the price of the first trade at which a stock is traded for that day. It plays a
key role in the analysis according to the candlestick system. If there is buying demand, the
market will open up higher than its previous day’s closing, and if there is a lack of demand, the
market will open lower than its previous day’s closing. If the price opens higher outside the
previous day’s range, the buying demand is very strong, and if it opens lower outside the
previous day’s range, there is great selling pressure. Traders have to be cautious on such days
and expect greater volatility in the price’s movements when it opens outside the previous day’s
range.
If the close of the day is higher than the opening price, then the buying power is stronger
than the selling power of that day. To the contrary, if the close of the day is lower than the
opening price, then the selling pressure is stronger than the buying power of that day. See
Figures 3.1
and
3.2
. A study of the relationship between the open and the close of the day will reveal the
strength of the buying power or the pressure of the selling power for that day.
FIGURE 3.1
Black candlesticks are formed when opening prices are higher than closing prices. The
illustration shows optimistic buyers buying at the top, but failing to push prices upward, and
finally overcome by selling pressure toward the end of trading. The pessimists won the day.

FIGURE 3.2
White candlesticks are formed when closing prices are higher than opening prices. Bald or
shaven heads, which are commonly used in candlesticks, indicate there are no shadows
extending from either end of the body. In this set of candlesticks, the shaven head candlestick
means that the closing price has closed at the high of the day.

HIGH
The high is the highest price at which a stock is traded in a day or in a specific period. This is the
highest point of the trading period at which buyers are willing to buy. It is also the highest point
of the trading period at which the supply has overpowered the demand; that is, the sellers have
gained control of the market. If the high of the day is at or near the opening of the day, then
the sellers have been the dominant force, overwhelming the buyers. If the high of the day is at
or near the close and the open was at or near the low of the day, then the buyers have been in
control for that day. Previous highs often become a stumbling block to advances. When prices
reach these previous highs, analysts should be on the lookout to see if the supply is trying to
overpower the demand at these levels again.
One particular area where the market is most susceptible to a sudden reversal is immediately
after the price has traded up to a new high or down to a new low. At these levels, we would
expect new buying or selling to enter the market and it should generally cause the market to
continue moving in the same direction. If, however, the market behaves otherwise and does
not conform to expectation, then something is amiss, because the price action is not behaving
as would normally be expected.
Price cannot continue to go up if there is no new buying and the price cannot continue to go
down if there is no new selling. Aggressive traders may want to act immediately on seeing a
new high or a new low that penetrates a previous pivot point. This may be a high-risk approach.
Conservative traders may wish to wait for the subsequent price action to confirm the action.
Traders must decide for themselves the risk they are prepared to take.

LOW
The low refers to the lowest price at which the stock was traded in a day or in a specific period.
This is the lowest price of the day at which sellers are willing to part with their stocks. They are
not willing to push the price any lower. It also means that at this low point of the day, the
buyers have entered the market again and taken control of the market.
If the low is at or near the opening of the day, the buyers have been the dominant force in
the market. They have forced the price up from the low. If the low is near the close of the day,
and the open was near the high of the day, then the sellers have been in control of the market,
driving the market down. As with the highs, previous lows will also act as support to stop
further declines. When prices reach these previous lows, analysts should be on the alert to see
if the demand will attempt to overwhelm supply again at a later stage near these same levels.

CLOSE
The close is the price transacted at the end of a trading day or of a trading period. This is the
most watched and most frequently quoted market-generated price information. Most of the
trading strategies, indicators, and oscillators are based on using the day’s close as the key
component. The close is often seen as the result of the struggle between the bulls and the
bears. If the close is at or near the high of the day and the opening was near the low, evidently
buying power was more powerful. If selling pressure was greater than buying power, then it
would have caused the market to close down from the high. If the close is at or near the low of
the day and the opening was near the high, then the selling pressure was dominant for the day.
If the close is halfway between the high and the low, irrespective of the opening, then it may be
assumed that the market is evenly divided between buying power and selling power. It is
common, as the market enters a rally stage, that the close tends to be near the high of the
period, with the open near the low.
A doji is a sign of a probable change in market direction and it should be read in combination
with additional candlesticks. See
Figure 3.3
. It is not a stand-alone signal. A gravestone doji is formed when both the open and the close
meet at the low of the day’s range; it gives a bearish signal when it is found at the top of an
uptrend. Its counterpart is the dragonfly, which is the reverse pattern of a gravestone doji. In a
dragonfly, both the open and the close are at the high of the range. The dragonfly has bullish
properties.
FIGURE 3.3
Four doji patterns. A doji is formed when the closing price closes at the same price as the
opening price, or the price closes extremely near to the opening price. The patterns tell of a
conflict between the bulls and bears, the outcome of which is yet undecided.

CANDLESTICK PATTERNS
In 1996, Gunduz Caginalp and Henry Laurent, from the Mathematics Department of the
University of Pittsburgh, published a brief paper, “The Predictive Power of Price Patterns,”
based on samplings of candlestick patterns. They concluded, among other things, that “a trader
who has the same information as others plus the knowledge of this method will have a
competitive advantage.” It is said that the practice of candlestick charting was started in
eighteenth-century Japan by a man named Munehisa Honma, who controlled a large family rice
business. He used this technique to monitor the daily movements of the price of rice.
Candlesticks charting has become increasingly popular since its introduction to the West in the
1970s by Steve Nison, who has published many great articles and books on the subject,
including his earliest book, Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques.
Over the years and with advanced software programs, candlestick analysis has developed
into a more visual and descriptive study, and candlestick patterns can now be incorporated into
any customized trading system. For instance, in a customized system, if all candles are plotted
in red color in a downtrend, the software could further decipher and separate the patterns of
the red candlesticks into bullish and bearish candles. A bullish candle will have a hollow red
candle while a bearish candle will be a filled red candle. Very often in a downtrend, the
appearance of a hollow red candle signifies a support area and probable reversal area. On the
other hand, if the candles in a customized trading system are plotted as blue in an uptrend,
filled blue candles will often indicate resistance and a probable reversal area.
Candlesticks plot price movements over a set period. Regardless of the time frame, a
minimum of two candlesticks is required to identify the probable market direction and its
relative strength and weakness. Identifying patterns that always work is difficult. Readings of
candlestick patterns should not be based on a single candlestick but should be made in
combination with other candlesticks. Candlestick patterns are more predictive when the
markets are at extreme overbought or oversold levels. A momentum oscillator would be a
handy tool to check such extremes.
Figures 3.4
to
3.8
show useful patterns that are frequently found in candlestick charts.
FIGURE 3.4
Engulfing patterns are similar to outside day patterns in classic bar charts. Engulfing
candlesticks are more significant if they have larger engulfing candlesticks. A bearish engulfing
pattern at or near the top would mark the peak, and when it appears in a downtrend would
seem to indicate further declines of the market. Bullish engulfing patterns tend to indicate
support areas, especially when occurring at the low of a downtrend. A breakout from an
engulfing pattern generally is short term, lasting no longer than 10 trading days.

FIGURE 3.5
Dark cloud cover is a bearish pattern and is generally found at the end of a congested trading
area or at the end of an uptrend. Piercing line is a bullish pattern and is more dependable when
it is found at the bottom of a declining market. These two patterns are easy to miss.

FIGURE 3.6
Evening star and morning star are both three-candlestick reversal patterns. Evening star is
found at the end of the uptrend, while morning star is a bottom reversal looking upward for the
sunrise or rising prices.

FIGURE 3.7
Three black crows is a top reversal signal consisting of three long black candlesticks closing
consecutively lower near their lows. Three white soldiers is a bottom reversal signal that has
three white candlesticks closing consecutively higher near their highs.

FIGURE 3.8
A harami pattern implies the preceding trend is coming to an end. It is a reversal pattern.

Harami patterns, as shown in
Figure 3.8
, are the opposite of engulfing patterns. They are referred to as inside days in bar charts.
When a large white candlestick is followed by a small white candlestick at or near the top of an
uptrend, it is common for this bearish pattern to break downward. The failure of the second
candlestick to push price higher outside the range of the first candlestick indicates that buyers
are losing stamina. Conversely, when a large black candlestick is followed by a small black
candlestick, it is a bullish pattern and is expected to break upward. The reason is that the
second candlestick manages to hold off the downward drive of the first candlestick. Market
practice says to follow the break from harami patterns when the previous day’s high or low is
exceeded, because a trend will normally continue in the direction of the break. This pattern is
often tricky and confirmation of the next day’s candlestick is important. We should also use our
momentum oscillator as a filter to check whether the stock is oversold or overbought.
Figure 3.9
shows two candlestick patterns, hangman and hammer. Hangman appears after a long
uptrend where the market is overbought. Hammer is found at the low of a long downward
trend where the market is oversold. Comparing the two patterns, hangman indicates a
potential confirmation of an uptrend reversal, but it is not as dependable as a hammer pattern,
which occurs at the low of a downtrend. When it comes to hangman, it is common to see
confirmation in the form of a gap down the next day. Hammer with a long shadow shows that
the bears have failed to push price lower and is more reliable, especially when its shadow is
much longer than its body. With the hammer, a gap up opening the next day with strong
support of buying may be all that is necessary to enter a trade.
FIGURE 3.9
A bearish hangman and a bullish hammer share the same pattern, having a top-heavy body
and long lower shadow. The color of the actual body is unimportant. The key difference is
where they appear in a chart.

Figure 3.10
shows the application of candlestick patterns as described in the preceding.
FIGURE 3.10

Candlestick patterns occurring at critical points at a turn of trend. Note also the increase of
volume and price projection from the break of the neckline, which becomes the resistance line
when price attempts to reenter previous levels. In the momentum oscillator window, a bearish
divergence pattern confirms the continuation of the bearish trend; and a bullish divergence
alerts to the bottoming of price.

DIVERGENCE PATTERNS
Divergence occurs when the movement of a momentum oscillator does not agree with the
price movement. Divergence gives signs of the hidden strengths and weaknesses of a price
trend. Prices may rise and fall, but if the momentum oscillator fails to confirm the
corresponding price trend, the resulting discrepancy is an advance warning of a probable
change in the price trend in the very near term.
There are four patterns of divergences. They are the two classic divergences, comprising
bullish divergence and bearish divergence; and the two hidden divergences, comprising hidden
bullish divergence and hidden bearish divergence.
Bullish divergence occurs when the price is declining while the momentum oscillator is rising.
This pattern can be seen generally at a market low. Bullish divergence occurs when the market
is reaching a support level and is preparing for an eventual rally. In the beginning of a bullish
buildup, the price fails to show any signs of rallying as weak investors are selling to strong
investors. As more investors enter the market and when the accumulation process is over, the
price will rally.
The other classic divergence is bearish divergence. Bearish divergence is the opposite of
bullish divergence. It occurs when the price is rising while the momentum is declining. The
pattern looks for higher high prices and lower low oscillator values. Bearish divergence happens
when the market is preparing for a corrective decline. In the beginning of the bearish buildup,
price fails to show any sign of corrective action as weak investors are buying from strong
investors. When more strong investors exit the market and the distribution is finally over, the
price will fall. (See
Figure 3.11
.)
FIGURE 3.11
Classic divergence patterns.

Another pair of divergence patterns, known as hidden divergences, should not be ignored.
(See
Figure 3.12
.) Like classic divergences, hidden divergences do not appear on every price move, but when
they do, they function equally well. They help to keep the trader on the right track of the trend

or to anticipate a trend change. Most hidden divergences indicate continuity of the prevailing
price trend.
FIGURE 3.12
The lower panel shows two hidden divergence patterns between the movement of price and
the momentum oscillator. The first pattern of a hidden bearish divergence occurs when price
fails to continue its upward movement despite the momentum crossing above the center line.
Although price is trading in a downtrend, the momentum is trending upward. The second
pattern is a hidden bullish divergence where price is trading at a higher level but the
momentum oscillator is at a lower low.

The first type of hidden divergence is hidden bullish divergence. Hidden bullish divergence
sees higher price lows and lower oscillator lows. In a rising market, a hidden bullish divergence
is formed when momentum oscillator makes a lower low value, but the price makes a higher
low. It occurs mostly during correction in an upward trend. Hidden bullish divergence signifies
underlying strength in the price movement and often is an opportunity for the trader to reenter
the market.
The opposite pattern of a hidden bullish divergence is a hidden bearish divergence. Hidden
bearish divergence seeks lower price high and higher oscillator high values. In a declining
market, a hidden bearish divergence is formed when the momentum oscillator makes a higher
high, but the price makes a lower low. Hidden bearish divergence occurs mostly during
corrective rallies in a downward trend. It signifies underlying weakness in the price movement
and often provides an opportunity for the trader to exit from the market.
Whether divergences are classic or hidden types, they warn of potential trend changes. They
provide opportunities for the trader to reassess his position and to either exit from the market
or to commit to a new position in anticipation of the trend change. Sometimes, in a strong
trending market, several divergences may occur. The more divergences that are occurring, the
more significant they become. For instance, at a market top, the greater the number of bearish
divergences appearing, the greater the weakness of the underlying price trend; and, at a
market bottom, the greater the number of bullish divergences appearing, the greater the
strength of the underlying price trend.
In studying divergence patterns between the price and the momentum, an important point
to bear in mind is that the momentum oscillator is displaying the velocity of the price and not
the price trend. The momentum oscillator does not represent the price trend or the price
direction.
The trend is reflected in the directional movement of the price. In order to trade better, it is

worthwhile to pay attention to divergence patterns. The key is to recognize classic and hidden
divergences when they appear and to take the appropriate actions.

DIAGONAL PATTERNS
In her book, Street Smarts, Linda Raschke writes, “All you need is one pattern to make a living!”
She then introduces a pattern called Three Little Indians, developed by her good friend, Bill
Wolfe. Others call the pattern Wolfe waves, three drives, three tops, and so forth. There are
certain applicable ratios among the five waves in the diagonal, but for all practicable purposes,
it has been found that the pattern is reliable most of the time without measuring or counting
such ratios. (See
Figure 3.13
.) It does not matter by what name it is called. As long as the pattern gives a good reading, it
will be worthwhile to pay close attention to it when it appears.
FIGURE 3.13
Bearish and bullish diagonal patterns.
