95% accurate). The correct answer should be that the probability of
being afflicted with the disease for someone selected at random who
presented a positive test is the following ratio:

160

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

Number of afflicted persons
Number of true and false positives
here 1 in 51.
Think of the number of times you will be given a medication that
carries damaging side effects for a given disease you were told you had,
when you may only have 2% probability of being afflicted with it!

we are option

blind

As an option trader, I have noticed that people tend to undervalue
options as they are usually unable to correctly mentally evaluate instruments that deliver an uncertain payoff, even when they are fully conscious of the mathematics. Even regulators reinforce such ignorance by
explaining to people that options are a decaying or wasting asset.
Options that are out of the money are deemed to decay, by losing their
premium between two dates.
I will clarify next with a simplified (but sufficient) explanation of
what an option means. Say a stock trades at $100 and that someone
gives me the right (but not the obligation) to buy it at $110 one month
ahead of today. This is dubbed a call option. It only makes sense for me
to exercise it, by asking the seller of the option to deliver me the stock at
$110, if it trades at a higher price than $110 in one month's time. If the
stock goes to $120, my option will be worth $10, for I will be able to
buy the stock at $110 from the option writer and sell it to the market at
$120, pocketing the difference. But this does not have a very high
probability. It is called out-of-the-money,
for I have no gain from
exercising it right away.
Consider that I buy the option for $1. "What do I expect the value of
the option to be one month from now? Most people think 0. That is not
true. The option has a high probability, say 90% of being worth 0 at
expiration, but perhaps 10% probability to be worth an average of $10.
Thus, selling the option to me for $1 does not provide the seller with
free money. If the sellers had instead bought the stock themselves at
$100 and waited the month, they could have sold it for $120. Making
$1 now was hardly, therefore, free money. Likewise, buying it is not a

RANDOMNESS

AND OUR BRAIN: W E ARE P R O B A B I L I T Y BLIND

161

wasting asset. Even professionals can be fooled. How? They confuse the
expected value and the most likely scenario (here the expected value is
$1 and the most likely scenario is for the option to be worth 0). They
mentally overweigh the state that is the most likely, namely, that the
market does not move at all. The option is simply the weighted average
of the possible states the asset can take.
There is another type of satisfaction provided by the option seller. It
is the steady return and the steady feeling of reward - what
psychologists call flow. It is very pleasant to go to work in the morning
with the expectation of being up some small money. It requires some
strength of character to accept the expectation of bleeding a little, losing
pennies on a steady basis even if the strategy is bound to be profitable
over longer periods. I noticed that very few option traders can maintain
what I call a "long volatility" position, namely a position that will most
likely lose a small quantity of money at expiration, but is expected to
make money in the long run because of occasional spurts. I discovered
very few people who accepted losing $1 for most expirations and
making $10 once in a while, even if the game were fair (i.e., they made
the $10 more than 10% of the time).
I divide the community of option traders into two categories:
premium sellers and premium buyers. Premium sellers (also called
option sellers) sell options, and generally make steady money, like John
in Chapters 1 and 5. Premium buyers do the reverse. Option sellers, it is
said, eat like chickens and go to the bathroom like elephants. Alas, most
option traders I encountered in my career are premium sellers - when
they blow up it is generally other people's money.
How could professionals seemingly aware of the (simple)
mathematics be put in such a position? Our understanding of math
can remain quite superficial; medicine is starting to believe that our
actions are not quite guided by the parts of our brain that dictate
rationality (see Antonio Damasio's Descartes' Error or Ledoux's
Emotional Brain11). We think with our emotions and there is no way
around it. For the same reason, people who are otherwise rational
engage in smoking or in fights that get them no immediate benefits,
likewise people sell options even when they know that it is not a good
thing to do. But things can get worse. There is a category of people,
generally academics, who, instead of fitting their actions to their brains,

162

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

instead fit their brains to their actions. These go back and cheat with the
statistics to justify their actions. In my business, they fool themselves
with statistical arguments to justify their option selling. ..

Probabilities and the Media (More Journalists)
A journalist is trained in methods to express himself rather than to
plumb the depth of things - the selection process favors the most
communicative, not necessarily the most knowledgeable. My medical
doctor friends claim that many medical journalists do not understand
anything about medicine and biology, often making mistakes of a very
basic nature. I cannot confirm such statements, being myself a mere
amateur (though at times a voracious reader) in medical research but I
have noticed that they almost always misunderstand the probabilities
used in medical research announcements. The most common one
concerns the interpretation of evidence. They most commonly get mixed
up between absence of evidence and evidence of absence, a similar
problem to the one we saw in Chapter 9. How? Say I test some
chemotherapy, say Fluorouracil for upper respiratory tract cancer, and
find that it is better than a placebo, but only marginally so; that (in
addition to other modalities) it improves survival from 21 per 100 to 24
per 100. Given my sample size, I may not be confident that the
additional 3% survival points come from the medicine; it could be
merely attributable to randomness. I would write a paper outlining my
results and saying that there is no evidence of improved survival (as yet)
from such medicine, and that further research would be needed. A
medical journalist would pick it up and claim that one Professor N.N.
Taleb found evidence that Fluorouracil does not help, which is entirely
opposite to my intentions. Some naive doctor in Smalltown, even more
uncomfortable with probabilities than the most untrained journalist,
would pick it up and build a mental block against the medication, even
when some researcher finally finds fresh evidence that such medicine
confers a clear survival advantage.

RANDOMNESS

AND OUR BRAIN: W E ARE P R O B A B I L I T Y

cnbc at lunch

BLIND

163

time

The advent of the financial television channel CNBC presented plenty of
benefits to the financial community but it also allowed a collection of
extrovert practitioners long on theories to voice them in a few minutes of
television time. One often sees respectable people making ludicrous (but
smart-sounding) statements about properties of the stock market. Among
these are statements that blatantly violate the laws of probability. One
summer during which I was assiduous at the health club, I often heard
such statement as "the real market is only 10% off the highs while the
average stock is close to 40% off its highs", which is intended to be
indicative of deep troubles or anomalies - some harbinger of bear markets.
There is no incompatibility between the fact that the average stock is
down 40% from the highs while the average of all stocks (that is, the
market) is down 10% from its own highs. One must consider that the
stocks did not all reach their highs at the same time. Given that stocks
are not 100% correlated, stock A might reach its maximum in January,
stock B might reach its maximum in April, but the average of the two
stocks A and B might reach its maximum at some time in February.
Furthermore, in the event of negatively correlated stocks, if stock A is at
its maximum when stock B is at its minimum, then they could both be
down 40% from their maximum when the stock market is at its highs!
By a law of probability called distribution of the maximum of random
variables, the maximum of an average is necessarily less volatile than the
average maximum.

you

should

be d e a d

by

now

This brings to mind another common violation of probability by primetime T.V. financial experts, who may be selected for their looks,
charisma and their presentation skills, but certainly not for their incisive
minds. For instance, a fallacy that I saw commonly made by a
prominent T.V. financial guru goes as follows: "The average American
is expected to live 73 years. Therefore if you are 68 you can expect to
live five more years, and should plan accordingly". She went into precise
prescriptions of how the person should invest for a five more years

164

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

horizon. Now what if you are 80? Is your life expectancy minus seven
years? What these journalists confuse is the unconditional and
conditional life expectancy. At birth, your unconditional life expectancy
may be 73 years. But as you advance in age and do not die, your life
expectancy increases along with your life. Why? Because the other
people by dying have taken your spot in the statistics, for expectation
means average. So if you are 73 and are in good health, you may still
have, say, nine years in expectation. But the expectation would change,
and at 82, you will have another five years, provided of course you are
still alive. Even someone 100 years old still has a positive conditional life
expectation. Such a statement, when one thinks about it, is not too
different from the one that says: our operation has a mortality rate of
1%. So far we have operated on 99 patients with great success; you are
our 100th, hence you have a 100% probability of dying on the table.
T.V. financial planners may confuse a few people. This is quite
harmless. What is far more worrying is the supply of information by nonprofessionals to professionals; it is to the journalists that we turn next.

the bloomberg

explanations

I have, on my desk, a machine eponymously called a Bloomberg™ (after
the legendary founder Michael Bloomberg). It acts as a safe e-mail
service, a news service, a historical data retrieving tool, a charting
system, an invaluable analytical aid and, not least, a screen where I can
see the price qf securities and currencies. I have gotten so addicted to it
that I cannot operate without it, as I would otherwise feel cut off from
the rest of the world. I use it to get in contact with my friends, confirm
appointments, and solve some of those entertaining quarrels that put
some sharpness into life. Somehow, traders who do not have a
Bloomberg address do not exist for us (they have to have recourse to
the more plebeian internet). But there is one aspect of Bloomberg I would.
dispense with; the journalist's commentary. Why? Because they engage
in explaining things and perpetuate the right-column, left-column
confusion in a serious manner. Bloomberg is not the sole perpetrator;
it is just that I have not been exposed to newspapers' business sections
over the past decade, preferring to read real prose instead.

RANDOMNESS

AND OUR BRAIN: W E ARE P R O B A B I L I T Y B L I N D

165

As I am writing these lines I see the following headlines on my
Bloomberg:
—> Dow is up 1.03 on lower interest rates.
—> Dollar down 0.12 yen on higher Japanese

surplus.

and so on for an entire page. If I translate it well, the journalist claims to
provide an explanation for something that amounts to perfect noise. A
move of 1.03 with the Dow at 11,000 constitutes less than a 0.01%
move. Such a move does not warrant an explanation. There is nothing
there that an honest person can try to explain; there are no reasons to
adduce. But like apprentice professors of comparative literature,
journalists being paid to provide explanations will gladly and readily
provide them. The only solution is for Michael Bloomberg to stop
paying his journalists for providing commentary.
Significance: how did I decide that it was perfect noise? Take a simple
analogy. If you engage in a mountain bicycle race with a friend across
Siberia and, a month later, beat him by one single second, you clearly
cannot quite boast that you are faster than him. You might have been
helped by something,,or it can be just plain randomness, nothing else.
That second is not in itself significant enough for someone to draw
conclusions. I would not write in my pre-bed-time diary: cyclist A is
better than cyclist B because he is fed with spinach whereas cyclist B has
2 diet rich in tofu. The reason I am making this inference is because he
beat him by 1.3 seconds in a 3,000 mile race. Should the difference be
one week, then I could start analyzing whether tofu is the reason, or if
there are other factors.
Causality: there is another problem; even assuming statistical
significance, one has to accept a cause and effect, meaning that the
event in the market can be linked to the cause proffered. Post hoc ergo
propter hoc (it is the reason because it came after). Say Hospital A
delivered 52% of boys and Hospital B delivered the same year only
48%; would you try to give the explanation that you had a boy because
it was delivered in hospital A?
Causality can be very complex. It is very difficult to isolate a single
cause when there are plenty around. This is called multivariate analysis.
For instance, if the stock market can react to U.S. domestic interest

166

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

rates, the dollar against the yen, the dollar against the European
currencies, the European stock markets, the United States balance of
payments, United States inflation, and another dozen prime factors,
then the journalists need to look at all of these factors, look at their
historical effect both in isolation and jointly, look at the stability of such
influence, then, after consulting the test statistic isolate the factor if it is
possible to do so. Finally, a proper confidence level needs to be given to
the factor itself; if it is less that 90% the story would be dead. I can
understand why Hume was extremely obsessed with causality and could
not accept such inference anywhere.
I have a trick to know if something real in the world is taking place. I
have set up my Bloomberg monitor to display the price and percentage
change of all relevant prices in the world: currencies, stocks, interest
rates, and commodities. By dint of looking at the same setup for years,
as I keep the currencies in the upper left corner and the various stock
markets on the right, I managed to build an instinctive way of knowing
if something serious is going on. The trick is to look only at the large
percentage changes. Unless something moves by more than its usual
daily percentage change, the event is deemed to be noise. Percentage
moves are the size of the headlines. In addition, the interpretation is not
linear; a 2 % move is not twice as significant an event as 1%, it is rather
like four times. The headline of the Dow moving by 1.3 points on my
screen today has less than one millionth of the significance of the serious
7% drop of October 1997. People might ask me: why do I want
everybody to learn some statistics? The answer is that too many people
read explanations. We cannot instinctively understand the nonlinear
aspect of probability.

filtering

methods

Engineers use methods to clean up the noise from the signal in the data.
Did it ever occur to you while talking to your cousin in Australia or the
South Pole that the static on the telephone line could be distinguished
from the voice of your correspondent? The method is to consider that
when a change in amplitude is small, it is more likely to result from
noise - with its likelihood of being a signal increasing exponentially as

RANDOMNESS AND OUR BRAIN: WE ARE PROBABILITY BLIND

Figure 1 1 . 1

167

Unfiitered D a t a C o n t a i n i n g Signal a n d N o i s e .

its magnitude increases. The method is called a smoothing kernel which
has been applied in Figures 11.1 and 11.2. But our auditory system is
incapable of performing such a function by itself. Likewise our brain
cannot see the difference between a significant price change and mere
noise, particularly when it is pounded with unsmoothed journalistic
noise.

0.4
0.2

50

ISO

150

/

200

0.2

Figure 1 1 . 2

Same D a t a W i t h its N o i s e R e m o v e d .

250

168

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

we d o n o t u n d e r s t a n d confidence

levels

Professionals forget the following reality. It is not the estimate or the
forecast that matters so much as the degree of confidence with the
opinion. Consider that you are going on a trip one fall morning and
need to formulate an idea about the weather conditions prior to packing
your luggage. If you expect the temperature to be 60 degrees, plus or
minus 10 degrees (say in Arizona), then you would take no snow clothes
and no portable electric fan. Now what if you were going to Chicago,
where you are told that the weather, while being 60 degrees, will
nevertheless vary by about 30 degrees? You would have to pack winter
and summer clothes. Here the expectation of the temperature carries
little importance concerning the choice of clothing; it is the variance that
matters. Your decision to pack is markedly different now that you are
told that the variability would be around 30 degrees. Now let us push
the point further; what if you were going to a planet where the
expectation is also going to be around 60 degrees, but plus or minus 500
degrees? What would you pack?
We can see that my activity in the market depends far less on where I
think the market is going so much as it does on the degree of error I
allow around such a confidence level.

an admission

We close this chapter with the following information: I consider myself
as prone to foolishness as anyone I know, in spite of my profession and
the time spent building my expertise on the subject. But here is the
exception; I know that I am very, very weak on that score. My humanity
will try to foil me; I have to stay on my guard. I was born to be fooled by
randomness. That will be explored in Part III.

PART III

w a x in my e a r s living with

ranbomitis

dysseus, the Homerian hero, had the reputation of using guile to
overcome stronger opponents. I find the most spectacular use of
such guile was against no other opponent than himself.
In book 12 of the Odyssey, the hero encounters the sirens, on an
island not far from the rocks of Caribde and Scylla. Their songs are
known to charm the sailors into madness, causing them to irresistiblycast themselves into the sea off the sirens' coast, and perish. The
indescribable beauty of the sirens' songs is contrasted with the
moldering corpses of sailors that strayed into the area around them.
Odysseus, forewarned by Circe, contrives the following ruse. He fills the
ears of all his men with wax, to the point of total deafness, and has
himself tied to the mast. The sailors are under strict instructions not to
release him. As they approach the sirens' island, the sea is calm and over
the water comes the sound of a music so ravishing that Odysseus
struggles to get loose, expending an inordinate amount of energy to
unrestrain himself. His men tie him even further, until they are safely
past the poisoned sounds.

O

The first lesson I took from the story is not to even attempt to be
Odysseus. He is a mythological character and I am not. He can be tied
to the mast; I can merely reach the rank of a sailor who needs to have his
ears filled with wax.

172

WAX IN MY EARS

i am n o t so

intelligent

The epiphany I had in my career in randomness came when I understood
that I was not intelligent enough, nor strong enough, to even try to fight
my emotions. Besides, I believe that I need my emotions to formulate my
ideas and get the energy to execute them.
I am just intelligent enough to understand that I have a predisposition
to be fooled by randomness - and to accept the fact that I am rather
emotional. I am dominated by my emotions - but as an aesthete, I am
happy about that fact. I am just like every single character whom I
ridiculed in this book. Not only that, but I may be even worse than them
because there may be a negative correlation between beliefs and
behavior (recall Popper the man). The difference between myself and
those I ridicule is that I try to be aware of it. No matter how long I study
and try to understand probability, my emotions will respond to a
different set of calculations, those that my unintelligent genes want me
to handle. If my brain can tell the difference between noise and signal,
my heart cannot.
Such unintelligent behavior does not just cover probability and
randomness. I do not think I am reasonable enough to avoid getting
angry when a discourteous driver blows his horn at me for being one
nanosecond late after a traffic light turns green. I am fully aware that
such anger is self-destructive and offers no benefit, and that if I were to
develop anger for every idiot around me doing something of the sort, I
would be long dead. These small daily emotions are not rational. But we
need them to function properly. We are designed to respond to hostility
with hostility. I have enough enemies to add some spice to my life, but I
sometimes wish I had a few more (I rarely go to the movies and need the
entertainment). Life would be unbearably bland if we had no enemies
on whom to waste efforts and energy.
The good news is that there are tricks. One such trick is to avoid eye
contact (through the rear-view mirror) with other persons in such
encounters as traffic situations. I try to imagine that the other person is a
Martian, rather than a human being. It works sometimes - but it works
best when the person presents the appearance of being from a different
species. How? I am an avid road cyclist. Recently, as I was riding along
with other cyclists, slowing down traffic in a rural area, a small woman

173

WAX IN MY EARS

in a giant sports utility vehicle opened her window and heaped curses at
us. Not only did it not upset me but I did not even interrupt my thoughts
to pay attention. When I am on my bicycle, people in large trucks
become a variety of dangerous animals, capable of threatening me but
incapable of making me angry.
I have, like anyone with strong opinions, a collection of critics among
finance academics and economists, annoyed by my attacks on their
misuse of probability and unhappy about my branding them as
pseudoscientists. I am incapable of taming my emotions when reading
their comments. The best I can do is just not read them. Likewise with
journalists. Not reading their discussions of markets spares me plenty of
emotional expenditure. I will do the same with reviews of this book.
Wax in my ears.
