
ratios. The portfolios are rebalanced each
December 31 using the last twelve months’
sales and capital expenditures . . . those
firms that engaged in the most capital
expenditures provided investors with the
worst returns, while those that had the
lowest expenditures had overwhelming
better returns — more than 3.5 percent per
year higher than the S&P 500 Index over
almost half a century.

There is strong evidence that firms with the
highest level of capital expenditures suffer
the worst performance across the entire
stock market. Five portfolios are formed,
ranging from the firms with the lowest to
the firms with the highest capex to sales

The two sectors Siegel identifies as having the
lowest capex to sales are the healthcare sector
at 0.07 and the consumer staples sector at 0.044.
Interestingly, the healthcare sector posted the
best return of all sectors in the market between
1957 and 2003.

Finally, the investing activities section of the cash flow statement shows
a large amount of borrowing: $107.84 million. The company purchased
(or retired) $127.37 million worth of existing stock, a positive sign for
shareholders because fewer shares on the market tends to lead to higher
stock prices.

Not Just Numbers: Qualitative Data
Fundamental analysis isn’t just based on numbers. A company is more than
its earnings, sales, and so on. Would you value a company led by a wellknown investor the same as a company led by your neighbor? Qualitative
factors also determine whether a company’s stock is a value or not.
Some qualitative factors that great performing stocks often share are
 High management ownership: Insider ownership is a sign that the
executives who run the company are putting their money where their
mouths are. The financial ownership also aligns shareholder interests
with management’s interests. A CEO is likely to think twice about taking
an action that may depress the stock price if he or she owns a good

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out
chunk of company stock in a 401(k) plan. The rule of thumb here is
that insider ownership of at least 10 percent of outstanding shares is a
bullish sign.
 A wide moat: Hundreds of years ago, castles often used moats as a
defense mechanism to prevent would-be attackers from successfully
penetrating the castle walls. An economic moat is similar: It’s the degree
of competitive advantage a company has that prevents competition from
taking market share.
Warren Buffett, a well-respected investor and head of Berkshire
Hathaway, is a major proponent of the idea of economic moats. He
looks for companies that would be difficult to displace because of brand
loyalty or cost advantages. Moats are often established in the pharmaceutical business because of drug patents that ensure the developer of a
new drug will be the sole provider of that drug for a number of years.
You can see the world, to some extent, as consisting of companies with
wide moats and those with more narrow moats (called commodities) —
a product you can buy from anywhere and don’t care much about who
manufactures it is a commodity. Think of things like salt, sugar, or —
increasingly today — computers. Contrast the businesses that provide
these products with companies that have wide moats and are difficult to
displace. Starbucks — which Jerry Seinfeld jokingly calls “Five Bucks” —
is able to charge premium pricing for cups of coffee. Sometimes the
moat may be a result of some technological advantage. Google, for
example, was a tiny technology company in 1996 but developed a search
technology that dwarfed the behemoths at Microsoft and Yahoo! In a
short time, Google gained a major foothold in the search engine field and
was able to translate that market share into advertising dollars.
Ask yourself when reviewing companies how difficult it would be for a
company to displace the firm you’re examining. The more difficult it is
to displace, the wider the moat.
 Positive catalysts: Catalysts help investors revalue shares upward.
Successful new products (like Apple’s iPhone) and new management
(like Hewlett-Packard’s Mark Hurd) are both catalysts that cause
investors to revalue shares.
A catalyst can also originate from outside the company. When one company is acquired or bought out in an industry, competitors of that
company often see share price increases as investors revalue shares
based on the purchase price multiple used in the acquisition. Investors
also often hope that another buyout will occur in the industry.
Negative catalysts that may propel shares of a firm downward can
include an earnings miss, a competitor’s introduction of a new product,
and the resignation of key management.

157

158 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Valuing a Company Based
on Data You’ve Gathered
You may feel like you can charge people for advice on analyzing financial
statements, reviewing earnings reports, and evaluating qualitative data, but
just how much is this darn company worth? There’s no line on the financial
statements that says, “This company is worth $5 billion. Please do not pay
more than this amount. Thank you.”
If you get ten different analysts in one room and ask them to analyze one
company, you’re likely to get ten different answers (ideally they’re at least
close to one another). So there are differences in how investors value firms.

Understanding the two main
methods of valuation
The two main ways stocks are valued today are relative valuation models and
absolute valuation models:
 A relative valuation model is likely the model you’ll use most often as a
swing trader. Relative valuation is estimating a company’s value based
on what its peers in the marketplace are trading at. The model may
be based on earnings (using the price to earnings ratio, for example),
sales (price to sales ratio), book value (price to book value), or a dozen
other ratios.
By far, the price to earnings ratio (P/E) is the most common method
of relative valuation. For example, if Macy’s and Dillard’s trade for 12
times earnings, then gosh darn it, maybe J.C. Penney should too. Maybe
it even deserves to trade at a premium to Macy’s because its earnings
are expected to grow faster in coming years than its competitors. Or
perhaps J.C. Penney deserves to trade at a discount to its competitors
because it has a lower net profit margin (net income divided by sales)
than its competitors. You get the idea.
 An absolute valuation model is calculated independently of the
valuations of a company’s peers. Instead of drawing conclusions based
on what Macy’s or Dillard’s are trading, an analyst valuing shares of
J. C. Penney determines a value based on the company’s earnings, cash
flows, or dividends. Corporate valuation differences arise primarily
out of disagreements over expectations of future earnings. If it were
possible to know with certainty how much a company would make in
the next ten years, there would be little disagreement on the value of
the company today.

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out
Relative valuation models are easier and faster to calculate than absolute
valuation models. Swing traders usually rely on relative valuation models
because of the complexity and time commitment inherent in absolute
valuation models. I address both here so you know that two basic methods
of analysis exist, but because this book is targeted to swing traders, I don’t
go into more detail on how to construct an absolute valuation model.

Implementing the swing
trader’s preferred model
Using the relative valuation model is the quick and dirty way of getting you
close to the actual value of a company you’re considering. All it takes are two
easy steps:
1. Choose your price multiple.
This metric can be P/E, price to sales ratio (P/S), or any of the other
metrics highlighted in Chapter 8.
2. Figure out what multiple your security should trade at for that
multiple.
Determining what’s a “correct” P/E ratio (or any ratio) is no easy task.
The best way to start is to look at the average P/E of the industry.
Then, decide whether the company you’re assessing deserves to trade
at a premium or discount to the industry. A company that can grow
earnings faster than its industry is generally awarded a higher P/E than
its competitors.
Figure 7-4 shows financial statistics of major drug manufacturers and the
average statistics for the entire industry. Merck (symbol: MRK) trades at a
premium to its industry on a P/E basis (24.58 times versus 21.31 times). But
that may be justified given Merck’s operating margins (operating income/
sales) of 25.22 percent versus the industry average of 14.53 percent. In
addition to Merck, this figure shows statistics for Bristol-Myers Squibb
(symbol: BMY), Pfizer (symbol: PFE), and sanofi-aventis (symbol: SNY).
Note: The acronym TTM stands for “trailing twelve months.”
A swing trader looking at Merck may determine that a premium valuation is
justified given the strength of operating margins and the recent quarterly
revenues growth versus the average industry. Coming up with an appropriate
multiple is more art than science. First determine whether the company
should trade at a premium, discount, or in-line multiple versus its industry.
If the company should trade at a premium or discount (because earnings

159

160 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
growth or operating margins or return on equity are higher or lower than
the industry average), determine an approximate size to the premium or
discount by measuring how much higher or lower the company’s growth or
margins are versus the industry. For example, a company growing twice the
rate of its industry may be worth a price multiple twice its industry average.
Alternatively, a company that’s growing at half the rate of its industry may
deserve to trade at a discount that’s half the industry average.
You can use other financial ratios to estimate the value of a company
relative to its peers. Remember to make higher or lower allowances for things
like profit margins, earnings growth rates, and efficiency ratios. Chapter 9
provides more details on how to determine a fair multiple. You may need to
award a company (with a higher multiple and, hence, higher valuation) if it
has strong earnings growth rates. Alternatively, a company with poor growth
rates or poor efficiency ratios may need to trade at a discount to its peers.

Figure 7-4:
Key
statistics
of several
large drug
manufacturers
relative to
the industry.
Source: Yahoo! Finance

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out

Don’t let analysts do your thinking for you!
If your head is swirling with the idea of valuing
a company, you may be asking, “Can’t an analyst just tell me what to think? Analysts make big
bucks to look at firms inside and out and tell me
whether to buy or sell them, right?” Wrong!
Well, not about the big bucks part. Analysts are
well compensated (maybe too well compensated) to form opinions on companies, and they
provide a valuable service. They spend their
time looking at a handful of companies, usually
in one industry, and issue buy or sell recommendations for the masses. But there’s something you should know about Wall Street: It’s
largely a big boy’s club. (There, I said it.) And
because it’s a club, firms don’t always have
your best interest in mind.
Because analysts can sell a buy recommendation to anyone with money (and you can only
shop around sell recommendations to people
who actually hold the stock already), the
number of buy recommendations out there far
outnumber the number of sell recommendations. So if you issue an opinion to buy a stock,
you can shop that opinion to literally anyone
with money. But issue a sell recommendation
and your target audience shrinks dramatically.
In the late 1990s, major investment banks like
Morgan Stanley or Merrill Lynch often issued a
buy recommendation right after selling the
company’s stock to the public. This worked like
clockwork, day in and day out, as investors rode
stocks down into the pennies (literally!) after
being assured by those smart Wall Street

analysts that all was well. The market collapse
in 2000 brought calls for reforms, and the public
learned that analysts often privately ridicule the
very companies they publicly endorse.
The reform of Wall Street is a good thing, but
analysts still may have unknown conflicts.
Moreover, as a group, analysts are often wrong
about the timing of buys and sells. In 2005, Zacks
Investment Research conducted a survey to
find out whether buy-recommended stocks outperform sell-recommended stocks. You may
guess that the demarcation between these two
extremes is wide enough that this question
doesn’t need to be asked, but you’d be wrong.
A 2005 Wall Street Journal article entitled
“Analysts Keep Misfiring with ‘Sell’ Ratings”
found that stocks with a large proportion of sell
ratings (that is, with more sell ratings than buy
or hold ratings) performed better than stocks
with no sell ratings and only buy or hold
ratings.
So don’t rely on an analyst’s buy or sell recommendation to help you determine whether a
swing trade is good or not. You need to use your
own judgment. This recommendation also
extends to the area of TV, specifically the various stock-picking programs on CNBC or Fox
News. I’m amazed at how many traders and
investors get stock picks from these programs.
Don’t they realize that millions of others are
watching, too? And the mass is often wrong
when it comes to the market — even when it
includes top Wall Street analysts.

161

162 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis

Chapter 8

Finding Companies Based
on Their Fundamentals
In This Chapter
 Working your way down the ladder by assessing the market and the industry
 Employing screens to discover swing trading candidates
 Figuring out which method works for you

Y

ou can identify fundamentals-based trades (and technical-based trades
for that matter) in two ways: by beginning with the security’s market
and drilling down into the promising industries or by identifying candidates
with promising characteristics on a grassroots level. One approach is top
down, whereas the other is bottom up. Both ways have merit.
This chapter outlines how to identify promising candidates to buy or short
using a fundamentally driven top-down or bottom-up approach — and how to
determine which approach is right for you.

Seeing the Forest for the Trees:
The Top-Down Approach
The top-down approach identifies promising swing trading candidates by
starting with market analysis (looking at stock markets, commodity markets,
currency markets, and the like). Then it drills down into specific industries
before finally examining individual securities. This approach implicitly argues
for greater weight on markets and industries over the merits of an individual
company because these big-picture items are more important in determining
a security’s return than company-level factors. A top-down trader cares less
whether he or she swing trades XYZ Oil Company or ABC Oil Company
(based on the individual characteristics of each company) and more about
whether he or she is trading an energy stock or a drug stock.

164 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
The top-down approach allows you to understand the condition of the
overall market, which is valuable because the majority of securities follow
trends in the overall market. For example, if the stock market is dreadful and
hits new lows every few weeks, you’re probably going to come up short on
your long trades. On the other hand, if you avidly short every stock that
moves while the market hits new highs, you’d best be prepared to take some
nasty losses.
Using this approach, you begin evaluating whether the overall market is
overvalued, undervalued, or just right. Then you question whether the industry is likely to outperform or underperform the market. Finally, you look at
the individual security to see whether its statistics are impressive enough to
warrant investment.
Top-down analysis involves two specific steps:
1. Determine whether the overall market is correctly priced.
This step allows you to determine whether the overall market is cheap
or dear so that you know whether you should trade the long or short
side. As a swing trader, you don’t have time to call analysts, survey
government data, and build an economic model that perfectly captures
all information that may influence an overall market. Even if you did
have the time for all that, I’ve never seen proof that such complexities
improve forecasting abilities (my apologies to my econometrics
professor).
2. Assess the prospects of different industries in the market.
This step helps you focus on the promising industries or lagging ones
so that the wind is at your back when you buy or short securities within
that industry. If the market is overvalued, for example, which industries
present the most opportunity on the downside? Being right on the
overall market and wrong on the industry may leave you with losses.
The following sections break down the details of how to dig into market and
industry analysis to benefit from the top-down approach.

Sizing up the market
You can’t identify good swing trading candidates with the top-down
approach without first evaluating the overall market. Fortunately you can
choose from three measures to determine whether the overall market is
cheap, fairly priced, or expensive.
Just because a market is cheap or expensive according to these measures
doesn’t mean you should ignore price action. Ideally, price action should confirm the findings of these measures. When it doesn’t, you know something’s
wrong and that the current trend may end. For instance, these measures

Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
would’ve told you that the stock market was expensive or overvalued at the
beginning of 1999. But that didn’t stop the Nasdaq Composite Index from
nearly doubling during that year. The smart swing trader would’ve followed
the upward price action. But he or she would’ve kept tight stops in light of the
findings of these three valuation measures and, as a result, would’ve been
better prepared for the ensuing collapse of the Nasdaq in 2000 that took
prices lower by nearly 80 percent through 2002.
The models I present in the following sections are all yardsticks. They aren’t
to be taken as fact. Stock markets can be over- and undervalued for long
periods of time. But as a swing trader, you should know where value is. Even
if you trade in the near term on the other side of value, you’ll know whether a
trend has legs based on whether it goes against or with the direction of value.
For example, the bull market in technology stocks in 1998 and 1999 was
incredible and powerful. But it didn’t last long. Knowing that the market was
overvalued — as all three of these indicators would’ve told you — would
have prepared you for the major bear market that began in 2000 and ended in
late 2002.

Taking the easy path: Long-term P/E ratio
The long-term P/E ratio method of determining whether a market is overor undervalued is the crudest and simplest method you can use. It simply
compares the market’s current P/E to its long-term average. The real question is: Do you look at the P/E based on the last 12 months of earnings, or do
you look at it based on the expected earnings in the coming 12 months?
Reviewing the expected earnings over the next 12 months makes more
sense than relying on historical earnings. After all, companies are valued
based on their future, not their past. Historical earnings are especially
unhelpful at points of inflection, where a major turn happens in the economy.
The recent past looks very little like the coming future.
Fortunately, Standard & Poor’s (S&P) publishes the P/E of the S&P 500
Index based on both historical and future earnings. The S&P Web site
(www.standardandpoors.com) provides spreadsheets that show the P/E
for the S&P 500 Index (large companies), the S&P 400 Index (mid cap companies), the S&P 600 Index (small cap companies), and the S&P 1500 Index
(the entire market). To download these spreadsheets, go to the S&P Web site
and click on these items in the following order: “Indices,” “Equity Indices,”
“United States,” “S&P 500,” and finally “Operating Earnings & Estimates by
GICS Sector.”
From 1936 through 2007, the average P/E of the S&P 500 Index — which
represents a large part of the market — has been 15.50 (see Figure 8-1). When
the market trades significantly above this level (say 20 times earnings), that
can indicate the market is overvalued. When the market trades well below
this level, that may signal that the market is undervalued.

165

166 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Historical P/E Ratio of S&P 500 Index
50.00
45.00
40.00
35.00
30.00

Historical P/E Ratio of S&P 500 Index

Dec-05

Dec-02

Dec-99

Dec-96

Dec-93

Dec-90

Dec-87

Dec-84

Dec-81

Dec-78

Dec-75

Dec-72

Dec-69

Dec-66

Dec-63

Dec-60

Dec-57

Dec-54

Dec-51

Dec-48

Dec-45

Dec-42

Dec-39

Dec-36

25.00

Figure 8-1:
The aver- 20.00
age P/E of 15.00
the S&P 10.00
500 Index 5.00
from 1936 0.00
through
2007 was
15.50.

Average P/E Ratio

The S&P Web site breaks out data into two segments: as reported earnings
and operating earnings. I recommend you use the operating earnings spreadsheet, because reported earnings can be distorted by one-time events that
aren’t reflective of a company’s underlying fundamentals. One-time events
that aren’t part of a company’s operations — like the gain generated from
selling land or the loss suffered due to a hurricane — can distort a firm’s
underlying strength or weakness. The operating earnings category ignores
these one-time effects and examines only those earnings generated from a
firm’s operations.
The long-term P/E ratio method has the following downsides when it comes
to valuing a market:
 It ignores the other investment opportunities you can acquire. Stocks
are one asset class and compete with other asset classes, most often
bonds, for investors’ dollars. When bonds offer investors low returns —
say 1 or 2 percent — stocks tend to be valued at a higher premium to
their historical average. A P/E of 15 may be cheap when bonds are
offering investors a return of 1 percent. You can address this issue by
combining the long-term P/E ratio with a method that looks at other
types of securities, such as the two models addressed in the following
sections.
 It may yield a result that won’t be reached for many months, or even
years. Take a look again at Figure 8-1. Between 1996 and 2000, the
market was overvalued based on long-term P/E but didn’t suffer a major
correction for a few years. However, the eventual correction was swift
and painful. That’s why you must use the long-term P/E ratio method in
conjunction with price action (that is, technical analysis) when determining how to swing trade in a specific market.
