
• Compounding: Dunn compounds relentlessly. He plows profits
back into his trading system and builds upon fresh gains.
• Recovery: Dunn had losing years of 27.1 percent in 1976 and
32.0 percent in 1981 followed by multiyear gains of 500
percent and 300 percent, respectively. You must be able to
accept drawdowns and understand that recovery is, by the
nature of trend trading, around the corner.
• Going short: Dunn goes short as often as he goes long. In
general buy-and-holders never consider the “short side.” If you
are not biased to trend direction, you can win either way.

Drawdowns Are Part of the Game
Dunn Capital has had its share of drawdowns, but his approach
to losses is clear and calm:
“Some experience losses and then wait for gains, which
they hope will come soon…But sometimes they don’t come
soon and sometimes they don’t come at all. And [the
traders] perish.”25
But don’t think for a second that you are not going to suffer
pain, either by trading like Dunn or letting Dunn manage your
money. Because drawdowns—a.k.a. your account going down—will
make you feel like you need an extra dose of Prilosec.

Dunn Capital in Print
There are great lessons to be learned from the performance
data of Dunn, but you can find insight from their writings as well.
The Dunn Capital monthly newsletter adopts a brutally honest tone
when communicating with clients, as evidenced by the following
excerpts from monthly newsletters throughout the spring of 2003:26
1. “As global monetary, fiscal, and political conditions grow

increasingly unsustainable, the trend following strategy that
DUNN steadfastly employs may possibly be one of the few
beneficiaries.”

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

2. “The only thing that can be said with certainty about the

current state of the world economy is that there are many
large, unsustainable imbalances and structural problems that
must be corrected. Perhaps the equity markets are correctly
predicting a rapid return to more stable and prosperous times.
Perhaps not. Regardless, there seems to be more than ample
fodder for the creation of substantial trends in the coming
months.”
3. “It seems that Mr. Greenspan’s twin bubbles, equities and

housing, working along side the federal, municipal, and
external deficits, will make the coming weeks and months more
interesting than anyone may really care to witness. If this all
seems a bit too grim, do not forget that California, on its own,
would be the fifth largest economy in the world. Currently, the
state has a 33 billion dollar budget gap, which seems almost
certain to result in the peaceful overthrow of the state’s chief
executive in November. Also remember that the analysis
presented here may be nothing more than an incorrect
interpretation of the facts. On the truly bright side, it is
comforting to know that the opinions expressed in this letter
will have absolutely no bearing on the time-tested methods that
DUNN uses to generate trading profits and manage risk.”
I love the fact that even though Dunn has strong political
opinions, he knows that his opinions mean zilch when it comes to
properly trading the market. His political and or economic opinions
do not form the basis of when he buys and sells.

Clients
What problems can prevent clients from seeing Dunn’s way?
• Clients usually do not understand the nature of trend following.
They often panic and pull out just before a big move makes
them a lot of money.
• Clients may start asking for the trader to change his approach.
Although they may not have articulated this directly to the
fund manager, they really wanted the trend following strategy

43

Change is not merely
necessary to life—it is life.
Alvin Toffler

44

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

customized for them before investing their money in the first
place. The manager is then faced with a difficult decision: Take
the client’s money and make money through management fees
(which can be lucrative) or trade the capital as originally
designed. Trading a trend following system as originally
designed is the optimal path in the long run.
If clients try to change or adjust how Dunn trades, he either lets
them go or doesn’t take them on as a client in the first place:
“A person must be an optimist to be in this business, but I
also believe it’s a cyclical phenomenon for several other
reasons. In our 18 years of experience, we’ve had to endure
a number of long and nasty periods during which we’ve
asked ourselves this same question. In late 1981, our
accounts had lost about 42 percent over the previous 12
months, and we and our clients were starting to wonder if
we would ever see good markets again. We continued to
trade our thoroughly researched system, but our largest
client got cold feet and withdrew about 70 percent of our
total equity under management. You guessed it. Our next
month was up 18 percent, and in the 36 months following,
their withdrawal of our accounts made 430 percent!”27
This observation always made me wonder why Dunn is not
studied in MBA programs. Are Harvard MBAs aware of Dunn’s
trading when they graduate?

Check Your Ego at the Door
What is it like to work at Dunn? They once posted a job wanted
ad on a job board. Part of it read:
“Candidates…must NOT be constrained by any active
noncompete agreement and will be required to enter into a
confidentiality and noncompete agreement. Only longterm, team players need apply (no prima donnas). Salary:
competitive base salary, commensurate with experience,
with bonus potential and attractive benefits, beginning at
$65,000.”28
Notice how Dunn says, “[N]o prima donnas.” In other words,
readers of this ad can choose either to work for Dunn or attempt to

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

45

be Dunn on their own, but they cannot have both. Trend following
demands taking personal responsibility for one’s actions, and Dunn
makes it clear that he is responsible for Dunn Capital.
One of the interesting traits of the many trend followers I spoke
with personally or observed from afar is their honesty. If you listen
closely to their words and review their performance data, they are
more than happy to tell you exactly what they are doing and why.

Key Points
• Dunn’s attitude captures the essence of trend following. His
performance data is one of the clearest, most consistent, most
dramatic demonstrations of trend-following success available.
• Dunn goes short as often as long.
• Dunn’s average rolling 60-month period has yielded a return of
about 231 percent.
• Dunn’s designed risk is a 1 percent chance of a 20 percent or
greater loss in a month.

John W. Henry
The performance data of Bill Dunn and John W. Henry shows
them to be trend followers cut from similar cloth. They are both
astonishingly successful self-made men who started without formal
association to Wall Street. They developed trading systems in the
1970s that have made them millions of dollars again and again.
Their correlated performance data shows that they both trade for
absolute returns and often trade in the same trends at the same
time.
Henry’s performance is clear (Chart 2.5):
Henry has captured some of the great trends of our generation.
By all available evidence, Henry was on the other side of the Barings
Bank blowout in 1995. In the zero-sum game, he won what Barings
Bank lost. More recently, in 2002, Henry was up 40 percent while
the NASDAQ was spiraling downwards. He, like Dunn, doesn’t have
a strategy that could be remotely considered “active or day
trading,” but when his trading system tells him, “It’s time,” he can

Men’s expectations
manifest in trends
John W. Henry29

46

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

literally blow the doors off the barn with spectacular returns in
short order. Can he have down years? Yes, and he does from time
to time, but he was right there again making huge money in 2008
when everyone else was seemingly losing.

Comparison of John W. Henry to the S&P 500 Cash Index
September 1984–November 2003
$1,000 Starting Value—Compounded
$1,000,000.00

$100,000.00

$10,000.00

Henry
S&P 500

CHART 2.5:
2003

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

$1,000.00
Henry Final Value:

$136,656

S&P 500 Final Value:

$6,369

$1000 Growth of Financials and Metals as of November,

Also, I can’t help but notice that, as the owner of the Boston Red
Sox, Henry applies the basic tenets of trend following—simple
heuristics for decision making, mathematics, statistics, and
application of a system—to the world of sports. Henry and baseball
are connected clearly, as discussed in Chapter 5, “Baseball:
Thinking Outside the Batter’s Box.”

Prediction Is Futile
Henry was blunt: “I don’t believe that I am the only person who
cannot predict future prices. No one consistently can predict

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

anything, especially investors. Prices, not investors, predict the
future. Despite this, investors hope or believe that they can predict
the future, or someone else can. A lot of them look to you to predict
what the next macroeconomic cycle will be. We rely on the fact that
other investors are convinced that they can predict the future, and
I believe that’s where our profits come from. I believe it’s that
simple.”
Because trend following is primarily based on a single piece of
data—the price—it can be difficult to paint the true story of what
that really means. Henry has always been able to articulate clearly
and consistently how he trades, year after year, to those willing to
listen carefully. To generate his profits, he relies on the fact that
other traders think they can predict where the market will go and
often end up as losers. Henry will tell you that he routinely wins the
losses of the market losers in the zero-sum trading game.

About John W. Henr y
John W. Henry was born in Quincy, Illinois to a successful
farming family. For a Midwestern farm boy in the ’50s, there was
nothing in the world like baseball, and from the time nine-year-old
Henry went to his first major league game, he was hooked. In the
summer, he would listen in rapt attention to the great St. Louis
Cardinals broadcaster Harry Caray night after night. Henry
described himself as having average intelligence, but a knack for
numbers, and like many young baseball fans, he crunched batting
averages in his head.
Henry attended community colleges and took numerous night
courses, but never received his college degree. It wasn’t for lack of
interest, however. When he was attending a class taught by Harvey
Brody at UCLA, they collaborated on and published a strategy for
beating the odds at blackjack. When his father died, Henry took
over the family farms, teaching himself hedging techniques. He
began speculating in corn, wheat, and soybeans. And it wasn’t long
before he was trading for clients. In 1981, he founded John W.
Henry and Company, Inc., in Newport Beach, California.31
If Henry’s first managed account was staked with $16,000 and
he now owns the Boston Red Sox, don’t you think the best question
to ask is, “How?” A former president at his trading firm paints what
appears to be at first glance a simplistic portrait depicting their
firm’s success:

47

There is no Holy Grail.
There is no perfect way to
capture that move from
$100/ounce to $800/ounce
in gold.
John W. Henry30

How are we able to make
money by following
trends year in and year
out? I think it’s because
markets react to news,
but ultimately major
change takes place over
time. Trends develop
because there’s an
accumulating consensus
on future prices,
consequently there’s an
evolution to the “believed
true price value” over
time. Because investors
are human and they
make mistakes, they’re
never 100 percent sure of
their vision and whether
or not their view is
correct. So price
adjustments take time as
they fluctuate and a new
consensus is formed in
the face of changing
market conditions and
new facts. For some
changes, this consensus
is easy to reach, but there
are other events that take
time to formulate a
market view. It’s those
events that take time that
form the basis of our
profits.
John W. Henry

48

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

“There has been surprisingly little change. Models we
developed 20 years ago are still in place today. Obviously,
we trade a different mix of markets. We’ve also added new
programs over the last 20 years, but relative to many of our
peers, we have not made significant adjustments in our
trading models. We believe that markets are always
changing and adjusting, and the information that’s
important to investors will also change. In the 1980s,
everyone was interested in the money supply figures…
everyone would wait by their phones until that number
came out. In the 1990s, the information du jour was
unemployment numbers. But people’s reactions to the
markets are fairly stable. Uncertainty creates trends and
that’s what we’re trying to exploit. Even if you have better
and faster dissemination of information, the one thing we
haven’t really improved is people’s ability to process
information. We’re trying to exploit people’s reaction,
which is embedded in prices and leads to trends. These
reactions are fairly stable and may not require major
adjustments of models.”32
He reiterates an important philosophical tenet of trend
following: In looking at the long term, change is constant. And
because change is constant, uncertainty is constant. From
uncertainty, trends emerge. It is the exploitation of these trends
that forms the basis of trend following profit. All of the cutting edge
technology and news-gathering capabilities in the world are not
going to help you trade trends. That is white noise, static if you will.
We have made our
business managing risk.
We are comfortable with
risk and we get our
reward from risk.
John W. Henry34

When I spoke with Henry’s president, he offered insight
regarding all aspects of their trading business:
• “We stick to our knitting.”
• “Most people don’t have the discipline to do what they need
to do.
• “We like to keep it sophisticatedly simple.”
• “Our best trading days are when we don’t trade.”
• “We make more money the less we trade.”
• “Some of our best trades are when we are sitting on our hands
doing nothing.”

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

49

• “We don’t want to be the smartest person in the market. Trying
to be the smart person in the market is a losing game.”
He was not being flippant. He was direct and gracious. His tone
was matter of fact. He wanted people to understand why John W.
Henry and Co. does what it does. A few years ago, he gave a great
analogy about the emotional ups and downs you must cope with to
reach trend following success:
“Looking at the year as a mountain ride…Anyone who has
ridden the trains in mountainous Switzerland will
remember the feeling of anxiety and expectations as you
ascend and descend the rugged terrain. During the decline,
there is anxiety because you often do not know how far you
will fall. Expectations are heightened as you rise out of the
valley because you cannot always see the top of the
mountain.”33

A World-View Philosophy
Trend followers like Henry and Dunn could not have developed
their trading systems without first deciding how they were going to
view the world. Each, through experience, education, and research,
came to an understanding of how markets work before they
determined how to trade them. What each of them found,
separately, was that market trends are more pervasive than people
think, and could have been traded in the same way 200 years ago
as they are today.
To that end Henry spent years studying historical price data
from the 18th and 19th centuries in order to prove to himself that
there was only one successful way to approach trading. When he
explains his investment philosophy, he is crystal clear about what it
is and what it is not:
• Long-term trend identification: Trading systems ignore shortterm volatility in the attempt to capture superior returns
during major trending markets. Trends can last as long as a few
months or years.
• Highly disciplined investment process: Methodology is
designed to keep discretionary decision making to a minimum.

Life is a school of
probability.
Walter Bagehot35

50

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

• Risk management: Traders adhere to a strict formulaic risk
management system that includes market exposure weightings,
stop-loss provisions, and capital commitment guidelines that
attempt to preserve capital during trendless or volatile periods.
• Global diversification: By participating in more than 70
markets and not focusing on one country or region, they have
access to opportunities that less diversified firms may miss.
As I have seen, some traders dismiss trend following as simply
predictive technical analysis. Henry is not some “technical
indicator guru” trying to make predictions:
“…‘Some people call what we do technical analysis, but
JWH just identifies and follows trends. It’s like, if you are in
the fashion world, you have to follow trends, or you’re
yesterday’s news.’ But as with technical analysis, trend
followers believe that markets are smarter than any of their
individual participants. In fact, they make it their business
not to try to figure out why markets are going up or down
or where they’re going to stop.”36
Henry’s use of fashion as a metaphor for trend following hits the
nail on the head and goes beyond obvious comparison between
trends in clothing and trends in markets. He explains that to be
fashionable, you have no choice but to follow stylistic trends of the
moment. Likewise, trend followers have no choice but to react to
trends, and like those who dictate fashion, successful trend
followers exploit trends long before the public is paying attention.
We don’t predict the
future, but we do know
that the next five years
will not look like the last
five years. That just
doesn’t happen. Markets
change. And our results
over the next three years
will not replicate the last
three. They never do.
John W. Henry39

Trend followers would agree with H. L. Mencken when he said,
“We are here and it is now. Further than that, all human knowledge
is moonshine.” They understand that attending to what is taking
place in the market from moment to moment isn’t a technique; it is
what is and that is all. The moment, the here and now, is the only
place that is truly measurable. Henry showed how he applies this
philosophy in a past coffee trade:
“All fundamentals were bearish: The International Coffee
Organization was unable to agree on a package to support
prices, there was an oversupply of coffee, and the freeze
season was over in Brazil…his system signaled an
unusually large long position in coffee. He bought, placing
2 percent of the portfolio on the trade. The system was

Chapter 2 • Great Trend Followers

51

right. Coffee rallied to $2.75 per lb. from $1.32 in the last
quarter of the year, and he made a 70 percent return. ‘The
best trades are the ones I dislike the most. The market
knows more than I do.’” 37

It’s What You Think You Know That Gets You
into Trouble
Henry knows that the complicated, difficult elements of trend
following are not about what you must master, but what you must
eliminate from your market view.
On why the long-term approaches work best over decades:
“There is an overwhelming desire to act in the face of
adverse market moves. Usually it is termed ‘avoiding
volatility’ with the assumption that volatility is bad.
However, I found avoiding volatility really inhibits the
ability to stay with the long-term trend. The desire to have
close stops to preserve open trade equity has tremendous
costs over decades. Long-term systems do not avoid
volatility; they patiently sit through it. This reduces the
occurrence of being forced out of a position that is in the
middle of a long-term major move.”38
On stocks:
“The current thinking is that stocks have outperformed
everything else for 200 years. They may have a little
relevance for the next 25 years. But there is no one in the
year 2000 that you can convince to jettison the belief that
200 years of performance will not cause stocks to grow to
the sky. Right now people believe in data that supports the
inevitable growth in prices of stocks within a new landscape
or new economy. What will be new to them is an inevitable
bear market.”40
For all his talk about avoiding predictions, Henry is making one
here. He is predicting that stocks can’t go up forever because
eventually trends reverse themselves. He is also pointing out that as
a trend follower, he will be prepared whenever they do to take
action and potentially profit (which he did to great profit during the
market crash of October 2008).

Let’s take a look at the
type of markets we face
around the world. There
is a constant barrage of
information, but often
this information can be
conflicting and, in some
cases, does not come out
with the frequency that
we would like. For
example, monetary policy
can serve as a simple
case. There are only a
limited number of Fed
meetings a year; however,
this is supposed to help
us infer the direction of
interest rates and help us
manage risk on a daily
basis. How do you
manage risk in markets
that move 24 hours a day,
when the fundamental
inputs do not come
frequently? In the grain
markets, crop reports are
fairly limited, and
demand information
comes with significant
lags, if at all. How can
this information be best
incorporated in the daily
price action? Under these
types of conditions,
simple approaches, such
as following prices, may
be better.
Mark S. Rzepczynski,
President & Chief Investment Officer,
John W. Henry & Co.41

52

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

It Starts with Research

We can’t always take
advantage of a particular
period. But in an
uncertain world, perhaps
the investment philosophy
that makes the most
sense, if you study the
implications carefully, is
trend following. Trend
following consists of
buying high and selling
low. For 19 years we
have consistently bought
high and sold low. If
trends were not the
underlying nature of
markets, our type of
trading would have very
quickly put us out of
business. It wouldn’t take
19 years or even 19
months of buying high
and selling low ALL of the
time to bankrupt you. But
trends are an integral,
underlying reality in life.
How can someone buy
high and sell low and be
successful for two
decades unless the
underlying nature of
markets is to trend? On
the other hand, I’ve seen
year-after-year, brilliant
men buying low and
selling high for a while
successfully and then
going broke because they
thought they understood
why a certain investment
instrument had to
perform in accordance
with their personal logic.
John W. Henry43
