
• 274 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

his father’s Rolls. Dorothy often borrowed Livermore’s Rolls and
chauffeur to drive her to visit Paul.
Paul ran over, and out of the car stepped Harriet, his stepmother, a surprise visit. She scared him so deeply that he ran across
the soccer fields to his dormitory, screaming.
His father later made him call and apologize to Harriet. But that
did not stop his fear of her. She was very possessive of his father
and insisted on summer camp for Paul so he would not be in the
apartment with them during his summer vacation. Paul always
brought home a school chum over holidays in order to insulate
himself from her. He also needed the company for the long periods of time he would otherwise be alone in the apartment.
On July 31, 1936, Dorothy Livermore Longcope sued Livermore in a New York court. She wanted a summons issued against
him to obtain money for the hospital expenses Jesse had incurred
after the shooting. The judge refused to issue a summons and
advised her to carry out other legal remedies. He threw the case
out of court. Livermore was informed of the action and could
only shake his head in astonishment.
When Jesse was well, fully recovered, Livermore sent him on
the trip to Europe he had wanted.
Livermore himself stayed at home.
Livermore’s next battle was with the Internal Revenue Service,
after he was hit with an $800,000 tax bill. He negotiated and settled the claim with the IRS in the same year.
In the summer, he was ready for a fishing excursion. He chartered the Ranger, a deep-sea fishing boat that ran out of Montauk
Point. In the early afternoon, trolling off Montauk slightly into
Long Island Sound, he hooked into a broadbill swordfish. Locked
into the fighting chair, he fought the fish for over an hour using
only 36-pound-test line. The fish ran long and hard, jumping,

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 275

THE SHOOTING OF JESSE LIVERMORE JR .

• 275 •

sounding, but with an expert captain, John Sweeting, at the helm,
it was an equal battle between human and fish.
Finally, the fish was brought alongside the boat. It was hoisted
out of the water with a block and tackle and weighed at the dock.
It weighed 486 pounds and remains a record as the second-largest
swordfish ever caught off Montauk Point on rod and reel.
Two years later, on November 14, 1937, at the age of 18, Jesse
married Evelyn Sullivan, the daughter of Hen Bletzer, who for years
promoted prizefights and operated a bar in Baltimore. Evelyn gave
her age as 20, and it was reported that she had been married before,
four years prior to this wedding. Dorothy was at the wedding to give
her blessings. In fact, she assisted in obtaining the license and witnessed the marriage ceremony. Jesse was particularly happy to be out
of the oppressive presence of the dour and gloomy Harriet.
Livermore did not attend. As a wedding present, he bought his
son the Pepsi-Cola bottling franchise for Connecticut.
In 1938 and 1939, Livermore sank lower and lower in his
depression. He was still playing the markets, but not like in the old
days when he would be consumed with energy and passion to get
to work, to beat the game, to apply all his energies on the stock
market, the grain markets, the overall market.
Those high times of the 1920s and the pure fun of living were
gone. He had ruined it with his affairs and carrying on. Sure,
Dorothy drank, but her drinking only got worse after the affairs,
the humiliation, and the desertion.
Dorothy was complimentary mirror image to his personality.
He was repressed and cerebral; she was outgoing and instinctive.
And she was beautiful. He missed her more as time passed. The
fun, the joy, the laughter were gone from his life.
He started having recurring nightmares for the first time in
his life.

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 276

• 276 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

In late 1939, Livermore’s son Jesse suggested that he write a
book about his experiences and techniques in trading in the stock
and commodity markets. This brought a flash of life back into Livermore: a mission, a goal, and a purpose. He began at once, thinking perhaps it would rekindle his spirit. The book was completed
and published by Duell, Sloan, and Pearce in March 1940. It was
titled How to Trade in Stocks.
The book did not sell well. The world war was underway, and
the general interest in the stock market was low. His methods were
still new and controversial at the time, and they received mixed
reviews from the stock market gurus of the period.
They remain controversial today.
Livermore said that his basic theories were just the beginning, as
Sigmund Freud’s and Carl Jung’s were in the study of the human
mind. In his book he said, “I know people will take these thoughts
I offer to new and better heights. Don’t worry, I won’t be jealous.
I wish them all well. I agree with Virgil: ‘Exoriare aliquis nostris ex
ossibus ultor.’ Let someone arise from my bones as an avenger.”

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 277

*

chapter fifteen

*

Facing the Grim Reaper

There is a reaper whose name is death.
And with his sickle keen,
He reaps bearded grain at a breath,
And the flowers that grow in between.
Longfellow, The Reaper and the Flowers

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 278

• 278 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

ON WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1940, THE 63-YEAR-OLD

Livermore and his wife, Harriet, whom he had nicknamed
“Nina,” were at the Stork Club, Livermore’s favorite club. The
house photographer came up and asked if he could take a photo.
“Of course you can,” Livermore said. “But it’s the last picture
you will take, because tomorrow I’m going away for a long, long
time.”
Nina was shocked. She asked Livermore, “Laurie, what do you
mean?”
“Only a joke, darling, only a joke.” He smiled back at her.
The flashbulb fired. Several people came by from time to time
to join them, and Nina had a few dances with friends. Livermore
looked on, a faraway stare in his eye. His food went untouched; he
had long since lost his appetite. He looked thin and wan.
The next day, November 28, at noon, he wandered up from his
offices in the Squibb building at 745 Fifth Avenue and entered the
Sherry Netherland Hotel. He stopped to say hello to Eugene Voit,
the manager. He had lived in the hotel for years before moving to
Park Avenue. He often stopped by for a cocktail on his walk home
from work.
At 12:30 he sat down for lunch alone, which was not unusual.
He was well known to the staff and a favorite regular at the hotel
bar and restaurant. He sat near the bar and accepted his oldfashioned, which the bartender automatically made when he saw
him enter. He spoke to no one during lunch. He appeared to the
waiter to be distraught and intense.
Throughout his lunch, he would whip out his favorite small
leather-covered memorandum book and extract the gold pen
attached to the chain on his vest to write. He wrote hurriedly,
a page or two at a time, like someone who had a lot to say but
could only say a little at any moment. Each time he replaced the

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 279

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 279 •

notebook in his pocket. He did this several times through lunch.
He smoked cigarette after cigarette as he sat there. At 2:30, he left
the hotel and returned to his office.
He came back to the Sherry Netherland at 4:30 in the afternoon and went directly to his favorite table near the bar. As usual,
he was handed an old-fashioned as he sat down. Livermore smiled
at the waiter but said nothing. He sat there for an hour, taking his
notebook out and writing in it, then replacing it. He ordered one
more old-fashioned during the hour he sat there.
He finally rose from his table and walked out of the bar into the
lobby.
To get to the men’s washroom in this hotel, it was necessary to
enter the lobby and walk about 120 feet, through swinging doors
that obscured the view, to an area which then led into the banquet
room, the cloakroom, and the washrooms.
At 5:33, Livermore walked through the swinging doors and
slipped through the closed door of the dim, dark, cloakroom. He
took a seat on the stool at the end of the cloakroom. He withdrew
a .32-caliber Colt automatic pistol and slid the barrel back, popping a round into the chamber. The clip was full. He had bought
the gun in 1928 when he was living at Evermore.
He placed the barrel of the gun behind his right ear and pulled
the trigger.
The bullet ripped through his brain. He died instantly.
A few minutes later, the assistant manager, Patrick Murray, was
making his hourly rounds when he opened the door to the cloakroom. He saw Livermore slumped in the chair. At first he thought
he should not disturb him, that Livermore was asleep. Then he saw
a pool of blood on the floor and the gun.
He ran back to the reception desk and called the police. The
news spread like wildfire. Reporters and newspaper photographers

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 280

• 280 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

crowded into the hotel lobby. Two radio cars sped up to the
entrance; four patrolmen were stationed in the lobby and entrance.
Inspector Patrick J. Kenney, who ultimately led the investigation,
arrived in an unmarked car along with Captain Edward Mullins
of the East Sixty-seventh Street station. Inspector Kenney, after
appraising the situation, phoned the Livermore apartment on Park
Avenue to notify Mrs. Livermore that her husband had shot himself.
“What? What are you telling me? He’s been ill lately.
Maybe . . .”
“I’m sorry ma’am, but I’m afraid your husband is gone from a
bullet wound.”
There was a dead silence on the other end of the phone. He
heard a thump on the floor. Inspector Kenney was a seasoned officer. He had known people to faint on the phone before from the
news he had given them. He sent a squad car over to make sure she
was all right.
The police phoned Jesse Livermore Jr. to give him the news. He
arrived by taxi at 6:45, shaking and visibly upset. He was accompanied by Harry Edgar Dache, Livermore’s office manager. Livermore’s body had not been moved. Jesse was led into the
cloakroom. He walked to the far end where his father was slumped
dead on the stool, the gun on the floor in the pool of blood. He
identified the body and collapsed, slumping down in the far corner. He was raised to his feet by a police officer and Dache.
He would not leave the body. He waited in the lobby until the
medical examiner, Inspector Raymond O. Miles, arrived at 9.
They left the body untouched until the medical examiner came,
examined the scene, and released the body. The medical examiner
verified the police verdict of suicide.
Dache made immediate arrangements to remove the body to
the Campbell Funeral Chapel at Madison Avenue and Eighty-first
Street.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 281

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 281 •

At 8:30 that same night, Paul Livermore was studying in his
room at the Hotchkiss School in Connecticut. There was a knock
on the door. “Paul, you’re wanted in the headmaster’s office,” a
student told him.
Paul walked down the long halls to the headmaster’s office. He
knocked on the door. “Come in,” was the response.
Paul stood in front of the headmaster. He was 17, slim, a good
athlete and student, and movie-star handsome, like his brother. He
would later actually become an actor in movies and various television series. “Yes sir?” he said.
“Young man, I’m afraid I have something to tell you, and there
is no easy way to do it.” He stepped out from behind his desk.
“I’m sorry to have to tell you that your father killed himself this
evening in New York. He shot himself. A car and chauffeur have
been sent from New York to drive you to the city. The car is waiting outside.”
Paul stood numb for a second and actually doubled over, as if he
had been punched in the stomach. He went down on one knee,
dizzy. He felt a wave of nausea sweep over him. He grabbed for the
edge of the headmaster’s desk. The headmaster circled the desk
and helped him to his feet. He gave him a glass of cold water, and
after a few short minutes, he walked him to the waiting Packard
town car in the driveway, where Frank, the chauffeur, waited, out
of uniform. Frank helped him into the back seat.
Paul Livermore sat alone in the dark silence of the rear seat of
the Packard as the lights flashed by him on the parkways that led
back to New York City. He was too numb, too dazed, and too
confused to cry.
The police revealed that there was a suicide note of eight small
handwritten pages in Livermore’s personal notebook. It was
reported in the November 30 New York Tribune.
The press wanted to know what it said. Tersely, the police

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 282

• 282 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

responded. “There was a leather-bound memo book found in Mr.
Livermore’s pocket. It was addressed to his wife.” A police
spokesman read from the notebook: “ ‘My dear Nina: Can’t help it.
Things have been bad with me. I am tired of fighting. Can’t carry
on any longer. This is the only way out. I am unworthy of your
love. I am a failure. I am truly sorry, but this is the only way out for
me.’ He signed the eight-page note, ‘Love Laurie,’ which we presume was a nickname, maybe from his middle name, Lauriston.”
The police went on to explain that this theme of failure, desolation, and despair was repeated throughout the book, with the
identical words used over and over again. They said it was not an
incoherent note, just repetitious, and obviously had been written
under great emotional stress.
A little after 10 that night, the Packard rolled up in front of the
private entrance and elevator to the Livermore apartment at 1100
Park Avenue. Frank rang the bell.
“Is that you, Frank?” Harriet asked.
“Yes ma’am,” he replied.
“Paul with you?”
“Yes ma’am.”
“Good, send him in. You wait there for me. I’ll be down in a
few moments,” she said through the speaker as she buzzed him in.
When Paul walked in, he saw Harriet, fully dressed, moving
quickly about the apartment. There were three paper bags by the
door. They were full to the top with cash, cash enclosed in bank
wrappers.
She saw him as he entered. “Hello Paul,” she said, stopping her
movement, her hands full of cash.
“Hello,” he said.
“Paul, come and sit on the couch.” He did as he was told. “The
school told you about your father?”

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 283

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 283 •

“Yes.”
“Look Paul, I just talked to a friend, a lawyer, who told me the
police often investigate suicides like they do homicides. They
came already, a uniformed officer in a squad car, to see if I was all
right. I’m afraid they might come here and search the apartment
and I could not explain certain things. Your father kept too much
cash in the house. So I’m going to go for the evening. Besides, I’m
very upset, but I have to try and think straight. I must think
straight. You understand?”
“Sure.”
“Okay, I’m in a hurry. They could arrive any moment. I’m not
going far, just to a hotel. But you tell the police that I’ve gone to
see a friend if they come, okay? I’ll send Frank back to be with you
after he takes me to the hotel.”
“I’m okay. I don’t need Frank.”
“You sure?”
“Yes.”
“Alright then, I have to go.”
Paul waited as she went to the safe in the living room. He
watched as she swept her jewels out of the safe into the paper
shopping bag, using her forearm. She disappeared into the bedroom. He could hear her opening and closing bureau doors,
dumping more jewelry into the last shopping bag. She came out
with a shopping bag half full of jewelry and stuffed a sweater in
on top.
“See, Paul, I use these shopping bags because nobody would
ever suspect what was in them,” she said. “I’ll take care of everything in the morning.”
Paul walked her to the door as she slipped on her coat. She swept
up the other shopping bags with the cash and left. He watched her
take the private elevator down to the waiting chauffeur.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 284

• 284 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Later he was to estimate that she had about $3 million in cash
and at least another $1 million in jewelry—the boy’s inheritance.
It was never spoken of again. Paul spent the night alone in the 12room apartment.
The next morning, November 29, when Paul awoke around 10,
Harriet had already returned to the apartment.
“Good morning,” she said to Paul. “I’ve notified Jesse Jr.,
Alexander Moore, and Reverend Crossland to meet us at Campbell’s at noon.” Paul just looked at her and nodded in stunned
acquiescence.
From Campbell’s they drove directly to the Ferncliff Crematorium in Hartsdale, New York, where they entered a small, spartan,
furnished room. The casket was removed from the hearse, rolled
into the room, and rested against a wall with floor-to-ceiling black
crepe curtains.
The Reverend Edgar Crossland stood, Bible in hand, and said a
few brief words over the closed casket. Paul and his brother Jesse
sat together by the side of the casket in iron chairs. Across from
them sat Harriet and Moore.
When Reverend Crossland was done, the attendant pulled back
the black floor-to-ceiling curtains to reveal an iron furnace door.
The door was opened, and flames could be seen hissing inside. The
boys were startled and looked at each other. They did not know
what to expect. They all rose as the two attendants grasped the casket handles and rolled the casket on conveyor wheels through the
open door into the flames.
As the casket hit the flames, they heard a great whoosh. After
the casket was completely inside, the iron door was clanged shut.
Moore, Jesse, and Paul just stood there numb, in stunned, silent
bewilderment. The great Lone Wolf of Wall Street, the Boy
Plunger, was gone forever. He had shot himself just the evening

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 285

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 285 •

before, and his body was cremated by noon, with only four people to mourn his passing.
Back at the apartment on Park Avenue an hour later, Harriet
talked to Paul. “Here Paul, take this.” She handed him a $20 bill.
He sat dumbfounded. “Your mother called from Brooklyn and
wants you to come over and see her. She wants you to stay with
her. I think it’s a good idea, Paul.”
“All right,” he said.
“Fine. Well, that’s settled. Frank is downstairs waiting with the
car for you.”
She walked him to the door and said goodbye. He went directly
to his mother, Dorothy, who was waiting for him at her home in
Brooklyn. She had not been invited to the funeral, nor had anybody else. He walked silently into his mother’s open arms. They
cried together. These were the first tears that he had shed.
On February 1, 1941, Livermore’s estate was settled; a report was
published in the New York Times. Harriet Metz Livermore was the
sole executor. The total estate was valued at $10,000 in assets and
$361,010 in liabilities. There was no mention of Livermore’s personal $1 million trust fund or of the money Harriet had taken from
the Park Avenue residence.
Paul went on to finish school at Hotchkiss. He then joined the
Army Air Forces for wartime service. He spoke perfect French, so
he was assigned to train pilots in the Free French air force to fly
P-51 Mustangs. When he got out of the service, he was called by
Harriet to come for a visit. “It is important,” he was told.
When he arrived, Harriet offered to leave him her entire fortune if he would just stay with her as a companion. “I’m so
lonely,” she said to him.
Paul refused to give up his life this way. Instead, he went to

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 286

• 286 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Hollywood, where he got roles and acted in several movies and
television series. He later went to Hawaii to surf, where he eventually married Margaret Seely, with whom he had two sons, Chad
and Scott. He and Margaret later divorced.
Paul wound up owning the Embers nightclub and restaurant in
Honolulu, where he met and married Ann MacCormack, a beautiful, talented nightclub singer who had sung with Frank Sinatra,
Tony Bennett, and many big bands. They remain happily together.
Jesse’s life was a different story.
Patricia Schneider Freiberg was a tall, slender, blonde beauty,
highly educated, a New York socialite, and the daughter of a
prominent real estate developer in Cincinnati, Ohio.
When she was introduced to Jesse by her friend Timmy Houston, he whispered to her: “Pat, Jesse Livermore is one of the most
famous playboys in New York. For God’s sake, don’t get involved
with him!”
Patricia ignored her friend’s advice and enjoyed herself as Jesse
swept her off her feet with lavish romantic candlelit dinners in
New York’s finest nightclubs, dining at the best restaurants, trips to
the country, surprise gifts of clothes and jewelry, and the use of the
Livermore name, which still got the best tables in places like the
Plaza Hotel and Sherman Billingsley’s exclusive Stork Club.
Their relationship seemed sealed when Patricia’s black poodle,
Hefner, who had a broken leg and was not a normally friendly
dog, ran down a flight of stairs to meet and greet Jesse, who loved
animals and had a way with them. In particular, he loved Dobermans and always had at least one dog.
Jesse was already separated from his first wife, Evelyn Sullivan.
He had a son with her, Jesse III, who was born on December 7,
1941. He rarely saw his son.
Jesse had run the Connecticut Pepsi-Cola franchise his father

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 287

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 287 •

had given him into the ground. It finally had to be sold to avoid
bankruptcy. He then convinced Charles Revlon to hire him, and
he eventually became the sales promotion manager for Revlon.
Jesse lived in the Metropolitan Club, an elegant men’s club in
midtown Manhattan. His father had also been a well-known
member. Jesse was a major backgammon and gin player and would
often play through the night, drinking and gambling for high
stakes.
Jesse lived as he was brought up to live. He had no regard for
money. He had always had money, and he believed it would always
be available to him. His father, who made sure Jesse had the finest
cars, the finest clothes, and plenty of spending money, had opened
every door in the country to him. One time Jesse showed his
father his report card from Choate when he had done poorly in
English composition.
“What’s this, son, this poor grade in English comp?” his father
had asked.
“I’m not a very good speller, Dad, that’s the problem.”
“That’s not a problem, son. You’ll always have a secretary. She’ll
do the spelling for you.”
Jesse married Patricia in March 1965. His divorce from Evelyn
Sullivan had cost him his Park Avenue apartment and whatever
cash and assets he had. He was broke except for his trust fund,
which was administrated by his mother, “Mousie,” as he called
her, as his father had. He still had problems with the gunshot
wound. Patricia never knew whether the problems were psychosomatic or real. He occasionally complained to her of intense chest
pain, and still had a slight curvature of the spine.
The couple moved into a house at 214 East Seventy-second
Street.
Dorothy, Jesse’s mother, was living in Long Island at Bright
Waters with Willie K. Thompson, her fourth husband. Thompson
