
CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

73

I want you to think about this next question: “Who trades in the
financial markets?”
Banks? No.
Pension plans? No.
Brokerage firms? No.
Investment firms? No.
Financial institutions? No.
Individuals trade in the financials markets—human beings with human
thoughts, human feelings, human emotions, and human fears. Humans who
represent the organizations listed above make multimillion-dollar financial
decisions.

THE GAME
Here is how it works. Bulls and bears fight aggressively to make the market go their way. For the Forex market to trade, there must be someone buying and someone selling simultaneously. In other words, one trader must be
a bull going long and one must be a bear going short. Both traders are
adamant about their positions, despite the fact that they rely on extremely
accurate information, often from the same sources. What is amazing is they
are adamant about the market going in opposite directions. In the market,
the bulls and bears have different characteristics, yet they want the same
thing—they both want to make a profit!
Bulls and bears enter the market buying or selling in hopes that more bulls
or bears will enter after them, giving the market what is called bullish or
bearish strength—creating a greater rally or greater dip. If their counterparts
step in, the market will begin to move in their direction. Take the bulls, for
example. If you wanted to be a bull, you would enter the market and, if your
analysis was right, more bulls would enter and the market would begin to rally
and reach new highs, or what is called higher highs. Now, what I have discovered is, most of the time, after the bulls achieve a new high, frequently prices
start to retrace, or fall back down.
I was in George, South Africa, working at one of our international
offices one afternoon and had been tracking a high on the GBP, the
British pound, for several months. I was in one of our trading rooms with
about 20 other traders when I asked, “Anyone wanting to make some
money today? Just watch and trade the GBP. The bulls are after a high from
several years back and when they get near it and/or take it out and achieve

74

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

a new high, turn to a 15-minute chart and keep your eyes open for an evening
star, engulfing bearish candle or tweezer tops. The second one of
them appears, go short!” Sure enough, the bulls made a new high, and, shortly
after, a bearish candlestick formation appeared, and the market fell 200 pips in
about 45 minutes. Needless to say, I did not have to buy dinner that night.
This information is critical when you trade. Think about it, if you are a
bull and have taken a bullish position and are looking for a place to get out
of the market, the best place to get out is right before the market makes a
new high and the bulls score a new point. Why? If the market begins to dramatically retrace after a new high is achieved, the market will take back all
the profit it gave you.
I’ve received countless phone calls from people telling me, “I know
where to get in, but I don’t know where to get out! After I enter a trade, I sit
there like a greedy idiot thinking the market will keep going to the moon,
when all of a sudden it starts coming back to where I got in and all of a
sudden I have lost all my profit—it was simply taken back!”
Oh boy, do we pay the price for our ignorance! It never ceases to
amaze me that gamblers are surprised when they lose. What did they
expect? Most traders are like gamblers, hoping lady luck will come their
way. Little do they realize that in the back of the casinos, there are Palacio
rooms, where educated gamblers play. These rooms are for private gambling, for gamblers with gambling systems, who frequently walk away with
hundreds of thousands of dollars by using a well-researched approach.
People lose when they trade from ignorance, allowing their emotions to
guide their trading rather than logic, education and information.

HOW DO BULLS AND BEARS SCORE POINTS?
Believe it or not, it is quite simple. Have you ever noticed that in life, the
most obvious things are the hardest to see?
Bulls and bears keep track of all the previous highs and lows, no matter how far back they go. When bulls achieve a new high—higher than a
previous high—they do what I call “scoring a point,” and after the point is
scored, the market pulls back. Conversely, the bears, too, are trying to score
points by taking the market lower and making lower lows. When the bears
make a lower low, lower than a previous low, they “score a point,” which is
followed by a pullback (see Figure 5-1).
Bulls and bears have memories like elephants; they never forget!

CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

FIGURE 5-1

75

USD/JPY (Four-Hour Chart)

IDENTIFYING HIGHS AND LOWS
A high is visible as two candles to the left, two candles to the right that
are lower than the center candle, and either the body or wick is higher.
A low is visible as two candles to the left and two candles to the right
that are higher than a center candle, and either the body or wick is lower
(see Figure 5-2 (A–C)).

RESISTANCE AND SUPPORT
Bulls and bears play this eternal game 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Bulls fight for control, proving their strength by making new highs, and
bears fight for the opposite.
As they make new highs and lows, levels of support and resistance are
registered. The terms support and resistance were created back in the early
1900s in the stock market. Support occurs when traders begin buying, supporting a product, or stock, as it was falling. Conversely, resistance occurs

FIGURE 5-2
(A)

(B)

CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

77

FIGURE 5-2 Continued

when traders feel prices are getting too high or expensive and they resist
buying at that price.
As traders supported a currency or stock at a certain price, a low or a new
low in price was created for that product, and when they resisted buying, a
new high was created for that currency. The game started when traders who
were buying and selling tried to take prices still higher or lower. Buyers
wanted prices to go lower so they could get a better deal, and sellers wanted
prices higher to enable greater profits. This game of trading started shortly
after Adam and Eve and has never ended. But it has just been within the past
few hundred years that it has been captured and monitored in charts.

RESISTANCE
Resistance occurs when the bulls move the market to a new high that is
higher than a previous high and the bears jump in aggressively selling,
attracting more sellers than buyers, interrupting the rally and creating a
retracement or pullback from that high. The new high becomes the new
level of resistance, which is defined as a market high or a price level where
bears start selling enough to interrupt and reverse a rally.

78

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

SUPPORT
Support occurs when bears move the market to a new low that is lower than
a previous low and the bulls jump in aggressively, buying to support the
price and attracting more buyers than sellers. That increased buying interrupts the dip and creates a retracement or pullback from that low. The new
low becomes the new level of support, which is where bulls start buying
enough to interrupt and reverse a dip. Bulls on the Forex are the buyers who
are looking for opportunities to buy a currency pair at a low price in order
to sell it at a higher price for profit (see Figure 5-3).
The definition of the phrase “buy low, sell high” differs from one bull
to another.
“Buy low, sell high” to you may mean buying a product for $10.00 and
selling it for $15.00. I may buy the same product for $7.00 and sell it for
$30.00. Either way, we are both buying low and selling high. However, if
you do your transaction seven times a day, you will make $35.00 and would
be considered “scalping.” I only need to do mine once to make $23.00 or
twice for $46.00, which is considered day trading. In the best of all possible scenarios, we would both buy right at the U-turn low and sell right at the
FIGURE 5-3

GBP/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

79

U-turn high, but rarely does it work that way. Most successful traders are
more focused and more comfortable trading mid-way of a price swing,
rather than going to extreme lows and highs in pursuit of profit.
As you read on, you will see I have pretty much figured out the where
and when to enter the market, as well as the why— which is the logical and
educational reason behind entering the market at this point. Knowing
where the projected lows and highs will be will allow you as a trader to
know when it is time to get in and get out of the market.
Bulls want to take the market to higher levels, enabling them to buy
low and sell high. It is important to know how to identify those potential
targets the bulls are aiming for. Past highs or major levels of resistance can
be determined by looking at the current price and then working your way
backward, as if you were climbing up a set of stairs (see Figure 5-4).
The major levels of resistance are the targets the bulls will be aiming
for if they are in control or if they take back control from the bears.
This happens when the market has reached a past level of resistance and
established a new high. There are two reasons for a pullback, as seen in
Figure 5-5.
FIGURE 5-4

USD/CHF (Four-Hour Chart)

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

80

FIGURE 5-5

1.

EUR/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

The first reason for a pullback could be the fact that traders that take
short positions most of the time place their protective stop-loss orders
near the last highs. This means that when the bulls hit that area, there
is a lot of buy stop orders and a lot of selling—perhaps more selling
than buying—taking place. Bulls succumb temporarily, bears start to
gain a little territory, and a pullback or dip takes place. As a rule,
prices will continue to fall until the bulls step in and support the price.
Bulls normally support the price at one of three locations:
●

Near a past level of support

●

Near an uptrend line

●

At a Fibonacci up retracement number

Sometimes all three are at the same numerical price point, which is
then called a convergence.
2.
The next reason for a pullback could be a Fibonacci up extension
level. We will go into more detail about Fibonacci numbers in
Chapter 8.

CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

81

If the past level of resistance is penetrated and the uptrend is going to stay
in place, the bulls will step in and start buying heavily near the last low or
level of support. The first level of support becomes a great area to go long
in the market, provided you get a bullish candlestick formation near a level
of support.

LEARNING TO SHORT THE MARKET
Bears want to take the market to lower levels, enabling them to sell high
and buy low, which is nothing more than buying low and selling high backwards. It is like your friend wanting to sell his house for what you think to
be a good price.
He says, “I will sell you my house for $180,000. Anything you get over
that, you get to keep.” So you agree to buy his house at $180,000, providing you sell the house for more than you paid for it. The two of you agree
that you get two months to sell the house before you have to actually buy it
from him. As long as you sell it within two months for more than $180,000,
you are going to make a profit. All of a sudden, you find a buyer at
$220,000. Now you have to sell it to the buyer first before you buy it from
your friend. In order to make your profit and earn your money, you now
need to sell first at a higher price and buy second at a lower price. In the
financial markets, this is called shorting the market, or going short, and
having the market go your way.
Here is how you sell first, buy second, and have the market go against
you. Let’s say that during the two months you could not sell the house,
and the market starts to crash. You panic because the house is now worth only
$160,000 and still falling, yet you are under contract to buy it for $180,000.
You decide to “dump it,” or sell for $160,000 to avoid any further loss. So you
sell it for $160,000, first, and then you buy it, second, at $180,000 and pay in
the difference. This time the market did not go your way and you ended up
buying high then selling low resulting in a loss of $20,000.
To avoid making losses, it is important to know how to identify those
potential targets the bears are aiming for. Past lows or major levels of support are determined by looking at the current price and then working your
way backward, as if you were walking down a set of stairs (see Figure 5-6).
The major levels of support are the targets the bears will be aiming
for if they are in control or want to take back control from the bulls. This
happens when the market reaches a past level of support and establishes a
new low. There are two reasons for the pullback (see Figure 5-7).

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

82

FIGURE 5-6

1.

USD/CHF (One-Hour Chart)

The first reason for a pullback could be the fact that traders that
take long positions most of the time place their protective stop-loss
orders near or at the last lows, meaning that when the bears hit that
price point, there are a lot of sell-stop orders and a tremendous
amount of buying taking place, perhaps more buying than selling.
Bears succumb temporarily and bulls start to gain a little territory,
and a pullback and small rally takes place. As a rule, prices will
continue to rally until the bears step in and start selling again and
bulls begin to resist buying because of all the selling. Bulls resist
buying and bears start selling at one of three locations in a
downtrend:
●

Near a past level of resistance

●

Near a downtrend line

●

At a Fibonacci down retracement number

You may also find all three at the same numerical price point, which is
then called a convergence.

CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

FIGURE 5-7

2.

83

USD/CHF (30-Minute Chart)

A second reason for a pullback could be a Fibonacci down extension level, which I will discuss in Chapter 8.

If the past level of support is penetrated and the downtrend is going to hold,
the bears will step in and start selling heavily near the last high or level of
resistance. The first level of resistance becomes a great area to go short
in the market, provided you get a bearish candlestick formation near
resistance.

PAST RESISTANCE CAN BECOME FUTURE SUPPORT
As bulls and bears continually play this wicked game of greed and
fear, bulls try to make higher highs and bears try to make lower lows. As
the market moves up, many times past resistance becomes future
support and becomes a great place to buy, but only after a bullish
candlestick formation appears at that most recent past level of resistance
(see Figure 5-8).

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

84

FIGURE 5-8

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

PAST SUPPORT CAN BECOME FUTURE RESISTANCE
As the market moves down, many times past support becomes future resistance and becomes a great place to sell after a bearish candlestick formation appears at that most recent past level of support (see Figure 5-9).

VISUALLY OBSERVING THE GAME
Seeing is believing. In just about every MTI class around the world, we
have our students experience the game firsthand, which is what you should
do, too. Should you be unable to attend a MTI class, you can download a
free seven-day trial of the MTI 4.0 charting package enabling you to watch
the game firsthand.
Look at Figure 5-10 and study the chart closely. Look at the dates and
times. Can you see all the past levels of resistance? Look how the bears
have maintained control, making lower lows and lower highs. Bears have
been scoring points, you just can’t see them on this chart.

CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

FIGURE 5-9

EUR/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

FIGURE 5-10

EUR/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

85

86

FIGURE 5-11

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

EUR/USD (Four-Hour Chart)

Now look closely at Figure 5-11. Here the bulls have taken control,
reversed the market, and scored four points. After scoring the first point,
there was a pullback. Points 2 and 3 were taken out by the same rally,
followed by a small pullback. Point 4 was made with a small rally and a
huge pullback. After the fourth level of past resistance was taken out by the
bulls, the bulls could not sustain the rally to achieve a fifth point and the
bears took control. You can clearly see that after the bulls scored the fourth
point, the bears took control and reversed the market scoring two points or
taking out the past two recent levels of support.

CONCLUSION
Trading is a game. It is a game played by two sides—bulls and bears—
although there aren’t actual bulls and bears, just human traders with very
different opinions. They started out just like you and me, trying to figure
out how this market works. Some have been washed out. Some are still surviving and trying to learn. Others have made it big, because they believed

CHAPTER 5

THE FINANCIAL GAME OF SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

87

in their dream and stayed focused until they figured out what works. The
way to learn how to win at this game is to work at it.
You have to move forward with the determination to succeed in this
game. After all, the majority of work is done for you in this book. Experiencing success at trading will teach you how ultimately to succeed—you
just need to take the time to understand truly what is written here.
Successful traders are successful for a reason. They take the time to
educate themselves first about the opportunity, and then they calculate the
risk versus the reward. With that calculated risk, they jeopardize their personal comfort level. A setback is an opportunity to start all over again more
intelligently the second time around. Giving up along the way is the
ultimate tragedy.
After teaching thousands of people how to trade, I would have to say
the one personal characteristic I would regard as being the most important
trait necessary to succeed at this game is the trait of persistence—the determination to endure to the very end after being knocked down 100 times,
and getting back up a 101st time with a positive attitude. When you get to
a point where you think this entire market, everything and everyone
involved in it, is against you and you adamantly feel you cannot hang on,
not for even one minute longer, it is right then and there that you cannot
give up. This could be the place and time when everything turns around for
you. The trader who can persist a little longer once his or her effort
becomes painful is the trader who will find success at trading. For
some reason, pain and suffering are our teachers and they help us persist
until we can succeed.
True winners keep playing until they get good at the game and get it
right. Our greatest achievement at trading is not in losing in a trade but in
getting right back in there after something went wrong and we lost on a
trade.
This game is not as hard as it looks. We make it hard. Successful traders
will do what unsuccessful traders won’t do. With their knowledge of how
that market works, they create a clear trading strategy and a trading plan
that they will follow with non-negotiable discipline.
Trading doesn’t come natural for anybody. Learning to trade is not like
learning a sport such as basketball or football. When it comes to trading,
you get good by working hard and by practicing over and over again a trading technique that you understand. Success will come by not trying to do
everything. You must keep it simple. Do not complicate it! When you make
a mistake, remember, what doesn’t destroy you will only make you a
stronger and wiser trader.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

6

A

P

T

E

R

TRENDS AND
TRENDLINES
A TREND IS YOUR FRIEND
For some traders, learning to trade on the Forex is like learning how to
build a car from scratch, without an instruction manual. Many of you have
acquired quality parts, such as breaks, wheels, motors, seats, and steering
wheels, yet as you attempt to put them together, you are not coming close
to building that perfect little car you envisioned.
To become a successful trader, you need the right parts, with the right
manual, to put all the parts together and have your car work properly. After
all, a part such as a $2.00 gasket can bring your car to a screeching halt. Just
look at what happened to the space shuttle Challenger.
I will never forget the day it happened. At the time, I owned a business
that took photographs for NASA of all the work being done on the space
shuttle at the Kennedy Space Center. We took pictures of all the different
phases, from construction, to liftoff, to landing, and then had a company in
Japan print laser photographs of the images for resale to the public. There
were just as many employees who worked on the shuttle seeking these quality laser photoprints as there were tourists around the world wanting them.
In fact, importing and exporting them is what introduced me to the
exchange difference in currencies, which is how I became familiar with
currency trading.

89
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

90

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

By 1986, laser photoprints had caught on and our company was offered
licensee rights for many national parks around the United States, as well as
for tourist parks such as Disney, SeaWorld, and Universal Studios.
Through our importing, we exchanged hundreds of thousands of U.S.
dollars once or twice a week for Japanese yen. At the time, I really knew
very little about currency trading, but I did recognize the constant fluctuation of the currencies as I was exchanging them. I wasn’t trading the yen
against the U.S. dollar to make money, but I saw that prices fluctuated up
and down. So I watched the price movement to make sure I got the best deal
at the time of the exchange; meaning, I was always waiting for the best time
to make an exchange, enabling me to get as many yen as possible for my
U.S. dollars.
In the late 1980s, I almost went bankrupt—not from mismanagement
of my company, as the company was growing by leaps and bounds, but
from the yen strengthening from 280 yen against the U.S. dollar to 150 yen
to the U.S. dollar in less than 90 days. My cost of production doubled over
a period of 90 days as the Japanese yen kept numerically falling and falling.
The yen was increasing in value against the U.S. dollar as it dropped in
price until it stabilized around 140 to 150 yen to the dollar. That is why
products made from Japanese firms such as Sony and Sanyo doubled in
price back in the late 1980s. That shift in economy opened the doors
of opportunity for many U.S. manufacturers to now compete with the
Japanese. It also forced the Japanese to start manufacturing their products
here in the United States.
It is amazing how one person’s loss becomes another person’s windfall.
I was going bankrupt, losing millions of dollars, while successful currency
traders were making millions by shorting the market.
Had I taken the time to educate myself about currency trading and
trends back then, using a simple piece of trading software like what we use
at MTI, I could have been making $130,000 to $1,300,000 from a relatively
small investment in the currency market, instead of losing millions as the
U.S. and Japanese economies shifted.
I was unable to find a chart of the yen falling 13,000 pips back in the
1980s, however, I did find an example of a yen chart falling 3,100 pips in
three months, between August 1998 and October 1998.
Looking at the chart of Figure 6-1, trading 10 lots or shorting the
market with 10 lots by investing $10,000, brought a return to the trader of
$300,000 in three months. Can you see how the inner trend line crossed
over from the north to the south of the outer trend line, signaling a sell
position for a long-term trader?
