
I want to be in businesses so good even a dummy can make
money.2
WARREN BUFFETT, 1988

For Buffett, stocks are an abstraction.3 He does not think in terms of
market theories, macroeconomic concepts, or sector trends. Rather, he
makes investment decisions based only on how a business operates. He
believes that if people choose an investment for superficial reasons instead
of business fundamentals, they are more likely to be scared away at the
first sign of trouble, in all likelihood losing money in the process. Buffett
concentrates on learning all he can about the business under consideration, focusing on three main areas:
1. Is the business simple and understandable?
2. Does the business have a consistent operating history?
3. Does the business have favorable long-term prospects?

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s

63

A S I M P L E A N D U N D E R S TA N D A B L E B U S I N E S S
In Buffett’s view, investors’ financial success is correlated to the degree
in which they understand their investment. This understanding is a distinguishing trait that separates investors with a business orientation from
most hit-and-run investors, people who merely buy shares of stock. It is
critical to the buy-or-don’t-buy decision for this reason: In the final
analysis, after all their research, investors must feel convinced that the
business they are buying into will perform well over time. They must
have some confidence in their estimate of its future earnings, and that has
a great deal to do with how well they understand its business fundamentals. Predicting the future is always tricky; it becomes enormously more
difficult in an arena you know nothing about.
Over the years, Buffett has owned a vast array of businesses: a gas
station; a farm implementation business; textile companies; a major retailer; banks; insurance companies; advertising agencies; aluminum and
cement companies; newspapers; oil, mineral, and mining companies;
food, beverage, and tobacco companies; television and cable companies.
Some of these companies he controlled, and in others he was or is a minority shareholder. But in all cases, he was or is acutely aware of how
these businesses operate. He understands the revenues, expenses, cash
f low, labor relations, pricing f lexibility, and capital allocation needs of
every single one of Berkshire’s holdings.
Buffett is able to maintain a high level of knowledge about Berkshire’s businesses because he purposely limits his selections to companies
that are within his area of financial and intellectual understanding. He
calls it his “circle of competence.” His logic is compelling: If you own a
company (either fully or some of its shares) in an industry you do not understand, it is impossible to accurately interpret developments and therefore impossible to make wise decisions. “Invest within your circle of
competence,” he counsels. “It’s not how big the circle is that counts, it’s
how well you define the parameters.”4
Critics have argued that Buffett’s self-imposed restrictions exclude
him from industries that offer the greatest investment potential, such as
technology. His response: Investment success is not a matter of how
much you know but how realistically you define what you don’t know.
“An investor needs to do very few things right as long as he or she avoids

64

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

big mistakes.”5 Producing above-average results, Buffett has learned,
often comes from doing ordinary things. The key is to do those things
exceptionally well.

Coca-Cola Company
The business of Coca-Cola is relatively simple. The company purchases
commodity inputs and combines them to manufacture a concentrate
that is sold to bottlers. The bottlers then combine the concentrate with
other ingredients and sell the finished product to retail outlets including
minimarts, supermarkets, and vending machines. The company also
provides soft drink syrups to fountain retailers, who sell soft drinks to
consumers in cups and glasses.
The company’s name brand products include Coca-Cola, Diet
Coke, Sprite, PiBB Xtra, Mello Yello, Fanta soft drinks, Tab, Dasani,
and Fresca. The company’s beverages also include Hi-C brand fruit
drinks, Minute Maid orange juice, Powerade, and Nestea. The company
owns 45 percent of Coca-Cola Enterprises, the largest bottler in the
United States, and 35 percent of Coca-Cola Amatil, an Australian bottler that has interests not only in Australia but also in New Zealand and
Eastern Europe.
The strength of Coca-Cola is not only its name-brand products but
also its unmatched worldwide distribution system. Today, international
sales of Coca-Cola products account for 69 percent of the company’s
net sales and 80 percent of its profits. In addition to Coca-Cola Amatil,
the company has equity interests in bottlers located in Mexico, South
America, Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and China.

The Washington Post Company
Buffett’s grandfather once owned and edited the Cuming County Democrat, a weekly newspaper in West Point, Nebraska. His grandmother
helped out at the paper and also set the type at the family’s printing shop.
His father, while attending the University of Nebraska, edited the Daily
Nebraskan. Buffett himself was once the circulation manager for the
Lincoln Journal. It has often been said that if Buffett had not embarked
on a business career, he most surely would have pursued journalism.
( Text continues on page 67.)

CASE IN POINT
BENJAMIN MOORE, 2000
In November 2000, Warren Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway
paid about $1 billion for Benjamin Moore & Co., the Mercedes
of paint companies. Founded in 1883 by the Moore brothers in
their Brooklyn basement, Benjamin Moore today is fifth largest
paint manufacturer in the United States and has an unmatched
reputation for quality.
It was reported that Buffett paid a 25 percent premium over
the stock’s then current price. On the surface, that might seem
to contradict one of Buffett’s iron-clad rules: that he will act
only when the price is low enough to constitute a margin of
safety. However, we also know that Buffett is not afraid to pay
for quality. Even more revealing, the stock price jumped 50
percent to $37.62 per share after the deal was announced. This
tells us that either Buffett found yet another company that was
undervalued or else that the rest of the investing world was betting on Buffett’s acumen and traded the price up even higher—
or both.
Benjamin Moore is just the sort of company Buffett likes.
The paint business is nothing if not simple and easy to understand. One of the largest paint manufacturers in the United
States and the tenth largest specialty paint producer, Benjamin
Moore makes one of the finest, if not the finest, architectural
paint in the United States. The company is not just famous for
the quality of its paint, however; architects, designers, and
builders regard Benjamin Moore colors as the gold standard for
their industry. In fact, the company developed the first computerized color matching system, and it is still recognized as the
industry standard. With roughly 3,200 colors, Benjamin Moore
can match almost any shade.
Buffett also tends to buy companies that have a consistent
operating history and as a result, upon buying a company, he
(Continued)

65

does not expect to have to change much. His modus operandi is
to buy companies that are already successful and still have potential for growth. Benjamin Moore’s current success and status
in the marketplace over the decades speak to the company’s
consistent product quality, production, brand strength, and service. Now, 121 years after its founding, the company brings in
about $80 million of profit on $900 million in sales.
Looking at Benjamin Moore, Buffett also saw a well-run
company. Although there were questions a few years ago about
Moore’s retail strategy, the company has undertaken a brand rejuvenation program in the United States and Canada. Benjamin
Moore increased its retail presence in independent stores with its
Signature Store Program and bought certain retail stores, such as
Manhattan-based Janovic, outright. Just before the Berkshire acquisition in 2000, the company underwent a cost-cutting and
streamlining program to improve its operations.
All that adds up to favorable long-term prospects. Benjamin
Moore is a classic example of a company that has turned a commodity into a franchise. Buffett’s definition of a franchise is one
where the product is needed or desired, has no close substitute,
and is unregulated. Most people in the building industry would
agree that Moore is a master in all three categories. Considering
the company’s arsenal of over 100 chemists, chemical engineers,
technicians, and support staff that maintain the company’s strict
product standards and develop new products, the risk of Benjamin Moore paints becoming a perishable commodity is slight.
The on-going and rigorous testing to which all the Moore
products are subjected is a sign that Benjamin Moore will continue to set industry standards. Finally, although Benjamin
Moore products are not cheap, their quality commands pricing
power that defeats any notion of inf lation.

66

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s

67

In 1969, Buffett bought his first major newspaper, the Omaha Sun,
along with a group of weekly papers; from them he learned the business
dynamics of a newspaper. He had four years of hands-on experience running a newspaper before he bought his first share of the Washington Post.

Wells Fargo
Buffett understands the banking business very well. In 1969, Berkshire
bought 98 percent of the Illinois National Bank and Trust Company
and held it until 1979, when the Bank Holding Act required Berkshire
to divest its interest. During that ten-year period, the bank took its
place beside Berkshire’s other controlled holdings and Buffett reported
its sales and earnings each year in Berkshire’s annual reports.
Just as Jack Ringwalt helped Buffett understand the intricacy of the
insurance business (see Chapter 3), Gene Abegg, who was chairman of
Illinois National Bank, taught Buffett about the banking business. He
learned that banks are profitable businesses as long as loans are issued responsibly and costs are curtailed. A well-managed bank could not only
grow its earnings but also earn a handsome return on equity.
The key is “well managed.” The long-term value of a bank, as
Buffett learned, is determined by the actions of its managers, because
they control the two critical variables: costs and loans. Bad managers
have a way of running up the costs of operations while making foolish
loans; good managers are always looking for ways to cut costs and rarely
make risky loans. Carl Reichardt, then chairman of Wells Fargo, had
run the bank since 1983, with impressive results. Under his leadership,
growth in earnings and return on equity were both above average and
operating efficiencies were among the highest in the country. Reichardt
had also built a solid loan portfolio.

CONSISTENCY
Warren Buffett cares very little for stocks that are “hot” at any given
moment. He is far more interested in buying into companies that he believes will be successful and profitable for the long term. And while
predicting future success is certainly not foolproof, a steady track record
is a relatively reliable indicator. When a company has demonstrated

68

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

consistent results with the same type of products year after year, it is not
unreasonable to assume that those results will continue.
As long, that is, as nothing major changes. Buffett avoids purchasing
companies that are fundamentally changing direction because their previous plans were unsuccessful. It has been his experience that undergoing major business changes increases the likelihood of committing
major business errors.
“Severe change and exceptional returns usually don’t mix,” Buffett
observes.6 Most individuals, unfortunately, invest as if the opposite were
true. Too often, they scramble to purchase stocks of companies that are
in the midst of a corporate reorganization. For some unexplained reason,
says Buffett, these investors are so infatuated with the notion of what tomorrow may bring that they ignore today’s business reality. In contrast,
Buffett says, his approach is “very much profiting from lack of change.
That’s the kind of business I like.”7
Buffett also tends to avoid businesses that are solving difficult problems. Experience has taught him that turnarounds seldom turn. It can be
more profitable to expend energy purchasing good businesses at reasonable prices than difficult businesses at cheaper prices. “Charlie and I have
not learned how to solve difficult business problems,” Buffett admits.
“What we have learned is to avoid them. To the extent that we have
been successful, it is because we concentrated on identifying one-foot
hurdles that we could step over rather than because we acquired any
ability to clear seven-footers.”8

The Coca-Cola Company
No other company today can match Coca-Cola’s consistent operating
history. This is a business that was started in the 1880s selling a beverage product. Today, 120 years later, Coca-Cola is selling the same beverage. Even though the company has periodically invested in unrelated
businesses, its core beverage business has remained largely unchanged.
The only significant difference today is the company’s size and its
geographic reach. One hundred years ago, the company employed ten
traveling salesmen to cover the entire United States. At that point, the
company was selling 116,492 gallons of syrup a year, for annual sales of
$148,000.9 Fifty years later, in 1938, the company was selling 207 million

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s

69

cases of soft drinks annually (having converted sales from gallons to
cases). That year, an article in Fortune noted, “It would be hard to
name any company comparable to Coca-Cola and selling, as Coca-Cola
does, an unchanged product that can point to a ten year record anything
like Coca-Cola’s.”10
Today, nearly seventy years after that article was published, CocaCola is still selling syrup. The only difference is the increase in quantity.
By the year 2003, the company was selling over 19 billion cases of soft
drink in more than 200 countries, generating $22 billion a year in sales.

The Washington Post Company
Buffett tells Berkshire’s shareholders that his first financial connection
with the Washington Post was at age 13. He delivered both the Washington Post and the Times-Herald on his paper route while his father
served in Congress. Buffett likes to remind others that with this dual
delivery route he merged the two papers long before Phil Graham
bought the Times-Herald.
Obviously, Buffett was aware of the newspaper’s rich history. And
he considered Newsweek magazine a predictable business. He quickly
learned the value of the company’s television stations. The Washington
Post had been reporting for years the stellar performance of its broadcast
division. Buffett’s personal experience with the company and its own
successful history led him to believe that the Washington Post was a
consistent and dependable business performer.

Gillette
Few companies have dominated their industry as long as Gillette. It was
the lead brand of razors and blades in 1923 and the lead brand in 2003.
Maintaining that position for so many years has required the company to
spend hundreds of millions of dollars inventing new, improved products.
Even though Wilkinson, in 1962, developed the first coated stainless
steel blade, Gillette bounced back quickly and has since worked hard to
remain the world’s leading innovator of shaving products. In 1972,
Gillette developed the popular twin-blade Trac II; in 1977, the Atra
razor with its pivoting head. Then, in 1989, the company developed the

70

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

popular Sensor, a razor with independently suspended blades. Gillette’s
consistent success is a result of its innovation and patent protection of its
new products.

Clayton Homes
In fiscal year 2002, Clayton reported its twenty-eighth consecutive
year of profits, $126 million, up 16 percent from the year before, on
revenue of $1.2 billion.11 This performance is all the more extraordinary when we consider the fearsome problems that others in the industry experienced. In the late 1990s, over 80 factories and 4,000 retailers
went out of business, a victim of two colliding forces: Many manufacturers had expanded too quickly and at the same time had made too
many weak loans, which inevitably led to widespread repossessions, followed by diminished demand for new housing.
Clayton had a different way of doing business (more about their policies in Chapter 6). Its sound management and skillful handling of rough
times enabled the company to maintain profitability even as competitors
were going bankrupt.

FAV O R A B L E L O N G - T E R M P R O S P E C T S
“We like stocks that generate high returns on invested capital,” Buffett
told those in attendance at Berkshire’s 1995 annual meeting, “where
there is a strong likelihood that it will continue to do so.”12 “I look at
long-term competitive advantage,” he later added, “and [whether] that’s
something that’s enduring.”13 That means he looks for what he terms
franchises.
According to Buffett, the economic world is divided into a small
group of franchises and a much larger group of commodity businesses,
most of which are not worth purchasing. He defines a franchise as a
company whose product or service (1) is needed or desired, (2) has no
close substitute, and (3) is not regulated.
Individually and collectively, these create what Buffett calls a moat—
something that gives the company a clear advantage over others and protects it against incursions from the competition. The bigger the moat, the
more sustainable, the better he likes it. “The key to investing,” he says,

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s

71

“is determining the competitive advantage of any given company and,
above all, the durability of that advantage. The products or services that
have wide, sustainable moats around them are the ones that deliver rewards to investors.”14 (To see what a moat looks like, read the story of
Larson-Juhl in Chapter 8.)
A franchise that is the only source of a product people want can
regularly increase prices without fear of losing market share or unit volume. Often a franchise can raise its prices even when demand is f lat and
capacity is not fully utilized. This pricing f lexibility is one of the defining characteristics of a franchise; it allows franchises to earn aboveaverage returns on invested capital.

Look for the durability of the franchise. The most important
thing to me is figuring out how big a moat there is around the
business. What I love, of course, is a big castle and a big moat
with piranhas and crocodiles.15
WARREN BUFFETT, 1994

Another defining characteristic is that franchises possess a greater
amount of economic goodwill, which enables them to better withstand
the effects of inf lation. Another is the ability to survive economic
mishaps and still endure. In Buffett’s succinct phrase, “The definition of
a great company is one that will be great for 25 to 30 years.”16
Conversely, a commodity business offers a product that is virtually
indistinguishable from the products of its competitors. Years ago, basic
commodities included oil, gas, chemicals, wheat, copper, lumber, and
orange juice. Today, computers, automobiles, airline service, banking,
and insurance have become commodity-type products. Despite mammoth advertising budgets, they are unable to achieve meaningful product differentiation.
Commodity businesses, generally, are low-returning businesses and
“prime candidates for profit trouble.”17 Since their product is basically
no different from anyone else’s, they can compete only on the basis of
price, which severely undercuts profit margins. The most dependable
( Text continues on page 77.)

CASE IN POINT
JUSTIN INDUSTRIES, 2000
In July 2000, Berkshire Hathaway bought 100 percent of Texasbased Justin Industries for $600 million. The company has two
divisions: Justin Brands, which comprises four brands of Western boots, and Acme Building Brands, with companies that
make bricks and other building products.
Cowboy boots and bricks. It is one of Berkshire’s most interesting, and most colorful, acquisitions. And it says a great
deal about Warren Buffett.
In many ways, Justin epitomizes all the business strengths
that Buffett looks for. Clearly, it is simple and understandable;
there’s nothing particularly complex about boots or bricks. It
represents a remarkably consistent operating history, as a look
at the separate companies will show; all have been at the same
business for many decades, and most are at least a century old.
Finally, and most especially, Buffett recognized favorable longterm prospects, because of one aspect that he highly admires: in
what are essentially commodity industries, the products have
achieved franchise status.

Justin Brands
The company that is now Justin began in 1879 when H. J. ( Joe)
Justin, who was then 20 years old, started making boots for
cowboys and ranchers from his small shop in Spanish Fort,
Texas, near the Chisholm Trail. When Joe died in 1918, his
sons John and Earl took over and in 1925 moved the company
to Fort Worth. In 1948, Joe’s grandson John Jr. bought out his
relatives (except Aunt Enid), and guided the business for the
next fifty years.
John Justin Jr. was a legendary figure in Fort Worth. He
built an empire of Western boots by acquiring three rival companies, worked out the deal to buy Acme Bricks in 1968, and
served a term as Fort Worth mayor. He retired in 1999, but
stayed on as chairman emeritus, and that’s why, at the age of 83,
it was he who welcomed Warren Buffett to town in April 2000.

72

Justin Boots, known for rugged, long-lasting boots for
working cowboys, remains the f lagship brand. But Justin Brands
includes other names.
•

Nocona, founded in 1925 by Enid Justin. One of Joe
Justin’s seven children, Enid started working in her father’s
company when she was twelve. After her nephews moved
the family business from the small town of Nocona, Texas,
to Fort Worth in 1925, Enid set up a rival company in the
original locale. Against all odds, she built a success. Fierce
competitors for years, the two companies were joined under
the Justin name in 1981. Enid, who was then 85, reluctantly
agreed to the merger because of her declining health.
