
MARKET PROFILE GRAPHIC

The Market Profile format organizes price and time into a visual
representation of what happens over the course of a single ses-
sion. It provides a logical framework for observing market behav-
ior in the present tense displaying price distributions over a period
of time. The price range evolves both vertically and horizontally
throughout the session. How is a profile graphic constructed?

Consider a 4 period bar chart (see Figure B.3a). This tradi-
tional bar chart can be converted to a profile graphic as follows:
(1) assign a letter for each price within each period's price range,
letter A for the 15 period, B for the 2nd, and so on (see Figure B.3b)
and then (2) collapse each price range to the leftmost or first col-
umn (see Figure B.3c). The completed profile graphic reflects
prices on the left and period frequency of price occurrence on the
right, represented by the letters A through D.

Price 1 2 3 4 Price 1 2 3 4
168 168 ~

167 167 D
166 166 B Cc D
165 165 A B ¢c D
164 164 A B Cc D
163 163 A B Cc D
162 162 A

161 161 A

160 160

159 159

Figure B.3a Figure B.3b


Market Profile 479

Each letter repre-
sents a Time Price Opportu-
nity or TPO to identify a | 168
specific price at which the | 167
market traded during a | 166
specific time period (¢.g., | 165
in B period prices traded | 164
between 163 and 166). | 163
These TPOs are the basic | 162
units of analysis for the | 161
day’s activity. In other | 160
words, each TPO is an | 159
opportunity created by the
market at a certain time Figure B.3c
and certain price. Market
Profile distributions are
constructed of TPOs. The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) assigns
a letter to each half-hour trading period on a 24 hour basis; upper-
case letters A through X represent the half-hour periods from
midnight to noon while lowercase letters from a through x repre-
sent the half-hour periods from noon to midnight.3

Price

>rPrrradg
ABBRAA
ANAS
~~~]

MARKET STRUCTURE

When you visit a commodities trading pit on a busy day, you
observe what is best described as “controlled chaos.” Beneath the
screaming and gesturing locals and other traders, there is a
describable process. Think of the market as a place where partici-
pants with differing price needs and time constraints compete
with each other to get business done. Emotions can run high as
anxiety levels soar.

The Market Profile concept was introduced by Mr.
Steidlmayer in an attempt to help describe this process. As a

3Letter assignments can vary between vendors. For example, CQG assigns uppet-
case letters A through Z from 8:00 am CST while lowercase letters from a through z from
10:00 p.m. CST.


480 Appendix B

CBOT floor trader (local) and student of market behavior, he
observed recurring patterns of market activity, which ultimately
lay the foundation for his understanding of the market. Since
the CBOT trading floor conducts trade in an auction-like man-
ner, he defined Market Profile principles in auction terms. For
example, an off-the-floor trader would describe an advancing
market as one that is rallying or trading up, whereas Mr.
Steidlmayer would instead say something like, “the market con-
tinues to auction up, advertising for sellers to appear in order to
shut off buying.”

To explain why a trading pit auction process works the
way it does, he invented some new terms unfamiliar to off-the-
floor traders. He began with a definition of a market's purpose,
which is to facilitate trade. Next, he defined some operational
procedures, namely that the market operates in a dual auction
mode as prices rotate around a fair or mean price area (i.e., sim-
ilar to the way school grades were distributed). Lastly, he
defined the behavior characteristics of market participants,
namely that traders with a short term time frame seek a fair
price, while traders with a longer term time frame seek an
advantageous price.

MARKET PROFILE
ORGANIZING PRINCIPLES

Auction Setting: The purpose of the marketplace is to facilitate
or promote trade. All market activity occurs within this auction
setting. Initially, as price moves higher, more buying comes in, as
price moves lower, more selling comes in. The market moves up
to shut off buying (i.e., auctioning up until the last buyer buys)
and moves down to shut off selling (i.e., auctioning down until
the last seller sells). The market actually operates through a dual
auction process. When price moves up and more buying comes
in, the up-move advertises for an opposite response (i.e., selling)
to stop the directional move. The opposite is true when price
moves down.


Market Profile 481

Continuous Negotiation: When a mar-
ket moves directionally it establishes
price parameters, an unfair high and an
unfair low, and then trades between them
Unfair High Area to establish a fair value area. All trade
takes place through this negotiating
process and remains within these parame-
ters until one side or the other side is
eventually taken out (i.e., a new high or
Value new low is formed). (see Figure B.4.)
Area Market Balance and Imbalance:
The market is either in equilibrium or
working toward equilibrium between
buyers and sellers. To facilitate trade, the
market moves from a state of balance
4 (equilibrium) to one of imbalance (dise-
quilibrium ) and back to balance again.
x i This pattern of market behavior occurs
in all times frames, from intraday ses-
sion activity to single session activity to
aggregated or consolidated sessions
Figure B.4 activity which form the longer term
auction.

Time Frames and Trader Behavior: The concept of differ-
ent time frames was introduced to help explain the behavioral
patterns of market participants. Market activity is divided into
two timeframe categories, short term and longer term. The short
term activity is defined as day time frame activity where traders are
forced to trade today (e.g., locals, day traders and options traders
on expiration day fall into this category). With limited time to
act, the short term trader is seeking a fair price. Short term buyers
and sellers do trade with each other at the same time and at the
same price. Longer term activity is defined by all other timeframe
activity (e.g., commercials, swing traders, and all other position
traders fall into this category). Not forced to trade today and with
time as an ally, these traders can seek a more advantageous price. In
pursuit of their interests, longer term buyers seek lower prices

Range Parameters

Unfair Low Area



482 Appendix B

while longer term sellers seek higher prices. As their price objec-
tives differ, longer term buyers and sellers generally do not trade
with each other at the same price and at the same time. It is the
behavioral interaction between these two distinct timeframe
types of activity that causes the profile to develop as it does.

The Short Term Trader and Longer Term Trader Play
Different Roles: Short term and longer term traders play key,
but different, roles in facilitating trade. A market's initial balance
(i.e., a place where two-sided trade can occur) is usually estab-
lished in the first hour of trade by short term buyers and sellers
(day timeframe activity) in their pursuit of a fair price. Most of
the day’s activity occurs in the fair price or value area. Prices
above and below this developed fair value area offer opportuni-
ty and are advantageous to longer term traders. With time on
their side, longer term traders can either accept or reject prices
away from fair value. By entering the market with large enough
volume, longer term buyers and sellers can upset the initial bal-
ance, thereby extending the price tange higher or lower. The
longer term trader is responsible for the way the day’s range
develops and for the duration of the longer term auction. In
other words, the role of the longer term trader is to move the
market directionally.

Price and Value: The distinction between price and value
defines a market-generated opportunity. There are two kinds of
prices: 1) those that are accepted—defined as a price area where
the market trades over time and 2) those that are rejected—
defined as a price area where the market spends very little time.
A rejected price is considered excessive in the market—defined as
an unfair high or unfair low. Price and value are all but synony-
mous for short term traders as they ordinarily trade in the fair
value area. For longer term traders, however, the concept that
price equals value is often inaccurate. Price is observable and
objective while value is perceived and subjective, depending upon
the particular needs of longer term traders. For example, a price
at the top of today’s range, while excessive or unfair for today, is
cheap to the longer term trader who believes that prices next
week will be much higher (i.e., today’s price is below next week’s
anticipated value).


Market Profile 483

‘

aie

saaatoaR
a-gaan-mn
peo ag
het

eee | Uptrend, but ...
BALANCE

Petit ti tits

er
e
H

Implies Price®

t
FS

ayn

SSeESSlREs tas Ss sass!
BgPaMRRER

i]
ons
ost
rn
ee
iy

7

Figure B.5 By combining daily consecutive profile graphics (upper) into a
larger cumulative profile graphic (lower), an evolving picture of long term
balance or imbalance emerges. (See explanation on page 489.)

The longer term trader distinguishes between price and
value by accepting or rejecting current prices away from his per-
ception of fair value. Recall that rising prices advertise for sellers
while falling prices advertise for buyers. When the longer term trad-
er responds to an advertised price, this behavior is expected and is
referred to as responsive. On the other hand, if the longer term trad-
er did the opposite (i.e., buy after prices rose or sell after prices
declined), then this unexpected activity is referred to as initiating.
Classifying longer term activity as responsive or initiating relative
to yesterday's or today’s evolving value area provides anecdotal evi-
dence of longer term trader confidence. The more confident the
trader becomes, the more likely he is to take initiating action.


484 Appendix B

RANGE DEVELOPMENT AND
PROFILE PATTERNS

Since market activity is not arbitrary, it’s not surprising that over
time recognizable price patterns reveal themselves. A skillful trad-
er able to anticipate such pattern development in its early stage
may be able to capitalize. Mr. Steidlmayer loosely identifies the
following daily range development patterns:

1. A normal day occurs when the longer term trader is rela-
tively inactive. The day’s range is established in the pioneer
range (defined as the first column of prices) during the ses-
sion’s first half-hour period of trade. The short term trader
establishes the initial balance, the unfair high and low, and
then prices rotate between these parameters for balance of
the day (see Figure B.6: Panel #1—Orange Juice).

2. A normal variation day occurs when the longer term trad-
er is more active and extends the range beyond the initial
balance. In this instance, the short term traders initial bal-
ance parameters do not hold and there is some directional
movement which extends the range and sets a new high or
new low parameter. As a rule, the range extension beyond
the initial balance can be anywhere from a couple of ticks
to double the initial balance. This profile type is probably
the most common (see Figure B.6: Panel #2—Dow Jones
Industrial Average).

3. A trend day occurs when the longer term trader extends
the range successively further. In this instance, the range is
considerably more than double the initial balance with the
longer term trader controlling direction as the market con-
tinues its search for a fair price. Here the market moves in
one direction and closes at or near the directional extreme
(see Figure B.6: Panel #3—Japanese Yen).

4. A neutral day occurs when the longer term trader extends
the range after the initial balance in one direction, then
reverses and extends the range in the opposite direction.
Neutral days indicate trader uncertainty and occur when
the market probes or tests for price trend continuation or
change (see Figure B.6: Panel #4—Cattle).


PRPTEELELESEEEiL Leia

~

. []

visa iS S
aoe]
2 ,alftesitiumnssigesikcee > L

PLERLELEREeeeS LEELeeE EEEEEEEEELEL EST

&
=
i

aa RRR Et!

~

£

[

a
—

ST eee

+ <a— (c)

Pressey

Scthbiaccs-

BEZAREEE2 33000 S0BDEER EES RREDEESERES ES Erecce ee SEPEREERSREERIEEBIEBEEDED:

HN

a3 FI

(b)

Hien

Hi Gana

saat nen

HTL

pPpet

ssid ile a
TEE sYaEaS 1550559 S0NENGEEOISISSSESSSOREEDISOEEEIZINS

Panel #3 Panel #4
Cattle

Panel #2

Panel #1

Japanese Yen

Dow Jones

Orange Juice

Industrials

> zy
< ~ ete Sx
a 88s0 fess bse
2HiG. MILNE
Essel es Ss eassss&
2 ES S
s cay
E seses? _
x Bessb lbs 2
BS. 'hbeseee2asss
ESSSSE PLETE SE
ESHaSESESES SSS
= cS Ss
y RR
,e ao 3
Q L
g  fyeszbsz iss
sz & 3
BoE: gu 8 2B iS g
esehuie Bees
Bp ESS5E% ESSE
Sas S
> ge ~ 3
< 3 ead Q Sy 8
Z yiicke Puig
82Sez0ses SR :
SSSEGESESEESss FG
2k Py .
ESSSSEVSESSSEES 5
Se S =
~— nN


486 : Appendix B

TRACKING LONGER TERM
MARKET ACTIVITY

With the exception of option sellers who profit when prices
remain static, the profit strategy of most traders requires direc-
tional price movement. The trader wins when he gets the direc-
tion right and loses when he is incorrect. Because the longer term
trader is responsible for determining the market's directional
movement, we monitor this activity to help detect evidence of a
price trend. After identifying and evaluating longer term trader
activity, an educated conclusion regarding price direction can be
reached. We begin the process by identifying the longer term trad-
er's influence in today’s session and then considering how that
influence extends into the future.

¢ Influence in day’s range development: The profile gtaph-
ic helps identify longer term trader behavior during daily
range development. By monitoring longer term activity
throughout the range, particularly at the extremes, at range
extension, and after value area completion, we can deter-
mine whether longer term buyers or sellers are more active
and hence control market direction. Activity at the
extremes provides the clearest indication of longer term
trader influence, followed by range extension and then
value area buying and selling.

1. Extremes are formed when the longer term trader com-
petes with the short term trader for Opportunities at a par-
ticular price level (which later becomes either the session
high or low). A minimum of two single prints is required
to establish an extreme. The more eager the longer term
trader is in this price competition, the more the single
prints and the longer the single print extreme. Anything
less than two prints suggests that the longer term trader is
not very interested in competing at that price. A local top
or bottom is formed when only one single print defines
the top or bottom of the range. This condition implies
that the market offered a Price opportunity which no one
Teally wanted (i.e., no evidence of competition [see Figure
B.7: Panel #1—Intel Corporation].


* (a)

ST

secHASEEETTEETT

vereoncoseso =a sg GER

——— (b)

Extension

. I

(a)

(b) = 59
(a)

|

_{(@) = 100

Panel #1
Intel Corporation

Extreme: formation
requires at least two
TPOs

(a) Selling Extreme
from 77 11/32 to
77 5/32

Buying Extreme
from 73 31/32 to
75 reveals spirited
competition
between short term
and longer term
traders.

(b)

Figure B.7

Panel #2
Coffee

Range Extension:
occurs when longer
term traders upset the
initial balance

(a) Initial Balance
established in peri-
ods: A & B.

(b) Range extension
down in periods C,
H, andI

Panel #3
S&P 500 Index

Value Area/TPO
Buying or Selling:
assessment of whether
longer term buyers or
sellers control the cur-
rent session in the
value area

(a) Modal or Fairest
Price at 1039.20

(b) TPO selling count
equals 59

(Q TPO buying count
equals 100

(a) Imbalance to the
buy side implies
that prices need to
go higher for market
balance.



488

Appendix B

2. Range Extension occurs when the longer term trader

enters the market with enough volume to tip the initial
balance and extend the range up or down. Range exten-
sion up indicates longer term buying while range exten-
sion down indicates longer term selling. However, there
are occasions when both the longer term buyer and sell-
er are active at a range extreme, but not at the same price
and time (recall that longer term buyers and sellers gen-
erally do not trade with each other). For example, if an
extreme is formed after a range extension up, the market
moves up first to shut off buying and then moves down
to shut off selling. This is an example of both longer
term buyers and sellers trading in the same price area
but at different times. Both kinds of activity at the
extremes are identified to evaluate the impact of longer
term buying and selling (see Figure B.7: Panel #2—
Coffee).

. The Value Area is determined each trading session by

ptice rotations around the modal price (i.e., the price
with the highest TPO count or the fairest price). The
value area is computed by counting 70% of all TPOs sur-
rounding the fairest price. In other words, the value area
is an estimate of fair value which is approximated by
one standard deviation of the session’s trading volume
{recall the student example earlier). When a longer term
trader makes a trade in the value area, he is buying low
or selling high in relation to a longer term view, not in
relation to today’s value. This behavior creates an imbal-
ance in today’s value area. Longer term trader activity is
measured by counting TPOs. The following procedure
can be used to determine which side contains the longer
term imbalance, 1) a line is drawn through the fairest
price, and 2) TPOs are counted on either side of the
fairest price until a single print is encountered. The
imbalance is assigned to the side with the smaller num-
ber of TPOs because the longer term trader activity rep-
resents the smaller percentage of total trade in the value
area. For example, if the TPO count was 22 above and 12


Market Profile 489

below the fairest price, that would indicate net TPO sell-
ing with a mild bias toward lower prices (see Figure B.7:
Panel #3—S&P 500 Index). Note that TPO buying and
selling in the value area is not applicable on trend days, as
the market is still in search of a fair value area.

After identifying and evaluating longer term trader activi-
ty correctly in today’s profile graphic, the user can readily deter-
mine whether longer term buyers or sellers were in control of the
current trading session.

e Influence beyond today: The profile graphic also helps
identify longer term trader behavior beyond today’s range
development. A key goal of the trader is to determine
whether the current market price trend will continue or is
likely to change. A change in market direction is a reversal of
the current price trend. The standard technical approach to
trend assessment, without Market Profile, is to draw an
appropriate trendline and monitor subsequent price action
against it. Unless the trendline is violated, the current price
trend is expected to continue. Trendline analysis is the most
important of basic technical tools, particularly given its uni-
versal usage and applicability to different time intervals (i.e.,
hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, etc.).

Market Profile, on the other hand, offers an alternative
approach to traditional trend analysis by evaluating market
activity over different time periods. In its simplest form, an
evaluation of the profile graphic on consecutive days can
help define the start or continuation of the short term price
trend. For example, if today’s value area is higher than yes-
terday’s value area, then the current market price trend is
up. Moreover, if tomorrow’s value area is higher than
today’s, then the current market uptrend has continued. By
monitoring market activity in this fashion, the trader is
able to readily identify trend continuation or change.
Similarly by combining daily consecutive profile graphics
into a larger cumulative profile graphic, an evolving picture
of longer term balance or imbalance emerges. The profile
graphic in Figure B.5 (Sugar) on page 483 illustrate this


490 Appendix B

point. A cursory review of the individual sessions (2/10—
2/13) in the upper panel suggest an uptrending market
without a hint of reversal. When these four (4) consecutive
sessions are combined (lower panel), however, a cumulative
balanced picture springs forth. Once balanced, a market
moves to a state of imbalance which, more often than not,
begins after a final test at the fairest price.

CONCLUSION

The Market Profile method can be used to analyze any price data
series for which continuous transaction activity is available. This
includes listed and unlisted equities, U.S. government notes and
bonds (prices or yields), commodity futures and options, where
applicable. The profile graphic presents the movement of prices,
per unit of time, in two dimensions—vertically (i.e., directionally)
and horizontally (i.e., frequency of occurrence). When price
action is viewed in this way, a picture of price discovery unfolds
which is unavailable in the traditional one dimensional (vertical)
bar chart.

The profile graphic offers unique advantages over the stan-
dard bar chart:

* The symmetry attribute of the profile graphic allows the
trader to assess the market's state of balance (or imbalance)
in any timeframe. When a market is symmetric, a condi-
tion of balance or equilibrium exists between buyers and
sellers. A market imbalance implies Price trend continua-
tion, as the market works toward a new equilibrium.
Market balance, however, is fleeting and implies market
change or a directional move (either up or down) is likely to
occur, a signal for traders to consider employing trend fol-
lowing methodologies.

e Every trend change occurs at a single moment in time, not
conveniently at the end of the hour, day, week or month.
The profile graphic can be used to more accurately identify
that specific time where control changed hands between


Market Profile 491

buyers and sellers. By pinning down such control shifts, the
profile graphic allows the trader to identify key support and
resistance levels.

In short, the profile graphic provides a substantial amount
of price information per unit of time, allowing the trader to iden-
tify patterns and dynamics which would not be readily apparent
using other methods.




Appendix C: The
Essentials of Building a

grading SLi

Trading system development is part art, part science, and part
common sense. Our goal is not to develop a system that achieves
the highest returns using historical data, but to formulate a
sound concept that has performed reasonably well in the past
and can be expected to continue to perform reasonably well in
the future.
