
Beware of "Analysis Paralysis"

Forecasting models are both art and science, with so many different approaches that traders can get
overloaded. It can be tough to decide when you know enough to pull the trigger on a trade with
confidence. Many traders switch to technical analysis at this point to test their hunches and see when
price patterns suggest an entry.

Look for Fundamental Drivers First

The fundamentals include everything that makes a country and its currency tick. From interest rates and
central bank policy to natural disasters, the fundamentals are a dynamic mix of distinct plans, erratic
behaviors and unforeseen events.

Section 05 | Fundamental & technical analysis

Which analysis is better?
No one will ever win the age-long battle
between technical and fundamental
analysis.
Prior to the mid-1980s, fundamental traders
dominated the FX market. However, with the
advent of new technologies, the influence of
technical trading on the FX market has
increased significantly.
Nowadays the best strategies tend to be
the ones that combine both fundamental
and technical analysis.
Textbook perfect technical formations have
failed too often because of major
fundamental news and events like U.S.
nonfarm payrolls.
But trading on fundamentals alone can also
be risky. There will oftentimes be sharp
gyrations in the price of currency on a day
when there are no news or economic
reports.
This suggests that the price action is driven
by nothing more than flows, sentiment, and
pattern formations.
Therefore, it is very important for technical
traders to be aware of the key economic data
or events that are scheduled for release, and,
in turn, for fundamental traders to be aware
of important technical levels that the general
market may be focusing on.

Most individual traders will start trading with
technical analysis because for some it is
easier to understand and does not require
hours of news and fact checking.
Technical analysts can also follow many
currencies and markets at one time, whereas
fundamental analysts tend to focus on a few
pairs due to the overwhelming amount of
data in the market.
Nonetheless, technical analysis works well
because the currency market tends to
develop strong trends. Once technical
analysis is mastered, it can be applied with
equal ease to any time frame or currency
traded.
However, as we already noted - it is
important to take both strategies into
consideration, as fundamental analysis can
trigger technical movements such as
breakouts or reversal in trends. Technical
analysis, on the other hand, can also explain
moves that fundamentals cannot, especially
in quiet markets, causing resistance in trends
or unexplainable movements.

Section 05 | Fundamental & technical analysis

How pros evaluate the market
Commodity trader Wang relies on simple supply & demand
Wang Bing’s Guli Trend Aggressive Strategy fund has made a 2,100% profit from
smart commodity trading.
While many of Wang’s peers have embraced computer-driven strategies in an
attempt to gain an edge, the former iron-ore importer says his trades are
dictated by old-fashioned analysis of supply and demand. Wang, who started
trading futures in 2008, said he supplements his fundamental analysis of
commodities supply and demand with simple forms of technical analysis. One
of his favorite measures is the 30-day moving average. When prices move
above that level, he’s more inclined to bet on gains.

Example

Responds to speculation
Wang had recently been betting on higher commodity prices, encouraged by
signs that President Xi Jinping’s government would take measures to tackle
oversupply. But he closed out the last of those positions on Wednesday,
responding to local speculation that producers of coke and coking coal will be
allowed to ramp up production.

$
¤

SECTION 06
CURRENCIES

Section 06 | Currencies

Currency nicknames

Greenback or Buck - U.S. Dollar
Sterling - British Pound
Cable - British Pound / U.S. Dollar pair
Single currency or Fiber - Euro
Swissy - Swiss Franc
Loonie - Canadian Dollar
Aussie or Ozzie - Australian Dollar
Kiwi - New Zealand Dollar
Barnie - U.S. Dollar / British Pound pair
Betty - Euro / Russian Rubble
Guppy or Gopher - British Pound / Japanese Yen pair
Euppy (pronounced Yuppy) - Euro / Japanese Yen pair
Ninja - U.S. Dollar / Japanese Yen pair
Chunnel - Euro / British Pound pair

Section 06 | Currencies

Which currencies should I trade?
Newer traders should start with following only the four major currency
pairs, which are the EUR/USD, USD/JPY, USD/CHF and the GBP/USD, and
then gradually add the AUD/USD, USD/CAD and NZD/USD, followed by the
non-dollar pairs.

1

EUR/USD

2

USD/JPY

3

GBP/USD

4

USD/CHF

beginners should
start with these!

Then

AUD/USD
Then

NZD/USD
Then

Non-dollar pairs

USD/CAD

Section 06 | Currencies

Commodity currencies

The commodity currencies are currencies
from countries that possess large
quantities of commodities or other
natural resources.
Natural resources often constitute the majority of
the countries' exports, and the strength of the
economy (its currency) can be highly dependent on
the prices of these natural resources. These
correlations makes them easier to trade.

rub

Ruble <> Brent crude oil
The free-floating ruble follows the Brent
price in almost-perfect lockstep.

RUB/USD

Brent (oil) price

Here is why there is such a dependancy:
Russian GDP Vs Oil price in ruble

Russian nGDP

Oil price in ruble

Section 06 | Currencies

Commodity currencies
$

$

When Gold Goes Up, the
USD Often Goes Down
(and Vice Versa)
Historically, gold is a "safe haven" - a
country-neutral investment and an
alternative to the world's other reserve
currency, the U.S. dollar. That means gold
prices tend to have an inverse relationship to
the USD, offering several ways for currency
traders to take advantage of that
relationship.

Dollar gains 5% > Oil
falls 10-25%
Oil is particularly leveraged to the dollar and
may fall 10 percent to 25 percent if the
currency gains 5 percent, Morgan Stanley
analysts including Adam Longson said in a
research note dated Jan. 11, 2016.

For example, if gold breaks an important
price level, you'd expect gold to move
higher. With this in mind, you might sell
dollars and buy Euros, for example, as a
proxy for higher gold prices.

$

CAD

USD/CAD <> Oil prices
Canada is considered the 2nd largest
exporter of oil in the world, second only to
Saudi Arabia, hence its currency is reliant on
this commodity. It also supplies the world’s
biggest oil consumer – the United States.
Because the US is largely dependent on oil,
the rise and fall of the commodity will have
an effect not only on the Canadian Dollar but
also on the US Dollar – the higher the price of
oil, the higher benefits Canada gets, and the
more disadvantaged the US becomes. In
currency exchange, the higher the oil prices
are, the lower the USD/CAD value will be.

AUD

Rising Gold Prices boost
AUD and CAD
Australia is the world's third largest exporter
of gold, and Canada is the third largest
producer worldwide. These two major
currencies tend to strengthen as gold prices
rise. You might consider going long these
currencies when gold is increasing in value,
or trade your GBP or JPY for these currencies
when gold is on the rise.

$
¤

SECTION 07
HOW FOREX
INFLUENCES BUSINESS

Section 07 | How forex influences business

Why one should monitor the EURUSD

1% move in the EURUSD
rate reduces profits by
EUR$7 million!
Monitoring exchange rates is essential to
predicting earnings and corporate
profitability.
Throughout 2003 and 2004, European
manufacturers complained extensively
about the rapid rise in the euro and the
weakness in the U.S. dollar.
The main reason for the dollar's selloff at the
time was the country's rapidly growing trade
and budget deficits. This caused the EURUSD
exchange rate to surge, which took a
significant toll on the profitability of
European corporations because a higher
exchange rate makes the goods of European
exporters more expensive to U.S. consumers.
In 2003, inadequate hedging shaved
approximately EUR$1 billion euros from
Volkswagen's profits, while DSM, a Dutch
chemicals group, warned that a 1% move
in the EURUSD rate would reduce profits
by EUR$7 million to EUR$11 million.
Unfortunately, inadequate hedging is still a
reality in Europe, which makes monitoring
the EURUSD exchange rate even more
important in forecasting the earnings and
profitability of European exporters.*

*Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market: Technical and Fundamental Strategies to Profit from Market Moves (Wiley Trading) by Kathy Lien.

Section 07 | How forex influences business

Real-world business stories

to help you understand how forex market works

As ruble loses half its
value, russians make
quick money by
re-exporting cars
Thanks to the ruble’s depreciation, prices of
cars sold in Russia turned out to be cheaper
than on foreign markets.
The price difference in Russia and abroad
made the re-export of cars from Russia
lucrative.
Seizing on currency disparities, Russians
made quick money by re-exporting the
vehicles, which got so cheap in ruble
terms that selling them back - sometimes
to the same country that manufactured
them in the first place - became a way to
make a good profit.

How Australians lost
their farms in the forex
In the early 1980s, Australian farmers
desperate for finance plunged into the forex
market, snapping up low-interest loans
denominated in Swiss francs.
But the loans, essentially a bet on the Aussie
dollar remaining strong against the franc,
went horribly wrong when the dollar
plunged in 1985 and 1986, costing some
borrowers their farms.

Section 07 | How forex influences business

Real-world business stories

to help you understand how forex market works

When yuan is weakening
chinese citizens are
buying properties
abroad
Motivated by a weakening yuan, surging
domestic housing costs and the desire to
secure offshore footholds, Chinese citizens
are snapping up overseas homes at an
accelerating pace.
They’re also venturing further afield than
ever before, spreading beyond the likes of
Sydney and Vancouver to lower-priced
markets including Houston, Thailand’s
Pattaya Beach and Malaysia’s Johor Bahru.
They are hoping to buy before the yuan
weakens any further. Expectations are
mounting for a higher Fed rate target,
boosting the appeal of holding dollars.

Russian gem polisher
benefits from weak
rubble
Maxim Shkadov, who runs Kristall, Russia’s
biggest gem polisher and a major exporter,
says the weak ruble - it’s lost half of its value
since oil began to slide in 2014 - slashed his
local costs in dollar terms.
“We don’t have any problems getting
loans, because banks have plenty of cash
and can’t find anywhere to put it,” he says.
But demand for his diamonds is weak, so
he’s paying down debt, not adding to it,
Shkadov says.

Section 07 | How forex influences business

Real-world stories

to help you understand how forex market works

How China became the
biggest investor in the
U.S.
Chinese Yuan Renminbi (RMB) was
pegged to the U.S. dollar. In the 1980s, the
RMB was devalued to promote growth in
China's economy, and between 1997 and
2005 the People's Bank of China artificially
maintained a USDRMB rate of 8.27.
At the time, it received significant criticism
because keeping the peg meant that the
Chinese government would artificially
weaken its currency to make Chinese goods
more competitive.
To maintain the band, the Chinese
government had to sell the yuan and buy
U.S. dollars each time their currency
appreciated above the band's upper limit.
These dollars were then used to purchase
U.S. Treasuries, and this practice turned
China into the world's largest holder of
U.S. Treasuries.

$
¤

SECTION 08
RISK
MANAGEMENT

Section 08 | Risk management

Why traders lose money
Most traders lose money simply because they have no understanding or
place no importance in risk management. Risk management involves
essentially knowing how much you are willing to risk and how much you
are looking to gain. Without a sense of risk management, most traders
simply hold on to losing positions for an extremely long amount of time,
but take profits on winning positions prematurely. There are a few key
guidelines that every trader, regardless of their strategy or what they are
trading, should keep in mind.

Risk-reward ratio

Stop-loss orders

Traders should look to establish a
risk-reward ratio for every trade they place.
In other words, they should have an idea of
how much they are willing to lose, and how
much they are looking to gain. Generally, the
risk-reward ratio should be at least 1:2, if not
more. Having a solid risk-reward ratio can
prevent traders from entering positions that
ultimately are not worth the risk.

Traders should also employ stop-loss orders
as a way of specifying the maximum loss
they are willing to accept. By using stop-loss
orders, traders can avoid the common
predicament of being in a scenario where
they have many winning trades but a single
loss large enough to eliminate any trace of
profitability in the account.

Pros recommend 1:2
risk-reward ratio, and
not risking more than
2% of your equity on any
single trade.

Trailing stops to lock in profits are
particularly useful. A good habit of more
successful traders is to employ the rule of
moving your stop to break even as soon as
your position has profited by the same
amount that you initially risked through the
stop order. At the same time, some traders
may also choose to close a portion of their
position.

Section 08 | Risk management

10 tips from the pros
1

Start gradually

6

Don’t open many positions at the same
time. It’s better to choose fewer positions,
but weigh each of them carefully.

2

Stop-Loss order

An essential mistake beginners make is
closing the transaction too soon and thus
not taking advantage of the full profit
potential. Trends last longer than they
might seem at first!

7

People often forget to limit their loss and
therefore have to step out of the game
very soon. With the Stop-Loss Order, you
will be able to control the situation even if
the rates change unexpectedly.

3

Rule of 1/6

Stick to the plan
Each good trader has their own plan, and
the best traders make an effort to hold
onto it. Those who have the time, make
daily transactions, others choose
long-term strategies. Keep it steady!

5

Multiple time frames
Differentiate the time frames of analysis.
Weekly graphs are used to observe trends
while daily and hourly graphs are best
used to observe the best time to open and
close positions.

Don’t play against
the trend

Transactions against a trend usually result
in loss. Wait for a beneficial tendency and
then make your move!

8

Specialists advise against risking more
than 1/6 of your free capital when you
aren’t completely confident.

4

Don’t stop the profit

If in doubt, follow
the leader

If you still aren’t confident about your
decisions, choose a platform that lets you
follow leaders and copy their transactions.

9

Trends have momentum
Beginners often don’t know that when
trends start, they develop quickly because
they are increased by the number of
traders following them. Use trends in your
favour!

10 Close the unsuccessful
Don’t hold unsuccessful positions open for
a long time. Experience shows that it’s
best to close them early and move on to
others.

$
¤

SECTION 08
TOOLS USED
BY PRO TRADERS

Tools for analysis and trading
1

3

You are serious about becoming a forex trader. Do you know which tools to
use? Here are the three most popular tools:

1. Ransquawk

£20/month - £150/month

Live 24/7 news (text & audio) covering all major
pairs and crosses.
https://ransquawk.com/

2. eSignal

$47/month - $309/month

Stock Charting Software, Best Day Trading
Platform.
http://www.esignal.com/

3. Oanda news
Forex market commentary and analysis,
statistics and more.
https://fxtrade.oanda.com/analysis/news/

Free

2

References

1. Trading in the Zone: Master the Market with Confidence, Discipline, and a Winning Attitude. By Mark Douglas.
2. Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques, Second Edition. By Steve Nison.
3. Currency Trading and Intermarket Analysis: How to Profit from the Shifting Currents in Global Markets. By
Ashraf Laïdi.
4. Trading for a Living: Psychology, Trading Tactics, Money Management. By Alexander Elder.
5. The Disciplined Trader: Developing Winning Attitudes. By Mark Douglas
6. Naked Forex: High-Probability Techniques for Trading Without Indicators. By Alex Nekritin.
7. Trading Price Action Trends: Technical Analysis of Price Charts Bar by Bar for the Serious Trader. By Al Brooks.
8. Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market: Technical and Fundamental Strategies to Profit from
Market Moves (Wiley Trading) by Kathy Lien.
9. Forex For Ambitious Beginners: A Guide to Successful Currency Trading. By Jelle Peters.
10. The 10 Essentials of Forex Trading: The Rules for Turning Trading Patterns Into Profit. By Jared Martinez.
11. Millionaire Traders: How Everyday People Are Beating Wall Street at Its Own Game. By Kathy Lien, Boris
Schlossberg.
12. 7 Winning Strategies For Trading Forex: Real and actionable techniques for profiting from the currency
markets. By Grace Cheng.
13. Forex Patterns and Probabilities: Trading Strategies for Trending and Range-Bound Markets. By Ed Ponsi.
14. https://www.tradeking.com/forex/economic_indicators.htm
15.http://www.babypips.com/school/undergraduate/freshman-year/trading-the-news/trading-with-a-directiona
l-bias.html

Congratulations
and thanks for
reading!
To take your skills to the next level
download the free learning app here.
$
¤

No real money needed. No risk involved.

