
SWING TRADING

192

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

regularly, within their channels. Cats and dogs are best left for trend
trading. To draw a list of candidates, start with the 20 most active
stocks and a handful of famous blue chips, and choose the ones with
the widest channels and the most regular swings.
Be sure to select only those candidates whose daily channels are
wide enough for a C-level trader to take at least a point out of a trade.
A C trader is someone who normally takes 10% or more out of a channel. The only way you can prove you are a B or even an A trader is
by trading at that level for at least six months. Even A traders are better off with broad channels because profits are fatter. Beginners have
no choice but to use the “1 point for a C trader” rule. This translates
into 10-point channels. Technical signals may look delicious, but if a
channel is narrower than 10 points, click on to the next stock.
Some stocks give better technical signals than others. Look for a
handful of regular performers; you need six or seven, certainly no more
than 10. Tracking just a handful of issues allows you to keep up your
daily homework without running ragged or falling behind. Learn the
personalities of your stocks, rate yourself on every trade, and once you
become a steady B trader, increase your trading size.
When the weekly trend is up, wait for daily oscillators to become
oversold while prices decline toward the EMA. When the weekly trend
is down, look for sell signals from daily oscillators while prices rally
toward the EMA. If an oscillator falls to a new multi-month low while
prices are moving toward the EMA, it shows that bears are extra strong
and it is better to put off buying until the following bottom. The reverse
applies to shorting.
In a weekly uptrend, the bottoms of daily charts tend to be very
sharp affairs. The best time to buy is when the market stabs below its
daily EMA. The best time to short is when the market stabs above it.
To place an order near the EMA, estimate its level for tomorrow. The
math is simple. You know where the EMA was yesterday and where it
closed today. If it has risen, say, by half a point, expect tomorrow’s rise
also to be half a point and add that to today’s EMA.
Take a look at how your stock has behaved since the latest trend
began. If the trend is up, look at the previous declines. If the stock has
returned to the EMA three times and penetrated it by an average of a
point and a half, place a buy order approximately a point below the
moving average, a little more shallow than the previous declines. Estimate the EMA for tomorrow and adjust your buy orders daily. Electronic
brokers do not become irritated when you change orders each day!

TRADING

193

Swing trading, like fishing, demands a great deal of attention and
patience. You need to do your homework daily, calculate the estimated
EMA for tomorrow, and place orders. You also must calculate your
profit targets and stops.
After entering a swing trade, place a protective stop, using the
SafeZone method. Swing trading is a high-wire act, requiring a safety
net. Stops and money management are essential for your survival and
success.
Take profits near the channel line. The exact level depends on the
strength of the swing. If MACD-Histogram and Force Index are making
new highs, the market is strong, and you can wait for the channel line
to be hit. If they act weak, grab your first profit while it’s still there.
What if a strong swing overshoots the channel line? An experienced
trader may shift his tactics and hold a little longer, perhaps until the
day when the market fails to reach a new extreme. A beginner must
train himself to take profits near the channel wall because he does not
have the skills to switch on the fly. Being able to take a limited profit
without kicking yourself for missing a big part of a move is a sign of
emotional maturity. It is liberating to accept what you asked for and
not worry about the rest. Profit targets help you create a structure in
an unstructured environment. Measure your performance as the percentage of the channel width. You must grade yourself to know where
you stand.
Early in your trading career, it is safer to concentrate on swings. As
your level of expertise rises, allocate a portion of your capital to trading trends. Major trends offer spectacular profit opportunities—the big
money is in big moves. You owe it to yourself to learn to trade them.
Concentrate on quality, and money will follow.

Options
The number of shares in any company is fixed, but options are created
out of thin air by writers responding to buyers’ demand. An option
buyer hopes that the price will get to his target fast enough, and the
writer sells him that hope. Most hopes never get fulfilled, but people
keep hoping and buying options. Fund managers, floor traders, and
exchange members sell hope by the truckload to amateurs who buy
calls in bull markets and puts in bear markets.
A call gives its holder a right, but not an obligation, to buy a certain
quantity of a specified security at a specified price at a specified time.

194

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

It is a bet on a price increase. A put is a right, but not an obligation,
to sell a certain quantity of a specified security at a specified price at a
specified time. It is a bet on a price drop.
Each option has an exercise price (also called strike price). If a
stock fails to reach that price before the exercise date, the option
expires worthless and the buyer loses what he paid; meanwhile, the
writer keeps his loot, the polite name of which is option premium. To
profit from buying or shorting stocks, you must pick the right stock
and the right direction. An option buyer’s job is much harder because in addition to that he must bet on how fast the stock will get
to his level.
An option is at-the-money when the current price of the underlying security equals the exercise price.
A call is out-of-the-money when the current price of the underlying security is below the exercise price. A put is out-of-the-money when the current price of the underlying is above the exercise price. The farther
out-of-the-money, the cheaper the option.
A call is in-the-money when the current price of the underlying security is
above the exercise price. A put is in-the-money when the current price
of the underlying is below the exercise price.

An option can be at-the-money, out-of-the-money, or in-the-money at
different times in its life, as the price of the underlying security changes.
The price of every option has two components: intrinsic value and
time value.
An option’s intrinsic value is above zero only when it’s in-the-money.
If the exercise price of a call is $80, and the underlying security rises
to $83, the intrinsic value is $3. If the security is at or below $80, the
intrinsic value of that call is zero.
The other component of each option’s price is time value. If the stock
trades at $74 and people pay $2 for an $80 call, the entire $2 represents
time value. If the stock rises to $83, and the price of the call jumps to
$4, $3 of that is intrinsic value ($83 − $80), while $1 is time value (the
hope that this stock will rise even higher during the life of that option).
Option price depends on several factors:
The farther out-of-the-money, the cheaper the option—the underlying
security must travel a longer distance to make it worth anything before
it expires.

TRADING

195

The closer the expiration day, the cheaper the option—it has less time to
fulfill the hope. The speed with which an option loses value is called
time decay, which becomes steeper as the expiration nears.
The less volatile the underlying security, the cheaper the option, because
the chance of that security making a large move is lower.
Other factors influencing the price of an option include the current level
of interest rates and the dividend rate of the underlying stock.

When a stock trades at 100, a 110 call is worth more that a 120 call
because that stock is more likely to rise to 110 than to 120. A stock is
more likely to rise to 110 in five months than in two, making a longer
call more valuable. Finally, if two stocks are selling for 100, but one
has moved 50 so far this year while the other has moved only 30, then
a 110 call for the more volatile stock is likely to be priced higher.
Different factors of option pricing may clash and partially cancel
each other out. For example, if a market drops sharply, reducing the
value of calls, the increase in volatility will lift option values, and the
calls may lose less value than expected. There are several mathematical models, such as Black-Scholes, widely described in options literature, to determine what is called a fair value of an option.
The simplest option strategy is to buy them. That’s what beginners
do, especially buying calls when they cannot afford to buy stocks.
They miss the fact that options are more complex than stocks and
someone who can’t make money in stocks is doomed in options. A more
sophisticated strategy involves writing, or selling, options. A writer may
be either covered or naked.
Covered writers own the underlying securities. For example, a fund
may hold IBM stock and sell calls against them, figuring that if the
stock does not reach its exercise price and the options expire worthless, they’ll pocket the extra income. If IBM rises to the exercise price
and their option is called, they’ll sell their stock at a profit, use the
money to buy another, and sell calls against it. Covered writing was
very profitable in the early years of exchange-traded options. By now
the field is very crowded, and the returns have shrunk. Naked writing,
to be reviewed later involves selling options without owning the
underlying securities, with writers backing up what they sell only with
cash in their accounts.
The above was a brief summary of option terms. To learn more, please
turn to the literature on options, listed at the end of this chapter. Just

196

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

watch out for the books that promise a “simple strategy for tripling
your money in a year, working 15 minutes a day, with no math.”
People who make money in options tend to be mathematically savvy
and highly capitalized, the exact opposite of an average wide-eyed
gambler who hopes to make a quick buck from his $5,000 stake. Let
us now review options strategies for buying and writing.
Buying Options—The Major Reversal Tactic It is harder to make
money buying options than stocks. You face all the usual problems, such
as choosing the right stock, identifying its trend, and selecting entry and
exit points. In addition, you must worry how fast your stock will get
where you expect it to go. If you buy a rising stock and it takes five
months instead of three to reach its target, you still have a winning trade.
Do the same with options, and they’ll expire worthless. If you decide to
buy more time by getting longer-term options, you’ll lose money in a different way, because those options are more expensive and move more
slowly. All options keep losing time value. Poor beginners who buy
them as a substitute for stocks rush in where the pros fear to tread!
Professionals tend to buy options only on special occasions, when
they expect a major reversal, especially to the downside. If you expect
not a little downtrend in a stock but a massive crash, buying a put may
be a good idea. When a long-term trend begins to turn, especially near
the top, it creates massive turbulence, like an ocean liner changing its
course. A stock may collapse today and soar tomorrow, only to collapse
again. When volatility goes through the roof, even well-heeled traders
have trouble placing stops. A stop belongs outside the zone of market
noise, but where do you put it when the noise level rises to a roar?
Options allow you to sidestep this problem, at a price which can only
be covered by a major move.
Prices tend to fall twice as fast as they rise. Greed, the dominant emotion of uptrends, is a happy and lasting feeling. Fear, the dominant emotion of downtrends, is sharper and more violent. Professionals are more
likely to buy puts because of shorter exposure to time decay. When you
expect a major downside reversal, buying a put can be a sensible trade.
The same principles apply to calls, but uptrends are better traded with
stocks.
A trader who expects a downswing must decide which put to buy. The
best choice is counterintuitive and different from what most people get.
Estimate how low you expect a stock to collapse. A put is worth buying only if you expect a waterfall decline.

TRADING

197

Avoid puts with more than two months of life. Buying puts makes
sense only when you expect a sharp decline. If you anticipate a drawnout downtrend, it is better to sell short the underlying security.
Look for cheap puts whose price reflects no hope. Move your finger
down the column of put strikes. The lower you go, the cheaper the
puts. At first, each time you drop to the next strike price, a put is 25%
or even 35% cheaper than the previous level. Eventually you come to
the strike level at which you would only save a tiny fraction of price.
This shows that all hope has been squeezed out of that put, and it is
priced like a cheap lottery ticket. That is the one you want!
Buying a very cheap, far-out-of-the-money put is counterintuitive. It
is so far-out-of-the-money and has so little life left in it that it seems
likely to expire worthless. You can’t place a stop on it, so if you’re
wrong, the entire premium will go up in smoke. Why not buy a put
closer to the money?
The only time to buy a put is when you’re shooting for an exceptional gain from a major reversal. In an ordinary downtrend it’s better
to short stocks. Cheap far-out-of-the-money puts provide the most bang
for the buck. Aim for a 10-fold gain or better, rather than the usual 2:1
or 3:1 ratio. Returns like these allow you to be wrong on a string of
trades, yet come out ahead in the end. Catching one major reversal will
make up for a string of losses and leave you very profitable.
The best options trade I ever made was during the October 1989
minicrash in the stock market. On Thursday the market closed weak,
with new lows exceeding the new highs for the first time in over a
year, which gave me a long-awaited sell signal. On Friday morning,
while at a trade show in Chicago, I bought OEX puts at 3⁄8. On Friday
afternoon the bottom fell out of the market. On Monday the market
opened sharply lower and my puts, purchased just a few trading hours
ago at less than half a point, were bid at 17.
Why don’t more people use this tactic? First, it requires a great deal
of patience, as opportunities are very infrequent. It offers very little
entertainment value. Most people cannot stomach the idea of being
wrong three, four, or five times in a row, even if they are likely to make
money in the end. This is why so few traders play one of the greatest
games in the options market.
Writing Options Beginners, gamblers, and undercapitalized traders
make up the majority of option buyers. Just think of all the money lost
by those hapless folks in their eagerness to get rich quick. Have you

198

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

sent a few dollars down the options hole? Who got all that money?
Brokers, of course, but mostly options writers. Well-capitalized professionals tend to write options rather than buy them. Covered writers sell
options against securities they own. Naked writers sell options without
owning the underlying securities.
A stock or a future can do one of three things: rise, fall, or stay flat.
When you buy a call, you can profit only if the market rises, but lose
if it goes down or stays flat, and sometimes even if it rises but not
fast enough. When you buy a put, you win only if the market falls fast
enough. An options buyer makes money only if the market goes his
way, but loses if it goes against him or stays flat. A buyer has one chance
to win out of three, but the odds are two out of three for an option
writer. No wonder the pros prefer writing options.
Large funds tend to use computerized models to buy stocks and
write covered calls against them. If a stock stays below the strike price,
they pocket the premium and write a new call with a new expiration
date. If a stock rises high enough to be called, they deliver it, collect
the money, invest in another stock, and write calls against it. Covered
writing is a mathematically demanding, capital-intensive business. Most
serious players spread their costs, including staff and equipment,
across a large capital base. A small trader doesn’t have much of an
edge in this expensive enterprise.
Naked writers sell options without owning the underlying securities,
similar to shorting. A naked writer collects his premium at the outset
of the trade but his risk is unlimited if the position goes against him
and he fails to get out. If you own a stock, sell a call, and that stock
gets called, you have something to deliver. If you sell a naked call
and the stock rises to its exercise price, the option buyer can demand
delivery, whether you own that stock or not. Imagine selling calls on
a stock that becomes a takeover play and opens $50 higher the next
morning—you still have to deliver. It can hurt.
Limited reward with unlimited risk scares most traders away from
naked writing, but the reality and perception are usually quite different in the markets. Writing naked options seems very dangerous, but
most of the time a far-out-of-the-money option with a short time to the
expiration is very likely to expire worthless, to the benefit of the writer.
Its chance of reaching the exercise price and causing a loss to a writer
is very low. The risk/reward ratio in naked writing is a lot better than
it looks, and there are techniques for reducing the impact of a rare
adverse move.

TRADING

199

Savvy naked writers tend to sell out-of-the-money calls and puts at
levels that a stock or a commodity is unlikely to reach during the
option’s life. They sell distant hopes. Good writers track market volatility to find how far a stock is likely to move, based on its recent conduct, and sell options outside that range. If a stock took a year to rise
from 60 to 130, the pros are going to fall all over themselves trying to
serve some greenhorn who wants to buy 170 calls that will expire in a
few weeks. The chance of that stock rising 40 points before the option
expiration is exceedingly low. A gullible amateur wants to buy hope,
and the pros are delighted to sell it to him. This game goes into high
gear during the week or two prior to option expiration, when the floor
mints money out of thin air, selling naked puts and calls that have
almost no chance of reaching their exercise price.
Cautious writers may close their positions without waiting for the
expiration date. If you write a call at 90 cents and it goes down to 10,
it may make sense to buy it back and unwind your position. You’ve
already earned the bulk of profit, so why expose yourself to continued
risk? It is cheaper to pay another commission, book your profits, and
look for another writing opportunity.
Becoming a naked writer requires absolute iron discipline. The size
of your writes and the number of positions must be strictly determined
by money management rules. If you sell a naked call and the stock rallies above its exercise price, it exposes you to the risk of ruin. You
must decide in advance at what level you will cut and run, taking a relatively small loss. A naked seller cannot afford to sit when a stock
moves against him. Amateurs hang on and wait for the underlying
security to turn around. They wait for the wasting time value to get
them off the hook. The longer you wait for a miracle, the deeper the
steel hook of the market lodges in your intestines. Stay away from
naked writing if you have the slightest problem with discipline!
WRITER’S CHOICE All options buyers know this sad sequence: you’re

right on the direction of the market, right on the stock, but still lose
money on the option. Time is the enemy of options buyers. Buyers
lose when the underlying security takes longer than expected to get to
the level at which they can collect on their bet. As the expiration date
nears, an option becomes worth less, and less, and less.
What if we reverse this process and write rather than buy options?
Now time will work in our favor because each passing day will reduce
the likelihood of that option having any value before it expires.

200

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

The first time you write an option, and do it right, you’ll experience
the delicious sensation of time working in your favor. The option loses
some of its time value each day, making the premium you’ve collected
safer and safer. When the market goes nowhere, you still make money,
as time value evaporates with each passing day.
If living well is the best revenge, then taking a factor that kills most
options buyers—time—and making it work for you is a gratifying
experience.
We must not forget that an option is a hope, and it is better to sell
empty hopes which are unlikely to be fulfilled. Take three steps before
writing a call or a put. First, analyze the underlying security, decide
which way it’s moving, and estimate its price target. Second, decide
whether to write a put or a call. Third, choose the strike price and the
expiration date for the option you’ll write. If any one of these steps
seems unclear, stand aside, do not force a decision, and look for
another opportunity.
One of the key factors in pricing options is the volatility of the
underlying security. A tool included in most trading software, called
Bollinger bands, can help you rate volatility. Those standard deviation
bands are centered around a moving average but unlike envelopes,
whose walls are parallel, they expand and contract as volatility changes.
Bollinger bands become narrow when markets are sleepy and wide
when they grow wild. Flat, narrow bands indicate a sleepy market
where options are cheap and it is better to buy them rather than sell.
When Bollinger bands go to a wide spread, they mark an overheated
market where options tend to be overpriced, creating an opportunity
for writers. Here are the steps to follow:
Analyze a security against which you want to write options. Use
Triple Screen to decide whether a stock, future, or an index is trending or nontrending. Use weekly and daily charts, trend-following
indicators, and oscillators to identify trends, detect reversals, and set up
price targets.
Select the type of option to write. If your analysis is bearish, consider
writing calls. If bullish, consider writing puts. When the trend is up, sell
the hope that it will turn down, and when it’s down, sell the hope it’ll
turn up. Do not write options when markets are flat and Bollinger
bands are tight because premiums are low, and a breakout from a trading range can hurt you.
Estimate how far, with a generous safety margin, the market would
have to move in order to change its trend, and write an option beyond
