
unthinkingly to grab a small profit. He learned these two lessons by brooding over the $492 he would have
made had he been more patient. It had taken five years of work, since he was six years old, to save the $120
to buy this stock. Based on how much he currently made from selling golf balls or peddling popcorn and
peanuts at the ballpark, he realized that it could take years to earn back the profit he had “lost.” He would
never, never, never forget this mistake.
And there was a third lesson, which was about investing other people’s money. If he made a mistake, it might
get somebody upset at him. So he didn’t want to have responsibility for anyone else’s money unless he was
sure he could succeed.

9
Inky Fingers
Omaha and Washington, D.C. • 1941–1944

One December Sunday afternoon when Warren was eleven, the Buffetts were driving back from a visit to
West Point after church. As they listened to the radio in the car, the announcer broke in to say that the
Japanese had struck Pearl Harbor. Nobody explained exactly what had happened or how many were killed or
injured, but from the commotion Warren quickly realized that the world was going to change.
His father’s already reactionary political views quickly turned even more extreme. Howard and his friends
considered Roosevelt a warmonger who lusted after dictatorship and was trying to achieve it by luring
America into yet another European war. They felt that Europe, a continent unable to settle its own petty
bickerings before these turned into mortal disputes, must be allowed to burn in its own tinderbox.
Until now, Roosevelt’s blandishments had not worked. Neither “international cooperation”—the wickedly
deceitful Lend-Lease program, which Howard considered “Operation Rat Hole,” 1 an outright gift of war
supplies to England, neither a loan nor a lease—nor giving speeches alongside that portly, popular
Englishman Winston Churchill, had drawn America into the war. Roosevelt had told the country—lying
through his teeth, they agreed—“To you mothers and fathers, I give you one more assurance…. Your boys
are not going to be sent into any foreign wars.”2 Howard now came to believe that in a desperate gamble,
Roosevelt and his army’s chief of staff, General George C. Marshall, had decided that “the only way to get
us into the European war was to get the Japanese to attack us,” says Warren, “and not tip off the people at
Pearl Harbor.” This belief was common among conservatives at the time, although Howard, as in most
things, was strikingly firm in his convictions.
The following spring, the Nebraska Republican Party tapped Howard with the awkward job of finding a
candidate to run for Congress against a popular incumbent, Charles F. McLaughlin. At the last minute,
according to family lore, Howard entered his own name on the ballot, unable to find another sacrificial lamb
willing to run against a heavily favored Democrat.
He found himself thrust into the role of campaigner. The Buffetts plastered simple flyers saying “Buffett for
Congress” on telephone poles. They went to county fairs, where Howard and Leila handed out cards amid
the livestock displays and entries in the best pickle competition. “He was the most unlikely candidate. He
hated to speak in public. My mother was a good campaigner, but my dad was introverted.” Leila, a talker,
instinctively knew how to work a crowd and enjoyed approaching people. The kids circulated, saying,
“Would you vote for my daddy?” Afterward they got to ride on the Ferris wheel.
“Then we made this little fifteen-minute radio program. My mother played the organ; my father introduced
us: ‘There’s Doris, age fourteen. And there’s Warren, age eleven.’ And my line was ‘Just a second, Pop, I’m

reading the sports section.’ Then, the three of us sang ‘America the Beautiful’ while my mother played this
little organ.”
It was no stemwinder, but “With that fifteen-minute radio program, everybody started volunteering. Still,
the other guy had been in for four terms.”
Even with the help of volunteers, Howard struggled against the political handicaps of his pessimism and his
literal honesty. Thus, the Buffett political platform bulged with dire warnings and bristled at the mindless
social conformity observable everywhere in the 1940s Midwest. Howard demanded that voters “buy
one-way tickets out of Washington for all of the screwballs, stuffed shirts, stool pigeons, sleepwalkers, and
society snobs.”
This fire-breathing rhetoric belied a sweetness in him, a subtle wit, and a certain innocence. For years,
Howard had carried in his pocket a handwritten piece of paper, softened and worn to the texture of linen,
which said, “I am God’s child. I am in His Hands. As for my body—it was never meant to be permanent. As
for my soul—it is immortal. Why, then, should I be afraid of anything?”3
Unfortunately for his only son, when it came to the streets of Omaha, Howard meant this almost literally.
When campaigning, he would roust Warren, now twelve years old, out of bed long before dawn, to head
down to the stockyards in South Omaha. Along with the railroads, these were Omaha’s main business,
employing almost twenty thousand people, mostly immigrants. More than eight million animals a year4
lumbered into a metropolis of meat and rolled out as billions of pounds of packaged goods.5 South Omaha
once was a separate city, a short distance from downtown geographically but culturally a continent away. For
decades it had served as the brewing ground for most of the city’s ethnic and racial unrest.
Warren planted his sneakers at one end of the block, hands clenched and eyes fixed anxiously on his father.
Howard limped from a childhood bout with polio, and the family worried about his heart condition. Warren’s
stomach churned as he watched his father down the street, approaching huge, cleaver-faced men in overalls
on their way into the packinghouses for the five-thirty a.m. shift.
Many of them did not speak English at home. The least well off, the blacks and new immigrants, lived
crammed into a buffer zone of boardinghouses and shanties next to the yards. Those with greater savvy and
more means had worked their way out into the ethnic parishes nearby, living in neat small houses with
steeply pitched roofs that rolled up and down South Omaha’s hills: Czechs in Little Bohemia, Serbs and
Croats in Goose Hollow, the Poles in G Town (the former Greek Town); the Greeks were long gone, their
homes destroyed in a 1909 anti-immigrant riot.
The people whom Howard approached ranged from the top rank of workers, the specialized butchers from
the killing gang who worked on the highest floor of the slaughterhouse, to those on the lower floors, in the
boneyard, the lard department, and the fertilizing department. A handful of women trimmed pork, twisted
wieners, painted and labeled cans, plucked chickens, and sorted eggs. Management especially prized black
women, who could be counted on to fill offal room jobs, and for less pay than whites.6 They cleaned the
“pluck”—intestines, bladder, hearts, glands, and other organs—their hands immersed in water and waste,
sorting, salting, and packing intestines for casings in a hell of heat and ankle-deep bloody water. They panted
shallowly with open mouths to keep airborne particles of excrement out of the deeper parts of their lungs.7
Even the newest and lowliest immigrant or black man would not set foot in the offal room. That was strictly
black women’s work.
Men and women, black and white, these people were Democrats in every fiber of their being. The rest of
Nebraska might be turning against the New Deal, the President’s cure for the Great Depression, but Franklin
Delano Roosevelt was still a hero in this part of town. Yet the leaflets that Howard Buffett politely pressed
into their callused hands shrieked that FDR was the greatest danger to democracy that America had ever
known. If given a moment to speak, he would calmly explain why, as their Congressman, he would always
vote to enact laws that the stockyard workers would oppose.

Howard was a zealot, but he was neither stupid nor crazy. Even though he placed his trust in God’s hands, he
had a backup plan. Warren had not come for an education, nor to tag-team his father in a fight. His job was
to run like hell for the cops if the stockyard workers started beating up his father.
Under the circumstances, a reasonable person might ask what Howard was doing there at all. His efforts
might not be repaid by a single vote. But apparently he felt an obligation to appear before every potential
voter in his district, however little of him they cared to see.
Warren always managed to return home intact; he never had to run for the cops. That may have been just
luck or it may have been Howard’s demeanor, which conveyed his basic decency. Still, the Buffetts had no
reason to believe the voters saw that, nor that if they did, it would overcome his underdog status. On election
day, November 3, 1942, Doris, convinced that her father had lost, went downtown and bought herself a new
pin to wear to school the next day so she would have something to look forward to. “My dad wrote out his
concession statement. We all went to bed at eight-thirty or nine o’clock, because we never stayed up late.
And he woke up the next morning to find out he’d won.”
Howard’s deep suspicion of foreign adventures was more than a quirk of his own Quaker-like personality. It
reflected a reservoir of conservative isolationism, which had once run deep and wide through the Midwest.
Although that stream was drying up, Pearl Harbor had revived it for a little while. Despite Roosevelt’s
overwhelming popularity, labor’s support for his foreign policies had wavered temporarily in Omaha, just
long enough to get Howard elected against an opponent who had been, perhaps, overconfident.
***
The following January, the Buffetts rented out their house in Dundee and boarded a train to Virginia. Ernest
handed them a hamper of beautifully packaged food along with instructions not to stray into any other cars,
lest they pick up dread diseases from traveling servicemen.
They arrived at Washington’s Union Station to find a provincial city grown packed and chaotic. Great crowds
of people filled the town, most of them working at vast new wartime government agencies. The military had
commandeered every building, office, chair, and pencil within reach in the effort to get itself organized in the
newly finished Pentagon, the world’s largest office building, which was outgrown by the time it was
completed. By now, flimsy temporary office buildings lined every inch of the Mall.8
Hordes of new arrivals had doubled the population. A ragged army of black men and women streamed across
the 14th Street Bridge from Virginia, fleeing the tobacco farms, cotton fields, and textile mills of the povertystricken South, lured by the prospect of any job at all in the busiest city in the world. Following in the dust of
the respectable, impoverished, and naive came pickpockets, prostitutes, grifters, and drifters, turning
Washington into the nation’s crime capital.
Rickety nineteenth-century wooden trolleys packed with government workers crept their way along
impassable streets. At any of the trolley stops, local residents might be picketing against Capital Transit,
which had refused to hire blacks.9 Still, the logjam of segregation was slowly starting to break. At Little
Palace cafeteria on the black side of town, Howard University students were staging a series of “lunch
counter sit-ins,” challenging the restaurant’s policy of refusing them service by simply occupying all available
tables and refusing to leave, effectively shutting the place down.10
The Buffetts had friends, the Reichels11—acquaintances of Howard’s from his stockbroking days—who told
them, don’t live in Washington, it’s terrible. They knew of an enormous house in Virginia that someone in the
Marines had just vacated. It sat on a hill above the Rappahannock River, next door to Chatham, headquarters
of the Union Army in the battle of Fredericksburg. The house had ten fireplaces, formal gardens, cutting
gardens, and a greenhouse. Although its grandeur was far above the Buffetts’ style, and it was located almost

an hour from the city, they leased it temporarily. Howard rented a tiny apartment in the District of Columbia
and commuted on the weekends. His time filled quickly as the Nebraska delegation assigned him to the
financial committees, and he started fitting in and learning the rules and procedures and unwritten customs of
serving as a Congressman.
Leila soon began riding into Washington to look for a permanent place to live. She had been unusually
irritable since their arrival and often spoke longingly of Omaha. The timing of the move had turned out to be
inauspicious. Her sister Bernice had just insinuated that she would commit suicide, saying that she would not
be responsible for what happened unless the family committed her to the Norfolk State Hospital, where their
mother, Stella, was also housed. Edie, now in charge of her sister’s care, consulted with a doctor. They
thought that Bernice wanted to live with her mother and was conceivably using melodramatic means to get
her way. Nevertheless, they clearly had to take the suicide threat seriously, and the family sent her off to
Norfolk.
The details of the Stahl family’s problems were rarely discussed in front of the children. Each adapted to
Washington in his or her own way. Beautiful fifteen-year-old Doris felt like Dorothy, who had just left blackand-white Kansas and stepped into the Technicolor land of Oz. Her life was transformed. She became the
belle of Fredericksburg and fell in love with the town.12 Leila began to treat her daughter as a social climber
who had pretensions above her station, and still launched the occasional tirade against her. But by now,
Doris’s spirit resisted her mother’s constraints, and she had begun to fight for her own identity.
Meanwhile, Warren, twelve years old, spent the first six weeks in an eighth-grade class that was “way
behind” where he had been academically in Omaha. Naturally, his first instinct was to get a job, working at a
bakery where he “did damned near nothing. I wasn’t baking and I wasn’t selling.” At home, furious and
miserable at being uprooted, he wanted to be sent back to Omaha and reported a mysterious “allergy” that
disturbed his sleep. He claimed that he had to sleep standing up. “I wrote my grandfather these pathetic
letters, too, and he sort of said, ‘You’ve got to send that boy back. You know, you’re destroying my
grandson.’” Succumbing, the Buffetts put Warren on a train back to Nebraska for a few months’ stay. To his
delight, his companion on the train was Nebraska Senator Hugh Butler. He had always gotten along well with
older people and chatted easily with Butler, in his precocious manner, all the way back to Omaha, his
“allergy” forgotten.
Bertie, nine years old, felt close to her grandfather and thought she had a special bond with him. She was
jealous. Trusting in her relationship with Ernest, she wrote him: “Don’t tell my parents, but send for me too.”
“When Bertie wrote the same kind of letters, I said, ‘Don’t pay any attention. She’s a fake.’”13
Ernest wrote back, “A girl should be with her mother.” Bertie sat in Fredericksburg, fuming that her brother
always seemed to get his way.14
Warren returned to Rosehill School and reunited with his friends. Every day he showed up around noontime
at the house of his father’s former partner, Carl Falk, whose wife, Gladys, served him sandwiches and tomato
soup and kindness for lunch. He “worshipped” Mrs. Falk15 as if she were a surrogate mother, just as he had
done with his friend Jack Frost’s mother, Hazel, and with his aunts.
Though Warren was comfortable with all these middle-aged women, he was shy, hopelessly shy, and girls his
own age terrified him. Even so, he soon developed a crush on Dorothy Hume, one of the girls in his new
eighth-grade class. His friend Stu Erickson had a similar crush on Margie Lee Canady, and his other friend
Byron Swanson had a crush on Joan Fugate. After weeks of talk, they worked themselves up to ask the girls
to go to the movies.16 But when Warren walked over to Dorothy’s house to invite her, he chickened out
when her father answered the door. Warren tried to sell him a magazine subscription instead. Finally,
however, he managed to ask Dorothy, and she said yes.
On the appointed Saturday, Byron and Warren went together to pick up their dates because they were afraid
to show up alone. Thus the afternoon started with a lengthy trudge from house to house to the streetcar stop,

walking for blocks in uncomfortable silence. Margie Lee, who lived in the opposite direction, arrived at the
stop with Stu and they all boarded the streetcar, where the boys stared red-faced at their shoes throughout the
trip downtown as the girls chatted easily with one another. When they reached the theater, Margie Lee,
Dorothy, and Joan strolled directly to a row of seats and sat down next to each other. The boys’ plan to
cuddle up with the girls during two horror films, The Mummy’s Tomb and Cat People, instantly fell apart.
Instead, they sat in their own group and watched the girls’ brunette heads huddled together as they giggled
and shrieked through the weekly serials, the cartoons, and both movies. After a painful trip to Walgreen’s for
after-movie treats, the boys retraced their trip on the streetcar in a dazed little group and began the long
march to the girls’ houses before being dismissed by their dates. They had barely spoken a word the entire
afternoon.17 All three were so mortified that it took each of them years thereafter to summon the courage to
ask another girl out on a date.18
But while Warren lost heart, he did not lose interest; he next developed a crush on another girl in his class,
Clo-Ann Kaul, a striking blonde. Yet she was not interested in him either; he seemed unable to make any
headway at all with girls. His way of diverting himself from disappointment was, again, making money.
“My grandfather liked the idea that I was always thinking of ways to make money. I used to go around the
neighborhood collecting wastepaper and magazines to sell for scrap. My aunt Alice would take me down to
the collection drop-off, where you could get thirty-five cents for a hundred pounds, or something like that.”
At Ernest’s house, Warren read a shelf full of back issues of the Progressive Grocer. Subjects like “how to
stock a meat department” fascinated him. On the weekends, Ernest put him to work at Buffett & Son, the
empire over which he presided. About the size of a two-story garage, it had a Spanish-style tile roof that
stood out in the pleasant upper-middle-class suburb of Dundee. The Buffetts had always sold on “credit and
delivery.” Ladies or their cooks would ring up Walnut 0761 on the telephone and read their lists to clerks
who took down their orders.19 Clerks rushed around the store, scrambling up and down a rolling wooden
ladder that flew back and forth along the shelves, retrieving boxes, bags, and cans, and filling their baskets
from the pyramids of vegetables and fruit. To cut a hand of bananas, they took down the wicked sharp knife
next to a four-foot bunch of bananas that hung from a hook by the back door. They ran down to the
basement to fill orders for sauerkraut and pickles that lay cooling in barrels near crates of eggs and other
perishables. All the goods went into baskets, which the clerks on the mezzanine raised on a pulley, priced and
packaged, and sent back downstairs. Then the orange Buffett & Son delivery trucks with rolled-up rubber or
leather panels on the side drove the packages off to Omaha’s waiting housewives.
Ernest sat at a desk on the mezzanine and glared down at the clerks. Behind his back, the employees called
him Old Man Ernie. “He didn’t do a damn thing. He just gave orders,” says Warren. “I mean, he was king.
He could see everything. And if a customer walked in who wasn’t waited on like that…” Snap of the fingers
and woe to the clerks. He believed in “work, work, plenty of work.” Ernest felt so responsible for making
sure that no one in his charge had foolish notions about there being any free lunch in this world that he had
once made a lowly stock boy bring two pennies to work to pay his Social Security tax in cash. This handover
had been accompanied by a half-hour lecture on the evils of socialism, so that said stock boy would fully
understand how that devil Roosevelt and the tweedy, pipe-smoking Ivy League professors he had brought
into the government were ruining the country.20
The only time Ernest left the mezzanine was the minute he saw an important woman drive up with her
chauffeur. He would tear down the stairs, grab an order slip, and wait on her himself, showing her the new
“alligator pears”—avocados—just flown in from Hawaii and handing peppermint sticks to her children.21 In
the face of all this attention to rank, when her brother-in-law Fred once stopped waiting on Leila in order to
attend to another customer, she stalked out in a huff and never shopped at the store again.22 Howard bought
the groceries from then on.
Warren now felt like one of these clerks, hustling around the store under Old Man Ernie’s thumb. Working in
his grandfather’s store, he came as close to being a slave as he ever would be in his life.
“He had me do a lot of little lesser jobs. Sometimes I was on the floor. Sometimes he had me counting

wartime rationing stamps—sugar stamps, coffee stamps, sitting up on the mezzanine with him. And
sometimes I was hiding where he couldn’t see me.
“The worst job was when he hired me and my friend John Pescal to shovel snow. We had this huge
snowstorm, a foot of superwet snow. We had to shovel out the whole bank of snow, in front where the
customers parked and in the alleyway behind the store, in the loading dock, and by the garage where we
had the six trucks.
“We worked at this for about five hours—shoveling, shoveling, shoveling, shoveling. Eventually, we
couldn’t even straighten our hands. And then we went to my grandfather. He said, ‘Well, how much should I
pay you boys? A dime’s too little and a dollar’s too much!’
“I’ll never forget—John and I looked at each other….”
That worked out to—at most—twenty cents an hour for shoveling snow.
“Oh no! This was the amount we were supposed to split. That was my grandfather….”
Well, a Buffett was a Buffett, but Warren had learned a valuable lesson: Know what the deal is in advance.23
Ernest had two other Buffett traits: an impulsive streak with women and an obsession with perfection. He had
entered into two short-lived marriages after Henrietta died, once coming back from a vacation in California
newly wed to a woman he had just met. His perfectionism, however, expressed itself at work. Buffett & Son
was a direct descendant of the oldest grocery store in Omaha and Ernest’s demanding ways were all in
pursuit of an ideal vision of service to his customers. He felt certain the discount national chain stores that
were encroaching on the neighborhoods were a fad that would disappear because they could never provide a
comparable level of service. Sometime during this period, he wrote confidently to one of his relatives: “The
day of the chain store is over.”24
When Buffett & Son ran out of bread, rather than disappoint his customers, Ernest sent Warren trotting down
the street to the nearby Hinky Dinky supermarket to buy bread at retail. Warren did not enjoy this errand
because he was quickly recognized once inside. “Hellooooooo, Mr. Buffett!” the clerks would call out to
him, loud enough for everyone to hear, as he slunk through the store, “trying to look inconspicuous,”
weighed down with armfuls of loaves. Ernest resented the Hinky Dinky, which, like Sommers, his other major
competitor in Dundee, was run by a Jewish family. It rankled him to pay good money to a competitor, much
less somebody Jewish. Like much of America before mid-century, Omaha practiced de facto segregation by
both religion and race. Jews and Christians (and even Catholics and Protestants) lived essentially separate
lives, with social clubs, civic groups, and many businesses refusing to accept Jews as members or hire them as
employees. Ernest and Howard used the code name “Eskimos” to make offensive remarks about Jews when
they were out in public. Since anti-Semitism was so much a matter of course in society at the time, Warren
never gave their attitudes a thought.
Ernest, in fact, was an authority figure to Warren, and he only escaped that authority when he was at school,
and for a few hours every Saturday when his grandfather put him to work on the delivery truck. Unloading
groceries from the truck was exhausting work, and Warren started to figure out how much he disliked manual
labor.
“There was this driver, Eddie, that I thought was a hundred years old. He was probably about sixty-five,
although he had driven a mule truck back when Buffett & Son delivered that way.
“He had the craziest delivery system that involved going first to Benson, then about five miles back to
Dundee to drop somebody’s groceries off, then back to Benson. All this during wartime gas rationing.
Finally I asked why, and he gave me this disgusted look and said, ‘If it’s early enough, we may catch her
when she’s undressed.’” Warren at first had no idea what this cryptic phrase meant. “He took the groceries
up to the house personally in the mornings while I carried twenty-four-bottle boxes of empty soda bottles
that were being returned to the store. Eddie would be there ogling Mrs. Kaul, the best-looking customer,
