
c02.indd 40

11/2/07 12:14:57 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

41

Dan’s plan forced him to stay disciplined, and his mind-set
kept him from getting too attached to his stock position. He
was in love with the idea of building his dream house, instead of
being in love with his stock positions. He didn’t want to marry his
stocks because then he would not be able to sell them to raise
enough money to build his house. He also knew that he could
not ride a loss in any one position because if he did this, he would
jeopardize the construction of this dream home and all would be
lost. Dan was able to finish his home, and after making over
$700,000 in the market in less than three years, he called to inform
us of his final purchase. To complete his ultimate dream he took
some of his profits and purchased a brand new Mercedes Benz to
park in his new garage. The last part of his plan was the icing on
the cake, and that was to drive over to the broker who told him to
go to Las Vegas in order to show him what he had done with his
$2,000.
Lesley

Another success story is Lesley Fontaine. Lesley started with a relatively small account and turned it into a million dollars by focusing
on price charts to help her make those all-important trading decisions. For years, Lesley, by her own admission, would get emotionally
tied up in the companies she invested in. Whether it was the product
that she fell in love with or the service the company provided, her
problem was that she found herself holding on too long. She believed
strongly in the company, and it was this faith in the company’s leadership team that caused Lesley to hold on when these stocks would
drop in price. Once we showed her how to remove these emotional
chains from her decision-making process, she quickly learned how
to properly enter a new position and, more importantly, how to exit
a stock when key support levels were being broken. Amazingly, this
newly acquired skill was the key that helped her reach the milliondollar mark. We will never forget the day she achieved this milestone
because she called to play a song written by Barenaked Ladies. It was
their hit single “If I Had $1,000,000.” Her success has spread around
the world, as she is now one of our featured guests on The Market Guys’ on-demand radio program. Her new title is the Emotional
Trader Lady!

c02.indd 41

11/2/07 12:14:58 PM

42

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Steve

Over the years, we have seen and heard many success stories about
people who have overcome the emotional challenges in order to reach
the pinnacle of success with regard to trading the markets. However,
with every success story we see the tragedies as well. One such person, whom we will call Steve, comes to mind. Steve had a high-level
sales position with Siebel Systems (Nasdaq ticker symbol: SEBL).
The company provided businesses with customer relationship management software and was considered to be one of the technology
darlings in the mid- to late 1990s. Seibel rewarded Steve with large
bonuses over the years, as well as stock options. Many companies pay
their sales force in stock options because it takes time for these stock
options to vest, and during this vesting period companies like Siebel
Systems are able to hold on to key producers like Steve. Should the
employee decide to leave the company, they could lose the options
that were awarded to them. So you can see how there was an incentive to stay in the ranks.
As Siebel Systems continued to grow, so did Steve’s investment
account. In fact, his account balance grew to over $152 million dollars. Each day, we would speak with Steve to discuss ideas of how to
grow this large sum of money until one day the price of the stock
started breaking down below key support levels. We would talk about
risk management ideas such as diversification, protective puts, stop
loss orders, and other things that would protect this nest egg of an
account. However, Steve was so attached to his company that he
abandoned all ideas that had anything to do with selling his stock. In
fact, his words to us still ring clear. He said, “I know there is a chance
this stock could drop, but I am willing to pay for the growth.” You
see, Steve’s optimism about the company and its products blinded
him to the fact that this stock was breaking down technically. The
sad part of this story is that Steve wound up losing over $100 million
dollars as a result of wanting to hang on.
We ran into Steve at a seminar we were doing in Washington,
D.C., a few years later and he came over to thank us for all of the
lessons we taught him over the years. But what amazes us the most is
how he was able to cope with such a loss. There were still many millions of dollars left in his account after that devastating loss but no
matter how you look at it, $100 million dollars was lost because of an
emotional attachment to the company he worked for.

c02.indd 42

11/2/07 12:14:58 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

43

Diane

These stories are not made up to make for an interesting book. These
are very real people, in very real situations, with very real emotions.
One of the most interesting stories of all is about a woman who lived
in Syosset, Long Island. We will call her Diane to protect her identity.
For many years, Diane and her husband owned a hardware store
not far from the Long Island Rail Road. They eventually decided to
sell their business in a plan to phase into retirement. Shortly after
they began this new chapter in their lives, her husband passed away
and she was left widowed. After careful consideration, she decided
to take some of the money she received from the sale of their hardware store and invest it in a new plan for the long term. She opened
an account with a discount broker down the street and deposited
$200,000 with them to get things started.
Diane shopped around for a good stock to buy. She had always
heard that you should buy companies that you are familiar with, or
at least a company that has products or services that you like yourself. Well, she always remembered liking a certain chocolate drink. It
came in a glass bottle with a yellow label, and printed in blue ink was
the word Yoo-hoo. This is the same drink that famous baseball player
Yogi Berra enjoyed, and if it was good enough for Yogi, it was good
enough for Diane, too. This is the stock that Diane wanted, so she
called up her broker and placed an order to buy $200,000 worth of
this one stock. Her instructions to her broker were to buy as many
shares as possible of ticker symbol YHOO with the money she had
in her account. The next day she looked at her account and saw
that the stock was up. The second and third day were the same, and
after a week of this excitement she discovered that what she thought
was Yoo-hoo, the chocolate drink, was in fact an Internet company
called Yahoo!. There was no reason to sell the stock now because
even though it was not the company she thought is was in the first
place, she was making money with this fortunate mistake. In fact, she
was making a lot of money, so she held on. Three years and a series
of stock splits later, this $200,000 investment turned into a $23 million dollar windfall. This was the good part of this unusual story, but
it didn’t stay good for Diane because her emotional attachment later
caused her to ignore sound risk management advice.
We discussed with Diane the possibility of moving out of this
Yahoo! position and into a more diverse bond portfolio. When she

c02.indd 43

11/2/07 12:14:58 PM

44

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

turned down that idea, we discussed protecting the position with
stop loss orders and protective puts to lock in this massive profit.
The stock started to show signs of weakness as Internet stocks
across the board starting breaking down below key support levels.
Does this story sound familiar? Instead of removing herself from the
emotional bond she developed with this company, Diane decided to
go on a world cruise instead. To make matters even worse, Diane borrowed money from the margin side of her account to purchase land
in Boca Raton, Florida, before leaving on her extended vacation.
Upon coming back from her cruise around the world, Diane was
welcomed by the news of the Internet bubble bursting and a letter
from her broker informing her that she was in a margin call. This
meant that the money she had in her account, which was pure profit
when she left on her cruise, turned into a huge debt owed to her
broker for the land that she purchased in south Florida. We can’t
say that this story had a tragic ending because Diane was still able
to hold onto $2 million of her $23 million. If you consider that she
started by investing $200,000, she still did better than if she had
bought Yoo-hoo.
Why do so many people decide to hold on when things get tough?
This goes back to what we talked about in Pavlov’s dogs. Greed does
a funny thing to us without us even realizing it, and if you are not
careful, the same things can happen to you. In the examples of the
people we’ve talked about, these individuals were able to pull their
financial lives together and live happily ever after. But what about
those individuals who have suffered and continue to suffer real
heartache because greed got the best of them?
After years in this business, we find that the stories are endless.
Like Andrew in Michigan, who lost all of his mother’s life insurance benefit because he decided to hold on to a stock even though
the stock was losing money year after year in a steady downward
spiral. Robert, in New York, sold a Wonder Bread route that he
spent 25 years building for retirement only to cash in and put all
of his $600,000 life savings in the market so he could turn it into
millions. Not only did he lose all of it, but he lost his marriage,
his children abandoned him, and later his health suffered greatly
because of the stress of having to deal with this financial catastrophe. We tell these stories as often as possible so that others like you
don’t fall into the same trap.

c02.indd 44

11/2/07 12:14:58 PM

Are You Out of Your Mind?

45

Mind Your Emotions
Removing your emotions when it comes time to invest or trade in
the market can be as easy as learning how to read a price chart. The
Market Guys have embraced the idea of simplicity, and in the next
chapter we will talk about the first and most important point of the
Five Points for Trading Success: Follow the Money Trail. This means
putting your money where the money is going. If you learn how to
do this well, then the decisions will be easier and a lot of stress will
be avoided. Learn how to profit by moving with the momentum,
like Dan and Lesley. But also learn from people like Steve, Diane,
Andrew, and Robert, who let greed get the best of them. It’s all
a matter you of how you develop your trader’s mind-set.

c02.indd 45

11/2/07 12:14:59 PM

c02.indd 46

11/2/07 12:14:59 PM

I

P O I N T

FOLLOW THE MONEY TRAIL
Identify the Trend

c03.indd 47

11/2/07 12:16:11 PM

c03.indd 48

11/2/07 12:16:12 PM

3

C H A P T E R

It Pays to Be Trendy
P UT T IN G Y O UR MO N EY WITH THE MONEY

T

he debate has raged for years about the validity of trends in
the markets. In 1973, Burton Malkiel published his classic tome,
A Random Walk Down Wall Street (New York: W. W. Norton), which
essentially makes the case that past stock prices have no bearing on
future price direction. He makes the claim that at any given point in
time, a stock price has equal probability of rising or falling; therefore,
any in-depth analysis is fruitless. The prevailing long-term trend is
upward, but short-term movements within the broad trend are random. Over 20 years later, Andrew Lo and A. Craig MacKinlay began
presenting statistical evidence to the contrary and eventually published their own counter title, A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999). Indeed, certain
correlations may be found and the possibility of outperforming the
broad market due to factors other than luck exists.
We want to clearly state at this point that we will not be presenting statistical models as the basis for this, the first point in The Market
Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success. Having seen that statistics will tend
to sing any desired song when the underlying data have been sufficiently tortured, we are offering this chapter based on our empirical
observations rather than a comprehensive financial theory. In the
simplest terms, this is how we’ve traded on and off the trading floor
for over a quarter century and it’s worked for us. As far as we’ve

49

c03.indd 49

11/2/07 12:16:12 PM

50

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

been able to discern, any proof of random markets or weaknesses in
technical analysis will not require us to return any of our profits from
trading the markets.

The Crowd May Be Wrong, but They’re
Still the Crowd
Before we talk about trends, including how they’re formed and
why they persist, let’s take a micro view of a single trade. In its most
basic form, a trade is simply the pairing of a buyer and a seller. It’s
been said that the buyer buys because he expects the price to rise
while the seller sells because he expects the price to fall. Therefore,
the conclusion is that one party or the other is always wrong. This
doesn’t take into account the reasons behind a trade, though. Take,
for example, a situation where a trader has 10,000 shares of stock
that was purchased at a price that was 50 percent of the current level.
This trader owns stock that has doubled in value. After reviewing the
technical indicators on a chart, it appears that the stock is highly
extended from its moving average support line. However, the stock
is still showing strength as each day’s close is higher than the previous day’s close. If this trader truly believed that the price was going
to drop in the next trading session, it would be reasonable to expect
him to sell his entire position. Instead, the trader sells a portion of
his position and keeps the remainder open to take advantage of any
move higher in the stock price.
In this example, the trader is not necessarily expecting the
price to fall. Rather, he is managing risk by locking in some of his
profits. He started as a speculator by assuming risk in the market
and he is now lowering his risk by lowering his exposure to loss of
profits in the event the price should fall. It’s important to make this
distinction because the reasons people buy and sell are more complex than just watching two sides make a wild guess at the direction
of the next trade price. The swings between traders assuming risk
and traders transferring risk are at the heart of trends in the market. Now multiply this single trade by many thousands or millions
of transactions and we see the trend wave forming. Note that we’re
not advocating always looking for the reasons behind the trend in
technical analysis, but rather attempting to understand why trends
rise and fall.

c03.indd 50

11/2/07 12:16:12 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

51

Dow Theory
Charles Dow introduced his theory of the markets back in the early
1900s, but more than a hundred years passed before investors and
money managers alike realized how important technical analysis was
for managing risk in the marketplace. Charts are what we rely on to
help remove the emotions from the decision-making process, and
these are the tools The Market Guys use to trade the markets.
Whether you are a seasoned investor who has spent many years
taking risk in the market or one who is just starting out on a journey into the world of trading, you should make it a point to review
Mr. Dow’s ideas as often as possible. We do our best to discuss the
tenets of Dow Theory whenever we can. Although there are many
who argue the relevance of Dow Theory, we believe that following
the trends will give you the highest probability of making money
in the markets. In every seminar we give, you can count on the fact
that we will be looking at charts. Trend analysis is the basis of how
we pick stocks, and analyzing these trends helps us establish our risk
points. There is a lot of truth to the old saying, “Repetition is the best
teacher.” If you apply these simple concepts to every chart you look
at, you will eventually become a master technician yourself.
Charles Dow made a simple observation that eventually propelled him to be one of the greatest analysts of all time. He recognized that there were certain companies in the United States that
were the driving forces behind the U.S. economy. He believed that if
he measured the progress of the companies that were responsible
for stimulating the overall growth, he would have a leading indicator for investors. So, on July 3, 1884, the Dow Jones Company, which
published the Wall Street Journal, introduced 12 companies and the
Dow Jones Industrial Average was born. Twelve years later, the editors got together and added more stocks to the index in order to get
better insight into the driving forces of the economy at the time. The
index is reassessed every few years to ensure that the average reflects
the blue-chip sector of the market. Following is a list of the original
Dow stocks that made up the Industrial Average in July 1884.
The Original Dow Jones Industrial Average, July 3, 1884
Chicago & North Western
Union Pacific
Delaware, Lackawanna & Western

c03.indd 51

11/2/07 12:16:12 PM

52

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Missouri Pacific
Lake Shore
Louisville & Nashville
New York Central
Pacific Mail
St. Paul
Western Union
Northern Pacific preferred
You can see by looking at these companies what the nature of
the economy was at the time, and although today’s index looks a lot
different, you will still see in it the “blue chips” that are the driving
our present-day economy.
Today the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) is a priceweighted average of 30 stocks traded on the New York Stock
Exchange (NY SE) and the Nasdaq. Often referred to as “the Dow,”
the DJIA is the oldest and single most watched index in the world.
Many times, you will hear financial commentators say “the market”
is up today, or “the market’ is down, and most of the time they are
referring to the Dow. The Dow is so popular that many investors
believe this index represents the whole of the U.S. markets. This, of
course, is not true, but it is amazing to see how many other markets
around the world react to the Dow when it is the highlight of the
day. The current Dow 30 is listed below.
The Current Dow Jones Industrial Average
3M Company (MMM)
Alcoa Inc. (AA)
Altria Group, Inc. (MO)
American Express Co. (AXP)
American International Group (AIG)
AT&T Inc. (T)
Boeing Co. (BA)
Caterpillar, Inc. (CAT)
Citigroup Inc. (C)
Coca-Cola Co. (KO)

c03.indd 52

11/2/07 12:16:12 PM

It Pays to Be Trendy

53

DuPont (E. I.) deNemours (DD)
Exxon Mobil Corp. (XOM)
General Electric Co. (GE)
General Motors (GM)
Hewlett-Packard Co. (HPQ)
Home Depot, Inc. (HD)
Honeywell International, Inc. (HON)
Intel Corp. (INTC)
International Business Machines (IBM)
JPMorgan Chase & Co. (JPM)
Johnson & Johnson ( JNJ)
McDonalds Corp. (MCD)
Merck & Co., Inc. (MRK)
Microsoft Corp. (MSFT)
Pfizer Inc. (PFE)
Procter & Gamble Co. (PG)
United Technologies Corp. (UTX)
Verizon Communications Inc. (VZ)
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (WMT)
Walt Disney Co. (DIS)
In 1916 the number of stocks making up the Dow increased
to 20, and in 1928 the number increased once again to a total of
30 stocks. General Electric is the only original member left in the
index, although it was dropped a couple of times, then reinstated
between 1898 and 1907. The Dow is the oldest continuing U.S. index
and remains with us as a constant reminder of the man who brought
us technical analysis, Charles Dow.
One of the tenets discussed in Dow Theory is that the markets
have three trends: up, down, and sideways. We find this to be the
most important of the six tenets because it helps us position our
money in the direction of the money flow. In other words, if you
want to make money in the market, then make sure you are putting
your money where the money is going. Going with the money flow
means we should be buying in the direction of the trend.

c03.indd 53

11/2/07 12:16:13 PM

54

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

This shouldn’t be too hard to understand, yet you would be
surprised to see just how many people buy stocks that are in downtrends. People all over the world try to buy stocks that are at bottom
prices because we are all programmed, from a very young age, to
think that buying anything at a lower price is good. If you have ever
gone shopping at a department store, you may have noticed that
shoppers everywhere are attracted to the word sale. Many who have
bought a new car tell us that they’ve spent long hours learning how
to negotiate a good price before they’ve even entered the car dealership. If you have ever bought a new car for yourself, you know exactly
what we are talking about here. If you are planning to purchase a
car, this usually means you are going to experience sales pressure,
and if you are not a good negotiator, you will most likely pay a higher
price for that automobile than a buyer who is prepared and knows
how to deal with the salesperson. Either way, we know that we are
going to try to talk the salesperson down on the price, and when
we finally do manage to negotiate a price that feels good, we think
we’ve gotten a bargain. As a result of these behavior patterns, we are
conditioned to buy low.
After many years of this conditioning, we assume that this is the
way we should shop for stocks. But when we apply these same buying strategies to the stock market, we lose money and wonder why.
Changing a thought process like this is a lot like trying to break a
bad habit. It’s not as easy as it sounds, and although buying stocks
that are trading at 52-week lows sounds like a good idea, it is not.
The better idea is to buy stocks that are on 52-week highs. It almost
seems unnatural to prefer paying a higher price for anything, yet
we must convince ourselves to think this way when we are trading because we are not shopping—we are trading for profit. If you
want to make money in the market, you will have to understand
that growth companies and growth stocks are most likely going
to set new highs each and every week. So buying a stock like this
shouldn’t be too scary, especially if you know there is a good chance
that it will go higher. Another way to look at this is to realize that
stocks on their 52-week lows will most likely reach another new low,
so buying a stock in this condition will most likely cost you money.
Let’s face it, is your buy order really going to change the minds of
all those people who have been selling this stock throughout the
year? Instead of trying to buy low and sell high, which is what most
people think of as a good plan, go ahead and tell yourself that you
