Meeting the strict requirements
A trading system is a mechanical trading system when it dictates every single
decision, leaving no latitude for the operator to inject a subjective decision.
Definitions for a mechanical trading system vary, but most systems designers
would agree on the bare minimum:
✓ You backtested every indicator and combination of indicators over a
large set of historical data and have determined that the indicator set
generates a favorable gain-loss ratio.
✓ The system contains enough trading rules so that whatever the contingency, you never need to make a judgment call. You have already
provided directions ahead of time. As noted in a previous section, this
really cannot be done in full. Why? Because of what Nassim Nicholas
Taleb named black swans — highly improbable events. Do traders ever
get a new black swan? In other words, an event shock of a type never
seen before? Maybe not. Human history is a long affair and perhaps
nothing is ever really new. But programming every contingency into
trading rules is a vast and probably impossible task.
✓ You follow the system without fail and without overriding the signals
by using judgment. You take every trade that the system gives you, if
only because you never know which signal is the one that’ll generate the
juicy profit. And in most systems, the successful backtest track record
depends on those big profits to offset many small losses.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 17: Considering a Trading System
Building a mechanical trading system is a major undertaking that requires
knowledge of statistics, computing, and risk management as well as technical trading methods. You could spend years developing a comprehensive
mechanical trading system, and many people do.

Finding your place on the spectrum
You don’t have to embrace a fully mechanized computer program-based
system to be a technical trader. But when you take losses, you start imagining that some indicator, rule, or risk-management concept might have
saved you from the loss, so you think you should trade more systematically.
Yearning for more systematic trading is especially heartbreaking if you have
a spectacular winning year and then a losing one, and honestly can’t remember how you did it in the winning year.
You can start small. The first step is to review various indicators and their
associated trading rules. You can develop a buy/sell system fairly easily,
choosing indicators that seem logical and workable to you, and then adjust
the trading rules until you get a satisfactory hypothetical gain-and-loss profile.
Hypothetical is the right word because the chief reason to combine techniques
in a trading system is to backtest indicators and trading rules to see how they
would have worked in the past. I discuss backtesting in Chapter 4. For all its
faults, backtesting is the only way to know whether an indicator works on
your security. After you find good indicators and rules, you can take them out
for a trial run in real time.

Discovering Why Mechanical
Systems Fail
Training yourself to be a fully systematic trader is hard. The virtue of a welldesigned trading system is that real-time results come in as the backtest leads
you to expect. The challenge of a mechanical trading system is . . . you.
You have to trade exactly as the system dictates in order to duplicate test
results. For some, following every single system dictate is impossible. More
than one advanced system designer has had to give day-to-day control of
trading his system to another party, because he can’t help second-guessing
it. Here are some ideas to help you sidestep some of the common pitfalls of
mechanical trading systems.

www.pdfdummies.com

287

288 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Fooling around with new ideas
Mechanical trading systems often fail because the trader can’t resist fiddling
with system components — either indicators or rules. Most traders’ systems
are never really finished. They evolve as the trader experiments with new
ideas. The problem with new techniques is that people are impatient and try
to fit the new idea into an existing system without fully backtesting it — or
sometimes without backtesting it at all. Even experienced technical traders
(late at night, after a few martinis) confess to reading about a new idea or
hearing about it at a conference, and running right back home to trade it —
using actual money. Needless to say, this decision usually ends in tears.

Backtesting until you’re blue in the face
To find the “perfect” parameter for your indicator on your securities, you can
spend countless hours backtesting. No sooner do you discover the ideal parameters than market volatility shifts, and the parameter is no longer optimum.
A lot of indicator testing is just spinning your wheels. Indicator signal accuracy isn’t 100 percent reliable to begin with, and fiddling with indicators never
cures the accuracy problem. To add more indicators to “fix” the shortcomings
of an existing indicator can result in excessive complexity without a commensurate improvement in accuracy. The one exception is if you’re able to make
your indicators more adaptive to market conditions, either arithmetically or
with filters or additional indicators.
Performing backtesting research while working toward a fully automated trading
system has two virtues. You not only find out about indicator effectiveness and
reliability, but you also get the opportunity to refine your money-management
rules.
Before you spend a zillion hours adding or perfecting indicators, remember
that your goal isn’t to have the perfect indicator; your goal is to make money.
You spend time more wisely by perfecting your money-management rules
than by backtesting indicators until 2 a.m. Maybe nothing is wrong with your
indicators — it may be your risk management that needs work. See Chapter 5
for a discussion of managing the trade.

Not knowing your time frame
No rule is always right. Technical analysis contains rules that are valid in the
context of their own time frame but work a whole lot less well in a different
time frame. Candlesticks (see Chapter 8), for example, tend to be most effective in a short time frame (intraday or three to five days). If your preference
is for trades lasting many months, you need indicators and risk-management
rules that match up to that time frame.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 17: Considering a Trading System

Practicing self sabotage
The success of technical trading systems is due to one characteristic — they
keep you in winning trades for a relatively long time while getting you out of
losing trades relatively quickly. Therefore, over a large number of trades, your
profit exceeds your losses. In this sense, fully systematic technical trading is a
numbers game.
While a mechanical system imparts confidence in the eventual profit-and-loss
profile over some period of time, it has the drawback of occasionally being
wrong on any single trade. Sometimes you can see the wrong trade coming,
which makes you want to override the signal. To override technical signals
is called discretion. Discretion is an innocent-sounding word, but in fact, it’s
dynamite. To exercise discretion means to abandon your hard-earned, highprobability systematic trading signals in favor of personal judgment.
Just about every technical trader allows himself the luxury of discretion to
some extent. Professionals tend to exercise discretion a lot more than nonprofessionals. System purists point out that to override signals is to defeat
the purpose of having a system, while experienced traders say they have a
“gut feel” about when a signal is bad.
Overriding system signals is the main way that traders sabotage themselves.
Sabotage can take the form of overtrading (trading too often) or being unable
to pull the trigger (indecisiveness), despite clear directions from your own
system on what to do.
One of the chief reasons to use technical analysis and a systematic approach
to trading is to give yourself a break from emotion. You may get away with a
little overriding once in a while if you have good instincts, but if you do it on
more than a few rare occasions (in other words, more than a quarter of your
trades), you’re still a technical trader but no longer a system trader.
Because you can’t backtest judgment, the only way to evaluate discretionary
overrides is to keep a diary and write down every override you want to do.
Every so often, go back and do an honest accounting of your judgment. A trading diary is a prose rendering of what you’re seeing on the chart. Print out the
chart and write your override idea on it. Then a few periods later, print out the
chart showing what happened.
A trading diary has many benefits:
✓ You get ideas about additions to your system to overcome a shortcoming.
The diary becomes a wish list. Then while perusing the technical literature,
you can see a gem when you come across it — it’s the solution to an issue
on your wish list.
✓ You may discover that your eye was detecting patterns that math-based
indicators don’t catch. If you had a feeling that you should stop out a

www.pdfdummies.com

289

290 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
position but your indicators didn’t agree, and in retrospect you can see
a pattern that was correct, you may have a hidden talent for patterns.
See Chapters 7 and 9 for more about patterns.
✓ You discover personal characteristics you didn’t know about yourself
(and may or may not like). A common finding is that you saw a continuing trend because you wanted to see it and willfully ignored reversal
warnings from other indicators that were present on the chart.

Following Big-Picture Rules
Having a positive expectancy of a gain is the key element of taking a trade
(for more on this topic, see Chapter 16). Whether you’re aiming for a full trading system or working more informally toward a more systematic approach,
this section gives you a short list of other considerations that have a big
impact on overall long-term profitability.

Stopping out versus the stop-and-reverse
Stopping out is a function of having met the maximum loss you’re willing to
take. When the stop is hit, you have to decide whether to go short. Hitting
a stop doesn’t necessarily mean you want to reverse direction. Maybe you
prefer to be out of the market altogether. As a practical matter, most individual traders are buy only and never go short.
Some professionals are required by the rules of their firms to be in the
market nearly all the time. They’re not “working” if they’re not trading.
Individuals don’t bear this burden. The flip side is that when you’re out of
the market, you’re potentially missing an opportunity.

Trading more than one security
You may have a valid and systematic way to trade a single security, but you
still face a high risk of loss due to a one-time catastrophe. The obvious solution is to apply your systematic trading regime to a broader array of securities. Diversification reduces risk. When one security is falling in price, some
other security is rising. A solid track record may require offsetting some
losses with gains in an inversely correlated or noncorrelated security.
A good portfolio is diversified, and so are good trading systems. Using spreadsheet software, you can easily discover whether any two securities are correlated. Or you can plot both securities on the same chart and eyeball whether
they move in tandem. If they do, you may not have to dump one if you can find
something else that is inversely correlated. The process of diversification is

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 17: Considering a Trading System
named portfolio optimization. Portfolio optimization isn’t, strictly speaking, a
technical analysis idea, but it’s a natural extension of the systematic approach
to trading.
Optimization may make for some strange bedfellows. Don’t reject a noncorrelated security on fundamental grounds and pass up the opportunity to
smooth your earnings path. You don’t have to like the security to trade it
successfully. If you’re building an equity system and find that adding soybean
futures would reduce total system risk by half, then resign yourself to finding
out how to trade soybean futures.
The same thing is true when you buy a system that requires you to trade
each security of a basket of securities. If you cherry-pick the securities,
you’re violating a core principle of the trading strategy — its diversification.
Diversification may be its best feature on which results depend. See the section “Buying a Trading System” later in this chapter.
Don’t forget that correlation or the absence of correlation is not written in
stone. Two securities that are uncorrelated today may become highly correlated at some point in the future. Keep your correlation data updated.

Don’t trade on too little capital
A good system designer acknowledges that every system takes losses, and
the trader must have enough capital to remain standing afterward. If the
system is capable of generating a $3,000 loss, the minimum capital required
to trade the system is obviously higher than $3,000. You must know in
advance the amount of money you could lose on any single trade, named
a drawdown. Whether you’re building your own system or buying one, you
should know the expected average drawdown and the expected maximum
drawdown.
A standard rule is the Turtle rule — never risk more than 2 percent of total
capital on any single trade. In practice, the maximum drawdown many traders
accept is 20 to 30 percent of capital, or ten times the conservative amount.
You can take only three or four worst-case losses in a row before you’re out
of business. Alas, this happens all too often because many brokers encourage
newcomers to trade with a small capital stake and high leverage.
This situation is particularly prevalent in foreign exchange trading, where you
can open an account with $1,000 and control (say) $20,000 in face value of contracts. If you applied the 2 percent rule using your true capital, your stop loss
would have to be $20, which is two points in a currency futures contract like
the Canadian dollar. The Canadian dollar has an average daily range of about
80 points, so you can forget about using the average true range (see Chapter 5)
as a guide or indicator. The stop is obviously unrealistically tight — you will get
stopped on the first random move. Instead of accepting that $1,000 is too little

www.pdfdummies.com

291

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

292 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
capital to trade, beginners widen their stops. But widening the stop is a mistake
when it’s done for this reason. One thousand dollars is simply too small an
amount.

Buying a Trading System
You may see ads for trading systems that promise huge returns, practically
no risk, and 80 percent accuracy on trade recommendations. Never forget
that if it sounds too good to be true, it’s not true. These trading systems are
usually black boxes, which are systems that claim to select high-probability
trades but don’t reveal the trading rules and indicators that the system uses.
The promotional material may say that the inner workings of the system are
self-adaptive (it’s a “neural network” that “learns” from its own mistakes) and
is simply too complex to display.
Even in the case of a self-adapting system, chances are that the system
worked well on certain securities in a certain time frame in the past. But
that’s no guarantee that it is working today, will work in the future, will work
on the securities you like, or will work for you. You have to ask yourself why
anyone would sell such a gold mine to you (at any price) instead of keeping it
to himself. This section can help you avoid these too-good-to-be-true trading
systems and find one that can work for you.

Overcoming phony track records
If you choose to buy a trading system, be aware that crooks and charlatans
are found in the technical analysis business just as they are in any other
business. You see fraudulent track records, track records that mysteriously
include only certain periods, and other chicanery. One trick is to adjust the
track record by excluding the performance of securities in a portfolio when
they produce losses in the period, but to add them back when they produce
gains. You can see through this financial foolishness by doing the following:
✓ Get disclosure of all the indicators and rules and verify results yourself by testing the system on the same historical data as the vendor’s
track record. Make sure that you get data covering several years, and
verify that the prices shown on the vendor’s track record actually
existed on each trade date.
✓ Examine the vendor’s actual brokerage statements, if possible. If the
vendor doesn’t trade his own system and disclose real-life results, why
not? To be fair, some system designers may have some good reasons why
he doesn’t trade his own system, including a fondness for systems and
deep dislike of the trading process. Forget testimonials. Everyone has a
Cousin Fred who will say the system is fabulous for the price of a pizza.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 17: Considering a Trading System
Evaluate carefully what it means if performance results are “hypothetical.”
Regulatory agencies require the hypothetical label if the vendor doesn’t have
brokerage statements. But this requirement applies equally to systems published in real time for same- or next-day day execution and systems that are
only curve-fitted to the past. Any 12-year-old can “fit” trading indicators to historical data to produce 100 percent plus gains. A system that gives you trading
signals, with stops and targets, for tomorrow’s market and then calculates a
track record on this outcome is a better bet.

Looking under the hood
Only a few system vendors are crooks. Most are perfectly legit. Still, you want
to get good value for money spent. You want
✓ Original ideas that are fully disclosed: In some cases, you could pay
$250 to $5,000, only to get nothing more than a formula or two that you
could have acquired free from a book or the Internet. Often the vendor
has a near-religious attachment to some theory of price movements that
is unproven or unprovable. You’re welcome to share beliefs, but remember that technical analysis is an empirical exercise. If a belief doesn’t
translate into profitable trading outcomes, why pay for it?
✓ Scalability, which means that you can trade the system with a variable amount of money, including small amounts: Some trading systems
require $50,000 or $100,000 in risk capital, amounts that are unrealistically high for a newcomer. Usually the vendor has a good reason for
requiring so much capital — the system depends on diversification
among many securities to get the published track record, for example,
or the system tends to generate big drawdowns. If you buy a high-capital
requirement system but then allocate too little money to it, you must
cherry-pick the trades, defeating the core concept.
✓ Fully defined money-management rules: Most trading systems don’t
contain money-management rules and leave so much decision making
up to the user that duplicating the advertised track record is virtually
impossible. At the very least, a trading system should tell you the recommended entry and exit (stop and target). An estimate of riskiness and
advice on adding and subtracting from positions would be nice, too.

Picking the Tool, Not the Security
Say that you just arrived from another planet, and you have no attachment
to the concept of blue chip stocks and no difficulty seeing soybean futures in
the same light as IBM or the Swiss franc. To you, a security is a security, and
you care nothing about its underlying value or fundamental characteristics.

www.pdfdummies.com

293

294 Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
Welcome to the realm of professional traders, chartists, and system designers. They all have a peculiar and wonderful ability to see a price as just a
price. Using this mind-set, you’re free to pick indicators and securities without regard for fuddy-duddy ideas of what is “proper.” Who knows? Maybe
your talent is for applying candlesticks to silver futures when you thought
you wanted to trade equities.
An accomplished technical trader can sit in front of a live price screen and
before an hour is out, spot a method to trade the security. Even if he’s an
equities trader and you’re showing him the Japanese yen, he can “read” the
price action. You can do this, too, if you focus on the tools and not on the
security.
Rather than seeking the best indicators to trade your favorite securities,
consider finding good indicators and matching the securities to them. If your
only goal is to make money by using technical indicators, why not reverse the
usual order? The process goes by several different names, the most generic
of which is scanning. You scan a universe of securities to find the ones that fit
the criteria you specify. Each technical analysis software package has its own
name and method of scanning. Say you like the breakout concept. You can tell
the software to search or explore for every security in your database that has
just risen above its 20-day moving average. Now you have a candidate list of
securities to check out for other technical criteria.
That list will be too large, of course, so next you seek out the securities that
have other characteristics that suit your indicators and risk preference, such
as a volatility filter. Note that some software vendors have scanning capability
for fundamental characteristics, too.

www.pdfdummies.com

Part VI

The Part of Tens

www.pdfdummies.com

E

In this part . . .

very trade has two parts — the security and its technical characteristics, and you. After you master a few
key concepts, exactly how you apply technical methods is
a matter of personal preference. No one technical method
is “right” — the right method is the one that consistently
makes you more money than you lose. To do that, your
chosen method must match up with your risk profile and
be practical — you have to be able to execute it.
This part — the legendary Part of Tens — gives you easily
digestible tips and tricks to do just that. I cover some of
the tricks of the trade many top-performing traders use on
a daily basis, as well as some basic rules for “playing well”
with indicators. Finally, I wrap up this part with ten ways
that the market has changed and what that means for
technical analysis and you.
