
END OF BRETTON WOODS: FREE MARKET CAPITALISM IS
BORN (1971)
On August 15, 1971, it became official: the Bretton Woods system, a system
used to fix the value of a currency to the value of gold, was abandoned once and for
all. While it had been exorcised before, only to subsequently emerge in a new form,
this final eradication of the Bretton Woods system was truly its last stand: no longer
would currencies be fixed in value to gold, allowed to fluctuate only in a 1 percent
range, but instead their fair valuation could be determined by free market behavior
such as trade flows and foreign direct investment.
While U.S. President Nixon was confident that the end of the Bretton Woods
system would bring about better times for the international economy, he was not a
believer that the free market could dictate a currency's true valuation in a fair and
catastrophe-free manner. Nixon, as well as most economists, reasoned that an entirely
unstructured foreign exchange market would result in competing devaluations, which
in turn would lead to the breakdown of international trade and investment. The end
result, Nixon and his board of economic advisers reasoned, would be global
depression.
Accordingly, a few months later, the Smithsonian Agreement was introduced.
Hailed by President Nixon as the "greatest monetary agreement in the history of the
world," the Smithsonian Agreement strived to maintain fixed exchange rates, but to
do so without the backing of gold. Its key difference from the Bretton Woods system
was that the value of the dollar could float in a range of 2.25 percent, as opposed to
just 1 percent under Bretton Woods.
18

Ultimately, the Smithsonian Agreement proved to be unfeasible as well. Without
exchange rates fixed to gold, the free market gold price shot up to $215 per ounce.
Moreover, the U.S. trade deficit continued to grow, and from a fundamental
standpoint, the U.S. dollar needed to be devalued beyond the 2.25 percent parameters
established by the Smithsonian Agreement. In light of these problems the foreign
exchange markets were forced to close in February 1972.
The forex markets reopened in March 1973, and this time they were not bound
by a Smithsonian Agreement: the value of the U.S. dollar was to be determined
entirely by the market, as its value was not fixed to any commodity, nor was its
exchange rate fluctuation confined to certain parametric. While this did provide the
U.S. dollar, and other currencies by default, the agility required to adapt to a new and
rapidly evoking international trading environment, it also set the stage for
unprecedented inflation. The end of Bretton Woods and the Smithsonian Agreement,
as well as conflicts in the Middle East resulting in substantially higher oil prices,
helped to create stagflation—the synthesis of unemployment and inflation—in the
U.S. economy. It would not be until later in the decade, when Federal Reserve
Chairman Paul Volcker initiated new economic policies and President Ronald
Reagan introduced a new fiscal agenda, that the U.S. dollar would return to normal
valuations. And by then, the foreign exchange markets had thoroughly developed,
and were now capable of serving a multitude of purposes: in addition to employing a
laissez-faire style of regulation for international trade, they also were beginning to
attract speculators seeking to participate in a market with unrivaled liquidity and
continued growth. Ultimately, the death of Bretton Woods in 1971 marked the
beginning of a new economic era, one that liberated international trading while also
proliferating speculative opportunities.

PLAZA ACCORD—DEVALUATION OF U.S. DOLLAR (198S)
After the demise of all the various exchange rate regulatory mechanisms that
characterized the twentieth century—the gold standard, the Bretton Woods standard,
and the Smithsonian Agreement—the currency market was left with virtually no
regulation other than the mythical "invisible hand" of free market capitalism, one that
supposedly strived to create economic balance through supply and demand.
Unfortunately, due to a number of unforeseen economic events—such as the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil crises, stagflation
throughout the 1970s, and drastic changes in the U.S. Federal Reserve's fiscal
policy—supply and demand, in and of themselves, became insufficient means by
which the currency markets could be regulated. A system of sorts was needed, but
not one that was inflexible. Fixation of currency values to a commodity, such as gold,
proved to be too rigid for economic development, as was also the notion of fixing
maximum exchange rate fluctuations. The balance between structure and rigidity was
cute that had plagued the currency markets throughout the twentieth century, and
while advancements had been made, a definitive solution was still greatly needed.
And hence in 1985, the respective ministers of finance and central bank
governors of the world's leading economies—France, Germany. Japan, the United
Kingdom, and the United Slates—convened in New York City with the hopes of
arranging a diplomatic agreement of sorts that would work to optimize the economic
19

effectiveness of the foreign exchange markets. Meeting at the Plaza Hotel, the
international leaders came to certain agreements regarding specific economies and
the international economy as a whole.
Across the world, inflation was at very low levels. In contrast to the stagflation
of the 1970s where inflation was high and real economic growth was low—the global
economy in 1985 had done a complete 180-degree turn, as inflation was now low but
growth was strong.
While low inflation, even when coupled with robust economic growth, still
allowed for low interest rates—a circumstance developing countries particularly
enjoyed—there was an imminent danger of protectionist policies like tariffs entering
the economy. The United States was experiencing a large and growing current
account deficit, while Japan and Germany were facing large and growing surpluses.
An imbalance so fundamental in nature could create serious economic
disequilibrium, which in turn would result in a distortion of the foreign exchange
markets and thus the international economy.
The results of current account imbalances, and the protectionist policies that
ensued, required action. Ultimately, it was believed that the rapid acceleration in the
value of the U.S. dollar, which appreciated more than 80 percent against the
currencies of its major trading partners, was the primary culprit. The rising value of
the U.S. dollar helped to create enormous trade deficits. A dollar with a lower
valuation, on the other hand, would be more conducive to stabilizing the international
economy, as if would naturally bring about a greater balance between the exporting
and importing capabilities of all countries.
At the meeting in the Plaza Hotel, the United States persuaded the other
attendees to coordinate a multilateral intervention, and on September 22, 1985, the
Plaza Accord was implemented. This agreement was designed to allow for a
controlled decline of the dollar and the appreciation of the main antidollar currencies.
Each country agreed to changes to its economic policies and to intervene in currency
markets as necessary to gel the dollar down. The United Slates agreed to cut its
budget deficit and to lower interest rates. France, the United Kingdom, Germany, and
Japan all agreed to raise interest rates, Germany also agreed to institute tax cuts while
Japan agreed to let the value of the yen "fully reflect the underlying strength of the
Japanese economy." However, the problem with the actual implementation of the
Plaza Accord was that not every country adhered to its pledges. The United Stales in
particular did not follow through with its initial promise to cut the budget deficit.
Japan was severely hurt by the sharp rise in the yen, and its exporters were unable to
remain competitive overseas, and it is argued that this eventually triggered a 10-year
recession in Japan. The United Slates, in contrast, enjoyed considerable growth and
price stability as a result of the agreement.
The effects of the multilateral intervention were seen immediately, and within
two years the dollar had fallen 46 percent and 50 percent against the deutsche mark
(DEM) and the Japanese yen (JPY), respectively. Figure 2-1 shows this depreciation
of the U.S. dollar against the DEM and the JPY. The U.S. economy became far more
export-oriented as a result, while other industrial countries like Germany and Japan
assumed the role of importing. This gradually resolved the current account deficits
for the time being, and also ensured that protectionist policies were minimal and
20

nonthreatening. But perhaps most importantly, the Plaza Accord cemented the role of
the central banks in regulating exchange rate movement: yes, the rates would not be
fixed, and hence would be determined primarily by supply and demand; but
ultimately, such an invisible hand is insufficient, and it was the right and responsibility of the worlds central banks to intervene on behalf of the international economy
when necessary.

Figure 2.1 Plaza Accord Price Action

GEORGE SOROS—THE MAN WHO BROKE THE BANK OF
ENGLAND
When George Soros placed a $10 billion speculative bet against the U.K. pound
and won, he became universally known as "the man who broke the Bank of
England." Whether you love him or hate him, Soros led the charge in one of the most
fascinating events in currency trading history.
The United Kingdom Joins the Exchange Rate Mechanism
In 1979, a Franco-German initiative set up the European Monetary System
(EMS) in order to stabilize exchange rates, reduce inflation, and prepare for monetary
integration. The Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), one of the EMS's main
components, gave each participatory currency a central exchange rate against a
basket of currencies, the European Currency Unit (ECU). Participants (initially
France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, and
Luxembourg) were then required to maintain their exchange rates within a 2.25
percent fluctuation band above or below each bilateral central rate. The ERM was an
adjustable-peg system, and nine realignments would occur between 1979 and 1985.
21

While the United Kingdom was not one of the original members, it would eventually
join in 1990 at a rate of 2.95 deutsche marks to the pound and with a fluctuation band
of +/- 6 percent.
Until mid-1992, the ERM appeared to be a success, as a disciplinary effect had
reduced inflation throughout Europe under the leadership of the German
Bundesbank. The stability wouldn't last, however, as international investors started
worrying that the exchange rate values of several currencies within the ERM were
inappropriate. Following German reunification in 1989, the nation’s government
spending surged, forcing the Bundesbank to print more money. This led to higher
inflation and left the German central hank with little choice but to increase interest
rates. But the rate hike had additional repercussions—because it placed upward
pressure on the German mark. This forced other central banks to raise their interest
rates as well, so as to maintain the pegged currency exchange rates (a direct application of Irving Fishers interest rate parity theory). Realizing that the United
Kingdom's weak economy and high unemployment rate would not permit the British
government to maintain this policy for long, George Soros stepped into action.
Soros Bets Against Success of U.K. Involvement in ERM
The Quantum hedge fund manager essentially wanted to bet that the pound
would depreciate because the United Kingdom would either devalue the pound or
leave the ERM. Thanks to the progressive removal of capital controls during the
EMS years, international investors at the time had more freedom than ever to take
advantage of perceived disequilibriums, so Soros established short positions in
pounds and long positions in marks by borrowing pounds and investing in markdenominated assets. He also made great use of options and futures. In all, his
positions accounted for a gargantuan $10 billion. Soros was not the only one: many
other investors soon followed suit. Everyone was selling pounds, placing tremendous
downward pressure on the currency.
At first, the Bank of England tried to defend the pegged rates by buying 15
billion pounds with its large reserve assets, but its sterilized interventions (whereby
the monetary base is held constant thanks to open market interventions) were limited
in their effectiveness. The pound was trading dangerously close to the lower levels of
its fixed band. On September 16, 1992, a day that would later be known as Black
Wednesday, the bank announced a 2 percent rise in interest rates (from 10 percent to
12 percent) in an attempt to boost the pound’s appeal. A few hours later, it promised
to raise rates again, to 15 percent, but international investors such as Soros could not
be swayed, knowing that huge profits were right around the corner. Traders kept
selling pounds in huge volumes, and the Bank of England kept buying them until,
finally, at 7:00 p.m. that same day, Chancellor Norman Lamont announced Britain
would leave the ERM and that rates would return to their initial level of 10 percent.
The chaotic Black Wednesday marked the beginning of a steep depreciation in the
pounds effective value.
Whether the return to a floating currency was due to the Soros-led attack on the
pound or because of simple fundamental analysis is still debated today. What is
certain, however is that the pound's depreciation of almost 15 percent against the
deutsche mark and 25 percent against the dollar over the next five weeks (as seen in
22

Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3) resulted in tremendous profits for Soros and other traders.
Within a month, the Quantum Fund rushed in on approximately $2 billion by selling
the now more expensive deutsche marks and buying back the now cheaper pounds.
“The man who broke the Bank of England” showed how central banks can still be
vulnerable to speculative attacks.

Figure 2.2 GBP/DEM After Soros

Figure 2.3 GBP/USD After Soros
ASIAN FINANCIAL CRISIS (1997-1998)
Falling like a set of dominos on July 2, 1997, the relatively nascent Asian tiger
economies created a perfect example in showing the interdependence of global
capital markets and their subsequent effects throughout international currency
forums. Based on several fundamental breakdowns, the cause of the contagion
stemmed largely from shrouded lending practices, inflated trade deficits, mid
23

immature capital markets. Added together, the factors contributed to a "perfect
storm" that left major regional markets incapacitated and once-prized currencies
devalued to significantly lower levels. With adverse effects easily seen in the equities
markets, currency market fluctuations were negatively impacted in much the same
manner during this time period.
The Bubble
Leading up to 1997, investors had become increasingly attracted to Asian
investment prospects, focusing on real estate development and domestic equities. As
a result, foreign investment capital flowed into the region as economic growth rates
climbed on improved production in countries like Malaysia, the Philippines,
Indonesia, and South Korea. Thailand, home of the baht, experienced a 13 percent
growth rate in 1988 (falling to 6.5 percent in 1996). Additional lending support for a
stronger economy came from the enactment of a fixed currency peg to the more
formidable U.S. dollar. With a fixed valuation to the greenback countries like
Thailand could ensure financial stability in their own markets and a constant rate for
export trading purposes with the world's latest economy. Ultimately, the regions
national currencies appreciated as underlying fundamentals were justified, and
speculative positions in expectation of further climbs in price mounted.
Ballooning Current Account Deficits and Nonperforming Loans
However, in early 1997, a shift in sentiment had begun to occur as international
account deficits became increasingly difficult for respective governments to handle
and lending practices were revealed to be detrimental to the economic infrastructure.
In particular, economists were alerted to the fact that Thailand's current account
deficit had ballooned in 1996 to $14.7 billion (it had been climbing since 1992).
Although comparatively smaller than the U.S. deficit, the gap represented 8 percent
of the country's gross domestic product. Shrouded lending practices also contributed
heavily to these breakdowns as close personal relationships of borrowers with highranking banking officials were well rewarded and surprisingly common throughout
the region. This aspect affected many of South Korea's highly leveraged
conglomerates as total nonperforming loan values sky-rocketed to 7.5 percent of
gross domestic product.
Additional evidence of these practices could be observed in financial institutions
throughout Japan. After announcing a $136 billion total in questionable and
nonperforming loans in 1994, Japanese authorities admitted to an alarming $400
billion total a year later. Coupled with a then crippled stock market, cooling real
estate values, and dramatic slowdowns in the economy, investors saw opportunity in
a depreciating yen. subsequently adding selling pressure to neighbor currencies.
When Japan's asset bubble collapsed, asset prices fell by $10 trillion, with the fall in
real estate prices accounting for nearly 65 percent of the total decline, which was
worth two years of national output. This fall in asset prices sparked the banking crisis
in Japan. It began in the early 1990s and then developed into a full-blown systemic
crisis in 1997 following the failure of a number of high-profile financial institutions.
In response, Japanese monetary authorities warned of potentially increasing benchmark interest rates in hopes of defending the domestic currency valuation.
24

Unfortunately, these considerations never materialized and a shortfall ensued.
Sparked mainly by an announcement of a managed float of the Thai baht, the slide
snowballed as central bank reserves evaporated and currency price levels became
unsustainable in light of downside selling pressure.
Currency Crisis
Following mass short speculation and attempted intervention, the aforementioned Asian economies were left ruined and momentarily incapacitated. The
Thailand baht, once a prized possession, was devalued by as much as 48 percent,
even slumping closer to a 100 percent fall at the turn of the New Year. The most
adversely affected was the Indonesian rupiah. Relatively stable prior to the onset of a
“crawling peg" with the Thai baht, the rupiah fell a whopping 228 percent from its
previous high of 12,950 to the fixed U.S. dollar. These particularly volatile price
actions are reflected in Figure 2.4. Among the majors, the Japanese yen fell
approximately 23 percent from its high to its low against the U.S. dollar in 1997 and
1998, its shown in Figure 2.5.

Figure 2.4 Asian Crisis Price Action
The financial crisis of 1997-1998 revealed the interconnectivity of economies
and their effects on the global currency markets. Additionally, it showed the inability
of central banks to successfully intervene in currency valuations when confronted
with overwhelming market forces along with the absence of secure economic
fundamentals. Today, with the assistance of IMF reparation packages and the
implementation of stricter requirements, Asia’s four little dragons are churning away
once again. With inflationary benchmarks and a revived exporting market, Southeast
Asia is building back its once prominent stature among the world’s industrialized
economic regions. With the experience of evaporating currency reserves under their

25

bells, the Asian tigers now take active initiatives to ensure that they have a large pot
of reserves on hand in ease speculators attempt to attack their currencies once again.

Figure 2.5 USD/JPY Asian Crisis Price Action

INTRODUCTION OF THE EURO (1999)
The introduction of the euro was a monumental achievement, marking the
largest monetary changeover ever. The euro was officially launched as an electronic
trading currency on January 1, 1999. The 11 initial member states of the European
Monetary Union (EMU) were Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, and Finland. Greece joined two
years later. Each country fixed its currency to a specific conversion rate against the
euro, and a common monetary' policy governed by the European Central Bank
(ECU) was adopted. To many economists, the system would ideally include all of the
original 15 European Union (EU) nations, but the United Kingdom, Sweden, and
Denmark decided to keep their own currencies for the time being. Euro notes and
coins did not begin circulation until the first two months of 2002. In deciding
whether to adopt the euro, EU members all had to weigh the pros and cons of such an
important decision.
While ease of traveling is perhaps the most salient issue to EMU citizens, the
euro also brings about numerous other benefits:
• It eliminates exchange rate fluctuations, thereby providing a more stable
environment to trade within the euro area.
• The purging of all exchange rate risk within the zone allows businesses to plan
investment derisions with greater certainty.
• Transaction costs diminish (mainly those relating to foreign exchange
operations, hedging operations, cross-border payments, and the management of
several currency accounts).
26

• Prices become more transparent as consumers and businesses can compare
prices across countries more easily. This, in turn, increase competition.
• The huge single currency market becomes more attractive for foreign
investors.
• The economy's magnitude and stability allow the ECB to control inflation with
lower interest rates thanks to increased credibility.
Yet the euro is not without its limitations, leaving aside political sovereignty
issues, the main problem is that, by adopting the euro, a nation essentially forfeits
any independent monetary policy. Since each country's economy is not perfectly
correlated to the EMU's economy, a nation might find the ECB hiking interest rates
during a domestic recession. This is especially true for many of the smaller nations.
As a result, countries try to rely more heavily on fiscal policy, but the efficiency of
fiscal policy is limited when it is not effectively combined with monetary policy.
This inefficiency is only further exacerbated by the 3 percent of GDP limit on budget
deficits, as stipulated by the Stability and Growth Pact.
Some concerns also exist regarding the ECB’s effectiveness as a central bank.
While its target inflation is slightly below 2 percent, the euro areas inflation edged
above the benchmark from 2000 to 2002, and has of late continued to surpass the
self-imposed objective. From 1999 to late 2002, a lack of confidence in the unions
currency (and in the union itself) led to a 24 percent depreciation, from
approximately $1.15 to the dollar in January 1999 to $0.88 in May 2000, forcing the
ECB to intervene in foreign exchange markets in the last few mouths of 2000. Since
then, however, things have greatly changed; the euro now trades at a premium to the
dollar, and many analysts claim that the euro will someday replace the dollar as the
world's dominant international currency (Figure 2.6 shows a chart of the euro since it
was launched in 1999).
