
132

Further strengthening that moat, Larson-Juhl is widely
known as the class act in molding. Frame shop operators order
molding material in one-foot increments, and then cut it to the
exact size needed for the customer’s project. If the molding
splits or does not cut cleanly, they cannot achieve the tight corners that they pride themselves on. Larson-Juhl molding, they
say, makes perfect corners every time. That reputation for
quality has made Larson-Juhl not only the largest but also the
most prestigious company in its industry.
Larson-Juhl sells thousands of framing styles and finishes to
its more than 18,000 customers. The leading supplier in the
United States, it also operates thirty-three facilities in Europe,
Asia, and Australia.
In sum, Larson-Juhl has many of the qualities Buffett looks
for. The business is simple and understandable, and the company has a long and consistent history; one of the original component companies dates back 100 years. It also has a predictable
future, with favorable long-term prospects. The ingredients of
custom framing—molding, glass, mats—are not likely to be
made obsolete by changes in technology, nor is customer demand for special treatment of favorite art likely to disappear.
What piqued Buffett’s interest at this particular time, however, was the opportunity to acquire the company at an attractive price, triggered by a dip in profitability that he believed
was temporary.
In fiscal 2001 (which ended in August), Larson-Juhl had
$314 million in net sales and $30.8 million in cash from operations. That was down somewhat from prior years: $361 million
sales and $39.1 million cash in 2000; $386 million in sales in
1999. Knowing Buffett’s general approach to calculating value,
we can make a good guess at his financial analysis of LarsonJuhl. Using his standard 10 percent dividend discount rate, adjusted for a very reasonable 3 percent growth rate, the company
would have had a value of $440 million in 2001 ($30.8 million
(Continued)

133

134

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

divided by [10 minus 3 percent]). So the $223 million purchase
price represented a very good value. Also, Buffett was convinced the fundamental economics of the company were sound,
and that the lower numbers were a short-term response to the
depressed economy at the time.
As is so often the case, Larson-Juhl approached Berkshire,
not the other way around. Buffett describes the conversation:
“Though I had never heard of Larson-Juhl before Craig’s call, a
few minutes talk with him made me think we would strike a
deal. He was straightforward in describing the business, cared
about who bought it, and was realistic as to price. Two days
later, Craig and Steve McKenzie, his CEO, came to Omaha and
in ninety minutes we reached an agreement.”12 From first contact to signed contract, the deal took just twelve days.

Coca-Cola
From the time that Roberto Goizueta took control of Coca-Cola in
1980, the company’s stock price had increased every year. In the five
years before Buffett purchased his first shares, the price increased an average of 18 percent every year. The company’s fortunes were so good
that Buffett was unable to purchase any shares at distressed prices. Still,
he charged ahead. Price, he reminds us, has nothing to do with value.
In June 1988, the price of Coca-Cola was approximately $10 per
share (split-adjusted). Over the next ten months, Buffett acquired
93,400,000 shares, at an average price of $10.96—fifteen times earnings,
twelve times cash f low, and five times book value. He was willing to do
that because of Coke’s extraordinary level of economic goodwill, and because he believed the company’s intrinsic value was much higher.
The stock market’s value of Coca-Cola in 1988 and 1989, during
Buffett’s purchase period, averaged $15.1 billion. But Buffett was convinced its intrinsic value was higher—$20 billion (assuming 5 percent
growth), $32 billion (assuming 10 percent growth), $38 billion (at 12
percent growth), perhaps even $48 billion (if 15 percent growth). Therefore Buffett’s margin of safety—the discount to intrinsic value—could
be as low as a conservative 27 percent or as high as 70 percent. At the

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s

135

same time, his conviction about the company had not changed: The
probabilities of Coca-Cola’s share price beating the market rate of return
were going up, up, and up (see Figure 8.1)
So what did Buffett do? Between 1988 and 1989, Berkshire Hathaway purchased more than $1 billion of Coca-Cola stock, representing
35 percent of Berkshire’s common stock portfolio. It was a bold move.
It was Buffett acting on one of his guiding principles: When the probabilities of success are very high, make a big bet.

Gillette
From 1984 through 1990, the average annual gain in Gillette’s share
was 27 percent. In 1989, the share price gained 48 percent and in 1990,
the year before Berkshire converted its preferred stock to common,
Gillette’s share price rose 28 percent (see Figure 8.2). In February
1991, Gillette’s share price reached $73 per share (presplit), then a
record high. At that time, the company had 97 million shares outstanding. When Berkshire converted, total shares increased to 109 million.
Gillette’s stock market value was $8.03 billion.
Depending on your growth assumptions for Gillette, at the time of
conversion the market price for the company was at a 50 percent discount

Figure 8.1 Common stock price of the Coca-Cola Company compared to the S&P 500
Index (indexed to $100 at start date).

136

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Figure 8.2 Common stock price of the Gillette Company compared to the S&P 500
Index (indexed to $100 at start date).

to value (15 percent growth in owner earnings), a 37 percent discount
(12 percent growth), or a 25 percent discount (10 percent growth).

The Washington Post Company
Even the most conservative calculation of value indicates that Buffett
bought the Washington Post Company for at least half of its intrinsic
value. He maintains that he bought the company at less than onequarter of its value. Either way, Buffett satisfied Ben Graham’s premise
that buying at a discount creates a margin of safety.

The Pampered Chef
It is reported that Buffett bought a majority stake in the Pampered Chef
for somewhere between $800,000 and $900,000. With pretax margins
of 20 to 25 percent, this means that the Pampered Chef was bought at a
multiple of 4.3 times to 5 times pretax income and 6.5 times to 7.5
times net income, assuming full taxable earnings.
With revenue growth of 25 percent or above and net income that
converts into cash at anywhere from a high fraction of earnings to a
multiple of earnings, and with a very high return on capital, there is no
doubt that the Pampered Chef was purchased at a significant discount.
( Text continues on page 138.)

CASE IN POINT
FRUIT OF THE LOOM, 2002
In 2001, while Fruit of the Loom was operating under the supervision of the bankruptcy court, Berkshire Hathaway offered
to purchase the apparel part of the company (its core business)
for $835 million in cash. As part of its bankruptcy agreement,
Fruit of the Loom was required to conduct an auction for competitive offers. In January 2002, the court announced that Berkshire was the successful bidder, with the proceeds of the sale to
go to creditors.
At the time of Berkshire’s offer, Fruit of the Loom had a
total debt of about $1.6 billion—$1.2 billion to secured lenders
and bondholders and $400 million to unsecured bondholders.
Under the terms of the agreement, secured creditors received
an estimated 73 cents on the dollar for their claims, unsecured
creditors about 10 cents.
Just before filing for bankruptcy in 1999, the company had
$2.35 billion in assets, then lost money during reorganization.
As of October 31, 2000, assets were $2.02 billion.
So, in simplified terms, Buffett bought a company with $2
billion in assets for $835 million, which went to pay the outstanding debt of $1.6 billion.
But there was a nice kicker. Soon after Fruit of the Loom
went bankrupt, Berkshire bought its debt ( both bonds and bank
loans) for about 50 percent of face value. Throughout the bankruptcy period, interest payments on senior debt continued, earning Berkshire a return of about 15 percent. In effect, Buffett had
bought a company that owed him money, and repaid it. As
Buffett explained it, “Our holdings grew to 10 percent of Fruit’s
senior debt, which will probably end up returning us about
70 percent of face value. Through this investment, we indirectly
reduced our purchase price for the whole company by a small
amount.”13
(Continued)

137

138

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Warren Buffett is one of the few people who could characterize $105 million as a “small amount,” but, in fact, after taking into account these interest payments, the net purchase price
for the company was $730 million.
At the time Berkshire’s offer was being reviewed by the
bankruptcy court, a reporter for the Omaha World-Herald
asked Travis Pascavis, a Morningstar analyst, about the deal. He
noted that companies like Fruit of the Loom usually sell for
their book value, which in this case would have been $1.4 billion. So with a bid of $835 million (ultimately, $730 million),
Berkshire would be getting the company for a bargain price.14

Clayton Homes
Berkshire’s purchase of Clayton was not all smooth sailing; a legal battle erupted over the selling price.
At $12.50 per share, Buffett’s April 2003 offer for Clayton was at
the low end of the $11.49 to $15.58 range that bankers had assigned to
the shares a month earlier. Clayton management argued that the deal
was fair considering the industry’s slump at the time. But Clayton
shareholders mounted a battle in the courts, saying that Berkshire’s offer
was far below the real value of Clayton’s shares. James J. Dorr, general
counsel for Orbis Investment Management Ltd., which voted its 5.4
percent stake against the merger, grumbled, “The fact that it’s Warren
Buffett who wants to buy from you should tell you that you shouldn’t
sell, at least not at his price.”15 For a value investor, that is probably a
very high compliment.
Warren Buffett defended his offer. At the time of the shareholder
vote, he wrote, “the mobile home business was in bad shape and companies such as Clayton, which needs at least $1 billion of financing
each year and faces declining sales, would continue to have a hard time
finding funds.” Clayton’s board apparently agreed. Then, as evidence
of his commitment to Clayton, Buffett added that he had advanced
the company $360 million of financing since his offer.16 Buffett and
Clayton management ended up winning the shareholder battle by a
narrow margin.

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s

139

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Warren Buffett has said more than once that investing in stocks is really
simple: Find great companies that are run by honest and competent
people and are selling for less than they are intrinsically worth. No
doubt many who have heard and read that remark over the years have
thought to themselves, “Sure, simple if you’re Warren Buffett. Not so
simple for me.”
Both sentiments are true. Finding those great companies takes time
and effort, and that is never easy. But the next step—determining their
real value so you can decide whether the price is right—is a simple matter of plugging in the right variables. And that is where the investment
tenets described in these chapters will serve you well:
• The business tenets will keep you focused on companies that are
relatively predictable. If you stick to those with a consistent operating history and favorable prospects, producing basically the
same products for the same markets, you will develop a sense of
how they will do in the future. The same is true if you concentrate on businesses that you understand; if not, you won’t be able
to interpret the impact of new developments.
• The management tenets will keep you focused on companies that
are well run. Excellent managers can make all the difference in a
company’s future success.
• Together, the business and management tenets will give a good
sense of the company’s future earnings potential.
• The financial tenets will reveal the numbers you need to make a
determination of the company’s real value.
• The value tenets will take you through the mathematics necessary to come up with a final answer: Based on everything you
have learned, is this a good buy?
The two value tenets are crucial. But don’t worry too much if you
are unable to address the other ten fully. Don’t let yourself become paralyzed by too much information. Do the best you can, get started, and
keep moving forward.

9
Investing in
Fixed-Income Securities

W

arren Buffett is perhaps best known in the investment world
for his decisions in common stocks, and he is famous for his
“buy and hold” positions in companies such as Coca-Cola,
American Express, the Washington Post, and Gillette. His activities are
not, however, limited to stocks. He also buys short-term and long-term
fixed-income securities, a category that includes cash, bonds, and preferred stocks. In fact, fixed-income investing is one of Buffett’s regular
outlets, provided—as always—that there are undervalued opportunities. He simply seeks out, at any given time, those investments that
provide the highest aftertax return. In recent years, this has included
forays into the debt market, including corporate and government
bonds, convertible bonds, convertible preferred stock, and even highyielding junk bonds.
When we look inside these fixed-income transactions, what we see
looks familiar, for Buffett has displayed the same approach that he takes
with investments in stocks. He looks for margin of safety, commitment,
and low prices ( bargains). He insists on strong and honest management,
good allocation of capital, and a potential for profit. His decisions do
not depend on hot trends or market-timing factors but instead are savvy
investments based on specific opportunities where Buffett believes there
are undervalued assets or securities.
141

142

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

This aspect of Buffett’s investing style doesn’t receive a great deal of
attention in the financial press, but it is a critical part of the overall Berkshire portfolio. Fixed-income securities represented 20 percent of Berkshire’s investment portfolio in 1992; today, 14 years later, that percentage
has grown to about 30 percent.
The reason for adding these fixed-income investments is simple:
They were the best value at the time. Because of the absolute growth of
the Berkshire Hathaway portfolio and the changing investment environment, including a lack of publicly traded stocks that he finds attractive,
Buffett has often turned to buying entire companies and to acquiring
fixed-income securities. He wrote in his 2003 letter to shareholders that
it was hard to find significantly undervalued stocks, “a difficulty greatly
accentuated by the mushrooming of the funds we must deploy.”
In that same 2003 letter, Buffett explained that Berkshire would
continue the capital allocation practices it had used in the past: “If stocks
become cheaper than entire businesses, then we will buy them aggressively. If selected bonds become attractive, as they did in 2002, we will
again load up on these securities. Under any market or economic conditions we will be happy to buy businesses that meet our standards. And,
for those that do, the bigger, the better. Our capital is underutilized
now. It is a painful condition to be in but not as painful as doing something stupid. (I speak from experience.)”1
To some extent, fixed-income investments will always be necessary
for Berkshire Hathaway’s portfolio because of Berkshire’s concentration
in insurance companies. To fulfill their obligation to policyholders,
insurance companies must invest some of their assets in fixed-income
securities. Still, Berkshire holds a significantly smaller percentage of
fixed-income securities in its insurance investment portfolio compared
with other insurance companies.
Generally speaking, Buffett has tended to avoid fixed-income investments (outside what was needed for the insurance portfolios) whenever
he feared impending inf lation, which would erode the future purchasing
power of money and therefore the value of bonds. Even though interest
rates in the late 1970s and early 1980s approximated the returns of most
businesses, Buffett was not a net purchaser of long-term bonds. There always existed, in his mind, the possibility of runaway inf lation. In that
kind of environment, common stocks would have lost real value, but

Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

143

bonds outstanding would have suffered far greater losses. An insurance
company heavily invested in bonds in a hyperinf lationary environment
has the potential to wipe out its portfolio.
Even though thinking of Buffett and bonds in the same sentence may
be a new idea for you, it will come as no surprise that he applies the same
principles as he does in valuing a company or stocks. He is a principlebased investor who will put his money in a deal where he sees a potential
for profit, and he makes sure that the risk is priced into the deal. Even in
fixed-income transactions, his business owner’s perspective means that
he pays close attention to the issuing company’s management, values, and
performance. This “bond-as-a-business” approach to fixed-income investing is highly unusual but it has served Buffett well.

