
animal for several days.”41 He could not stand up to be bathed by the nurses because he was so nauseated
from the pain. He told Buffett that he wanted to die. Terrified of going through another such ordeal and
facing the possibility of blindness, he decided to have the remaining cataract in his right eye scraped off
without replacing the lens. Instead, he wore old-fashioned cataract glasses, thick as a jellyfish, over his
“good” eye.
During Munger’s ordeal, the Buffalo Evening News’s drivers’ union—perhaps emboldened after three years
with new management running the place under duress—demanded overtime for work not performed. The
Evening News had been paying this in a temporary capitulation; now the union wanted it as part of its
permanent contract. Munger and Buffett said not a chance. Then in December 1980, the Teamsters, figuring
that Buffett couldn’t take a strike while the battle with the Courier-Express dragged on, walked out at six
a.m. after an all-night mediation attempt failed. Working with other unions, who crossed the picket line,
Lipsey, Henry Urban, and Murray Light worked feverishly to get out the evening paper. Then, at the last
minute, the pressmen walked off the job, pulling the page plates off the presses as they went.
Buffett figured he was sunk. From his decades of background in newspaper circulation, he knew that, even
more than the pressmen, the tiny drivers’ union—all of thirty-eight employees—had the power to shut the
paper down. Other unions and volunteers could run the presses, but without the drivers to distribute the
newspapers, the paper was dead. Buffett would not use nonunion replacements, concerned for their safety. “I
was not going to send our people out in December, in the dark, dropping papers in some rural area where
some guy can hit them with a tire iron. I was sitting there in Omaha, and that’s not a decision I was going to
make for a bunch of people who were going to have the hell beat out of them.”
The Evening News closed its doors.
Buffett told the union that the paper “has a limited amount of ‘blood,’ and if it bleeds too much, it will not
live anymore…. We’re going to reopen only if there is a reasonable prospect of a viable operation.”42 That
tipping point could quickly be reached.43
This time, the unions blinked. Within forty-eight hours, the Evening News was back on the streets. By then,
the News, though still trailing on Sundays, had gained some ground on the Courier-Express and was crawling
slowly toward the lead while maintaining its weekday advantage.44 By the end of 1981, Lipsey and Buffett
had cut the losses to $1.5 million a year, half of what the Courier-Express was suffering.45 In a war of
“survival of the fattest,” it was almost certain to win—albeit at a staggering price. The Courier-Express had
never given up the lawsuit trying to reinstate Judge Brieant’s injunction, but its owners saw another judge, the
judge of the marketplace, heading with the blue ribbon toward the Buffalo Evening News. The CourierExpress now tried to sell itself to press lord Rupert Murdoch, but the unions wouldn’t cave in to Murdoch’s
demand that they give up seniority. And with that, the Courier-Express laid down its last card in September
1982. Its next move was to fold.
The Buffalo Evening News immediately rolled out a morning edition and changed its name to the Buffalo
News. With victory in hand, Buffett and Munger went to a meeting of employees at the Statler Hilton
downtown. Somebody asked about profit sharing. “There is nothing that anybody on the third floor”—where
the newsroom sat—“can do that affects profits,” Buffett said. Capital took the risk and reaped the rewards.
He and Munger had staked $35 million on a series of decisions. They might have lost every dime; to them
went all the profits that followed. The workers got a paycheck for the time and effort they put in—no more,
no less. A deal’s a deal. But after everything they had all been through, the staff was stunned at his lack of
empathy.
As Buffett and Munger left the office, Munger walked past publisher Henry Urban, who was “waiting for at
least a small accolade,” said Ron Olson. Munger was famous for getting into cabs while people were talking
to him as if he did not hear them and for disappearing through doors the second he finished talking without
waiting for a response. Nonetheless Urban stood open-mouthed. Buffett followed along right after Munger
without looking at anyone. Nobody said thanks. Olson, following in their wake, moved around the room
shaking hands in an effort to make up for it.46

A year later, with higher ad rates and soaring circulation, the News was earning $19 million pretax, more than
all the previous years’ losses combined. About half of that went straight to Buffett. And as the excitement
ended, his attention waned. While he still spoke well of the Buffalo News in his annual report, his interests
had moved on to the next new thing.

PART FIVE
The King of Wall Street

43
Pharaoh
Omaha • 1980–1986

Five hundred of the grateful rich, wearing black tie and ball gowns, walked up the red carpet and into New
York’s swanky Metropolitan Club for Buffett’s fiftieth birthday party. With Berkshire Hathaway trading at
$375 a share, the Buffetts’ net worth had more than doubled in the past year and a half. They could easily
afford to rent the place.1 Dotted among the Buffett Group members were semi-demi-celebrities like the actor
Gary Cooper’s daughter. Susie had ordered a cake shaped like a six-pack of Warren’s beloved Pepsi-Cola.
He had asked his old pinball partner Don Danly to bring him the balance sheet for Wilson’s Coin-Operated
Machine Company.2 Buffett was beginning to gather materials from his early business efforts—treating these
objects like totems and showing them to people with a slight tinge of reverence. They seemed like tangible
evidence of himself, reassuring artifacts.
Susie brought her band from San Francisco and took center stage to sing a version of “Shuffle Off to Buffalo”
to her husband:
Warren got fed up with candy
With stamps he wasn’t handy….
The song continued for verse after verse on the theme of Buffett’s latest caper: packing up his duffel and
shuffling off to Buffalo to buy an undervalued paper.

Susie’s star turn, corny but sweet, was the beginning of a new tendency. Buffett’s family and friends had
started to recount—in his presence—the list of the companies and investments he had collected like the
beads on a rosary. The man himself, with eyebrows sprouting like ivy tendrils over the frames of his glasses,
now looked less awkward in black tie. The modern Berkshire Hathaway that he had created churned out new
beads for the rosary almost like a clockwork. Buffett’s hunt for things to buy had become more ambitious,
free of the cigar butts and lawsuits of the decades before. The great engine of compounding worked as a
servant on his behalf, at exponential speed and under the gathering approval of a public gaze. The method
was the same: estimate an investment’s intrinsic value, handicap its risk, buy using margin of safety,
concentrate, stay in the circle of competence, let it roll as compounding did the work. Anyone could
understand these simple ideas, but few could execute them. Even though Buffett made the process look
effortless, the technique and discipline underlying it actually did involve an enormous amount of work for
him and his employees. As his business empire had expanded from coast to coast, from the shores of Lake
Erie to the suburbs of Los Angeles, Kiewit Plaza remained at the center—a quiet but endlessly busy temple
of commerce, furnished with dinged, scuffed steel-frame furniture and linoleum floors. With every new
investment, there was more to do; but the number of people at headquarters barely changed. Buffett still
remained behind closed doors, guarded by Gladys. The very rich Bill Scott now worked part-time and spent
the rest of his days playing with his polka band. A new manager, Mike Goldberg, now augmented the
headquarters staff. Verne McKenzie managed the finances. The employees rarely left their tiny offices
except for the occasional conclave in the conference room, which seated only four people. No chats took
place around the watercooler. As for a period of ease following the scuffle at the Buffalo Evening News,
McKenzie put it this way: “There was never such a time.”3 Those who tested Rickershauser’s Law of
Thermodynamics found that the sun was indeed nice and warm, but Buffett was so focused and his mind
worked at such speed that extended conversations with him left them sunburned. “My mind was so tired,”
said one friend. “I had to recuperate from seeing him,” said another. “It was like being pounded on the head
all day long,” said a onetime employee.
Buffett had the energy and enthusiasm of a restless teenager; he seemed to remember every fact and figure
he had ever read; he finagled people into volunteering for tough jobs, then assumed they could accomplish
miracles; and while remarkably tolerant of others’ quirks and flaws, was less so of quirks and flaws that cost
him money. So eager for results was he, so confident of others’ skills, so unaware of how far short of his own
they fell, that he chronically underestimated people’s workloads. Buffett, the sun around whom everyone
revolved, was impervious to the effects of Rickershauser’s Law of Thermodynamics himself.
“People tell me I put pressure on them. I never intend to. Some people like to apply pressure. I never do.
It’s actually the last thing I like to do. I don’t think I’m ever doing it, but I’ve had enough people tell me
that I do it that it must be true.”
The managers out in the hinterlands who ran the businesses that Berkshire and Blue Chip owned were lucky
because Buffett largely left them alone, his trick of management being to find obsessed perfectionists like
himself who worked incessantly; then ignore them except for a “Carnegizing”—attention, admiration, and
Dale Carnegie’s other techniques—every now and then. Most would not have had it any other way.
The decisions Buffett had made about stocks in the 1970s were defiant bets against pessimism in the great
bear market, plagued by rampant unemployment and consumer prices that rose at an intolerable fifteen
percent a year. Now that bet suddenly paid off, thanks to a desperate President Carter, who had appointed a
new Federal Reserve Chairman, Paul Volcker, in 1979. Volcker ratcheted up the central bank discount rate
to fourteen percent to get inflation under control. In 1981, new President Ronald Reagan began to cut taxes
sharply, started deregulating business—and supported Volcker despite the howls of pain his policies were
causing. The economy and markets had been going through a seizure for two and a half years. Then, in late
1982, the bull market of the 1980s began its stampede as the prices of stocks started catching up with the
growth in corporate earnings.4
Much of the money used for Buffett’s late seventies spending spree came from a bonanza of float from
insurance and trading stamps. While National Indemnity prospered, at Blue Chip stamp sales continued to

shrink, but investments made from the slowly dwindling pool of float from prepaid stamps paid handsomely.5
The turnaround of the Buffalo Evening News meant that Buffett and Munger no longer had to debate
whether Blue Chip’s largest asset was worth more dead than alive. The News would live; it now threw off a
steady stream of profits. In 1983, they finally agreed on a value for Blue Chip, and Berkshire swallowed it
whole—the last step of the great untangling.6 Buffett and Munger were now full partners for the first
time—although Munger was the junior partner by miles.
Buffett made Munger, who now owned two percent of Berkshire, the company’s vice chairman. Munger also
now took over as president and chairman of Wesco, a wee thing compared to the now-swollen Berkshire, but
Munger’s own. It dangled like a tiny strand of spaghetti from the corner of Berkshire Hathaway’s mouth, the
only morsel that Buffett had yet failed to swallow. Wesco’s shareholders eventually figured out that he would
get to it someday, and inevitably they began to value Wesco’s stock at a forbidding price.
Munger’s influence on Buffett’s thinking had always far outweighed his financial clout. They thought so
much alike that the main difference between their behavior in business was that Munger on occasion would
veto deals that the more easily enraptured Buffett might have struck. Their attitude toward their shareholders
was identical. With the merger done, in the 1983 annual report the two men spelled out to Berkshire’s
shareholders a set of principles from which they would operate. They called them the “owner-oriented
principles.” No other management told its company’s owners these things.
“Although our form is corporate, our attitude is partnership,” they wrote. “We do not view the company as
the ultimate owner of our business assets, but, instead, view the company as a conduit through which our
shareholders own the assets.”7
This statement—deceptively simple—amounted to a throwback to a former generation of corporate
governance. The modern-day corporate chief viewed the shareholders as a nuisance, a noisy or quiet group to
be appeased or ignored. They were certainly not his partners or his boss.
We don’t play accounting games, Buffett and Munger said. We don’t like a lot of debt. We run the business
to achieve the best long-term results. All of these sounded like simple truisms—except that so few
managements could honestly make all of these statements.
Incidentally, Buffett also wrote that year, “[r]egardless of price, we have no interest at all in selling any good
businesses that Berkshire owns, and are very reluctant to sell sub-par businesses”—even if that hurt
performance—“as long as we expect them to generate at least some cash and as long as we feel good about
their managers and labor relations.”8 That was a warning in the guise of a hint to Gary Morrison, who took
over from Ken Chace at Berkshire in 1982 after the exhausted Chace retired. By then, Buffett had shut down
the Manchester mill and cut back on production in New Bedford by one-third.
“The textile business would make money for about ten minutes each year. We made half the men’s suit
linings in the country, but nobody ever went to a tailor and said, ‘I’d like a pin-striped gray suit with a
Hathaway lining.’ A square yard of cloth that came out of our mill cost more than a square yard from
somewhere else, and capitalism’s frugal that way. We’d get awards from Sears, Roebuck as supplier of the
year, and we took them fishing, and supplied them during World War II, and I was personal friends with the
chairman of Sears, and they’d say, Your products are wonderful. And we’d say, How about another half a
cent a yard? And they’d say, You’re out of your mind. So it was a terrible business.”
Instead of “generating cash,” Morrison begged Buffett to give him cash so that he could upgrade the mills.
Buffett said no.
And yet he clung to the beleaguered mills. Thus, it had been even harder, like having a root canal without
novocaine, for him to sell one of the company’s most profitable businesses, the Rockford Bank. But he had
had to do it; the Bank Holding Company Act required it in order for Berkshire to carry on its nonbanking
interests (especially in insurance).9 Even so, he still carried money with Gene Abegg’s picture on it in his

wallet afterward.
He was equally loath to lose Ben Rosner, who had finally retired from Associated Cotton Shops. Rosner’s
underlings had made fun of his toilet-paper-pickin’ ways. Sure enough, as soon as they took charge,
Associated fell into the tank. For months, Verne McKenzie slogged back and forth to New York’s garment
district, peddling its soggy carcass.10 Finally, he found some buyer willing to pay half a million dollars to haul
away the remains of a business that only recently had earned Berkshire as much as $2 million a year.
A few of the Berkshire companies were so self-steering that it was hard to tell the difference between a
well-run business and one guided by the wind alone. At Wesco, Lou Vincenti, who resisted being managed,
succeeded in concealing his Alzheimer’s from Buffett and Munger for several years.
“We didn’t see him that often,” says Buffett, “and he would sort of get himself psyched up to try and get
past that. Plus, we didn’t want to see it. Charlie and I loved him so much we didn’t want to face it.”
“Lou Vincenti was decisive, he was intelligent, and he was honest and shrewd,” says Munger. “And he ran
the last savings and loan in California to go to a computer-run system for depositor’s accounts, because it was
still cheaper to do it manually with community-college students working as part-time employees. You can see
how that would turn Warren and me on. He was cranky and independent and a very good human being. And
we loved him so much that even after we found out, we kept him in his job until the week that he went off to
the Alzheimer’s home. He liked coming in, and he wasn’t doing us any harm.”11
Buffett and Munger turned this story into a jokey parable, saying that they wanted more businesses that could
be run successfully by a manager with Alzheimer’s.
***
Buffett was sensitive to the subject of Alzheimer’s. He took great pride in his powerful memory; now his
mother grew forgetful. Her state of mind could be obscured by the way that Leila had always tended to live
in the past, and to create her own ideal reality—her version of Buffett’s bathtub memory, in which—
whoosh—the plug popped up, and bad memories drained away. Now in her late seventies, her son’s glory
was her major joy, but Warren still trembled if he had to spend time with her. It was no wonder, since the old
rages still flared up occasionally. By now, virtually every member of the family had had the experience of
picking up the phone and hearing her wrath come scorching over the line. Her victims all ran for comfort to
Susie, who said, “You have to understand that this just happens sometimes, to other people and not just you.
Warren and Doris went through it for years. So just don’t focus on what she said, because it’s not true.”12
Peter was one grandchild whom Leila had always left alone. She sometimes commented that he looked like
Howard and had a way of walking like Howard, so possibly that was why. The resemblance was only in
appearance, however. Peter had dropped out of Stanford not long before graduation and married Mary Lullo,
a recently divorced woman six years his senior who had four-year-old twin girls, Nicole and Erica. Peter
treated them as his own daughters, they began using the name Buffett, and they became great favorites of Big
Susie’s. Warren had been trying to interest Peter in Berkshire for some time and eventually sent his protégé,
Susie’s former tennis buddy, Dan Grossman, to talk to him about working in the business, but Peter had no
interest; his future lay in music.13 He cashed in $30,000 of his Berkshire stock to finance a recording and
music production company, Independent Sound, scoring commercials out of his apartment in San Francisco
with Mary as his business manager and promoter.14
Susie stayed close to Peter through his music, while she continued to toy with the idea of reviving her career,
working with a pair of producers, Marvin Laird and Joel Paley. She took them to Omaha and toured them
around the Old Market jazz clubs. They felt like they were writing an act for “their favorite English teacher.”
Susie displayed no signs of wealth, but since they had heard something about a newspaper and See’s, they
thought, “Maybe she’ll pay us in candy.”

At last they settled on an act that Susie would perform at Delmonico’s in New York at a benefit for New
York University. The act she wanted them to create would reflect her personality—a bohemian, gypsy soul
and a wicked, sly sense of humor. In the end, however, she sang a conventional medley, replacing the soulful,
passionate songs of 1977 with standards: “String of Pearls,” “I’ll Be Seeing You,” “The Way You Look
Tonight,” “Satin Doll,” “Take the A Train,” “Seems Like Old Times.”
At the benefit, Warren beamed as he watched his wife work the audience. Laird and Paley realized that
showing off his talented, beautiful wife made Buffett proud and happy. It seemed to them that, unlike most
show-business people, Susie’s performance wasn’t about her ego. Performing was a way of connecting with
the audience, and giving something to her husband.15
Laird and Paley, who referred to themselves jokingly as “musical gigolos,” became part of Susie’s singing
life, meeting Peter and going down to the Laguna house to work with her for the next few years on her music
as she considered whether she could make a viable career out of it. They never met Susie Jr., who had moved
to Washington, where Katharine Graham took an interest and arranged for her to work as an editorial
assistant, first at the New Republic and then at U.S. News & World Report. In November 1983, in a huge
wedding at New York’s Metropolitan Club, she married again, this time to Allen Greenberg, a public-interest
lawyer for Ralph Nader. Greenberg had her father’s cool analytical bent and looked like someone who lived
in a library. Both Susie’s parents took to their new son-in-law immediately, and people remarked on how
much Allen resembled Susie’s father—rational, dispassionate, good at saying no. The newlyweds moved into
a Washington town house but rented most of it out to other tenants and lived in a tiny apartment. By this time
Susie Jr. had sold all her Berkshire stock—when it was trading for less than $1,000 per share.
Howie’s first marriage, like his sister’s, had not lasted. Despondent, he spoke to his father, who had told him
a change of geography would do him good and suggested that he work at one of Berkshire’s businesses.
Attracted to California, Howie took a job at See’s Candies in Los Angeles. Big Susie sent him to live with
Dan Grossman, whom Buffett had installed at one of Berkshire’s little insurers in Los Angeles when it ran
into trouble. Howie started mopping floors and doing maintenance and worked his way up to ordering boxes,
while getting into adrenaline-charged scrapes of various types. Buffett told him he had to stay at See’s for
two years. Howie prepared to wait it out in resignation, but he didn’t last at Grossman’s. He moved into the
house at Laguna, where he felt more at home.16
By chance, Howie was partnered in doubles tennis at Emerald Bay with Devon Morse, a sweet, unhappily
married blonde with four daughters. To impress her, he shimmied up a post to change the time on a clock by
the tennis court, fell off, and broke his foot. She helped him get home, then showed up at the house with
some food. They started to talk and he learned she was trying to leave her rich husband. The marriage that
had eventually resulted from their relationship followed a series of Howie-type adventures; the couple
removed the children from the home of Devon’s husband, a gun collector whose house was filled with
hundreds of weapons. In 1982, Howie had convinced Devon that it would be best to relocate to Nebraska,
where they were married by a judge, with Buffett and Gladys Kaiser as witnesses.17
Buffett now had six step-grandchildren, and soon added a grandson when Howie and Devon had a child of
their own, Howard Graham Buffett Jr., who would become known as Howie B. Buffett liked children well
enough but was awkward and stiff around them and had no idea how to play with or engage a child. So he did
as he had done with his own children—left them to Susie, who took up the role of grandmother with zest at
family gatherings, and quickly added trips to visit grandchildren in Nebraska to her already extensive
traveling routine.
Buffett involved himself more actively when it came to Howie’s career. At first Howie had gotten a job in
real estate, but what he really wanted to be was a farmer. Since he had no capital, Buffett agreed to buy a
farm, which he would rent to his son—an arrangement rather like the one he had had with his sharecropper
back when he was still in high school. Howie trudged through Nebraska, looking at over a hundred farms and
making offers on behalf of his father, who was determined that a farm be a cigar butt and would not pay a
nickel more than necessary. Finally, somebody bit in Tekamah, and Buffett plunked down the necessary
