
20 506455-ch14.indd 226

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

227

company’s stock. And the company must disclose what percentage of all its
ratings are buy, hold, or sell. Clearly, if a company only gives out buy ratings,
you know to take a double dose of salt when reading that firm’s reports.

Independent research
Wall Street firms aren’t the only firms that provide research on stocks.
Analysts not connected with a big Wall Street firm are typically grouped into
the category called independent research.
By definition, independent research is considered to be analysis that comes
from a firm that doesn’t have an investment banking unit. As you read above,
the co-existence of research and investment banking has been problematic at
times in the past.
Independent research often comes from boutique research firms, which may
be operated by one analyst or a team of analysts who may have specific experience, such as a particular industry or type of fundamental analysis. Other
independent research comes from quantitative research firms, which create
automated computer programs to study different stocks using a series of tests.
But not all independent research comes from small research firms. In fact,
one of the largest providers of independent research is Standard & Poor’s, an
investment research company that provides data and information on stocks,
bonds and other investments. S&P’s research is considered to be independent because the company does not do investment banking.
But just because research comes from an independent research firm, don’t
assume it’s better than the research from a brokerage firm. In fact, after
the settlement with Wall Street firms, the quality of some brokerage firm’s
research improved markedly. Similarly, some of the research from independent firms has been way off the mark. You should judge whether or not to
listen to analysts’ research based on how good the research has been in the
past, not by whether it is independent or not.

Keying into the main types
of analyst research
Just as there are many types of books, there are many types of analyst
research reports. As a fundamental analyst, there are two main types of
reports you need to concern yourself primarily with, including:
✓ Idea reports: Idea reports are usually lengthy pieces of research an
analyst publishes to lay out everything investors need to know about
the company, industry and the stock. These reports are often released
when an analyst initiates coverage of a stock, or begins to regularly

20 506455-ch14.indd 227

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

228 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
follow a company. Some analysts often publish idea reports every year,
where they take a comprehensive look at the just-completed year for the
company and forecast what might happen next year. These idea reports
are usually chock full of industry statistics, which might come in handy
when you dig into how to do industry analysis in Chapter 16.
Idea reports can be excellent ways for fundamental analysts to get up to
speed on a company or industry they hadn’t been aware of before.
✓ Maintenance reports: If idea reports are long and comprehensive, maintenance reports are just the opposite. Analysts usually dash out quick
maintenance reports following major events at a company, such as the
release of earnings or the announcement of a significant new product.
Maintenance reports are kind of like an episode of a soap opera: Unless
you’ve been following along (and reading earlier reports) you might not
be able to follow what’s going on in a just-released maintenance report.
It can be a good idea to review an analyst’s idea report on a company
along with the maintenance report.

How to read between the lines
of an analyst report
After you determine whether or not a research report is an idea or maintenance report, it’s time to start reading more closely. Since I urged you to
essentially ignore the stock rating on most research reports, you might be
wondering what you’re supposed to pay attention to instead in the report.
Some of the key pieces of data you should be on the lookout for in an analyst
report include:
✓ Savvy comparisons of a company to its peers: Analysts most frequently
will be assigned to cover an entire industry, including both the large stalwarts in the business and the small up-and-comers. Sometimes analysts
are able to pinpoint a company’s strengths and weaknesses that aren’t
readily apparent from studying the financial statements.
✓ Deep analysis of demand for a company’s products: The better analysts perform what are called channel checks. In a channel check, an analyst will call up a company’s customers and suppliers to see how well a
particular product is flowing through the distribution channel. Analysts
might find out, for instance, that retailers are slashing prices on a company’s products just to clear them off the shelves. That’s not a good
sign. On the contrary, a supplier might say a company is ordering a great
deal of raw materials, which could indicate the company is ramping up
production.

20 506455-ch14.indd 228

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

229

✓ Forecast for long-term growth: One of the most difficult aspects of fundamental analysis is getting a realistic expectation for the future. I’ll give
you some pointers on how to estimate a company’s expected growth rate
for the next five years in Chapter 17. But it’s not a bad idea to check analyst research reports to see what five-year growth forecasts they have.
✓ Exploration of a stock’s valuation: Understanding how to measure
whether a stock is cheap or expensive is one of the top things investors
try to do. There are many ways to attempt measuring a stock’s valuation, including looking at price-to-earnings ratios (Chapter 8) and performing the discounted cash flow analysis (Chapter 11). Both of these
analyses, though, are subject to numerous assumptions and educated
guesswork.
Sometimes it can be helpful for you, then, to examine the valuation
assumptions and results determined by professional analysts. Even if
the results don’t agree with your findings, you can compare what they
measured to what you measured, see why there’s a difference and adjust
your model if needed.
If you’re looking for help with the discounted cash flow model, stock reports
from Standard & Poor’s can be useful. A vast majority of the stock reports from
S&P, which can be obtained using the directions I’ll give you below, provide the
stock’s discount rate and terminal growth rate. The discount rate is the rate of
return investors demand in exchange for putting their money at risk by giving
it to the company. And the terminal growth rate is how much the company’s
earnings and cash flow are expected to grow in the very long term. Both the
discount rate and terminal growth rate can have a major effect on the results of
the DCF analysis, and both are somewhat difficult to calculate yourself.
Analyst research reports can be very helpful when their insights help you
tweak your own fundamental analysis for the better. But, there’s an ugly underside to analyst reports, too, especially when the authors are cheerleading or
touting a stock. It can be difficult, until it’s too late, to know when an analyst
report is being more promotional than insightful. A few things to watch out
for, though, include reports that attempt to say recent bad news isn’t that terrible, without justification. Also, be suspect of analyst reports that try to say a
company is so well-managed or well-positioned that it’s not subject to the ups
and downs of the economy. As you’ll discover in Chapter 15, all companies are
subject to the typical ebb and tide of the broad economy.

Getting your hands on analyst reports
By now you’re probably tired of reading about analyst reports and ready to
get your hands on some. Accessing analyst reports is very easy, and may

20 506455-ch14.indd 229

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

230 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
even be free depending on which brokerage firm you use. There are four
primary ways to get analysts reports, including:
✓ Your brokerage firm: If you’re a client of the big Wall Street firms, one of
the perks you receive is access to the firm’s analysts’ reports. You might
be able to access the reports yourself, or you may be able to ask your
individual broker for a copy.
What if you’re with a low-cost online discount broker? You’re still in luck.
A vast majority of the online brokerage firms provide you with research
from both the Wall Street firms and from independent research firms.
Charles Schwab, for instance, provides access to S&P research reports,
as well as access to its own quantitative research model called Schwab
Equity Ratings.
✓ Directly from research providers: Most boutique research firms and
even the larger independent research providers will sell their research
to you. You can buy S&P’s stock research reports, for about $35, from
this Web site: www.sandp.ecnext.com/coms2/page_industry2.
✓ Research resellers: A number of companies have created Web sites that
let you shop for and order a variety of analyst research reports. Both
Reuters and Yahoo Finance, for instance, allow you to enter a stock’s
ticker symbol to see what analyst research is available and purchase
it if you choose to. Reuters provides its analyst-report bazaar here,
https://commerce.us.reuters.com/purchase/default.do, and
Yahoo Finance offers reports for sale here: http://screen.yahoo.
com/reports.html. Most reports cost between $10 and $100, but they
can be free or cost more.
✓ Analyst research summary Web sites. Several Web sites let you look
at the high-level summaries of analyst reports. Most of these sites give
you the average recommendation of all the investors who follow a stock,
which may be more valuable than just the opinion of one analyst. For
instance, MSN Money, at http://moneycentral.msn.com/investor/
invsub/analyst/recomnd.asp lets you look up the breakdown in
stock ratings for individual stocks.

Interpreting Credit-Rating Agencies’
Reports For Fundamental Analysis
Stock investors commonly forget the fact that they’re not alone in bankrolling
a company. Generally, companies obtain the cash they need to operate from
both stock investors and bond investors. And while stock investors look at
analyst research reports, bond investors pay even closer attention to creditrating agencies’ reports.

20 506455-ch14.indd 230

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

231

Credit-rating agencies, including Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch
Ratings, look at companies very differently than stock analysts do. The role
of the credit-rating agencies is to access how capable companies are of repaying the money they’ve borrowed by selling bonds.

The role of reports issued by
credit-rating agencies
If you’ve ever compared a credit-rating agency’s report with a stock analyst
report, even for the same company, you might be surprised at how different they are. Certainly, both the credit and stock reports will take a look at
popular financial ratios, such as the debt-to-equity ratio and various interest
coverage ratios, discussed in Chapter 8.
But while stock analyst research reports try to help investors make money,
the credit-rating agencies reports are primarily concerned with helping investors just get their money back, with interest.
Bond investors are very different from stock investors. They are lending money
to a company, and get no piece of the upside if the company does better than
expected. Bond investors simply want to get their money back from the company that borrowed from them. And for that reason, credit analysts look at
companies very differently than stock analysts do. For instance, credit analysts
have very little interest in a company’s stock valuation. Bond investors don’t
care if a stock is overvalued, as long as they get their money back.
But while the credit-rating companies are serving a different investor, the
bond holders, fundamental analysts interested in a company’s stock can benefit from the reports. Some of the aspects of credit-rating agencies’ reports
that might be especially valuable include:
✓ The credit rating: The credit-rating agencies assign various letter grades
to companies. These letter grades attempt to give investors a quick way
to determine how likely it is for a company to repay its debt, or, on the
contrary, to default or miss an interest payment. Table 14-2 summarizes
the credit ratings from both Moody’s and S&P, and what they mean.
Just as you should never take too much stock in a stock analysts’ rating,
you should also exercise discretion when looking at a company’s credit
rating. Since the credit-rating agencies are paid by the companies to provide their ratings, there’s long been suspicion that credit ratings give companies a great deal of leeway. It’s the analysis behind the rating, instead of
just the rating itself, that has the most value for fundamental analysts.
✓ Analysis of how much and how often the company is borrowing: The
credit-rating agencies take interest, and sometimes concern, when a company borrows more money by selling additional bonds. New bond issuances are monitored and explored in most credit-rating agencies’ reports.

20 506455-ch14.indd 231

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

232 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
✓ Risk assessment: While companies themselves pinpoint the risks facing
their businesses in their annual reports, as described in Chapter 12, it’s
often better to get this information from a credit-rating agency report.
Bond investors are a pretty nervous bunch, since they’re petrified of
not getting their money back. As a result, credit-rating agencies spend a
great deal of time investigating things that could go wrong at a company
instead of what could go right.

Table 14-2

Alphabet Soup: What The Credit Ratings Mean

Quality of debt

Moody’s

S&P

Best

Aaa

AAA

High

Aa

AA

Upper-medium

A

A

Medium

Baa

BBB

Lower-medium

Ba

BB

Low

B

B

Poor

Caa

CCC

Highly speculative

Ca

CC

Extremely poor

C

C

In default

C

D

Source: www.credfinrisk.com/ratings.html

The death of the AAA-rated company
Just as consumers have largely gone on a
credit-binge since the 1980s, so too have companies. The borrowing boom by companies is
extremely evident in how the number of companies with the coveted AAA credit rating has
continued to dwindle. General Electric, which
had its AAA rating from Standard & Poor’s
since April 26, 1956, saw its credit rating get
cut one notch to AA+ in March 2009. GE’s
downgrade was a stunner, since it had the
AAA rating longer than any currently operating company.
After S&P took GE down a notch, only five
U.S. non-financial firms were still rated AAA

20 506455-ch14.indd 232

by S&P, including Automatic Data Processing,
Microsoft, Pfizer, ExxonMobil and Johnson &
Johnson. Table 14-3 shows how the number of
AAA companies has been in free fall.
There are many hypotheses on why AAA-rated
companies are vanishing. Perhaps one of the
best explanations for a fundamental analyst is
how companies have increasingly elected to
borrow more, or leverage themselves up. By
using more borrowed money, companies can
increase how profitable they appear to investors who study return on equity. You can find
out how a company can use debt to goose its
profitability in Chapter 8.

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

Table 14-3

233

AAA-Rated Companies Increasingly Hard to Find

Year

Number of non-financial
companies with AAA rating

1980

61

1990

37

2000

16

2005

6

2008

6

Source: Standard & Poor’s

Getting your hands on the credit rating
If you thought getting stock analyst reports was convoluted, that was simple
compared with getting a credit-rating agency’s report. Generally speaking, you’ll
need to contact your broker directly to get a copy of the credit-rating report.
However, there are some online resources that will help you get what you
need from the reports, including the:
✓ Credit-rating agencies’ sites: Both Moody’s site, www.moodys.com and
S&P’s site, www.standardandpoors.com will let you look up the rating
on most stocks for free. You just need to register, which is free. If you
need the full reports, you’ll need to contact the agencies yourself.
Both Moody’s and S&P provide free access to some of their broader
analysis on trends in the credit market. These reports can be helpful
with fundamental analysis of stocks, too, since they pinpoint many of
the concerns bond investors have with the economy in general.
✓ Media reports: Most major news outlets have real-time access to the
credit-rating agencies’ full reports and routinely issue stories on them.
News outlets also have access to personnel at the rating agencies and
can ask questions that go beyond what’s contained in the reports. For
instance, when GE’s credit rating was cut by S&P, there were many
media reports providing a summary of the key information in the report.
If you want to review how to use news reports to bolster your fundamental analysis, flip back to Chapter 13.

20 506455-ch14.indd 233

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

234 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Knowing when a company’s
credit rating is suspect
It’s never a good idea to take any analyst’s report on a company as fact.
Analyst reports are based on a heavy dose of estimation. But when it comes
to credit-rating agencies’ reports, and credit ratings, there’s a good way to
know when bond investors themselves don’t believe what they see.
Companies’ debt, including their bonds, trade during the day just like stocks.
Just as stock investors buy and sell shares all day, bond investors buy and sell
companies’ debt securities. The constant back-and-forth determines the price
of bonds, just as trading determines a stock’s price.
Savvy fundamental analysts know how to check the price of a company’s debt
and compare that to the prices of debt issued by other companies with similar
credit ratings. If the prices on a company’s bonds are dramatically lower than
those on debt issued by companies with the same credit ratings, fundamental
analysts know investors think the company’s credit rating is too high.
If you’re investing in a company’s stock, why should you care if its debt rating
is too high? If a credit-rating agency ultimately decides to lower the credit
rating on a company, or downgrade it, that could potentially increase the
company’s borrowing costs in the future. And higher borrowing costs could
increase a company’s interest expense and decrease its net profit in the future.
And net profit, as you discovered in Chapter 5, is critically important to fundamental analysts.
There are several ways to see how a company’s bonds are trading to determine if investors think the credit rating might fall.
One method to see if bond investors trust the credit ratings is to look up bond
prices using the Web site, called TRACE, operated by the securities regulator
called Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA. You can enter any
company’s name and see the prices on its bonds here: http://cxa.marketwatch.com/finra/BondCenter/Default.aspx.
A much easier way, though, to find out whether investors trust a credit rating
is by using Moody’s own site. It’s free; you’ll just need to register. Below are
step-by-step instructions on how to see if bond and stock investors agree or
disagree with a credit rating:
1. Log into moodys.com.
You will just need to enter your username and password.
2. Search for the company’s rating.
Change the “search by” pull-down option in the upper right-hand corner
to “Ticker.” Enter the company’s ticker symbol and click the “go” option.

20 506455-ch14.indd 234

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

235

3. Locate the company’s name.
Look through the list of company names until you find the one you’re interested in. If there’s a gold-colored icon to the right of the company’s name,
continue to step 4. If not, the analysis is not available for this company.
4. Hover your mouse arrow over the golden icon.
When you do this, a small box titled “Market Implied Ratings” will pop up.
5. Interpret the results.
The first line, called Moody’s Senior Unsecured or Equiv, will show you the
official credit rating from Moody’s. For GE, that rating in early 2009 was
Aaa, as Moody’s hadn’t yet downgraded the company’s debt as did S&P.
Below the line with the official credit rating, you’ll see a line called bondimplied. This line tells you what bond investors think GE’s debt should
be rated, based on the current price. That rating on GE was Baa in early
March 2009. Next, check out the “Equity-Implied” line. This line tells you
what stock investors think the company’s credit rating should be, based
on a methodology used by Moody’s. In early 2009, GE’s Equity-Implied
rating was Ba.
Doing this analysis tells you that neither bond investors nor stock investors thought GE deserved the Aaa rating Moody’s was giving it in early
March 2009. That’s crucial information for a fundamental analyst. And it
was telling. Weeks later, on March 23, Moody’s cut its rating on GE’s debt
to Aa.

Finding Fundamental Data about
Companies Using Social Investing
Up to this point in this chapter, you’ve learned how to pick up fundamental
analysis from professionals. The analysts who write both stock research
reports and the reports that go with credit ratings tend to do this type of
thing full-time.
But there’s growing interest in using the so-called wisdom of crowds, or the
collective opinion of a large group of investors and analysts, to learn more
about companies and investments. The idea is that one analyst may make an
incorrect assumption or may be influenced by bias. If you pool together the
opinions of hundreds of analysts, consumers, and others interested in a company, though, the hope is the collective wisdom will be valuable.
And that’s where social investing comes in. Social investing is the financial
version of social networking sites, like Facebook, Linked In, and Windows
Live Spaces. Just as social networking allows you to meet new people and
