their risk-seeking profiles, and so it's best to think of trade setups as having multiple entries
depending on your risk-tolerance level. Either way, price did officially break above the doji high and
the trendline at $54.00 on November 5 with a powerful bullish confirmation candle, triggering entry
at any point in the day. A fill (trade entry) could have occurred anywhere between $54.00 and $54.48
(the high of the day).
While waiting for proof increases the odds that we will be putting on a successful trade, what
happens to the risk/reward relationship for the conservative trader? In most cases, waiting for proof
will deteriorate your risk/reward relationship and harm your edge while increasing accuracy. How
can that be so? We will discuss edge in a later chapter, but for this example, the conservative trader
would enter a position at the $54.00 level, place a stop under $52.00 (perhaps as low as $51.00), and
then play for the exact same upside bull flag target to $59.00. With their entry at $54.00 and a stop at
$52.00, the conservative trader has deteriorated their edge to a $5.00 reward for a $2.00 risk. In
terms of the ratio, this becomes a two and a half-to-one reward-to-risk ratio. It's still better than the
two to one that is usually required as a minimum for putting on a trade, but is worse than the three and
a half to one that the aggressive trader enjoys. If the conservative trader located his or her stop under
$51.00 per share (the 61.8 percent retracement), then the reward-to-risk relationship would be a
$5.00 target with a $3.00 stop or a one point six-to-one reward-to-risk relationship, which
deteriorates the edge to less than the two-to-one reward-to-risk relationship.
Keep this discussion in mind when thinking of taking trades based on price patterns, and how
conservative or aggressive strategies affect the entry and reward/risk relationship of the trade.
Patterns give you an inherent signal for entry, stop-loss, and a target, but how you employ them, enter
your trade, manage your trade, and exit your trade will be based upon whether you are a conservative,
moderate, or aggressive trader.
The resolution? Coca-Cola rallied for the next month, enduring another mini-retracement on the way
to its target, which price hit on December 11, 2009, as a clear negative momentum divergence formed
along with a shooting star/doji candle on December 14. Once price meets a target, it can change the
supply/demand relationship. In the event that other bearish signals form, such as negative divergences
or reversal candles, it can further tip the balance to the sellers and help send price lower. Aggressive
traders could have shorted near the $59.00 level in anticipation of some sort of price retracement as
the $59.00 target was hit—and that is exactly what happened. Price quickly retraced into January
2010 to see the $55.00 level again. Both conservative and aggressive traders should have exited a
bull flag position as price touched $59.00, completing the price pattern trade.

TRIANGLES
I mentioned that head and shoulders and flag patterns would likely take one of the top three spots on a
trader's favorite price patterns list. It's likely that triangles would also occupy one of the top three
spots for the same reasons—triangles are easy to recognize, give clear entries and targets, and they
occur with relative frequency so traders can see many examples of triangles.
The head and shoulders is based on both the trend reversal and momentum divergence principles,
the flag is based also in the trend continuity and momentum burst/impulse principle, but on what
principle do we base triangle patterns? Triangles are clearly range contraction patterns that derive
their logic from the Price Alternation Principle described in Chapter 3. Restated, the principle
declares that price alternates between periods of range contraction and range expansion. We can thus

use this principle to help us forecast the next swing in price and trade it as such. Triangles are shortterm contraction patterns that often precede a short-term, tradable price range expansion phase.

An Important Caveat on Directional Biases
There is one major caveat to know when working with triangles. In the trading literature, you will
find ascending triangles described as bullish continuation patterns and descending triangles described
as bearish continuation patterns. In my experience, you do yourself a disservice if you classify
triangles as such. Why? Let's assume you see an ascending triangle in the context of an uptrend and
you enter a buy position prior to the breakout from the triangle, which is the official signal to enter. In
other words, you assume the triangle will break to the upside and so you position yourself early in
expectation of an upside break. However, the triangle does not break to the upside, but instead breaks
to the downside and you're now facing a rapidly moving downward impulse that either stopped you
out or leads to a very large loss if you did not take a stop loss. Either way, you walk away confused
as to what happened and why the triangle did not do what it was supposed to do.
The triangle did exactly what it was supposed to do based on the Price Alternation Principle, which
was expand after a period of range contraction, but you tried to outthink the triangle by predicting in
which direction the triangle was going to expand. Ultimately, we should not try to predict which
direction price will break from a range compression pattern (including rectangles along with
triangles)—this is where new traders get in trouble. We should understand that the pattern is based on
the Price Alternation Principle and expect that a period of range expansion, in either direction,
follows a period of range compression, as described in Chapter 3. The Price Alternation Principle
does not reveal to us in which direction price will ultimately break. While bull/bear flags along with
head and shoulders patterns do have directional biases, based on the prevailing trend, triangles do not
have inherent directional biases based on the Price Alternation Principle.
That's not to say that ascending triangles cannot meet their upside breakout targets—many times they
will or that descending triangles will not break to the downside—they do. However, when thinking of
these patterns in terms of risk/reward and edge, it's best to treat them without directional bias and take
advantage of the principle of range expansion following range contraction instead of the complexity of
trying to predict which direction price will break.
In fact, you'll likely find that some of the best trades will come from triangles that break opposite of
their expected directional bias. Why? Because traders who think that ascending triangles will always
break to the upside will be forced to sell their shares as they stop-out when the ascending triangle
breaks unexpectedly to the downside, and these traders stopping out, when combined with sellers
entering new short-sale positions as a result of the confirmed triangle pattern entry, will create a
positive feedback loop that propels price to achieve the unexpected downside target. Strangely
enough, price tends to move faster when one side of the market is being squeezed, or forced to stopout unexpectedly. Knowing this is a major benefit when anticipating where or how to enter a potential
triangle trade.

Symmetrical Triangles
Symmetrical triangles are very easy to spot, as traders can observe a distinct narrowing in the price
range as it forms to a central point. As price swings narrow, you can draw simple trendlines on your
chart to highlight the range compression that takes place.

The easiest way to conceptualize a symmetrical triangle is to think of price winding down to an
exact value area, or exact fair value price. Under the range alternation principle, a rectangle style
trading range has an overhead resistance price at which shares are deemed expensive, a lower
support price at which shares are deemed cheap, and a central value area which price is deemed fair
value. In a range pattern, price bounces up and down between these levels until some other force acts
on the equilibrium to send price breaking out—up or down—into a new price range expansion move.
Now, instead of visualizing the upper and lower levels as horizontal lines, envision them as
contracting toward the fair value price. The best way to think of it is that price is narrowly arriving at
a fair price that is deemed reasonable to both buyers and sellers. Remember, if price is deemed too
expensive, buyers will not pay the high price, and if price is deemed too cheap, it will attract a rush
of buyers to purchase shares on sale. If a price is at exact equilibrium between buyers and sellers,
then participants have neither a need to rush to buy shares nor a need to sell shares for a profit.
Buyers and sellers meet each other halfway in a state of agreement or equilibrium.
In a symmetrical triangle, the upper resistance line declines over time toward the midpoint or fair
value line, while the lower support line rises over time to meet the fair value line. A symmetrical
triangle is an example of price efficiency between buyers and sellers.
We know from the Price Alternation Principle that this equilibrium cannot last forever, and when
some new piece of information disturbs the calm balance, we can expect some sort of impulse move
to send price bursting up or down depending on how that information has affected buyers and sellers
and changed their perception of fair value. This would be akin to an initial burst in the supply/demand
relationship that serves as the force that sets an object into motion that has been at rest. Figure 5.7
reveals an ideal version of a symmetrical triangle.
FIGURE 5.7 An Idealized Example of a Symmetrical Triangle

Look back to Chapter 3 where we defined the upper trendline as an overhead resistance expensive
price level while the lower trendline was a lower support cheap price level. The fair value, or
midpoint price, represents the value area between prices deemed expensive or cheap. In a
symmetrical triangle consolidation pattern, unlike the rectangle, the trendlines converge and angle
toward the fair value price as time progresses.
Specifically, traders deem what is expensive to be decreasing and what is cheap to be increasing

until price arrives at the fair valuation level. At that point, price often breaks out of the pattern in a
range expansion phase in price where we have a volatile impulse that creates a positive feedback
loop as both buyers and sellers are thrown off balance with regard to prior-existing reference levels
of expensive and cheap. In the event of an upside break, buyers are rushing in to drive the price higher
while sellers, or those who are holding short-sale positions, are forced to buy to cover, which also
drives price higher in an expansion move.

Rules for Entry, Stops, and Targets
As a trader, you can take advantage of these range breakout plays. The rules for entry usually center
on buying shares as soon as price breaks solidly above the declining upper trendline, or short selling
shares as price breaks under the rising lower support line. Research by Thomas Bulkowski and other
technicians indicate that price often will break out of a symmetrical triangle ahead of the price at
which the trendlines converge, which is labeled the apex. From the point where the triangle begins,
research shows that most triangles break out of either the upper or lower trendline anywhere from 66
percent (two-thirds) and 75 percent (three-fourths) of the way to the apex, though some triangles
break out at the apex.. As with all patterns, nothing is guaranteed to happen, and a trade is based on
the historical probabilities along with edge—a smaller stop in relation to a larger target. Again, even
if half of the trades fail, if we consistently play for at least a two-to-one reward-to-risk relationship,
we have a monetary edge.
In regard to where to enter the triangle, we turn back to conservative versus aggressive tactics. An
aggressive trader would put on a position immediately as price began to break above the upper
trendline or beneath the lower trendline without waiting for confirmation. Conservative traders have a
variety of entry strategies, including entering only as price breaks above a strong bullish breakout
candle like a bullish engulfing or marabozu, or beneath a strong bearish candle like a bearish
engulfing.
In addition to adding candle analysis, traders can employ a two-bar or three-bar close rule, meaning
a trader will only enter after two or three bars have closed outside the upper or lower trendline as
drawn. A conservative trader may also use a price or percentage function, meaning price has to close
a certain dollar value or percentage value (depending on the timeframe) before entering—for
example, $1.00 or $2.00, or 2 percent. A trader might also use a multiple of the current Average True
Range (ATR) for determining when to enter. For example, if the current daily ATR value is $2.00 and
the price is currently trading at $50.00 per share with the apex of the symmetrical triangle also trading
at $50.00 per share, then a trader will demand that price rise at least one ATR value or even two
ATR values before entering. This would place the trade entry at $52.00 when price has moved one
ATR value, or at $54.00 when price has moved two times the current ATR value.
Traditionally, a trader will place a stop just beyond the opposite trendline once he or she has
entered a position in expectation of a range breakout. For example, if the horizontal value area for a
fair price is $50.00 per share, and the declining resistance line currently rests at $51.00 and the rising
support line rests at $49.00, then a trader would enter when price rises above $51.00 and place a stop
under $49.00 per share.
In the event that a triangle breaks out earlier than expected, or if the respective trendlines are a
lengthy distance apart that would make placing a stop at the opposite trendline unpalatable, then a
trader can choose to place a tighter stop at the apex or fair value price of the triangle, which would be

$50.00 in the immediate example.
Where would a trader place a price target when playing for a range breakout symmetrical triangle
trade? The traditional target is to measure the height of the triangle, which is the greatest distance
between the upper declining resistance line to the lower rising support line from where the triangle
pattern trendlines began. Take this distance and then add it to the breakout price, similarly to the head
and shoulders or flag patterns, to calculate the expected price pattern target.
In the previous example, with an apex at $50.00, let's say that the triangle pattern began to form with
an upper price at $55.00 for overhead resistance and a lower price of $45.00 for the lower support
line. The distance, or height of the triangle, is thus $55.00 minus $45.00 or $10.00. We take the
$10.00 and then add that value to the apex or midpoint of the pattern at $50.00 per share to arrive at a
final price projection target of $60.00 per share. If we enter our position at $51.00 and then place a
stop at $49.00, then we effectively are playing for a $9.00 target with a $2.00 stop-loss risk price,
which gives us a ratio of $9.00 to $2.00 or four and a half-to-one reward-to-risk ratio, which is quite
high—much better than the standard two-to-one minimum requirement.
As we will learn when discussing edge in Chapter 8, there is a tradeoff between high reward-torisk relationships like this. The tradeoff between a high ratio is often a lower win rate, or accuracy
rate of the trades which you'll often find is the case. Triangles, and breakout trading patterns in
general, tend to be less reliable patterns because of the potential for false breakouts, known as bull or
bear traps. However, even if 50 percent of the triangle trades that you take fail by hitting the stop-loss
instead of the target, if you consistently take the same setups with higher-than-average reward/risk
relationships, you will profit more from the fewer trades that succeed than from the more numerous
trades that fail.
The key to understanding these patterns is to realize that the Price Alternation Principle, when price
reacts as expected with a fast, volatile range expansion move that originates from the breakout, will
result in quick profits that often are a multiple of three or four times your initial stop-loss price, which
is often on the opposite side of converging trendlines.
Let's see an example of a long-term symmetrical triangle that formed in gold throughout 2009
(Figure 5.8).
FIGURE 5.8 Symmetrical Triangle Example in Gold Futures Prices through 2009

Gold prices remained in a long-term uptrend moving into 2009, yet price formed a consolidating
trading range from January to September that formed a symmetrical triangle pattern, with converging
highs and lows that moved toward the apex in early September at the $950.00-per-ounce-level.
Instead of the consolidating taking more of a rectangle shape with a clear horizontal resistance line
and horizontal support line, these price boundaries converged toward the midpoint or value area at
$950.00. Traders could have been anticipating putting on a position on a break above the resistance
trendline or beneath the support trendline as shown. In early September, price officially broke and
closed out of the triangle pattern forming two bullish power candle days in a row that took price
above the prior swing high from June at the $1,000.00-per-ounce level.
Remember back to the chapter on the Price Alternation Principle, and you can visualize the range
contraction period that marked the triangle giving way to a range expansion period that formed after
price broke out of the established “expensive/cheap” boundaries that converged toward the fair value
price. An aggressive trader would establish a long position as soon as price broke above the $970.00
level which reflected the upper resistance line at that time and then measured the distance from the
start of the pattern—the height of the triangle—and then added that value, which was roughly $225.00,
to the breakout zone at the $970.00 level just above the fair value price of $950.00. For the purpose
of this example, I'm using round numbers to make the example clearer. Taking the height of $225.00
and adding it to the breakout price at $975.00 gives us a price pattern projection target of $1,200.00.
A trader would place a stop on the opposite side of the triangle trendline, in this case the lower
trendline at the $925.00 level, or for a tighter, more conservative stop, at the apex value area of
$950.00 per ounce.
Price continued up to the $1,200.00 target, rallying from $1,050.00 to $1,200.00 in a single month
—November—at which point triangle pattern traders would sell their positions with a profit and
successfully completed pattern. Gold actually rallied slightly higher than its official $1,200.00 target
before falling back to the $1,050.00 level. Again, some traders will decide to sell short once a

classic price projection target is achieved.

Ascending and Descending Triangles
For all practical purposes, you should treat an ascending triangle the same way you would a
symmetrical triangle. All triangles are consolidation patterns that derive their predictive nature and
price projection targets from the Price Alternation Principle. While most traders view triangles as
continuation patterns, it's best to see them as neutral and be equally prepared to trade an upside or a
downside breakout from the converging trendline boundaries.
If the triangle behaves as expected, meaning the range consolidation phase gives way to a sudden
impulse in price into a range expansion phase, you would be saddled with a large, unexpected loss in
the event you guessed incorrectly as to which direction the triangle would break.
It may indeed be statistically true that ascending triangles have a greater than 50 percent chance of
breaking out to the upside, but remember, it's best to base your trading decisions on long-standing
price principles such as the Price Alternation Principle, Trend Continuity Principle, or Momentum
Principle. As such, I suggest treating ascending and descending triangles with a neutral directional
bias, the same as a symmetrical triangle, and trading them as such.
The logic is similar to that of the symmetrical triangle, except that in the case of an ascending
triangle, price will form a horizontal overhead resistance level above the value area while the lower
support trendline will rise to converge with the horizontal level, forming a triangle pattern that moves
toward the apex, or convergence of the trendlines. Similarly, a descending triangle will form a
horizontal support line along with a descending upper resistance line that eventually will converge at
the apex of the pattern.
Let's move from our example in Figure 5.8 and see a descending triangle in the context of gold's
larger uptrend.
While Figure 5.8 showed a complete symmetrical triangle example in gold prices, Figure 5.9 shows
a descending triangle example and ends with the breakout from the descending upper resistance line.
FIGURE 5.9 Descending Triangle Example in Gold Futures Prices through 2006

A descending triangle contains a clear horizontal support line, which can be referred to as cheap
(or on sale) to market participants, which can cause them to buy at the horizontal support level and
thus drive the price higher. However, unlike a rectangular consolidation pattern, the upper expensive
resistance line resembles a descending trendline, as investors deem price to be expensive at
sequentially lower levels over time. That is one reason investors often view descending triangles as
inherently bearish.
The official trade entry signal comes as price breaks under the lower support line, in this case at the
$650-per-ounce level which is clearly defined as support, or the upper resistance level which
occurred at the end of October 2006 at the $690.00 level. In this example, price broke out of the
descending triangle to the upside, giving you a chance to buy into the context of a prevailing uptrend at
a low-risk entry level. You would place your stop under the clear support level at $650.00 and set
your price target in a similar method as you did for the symmetrical triangle. Take the height of the
triangle and then add that value to the breakout price of the pattern. The triangle begins at the $820.00
level and ends at the $650.00 level, which gives us a height of $170.00 per ounce. We then add our
$170.00 height to the breakout price at $690.00 to give us a price pattern projection target of $860.00.
Although the chart does not show it, price continued to rise almost without pausing to meet the
$860.00 target in September 2007, less than a year from when the breakout occurred. Price again
overshot the target slightly, peaking at $894.00 before falling sharply back to the $820.00 level.
