
Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 23 Money and Risk Management

575

Technical Point Versus Money Point
The decision about a trailing stop usually centers on whether to use a technical point or a money
point. A money point stop is similar to a hard money stop described previously, only in this case
it defines the amount that the trade should not lose from its maximum profit level. If $500 is the
money point stop, the stop-price level changes with the value change in the market issue, such
that if a correction of more than $500 occurs from the maximum unrealized profit, the system
will exit the trade. A technical stop is one that is placed at a price that represents a technical level
beyond which it is obvious that the trade is reversing direction. It is sometimes called a critical
threshold stop (Katz and McCormick, 1998) because breaking the specified stop level is critical
to the trade. Technical points often are used more in investment and swing trading trailing stops.
Money point stops are used more in short-term trading, where price action is often more erratic.
The market itself does not accommodate a money point stop because that level is unrelated to the
market price and is a matter of the personal risk decision of the trader, but the market does
respect the technical stop if properly placed.
Volatility Stop
We discussed volatility stops in Chapter 13, “Breakouts, Stops, and Retracements.” A trailing
stop is placed at a certain level based on the historical volatility of the issue. As such, the stop
price will adjust to changes in volatility, and loosen when volatility increases and tighten when
volatility decreases. It is commonly used for this reason.
Maximum Winning Favorable
A maximum winning favorable excursion, as opposed to the adverse used in establishing stops,
also can be used to establish a trailing stop. The maximum favorable excursion is the highest
amount that a profitable trade reaches before it is exited. It is similar to a target. A fraction of this
calculation is added to the entry price, and the fraction is increased over time.
Trend Line
A trend line stop can be used because a trend line follows the price action. As a technical point
stop, it has advantages in that a bunching of orders at a critical level, such as a support or resistance zone, usually is not seen along a trend line, such that when triggered, the execution of the
exit will be less influenced by competing orders.
Adaptive
Special formulas, such as Wilder’s parabolic, can be used. These formulas follow the price trend
and adjust to market conditions along the way. They and volatility stops also are called adaptive
stops, and their details can be complicated.
Other Kinds of Stops
We have just considered a number of protective and trailing stop strategies, which are generally
based on price action. Other exit strategies may be employed, such as those based on a particular
technical signal or those based on time.

Download at www.wowebook.com

576

Part VIII System Testing and Management

Signal
One obvious stop is the signal stop. This occurs when the system gives a signal to enter a position in the opposite direction from the existing position. It is part of a stop-and-reverse system.
Time
Because of the multidimensional aspect of time and reward versus risk, a time stop often is used
in short-term trading when time, cost of money, and opportunity cost are important. This stop is
placed to exit the position a certain time after the entry. If a profit has not been gained within the
time specified, the odds of it not occurring in the future increase and the position is best closed to
avoid further risk. A variation of the time stop is to reduce the position size as certain time
passes. This reduces the risk but leaves room for some further gain. Time stops are also used in
swing trading where the trade horizon is only a few days.
Targets
In our look at point-and-figure charts and, in some instances, at bar chart patterns, a price target
often is established. Exiting at a target can be an exit strategy. In short-term trading, money targets are often used: “If I make $500 on this trade, I’m out.” Targets can be tested as long as the
target calculation method is easily quantified. At a target, especially a longer-term target, position size may be reduced or trailing stops tightened using technical barriers, a money stop, or
volatility adjustment. In addition, once a target is reached, the system might have a reentry signal
that enters the position again if the target is exceeded by a certain amount or the trend continues.
Finally, a combination of target and time stop can adjust the target prices as time moves along.
This reduces the possibility of the added risk with time affecting profits. All target limits should
be accompanied by a trailing stop to avoid losing any profits already gained in case a target is not
reached.
Execution
Execution risk strategies are useful in short-term trading where profit margin often is related to
executed prices and slippage. Entry execution in most instances is related to when the system
gives a signal. A breakout system often has competition at the breakout level, for example. Exit
execution, on the other hand, can be controlled through experiment. A short-term system must
establish, when the system is not a stop-and-reverse, the time at which a better exit can be
obtained. Should the trade exit on the close for the day, the opening of the next day, or at some
time between when volatility usually declines? The opening is usually emotional and can be both
an advantage or disadvantage. The closing is used in most systems because it is the most rational
and eliminates overnight risk.
Another means of executing an entry or exit is scaling. This is done more by institutions,
which have large positions they need to accumulate or distribute, but it can equally be useful for
the smaller-sized trader or investor, who can accommodate more than one standard position size.
Scaling is the entering or exiting a position over time in small pieces. The initial execution
accomplishes part of the goal of the system, and over time, entries may be added at more advantageous prices. If they do not, at least a small position has been entered.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 23 Money and Risk Management

577

MONITORING SYSTEMS AND PORTFOLIOS
All systems and portfolios must be monitored for changes in behavior. The obvious change is
when the system is running a series of losses larger than usual. There are methods of monitoring
the system that will warn of changes, however, before any substantial loss is incurred.
Bryant (2001) suggests the following methods. Calculate the average profit factor over a
moving number of trades—say the last 20 trades—just as in an oscillator such as the stochastic.
Plot this calculation and then run a moving average through the plot and watch the behavior of
the profit factor window to its moving average. The profit factor should always be above 1.0, and
minor oscillations should be ignored. Any drift lower, however, is a warning of something potentially wrong. The recent calculation of a profit factor window should be compared with the entire
history of profit factors with a t-test to see if the deviation from the moving average is significant.
Perform a test run to see if the strings of wins and losses are within a normal distribution—
that is, if they are random or not. If no dependency is present, smaller size positions should be
traded after a win and larger after a loss. If the test shows a positive dependency, the run streak is
significant and positions should be reduced until the last trade is a win, at which point position
size can be increased.
The equity curve of the system should be checked periodically. One method is to sum the
profits and losses over a specified number of trades—say 30—and plot this figure in time. The
sum should remain positive, or equity momentum is declining. Another common method of
watching the equity curve is to calculate a moving average of equity. Breaking of the moving
average is not necessarily a signal for action but is a warning. If a forward line is calculated or a
trend line plotted and broken, action likely should be taken, as the system performance is deteriorating for some reason. Often when these signals of danger arise, the position size in the system
is reduced until evidence of recovery is seen or the problem resolved.
The sum or average of the percent of winning trades over a specified number of trades will
tell if there is a change in runs. A z-test can test whether the differences in proportions or percentages are significant and worth investigating further.

IF EVERYTHING GOES WRONG
Occasionally a portfolio model breaks down completely. Murphy’s Law takes hold, and everything that can go wrong does. At that point, the remedy is to close down the system and exit all
positions. A standard for closing the entire portfolio model is a dollar or percentage stop, usually
around 20%. No system should sustain that amount of loss without adjustment.

CONCLUSION
It pays to understand that trading and investing are not just a matter of entry into positions. Technical signals are useful for entry, but technical understanding of risk is even more important.
Remember the law of percentages and how difficult it is to recover from losses. Investing and

Download at www.wowebook.com

578

Part VIII System Testing and Management

trading are a matter of determining and controlling loss of capital. Entry is easy; best exit is difficult. Money management consists of a number of ways to measure and to protect from the risk
of loss either in individual trades or in complete systems. Exit strategies and the principles of
position size are likely the most important aspects of any portfolio model. Amateur investors and
traders do not often utilize these risk control measures, but if they did, considerably fewer disasters to pride and portfolios would result.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. You have tested a system and find that it has a losing percentage of 25%.
a. What is the chance of having a run of three losses?
b. What is the chance of having a run of four losses?
c. What is the chance of having a run of five losses?
2. Explain what is meant by the martingale betting system.
3. You have tested a system, and it has an MDD of 30%. You are willing to have a 45% drawdown. How might you use leverage with this system to maximize your return, given the
level of risk you are willing to take?
4. You are employed as a money manager and know you will lose your job if your drawdown
exceeds 15%. However, you have a system with a 30% MDD that you would like to use.
How can you structure your strategy to use the system, but at the same time not exceed a
15% drawdown?
5. A phrase heard frequently in finance is “more risk, more return.” If I invest my entire portfolio in one stock, High Growth Energy Corporation (HGEC), I am taking substantial risk
because “all my eggs are in one basket.” Should I expect a higher return than I would if I
had diversified my portfolio because I am taking so much risk? Explain.
6. Explain the difference in correlated (market) risk and uncorrelated (diversifiable) risk.
7. Explain how each of the following items would impact the percentage of capital you would
want to allocate to a particular system:
a. Average winning trade amount
b. Average losing trade amount
c. Percent of trades that are profitable
8. In the words of a Kenny Roger’s song, “You’ve got to know when to hold ‘em, know when
to fold ‘em.” How could these words be applied to money management?
9. Explain how stops are an important part of risk management.
10. Explain the meaning of the phrase, “Entry strategies carry no risk until executed.”

Download at www.wowebook.com

P A R T

I X

APPENDICES
A PPENDIX A B ASIC S TATISTICS
A PPENDIX B T YPES OF O RDERS AND O THER T RADER
T ERMINOLOGY

579

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

A P P E N D I X

A

BASIC STATISTICS

This appendix was written by Richard J. Bauer, Jr., PhD, CFA, CMT, Professor of Finance, Bill
Greehey School of Business, St. Mary’s University, San Antonio, Texas.

APPENDIX OBJECTIVES
By the end of this appendix, you should be familiar with

• The difference between descriptive and inferential statistics
• How to calculate common measures of central tendency and dispersion
• The process of regression
• The basic premises and statistics related to MPT
Because financial asset prices are numbers that often change with high frequency, it is not surprising that statistical techniques, which primarily concern the analysis of numerical data, have
been applied to investing in a variety of ways. According to Lind, Marchal, and Wathen (2002),
statistics is “the science of collecting, organizing, presenting, analyzing, and interpreting data to
assist in making more effective decisions” (p. 3). In this appendix, we examine the major statistical and quantitative techniques that have been used in connection to stock analysis, although
some of the techniques also apply to other assets. The primary goal of the appendix is to acquaint
you with these methods, not present them in detail.

RETURNS
In finance, we often refer to an investment’s return. Suppose that we buy a stock for $50, hold it
for one year while earning a $2 dividend, and then sell it for $53. We calculate the stock’s return
as follows:

581

Download at www.wowebook.com

582

Part IX Appendices

More generally, we can express the formula for returns as the following:
R

( Pt

Dt Pt
Pt 1

1

)

This formula can apply to bonds, options, futures, and so on. The only difference is that the
term for dividends would be replaced with interest or any other additional inflow over the period.
We usually talk about return, even though the return might not represent a realized gain.
Even if we continue to hold a stock, we can still talk about our return over the previous year;
essentially, we assume that we did sell it and calculate the return based on that assumption. There
are some important reasons for focusing on returns rather than prices. We learn about them later
in this appendix.

PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
The foundation behind most of statistics is probability. Probability is concerned with the question: Is it likely that the observed outcome occurred purely by chance? The notion of chance is
tricky. It is a topic that can lead to deep philosophical debates. For example, we could ask, “Did
life on earth appear purely accidentally (by chance), or was it somehow determined through
another mechanism?” If something is not random, then we say it comes about through a deterministic process.
We can think about stock prices in terms of random versus deterministic. Are stock prices
random? Alternatively, are stock returns random? On the other hand, are the deviations from an
average return random, while the average return is stable? As we saw in Chapter 4, “The Technical Analysis Controversy,” researchers have debated these questions and continue to debate these
questions. Regardless of your viewpoint, probability concepts and statistical concepts are widely
used in the study of investments.
One key concept in statistics is called independence. If two events are independent, then
whatever outcome there is from the first event does not affect the probability of the outcome for
the second event. Suppose you start flipping a coin that is perfectly weighted so that the probability of a tail is 1/2 and the probability of a head is 1/2. You flip the coin five times and get five
heads in a row. What is the probability of a head on the next flip? It is tempting to say that there
is a greater probability of a tail than a head because flipping six heads in a row happens only
rarely; however, heads is just as likely as tails on the next flip. The events of the six flips are all
independent; later outcomes are not affected by earlier outcomes. If you are performing statistical tests to analyze investments, you have to consider the concept of independence. Many statistical tests assume that the events are independent.
Two mathematical/statistical terms that are relevant to investing are permutations and
combinations. Let us assume that we are considering investing in five different stocks: CocaCola (KO), Pepsico (PEP), IBM (IBM), Microsoft (MSFT), and McDonald’s (MCD).
Permutations deal with rearrangements of items. Instead of listing the five stocks as KO,
PEP, IBM, MSFT, MCD, we could list them as IBM, KO, MCD, MSFT, PEP. With five unique
items, 120 different sequences could be listed. If we are going to buy some of each of the five
stocks, the order should not make a difference; therefore, we are not as interested in permutations.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Appendix A Basic Statistics

583

The concept of combinations has more application in investments. With combinations, the
sequence is not important. A portfolio consisting of KO and MSFT is the same as a portfolio consisting of MSFT and KO. With five stocks, there are five different one-stock portfolios we could
form, ten different two-stock portfolios, ten different three-stock portfolios, five different fourstock portfolios, and only one five-stock portfolio. It does not take very many stocks to generate
many different possible portfolios. Using 100 stocks as the universe to choose from, there are
75,287,500 5-stock portfolios that could be formed. Using 500 stocks (for example, the S&P
500) as the universe, there are 245,810,588,801,891,000,000 possible 10-stock portfolios.
In the previous discussion, we have assumed equally weighted amounts of the stocks. For
example, the amount invested in each of two stocks would be 50% of the total dollar amount
invested. If we consider unequal weightings, such as 78% of MSFT and 22% of KO, the number
of possible portfolios is limitless (assuming we can buy fractional amounts of each stock). You
can see how different investors could decide to hold very different portfolios, even if they are
choosing stocks from the same set, such as the Dow Jones Industrial stocks.

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
In statistics, a distinction is made between descriptive statistics and inferential statistics.
Descriptive statistics, as the name suggests, merely tries to describe or characterize data in a
shorthand manner. Inferential statistics tries to infer various statements about data based on
observed outcomes or assumptions about outcomes. We first examine descriptive statistics.
How would you describe a set of outcomes? How similar are the items in the set of outcomes? Are the outcomes generally high or low? How are two or more sets of outcomes related
to each other? Do they tend to be alike or different? Do the outcomes seem to be linked to time?
In other words, are outcomes later generally different from outcomes at earlier times? We try to
answer some of these questions with descriptive statistics.

Measures of Central Tendency
A logical starting point in describing a set of data is to ask: What is the typical outcome? In statistics jargon, typical outcome is called central tendency. There are several different measures of
central tendency, each one approaching things from a slightly different perspective.
To illustrate the different measures, assume that we have the following monthly return data
for nine months (January–September 2004) for PepsiCo (PEP): 1.4%, 9.8%, 4.1%, 1.2%, –2.1%,
1.4%, –7.2%, 0.0%, –2.2%.
Mean
The first measure of central tendency (and the one most frequently used) is the mean. This is
what we would normally refer to as the average. To calculate the mean, we would total the values
for the nine months and divide by 9:

Download at www.wowebook.com

584

Part IX Appendices

Notice that the average value, 0.7%, is not one of the observed values, even though we are
in effect saying that it is average outcome.
Median
The second measure of central tendency is the median. To calculate the median, we must first
arrange all the outcomes in rank order (this just means that we list them from lowest to highest).
The outcome that divides the list into two equal parts is the median. In this case, the median is
1.2%. Half of the outcomes are above 1.2%, while the other half are below 1.2%. The median
often is used when either the distribution of outcomes is skewed to more high values or more low
values, rather than being symmetric.
Mode
The third measure of central tendency is the mode. The mode is the outcome that occurs with the
highest frequency. In the preceding list, the mode is 1.4%. If the figures had more decimals, like
1.368%, there would likely not be any outcome that occurred more than once. In that case, the
mode would not be meaningful. This is why it is unlikely that someone would refer to the mode
when analyzing stock return data.
Geometric Mean
The three measures of central tendency just described are standard in statistics textbooks. However, there is another measure of the mean that often is used in finance: the geometric mean. The
mean described earlier is called the arithmetic mean. To illustrate the difference between the
arithmetic mean and the geometric mean, consider a four-year investment asset with annual
returns of 90%, –40%, 60%, and –50%. The arithmetic mean is calculated by adding the four
outcomes and dividing by 4. Doing this, we get a value of 15%, which sounds quite good as an
annual return. However, consider someone who had started with $1,000 and invested in the asset.
After year 1, he/she would have $1,900. After year 2, the investment would be worth $1,140.
After year 3, it would be worth $1,824. Finally, at the end of year 4, he/she would have only
$912. What happened to the 15% return of the arithmetic mean? Well, this example illustrates the
weakness of arithmetic means, especially when used with percentages.
The geometric mean in this example would be calculated by taking the fourth root (due to
four outcomes) of (1.90) (0.60) (1.60) (0.50), subtracting 1, and getting –2.3%. The 1.90 comes
from adding 1 to the decimal representation of 90%. By multiplying the initial investment of
$1,000 by (1.90) (0.60) (1.60) (0.50), we get $912, which was the ending value of the investment, referred to as terminal wealth. When we compute the terminal wealth divided by the initial
investment, we take the nth (where n is the number of outcomes) root of that number, and then
subtract 1 to get the geometric mean. If we were using a financial calculator, we could find the
geometric mean by putting the terminal value of $912 into the FV register, 4 into the n register,
$1,000 into the PV register, and then solving for the %i, or interest rate. Therefore, the geometric mean return is the same as what is called the compound rate of return.
It is important to understand the difference between the arithmetic mean, which is the
“average” we usually hear quoted, and the geometric mean. The geometric mean has a more
direct bearing on how much you will actually earn over the life of an investment. The geometric
