more significant a signal when it is broken. For example, support that has not been broken for
over a year is considered stronger than support that has held for only a few weeks or hours. In
Figure 4.1, note how the strongest, major support and resistance levels are the oldest and rarely
reached or breached.
3. The number of times tested: After age, this is the next most important criteria for judging
strength of a price level as s/r. The more times price hits a given level and that level holds, the
stronger it is and more significant if broken. Often age and number of times tested go together.
See Figures 4.1 and 4.2 for examples of how repeated tests of a price level define it as an s/r
area.
4. Multiple types of s/r converge: The more kinds of s/r that meet at one price or narrow price
range, the more they reinforce each other and strengthen that s/r point. The stronger each of these
are (older, tested, etc.), the stronger that s/r area. We'll see an example of mutually reinforcing s/r
indicators at the end of this chapter.

FIGURE 4.2 EURUSD Monthly Chart, September 1, 2005, to September 1, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Longer Time Frames Offer More Reliable S/R Indicators
The longer the chart's time frame, the more established and reliable the key price levels and other s/r
indicators.
For example, the EURUSD monthly chart shown in Figure 4.2 shows the major long-term s/r levels
from a nearly six-year period from late 2005 to late 2011. Deep support is around 1.1700 to 1.2000.
Strong resistance is around 1.6000. During this period, each represented extreme market sentiment
and a major reversal point. We can see that around 1.5000 and 1.4000 are significant levels.
Having more reliable data is one of the advantages that come from working on charts with daily or
longer time frame candles. We'll look at more advantages of longer time frame trading in Chapter 5.

Check Shorter Time Frames to Detect Interim S/R Levels
As we see above, different time frames contain different s/r points and trends. Over any given time
frame, a number of minor s/r points from shorter time frames can be nested within the upper and
lower price extremes that serve as the strongest s/r of different price levels of longer time frames.
The longer the time frame you're viewing, the more these minor levels appear.
Whatever time frame you trade from, you need to check shorter-term time frames (typically, about a
fifth of the time frame from which you trade) to be aware of these so you can anticipate possible
pauses or reversals and a possible need to exit a position at these levels. Sometimes, these are shortterm gyrations or pauses, and sometimes they can be the start of longer-term reversals.
For example, additional minor s/r levels show up more when we look at the same period covered
in the monthly chart in Figure 4.2 for the EURUSD, but a finer resolution is present via the weekly
chart shown in Figure 4.3 with some of the price areas that serve as more intermediate-term s/r.
FIGURE 4.3 EURUSD Weekly Chart, Week of September 25, 2005, to Week of July 24, 2011

Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The areas around 1.2600, 1.2800, 1.300, 1.4200, and 1.4800 serve as important s/r levels. Look
closer, and you'll find others as well.
The EURUSD daily chart in Figure 4.4 gives a clear view of the major s/r levels:
Firm support around 1.4340 and 1.4375
Firm resistance at 1.4515 and lesser resistance at 1.4440 and then 1.4410.
FIGURE 4.4 EURUSD Daily Chart, July 22 to August 1, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Within this same period, note the lesser s/r levels on the EURUSD hourly chart in Figure 4.5 for the
same period.
FIGURE 4.5 EURUSD 1 Hour Chart, July 22 to August 1, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

For example, we can see lesser s/r levels worth noting: 1.4255, 1.4345, 1.4360, 1.4375, 1.4480,
and so on.

TRENDS AND TREND LINES
In addition to being an essential element of TA in their own right, trend lines are one of the most basic
forms of s/r, along with price levels. First, here are some principles that apply to all kinds of trend
lines.

Trends Vary with Time Frame
Over any given period of time, price can only move up, down, or sideways in a trading range. The
sequence of candles in a given time frame forms the trend. I keep emphasizing time frame because the
strength and trustworthiness of trends (and other technical indicators) varies radically with time
frame, because they are more established and tested on the longer time frame charts. For whatever
time frame you trade from, remember to always check:
At least one longer time frame to get a sense of the bigger overall trend within which you're
trading. Ideally, you want to trade in the direction of that larger trend although there will often be
tradable counter moves within the longer-term trend. As a rule of thumb, the longer time frame
should be four to six times longer than the chart from which you trade. For example those trading
off of daily charts would check weekly charts for the bigger trend.
At least one shorter time frame to check the minor trends and s/r levels nested within your trading
time frame so you know where the trend may pause or reverse and be a possible exit point to take
profits or cut losses. Again the rule of four to six times applies. For example, those trading off of
daily charts would look at four-hour charts.
Similarly, time frames of much greater or lesser magnitude can usually be ignored.

Defining Trends, and Constructing Trend Lines
Here's how we define and construct trend lines:
Uptrend definition and trend line construction: An uptrend is comprised of a series of at least
two (preferably more) higher lows and higher highs. To construct an uptrend line, we will need
to connect at least two higher lows. For example, see the long rising line on left side of Figure
4.6? From the start of the uptrend on May 2 until May 27, 2011, we had an uptrend. Note the brief
downtrends within the overall uptrend. Such temporary counter moves are common and normal
within longer-term trends.
Downtrend definition and trend line construction: A downtrend is a series of at least two
(preferably more) progressively lower highs and lower lows. To construct a downtrend line, we
will need to connect at least two lower highs. For example, see the long falling line on the right
side of Figure 4.6. Note that there was also a normal shorter-term counter move higher in the
middle part of this downtrend in the first half of July 2011.
FIGURE 4.6 USDCAD Daily Chart, April 29, 2011, to July 22, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Like much of TA, a degree of subjectivity exists about how you apply and interpret these tools. For
example, some may choose to connect only closing prices to form their trend lines, and others may
include wicks to better reflect the overall direction or reflect a more conservative strategy of catching
only the deepest tests of support or resistance as entry points. Traders have different strategies
concerning how close to a trend line to enter or exit positions As with other kinds of s/r, view trend
lines as bands rather than precise lines of s/r.
Finally, in Chapter 2, you learned currencies trade in pairs. When we speak about a pair trending
higher or lower, remember that we're really referring to how the base currency (the one on the left) is
moving relative to the counter currency. In any given pair, one currency is moving up or down versus
the other. So, when traders see the EURUSD dropping, they may say the pair is falling or the USD is
rising versus the Euro. They're saying the same thing, just from opposite perspectives of the base and
counter currencies.

Types of Trend Lines
Trend lines come in four basic types:
1. Single up or downtrend lines
2. Channels, including flat trading ranges
3. Moving averages (MAs)
4. Bollinger Bands (BBs), a variation on MAs
These are the must-know basic tools of trend analysis. For further study, you'll want to learn about
Average Directional Index (ADX), Directional Movement Index (DMI), and others, which you can
research on the Internet.
Here you will learn how to use a set of analytical tools not just separately but in combinations,
because that's how you'll actually make trading decisions. That way you can get started making
intelligent, well-planned trades on practice accounts and then with real money. Unlike many forex
books, we'll avoid overloading you with superficial understandings of more tools than you can or

should use, with little idea of which to use, when to use them, or in what kinds of combinations.

Single Uptrend or Downtrend Lines
Let's look more at single trend lines. As the name suggests, these individual trend lines are lines we
draw to better highlight the overall price direction over a given period. Figure 4.6 provides an
example of how we plot up, down, or flat range trading trend lines.
The figure suggests:
An uptrend is a series of higher lows and higher highs, as we see from May 2nd to the 22nd. To
plot an uptrend line, draw a line that connects as many of the higher lows of the candle bodies as
possible, while best capturing the overall upward slope, even if that means having some
candlesticks either not touching the line or crossing it. Trends rarely move in neat straight lines,
so varying degrees of overlapping candles are okay.
A downtrend is a series of lower highs and lower lows. To plot a downtrend line, you want to
connect as many of the lower highs as possible while best showing the overall downward slope
even if that means having some outlier candlesticks.
Again, as with any other kind of s/r, trend lines should be viewed as bands or areas of s/r rather
than precise points, and candlesticks rarely line up in a straight rising, falling, or flat line. Thus, you
can have a few outlier candlesticks or wicks above or below your uptrend line. The goal is to best
capture the overall slope of the line. Again, variations in speed and direction within the overall
trend are expected.

Channels: Better Than Single Trend Lines
Instead of single trend lines, you can draw their clearer, more useful version: channels.
As the name suggests, channels (aka tunnels or sleeves) are parallel trend lines that surround a
rising or falling trend at an angle that shows the overall slope of the trend up, down, or sideways. As
with single trend lines, the goal is to draw lines that show the overall slope of the trend . We want
to capture the likely trading range, so don't worry if you've some outlying candles that extend beyond
or fall within your channel lines when keeping them parallel.
Figures 4.7 and 4.8 show some examples of a rising, flat, and falling channel.
FIGURE 4.7 Rising Channel AUDJPY Daily Chart, September 6, 2010, to February 21, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

FIGURE 4.8 Flat Channel or Trading Range AUDJPY Daily Chart, May 16, 2010, to September 14,
2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The big advantage of channels over single trend lines is they provide clearer, more useful
information than single trend lines. In addition to trend direction, they provide the following
advantages.

Channels Provide Guidance for Both Entry and Exit Points

As long as you're trading in the direction of the trend, these upper and lower limits may be attractive
entry and exit points if, as always, confirmed by other indicators.
Be cautious, however, about using these to trade against the trend (i.e., opening short positions at
the top of a rising channel or long positions at the bottom of a falling channel). Playing both ends of
the channel works well when you trade in the trend's direction, or if the slope of the channel is very
mild and the channel is wide. Don't trade against the trend if the trend is steep and/or the range of the
channel is narrow, because you may run out of room to exit profitably if the price doesn't move in
your favor fast enough. When you trade against a channel, resistance gets closer with each candle and
the odds of a successful trade drop rapidly.

Beware of Trading against the Trend Using Channels as S/R for Entries
and Exits—An Example
In Figure 4.9, see how an otherwise well-planned trade can be foiled by trading against a channel that
is sloping too steeply or is too narrow.
FIGURE 4.9 Falling Channel EURCHF Daily Chart, April 11 to June 24, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Look what can happen when you trade against the slope or trend using channel lines as entry and
exits:
1. You correctly identify a good entry point for a long EURCHF position near the bottom of the
downtrending EURCHF.
2. You entered near the low of the day around 1.2485, with a planned sell limit to take profits
entered in advance on your trading platform around 1.2701, a realistic target which the price had
hit two out of the three prior days.
3. You used solid risk management. Your planned loss was only about a third of your likely gain.
You'd earn about 216 pips, so you could afford to set a generously wide stop loss order 63 pips

down at 1.2422 and have a better than 3:1 reward-risk ratio. If you're correct, you gain over three
times what you'd lose if your stop loss is hit. When we cover risk management, you'll see how
these kinds of reward-risk ratios are what we want to remain profitable even when we're wrong
the majority of our trades.
4. Theoretically, this looks like a worthwhile trade setup backed by sound risk management.
You've a low-priced entry, and your likely loss is only about a third of the likely gain.
5. However, even though the channel was wide enough to trade profitably (over 300 pips) and
you had entered near the bottom of it, the trend was falling hard and, by May 16, the upper trend
line (resistance) was below what had been an otherwise realistic profit-taking point only five
days earlier. Now that profit target was right at resistance and no longer a good bet.
6. If you were alert and lucky, you might have decided to exit that day, even at the low for the day
at 1.2565 with a profit of 82 pips, not bad, but about the same size as your stop loss of 63 pips, a
reward-risk ratio slightly better than 1:1. To stay profitable over the long run, you will want your
gains from winning trades to produce at least two to three times the losses from your losers. That
way you're profitable even with fewer than 50 percent winning trades. More on this when we
cover RAMM.
7. If you weren't monitoring the trade, your stop loss was hit May 20 as the falling upper trend
line held as resistance and price kept falling.
The big lesson here is don't trade against a channel's trend unless the slope is gentle and the channel
is wide. When in doubt, don't. Use the resistance line only as an area for taking profits.

Channels Offer Stronger Trend Reversal Signals from Breakouts in the
Opposite Direction of the Channel
The other big advantage of channels over single trend lines is that when the lower line of a rising
channel or upper line of a falling channel is breached, that is a potentially significant trend reversal
signal because such a move requires a significant change in market sentiment. Breakouts in the
direction of the channel are not a signal of changing sentiment and often signal the trend may have
spent itself as the final supporters of the trend have joined in.
Trading sideways moving markets like that shown in Figure 4.9 requires the use of channels to
gauge the height of that range and locate s/r. Their distance should capture the overall range even if
some candlesticks extend outside or remain well within the lines.
Even though trend lines are useful tools, their construction can often be subjective, and that's why
we view them as areas or bands of s/r rather than as precise, discrete lines.
To avoid the subjective human element of trend lines, we turn to moving averages, the product of an
objective mathematical calculation.

Moving Averages (MAs)
As the name implies, moving average (MA) lines for a given period don't plot the price at a given
moment. Instead, each point on these lines is the average closing price for a certain number of prior
completed candlesticks or periods.
For example, at any given point in time, a 200-period MA plots the average price over the past 200

periods. On a one-minute chart, in which each candlestick shows price movement over one minute,
the 200-period MA is comprised of a series of average closing prices for the past 200 one-minute
candles. On a daily chart, the 200-period moving average shows a series of average closing prices
over the past 200 days.
As each new closing price is added, the oldest one is dropped from the calculation, hence the term
moving average, or MA. In other words, what makes these MAs is that for each new candlestick, the
calculation replaces the oldest closing price with the latest one. For example, over a 251-candlestick
period, the 200-period MA calculation would drop the closing price from the 250th candle and
replace it with the one from the most recent, the 251st period. These 200 most recent closing prices
would be totaled and divided by 200 to give the latest price level of the 200-period MA. This is the
formula for the most basic MA, the Simple Moving Average (SMA).

Advantages of MAs
MAs have two advantages over the other types of trend lines previously discussed:
1. They clarify trend direction: As a series of average prices over a given period rather than realtime prices, MAs filter out random price movements and present a smoother, clearer picture of
the trend for the period they cover versus the series of candlesticks. Because MAs are dynamic
and changing trend lines, MAs can provide a useful look at the more subtle price fluctuations
within the overall trend that hand-drawn straight trend lines or channels will miss.
2. They are often more reliable s/r because everyone's MAs look the same: They're built from an
objective mathematical formula, so unlike trend and channel lines, a given type (SMA, EMA,
WMA) and duration of MA for a given time frame looks the same on everyone's chart and
presents the same picture of trend and s/r for all viewing it. That's a valuable attribute. By
watching the most widely followed MAs, you have a better idea of what the rest of the herd
believes to be the s/r of these trend lines. That allows you to anticipate and exploit their moves.

Disadvantages of Simple MAs and Their Alternatives
The main disadvantage of using single SMA lines is that by their nature of being a series of average
prior prices, they lag the current price. We'll see later in Chapter 8 that using multiple MA lines
together can turn MAs from lagging indicators into leading indicators.
To partially remedy this time lag for individual SMAs, Exponential Moving Averages (EMAs) and
Weighted Moving Averages (WMAs) are available. Leaving aside the mathematical distinctions,
know that though SMAs weigh the oldest and newest prices equally, WMAs and EMAs assign greater
weight to the most recent data and are a bit more responsive to recent price changes. No clear
consensus exists on which is better or more popular. Whether one or another works better for you
will be a matter of experiment (see later discussion of back testing). The more responsive WMA and
EMA are more accurate if recent prices are more indicative of where the trend is going. Sometimes
that is true, and sometimes it's not.

The Most Important MAs to Watch
The 5-, 10-, 20-, 50-, 100-, and 200-period MAs are widely followed in most markets and time

frames. They are the standard sampling of shorter and longer-duration MAs and provide a degree of
self-fulfilling prophecy. They indicate s/r because traders believe they are s/r points. The longerduration MAs are particularly popular s/r indicators. For example, even the mainstream financial
press aimed at laymen will usually mention if a major stock index crosses its 50- or 200-day MA.
The forex media (which exists almost exclusively on the Internet) will quickly note if a major pair
hits or crosses one of the longer-duration MAs like its 50-, 100-, or 200-day MA. Similarly, because
MAs in longer timeframes are older, 20-, 50-, or 200-day, week, and month MAs get more attention
because they provide much more significant s/r than those durations in shorter time frames.
By all means, tinker with slight variations on these. For example, some prefer to shorten their
sampling period to get a head start on the crowd (at the risk of getting a premature, false signal).
Slightly longer or shorter sampling periods have their advantages and disadvantages. Following is a
summary.

MA Duration and Age: Advantages and Disadvantages
To understand and use MAs, you need to understand the relative strengths and weaknesses of the
longer- and shorter-duration MAs, and the older ones you'll see on daily to monthly charts versus the
younger MAs in the shorter time frames. Here's what you need to know.

Shorter Durations (5, 10, 20 Periods): More Responsive to Price
Changes, Weaker, Less Significant S/R
The advantages:
More responsive to price changes and are quicker to indicate a change in trend.
Are better at showing short-term trends.
May provide warning of trend changes when they cross longer-duration MAs (see Chapter 8 on
MA crossovers).
The disadvantages:
Weaker, less significant s/r, so they don't provide as reliable signals of trend continuation or
reversal as the longer-duration MAs when they are breached or when they hold.
Shorter-duration MAs don't display the overall trend as well as longer-duration MAs when
prices are bouncing around because the shorter-duration MAs follow each price move so
closely.

Longer Duration (50, 100, 200 Periods): Less Responsive to Price
Changes, Stronger, More Significant S/R
The advantages:
Stronger, more significant s/r provide more reliable signals of trend continuation or reversal
when they are breached or when they hold.
They are better than the shorter-duration MAs at displaying the overall trend when prices are
volatile because a more sustained trend is needed to move these MAs.
The disadvantages:

The longer the duration, the further they lag current price action.

The Same Advantages and Disadvantages Apply When Comparing
Younger versus Older MAs
The same durations on longer time frame charts are older than those on shorter time frame charts.
Thus a 200-day MA is a much more significant s/r than a 200-hour MA but is less responsive to
price and trend changes.

Examples of Long- and Short-Term MA Behavior
Let's look at some examples of how long- and short-term MAs behave. In Figures 4.10 and 4.11, the
shorter MAs, the more closely they follow price. The longer the MAs, the smoother they are and the
less often they tend to be breached.
FIGURE 4.10 EURUSD Weekly Chart, November 23, 2008, to October 1, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.
