FINGER STRATEGIES
Finger finder often predicts a reversal within the signal time frame as well as the trend below the
candle. The long shadow foretells larger-scale price direction when other conditions support the
event. The significance of these one-bar patterns relates directly to their location within the overall
charting landscape. Fingers represent major swing levels when they appear on high volume or near
significant S/R. But they lose significance when buried within congestion or the impact of larger
candles.
Candle patterns work well at the intraday level when sufficient liquidity makes bar range
meaningful. As with the coiled spring, limit these techniques to stocks that trade high volume
within each bar. Then apply all three primary candlestick signals with confidence. But take time to
cross-verify their relationship to major S/R swing levels. Also estimate average bar range for that
chart on that day. Then look for dojis or hammers that print well above average and haramis that
print well below average.
Professionals trigger finger signals when they clean out stops at the edge of congestion. This
activity occurs for two reasons. A slow market may bore participants and the quick price expansion
captures their attention. Or the professionals may want to relieve demand on one side of the market
so that trend can break out in the other direction. For example, a pool of sell stops below congestion
may be hard to resist just before a stock prepares for a new rally.
These congestion dojis and hammers give away insider secrets. Price should not jump back into
congestion if buying or selling pressure is great enough to initiate a true breakout. The activity
impacts market chemistry because it relieves stress in one direction by filling the standing orders.
Determine the point in range development that these candles print. Finger reversals represent
significant price discovery in the restless period at the start of new congestion, but those that appear
after volatility dissipates signal a market ready to cycle into positive feedback.
Odds favor a strong move against the direction of a significant stop gun event. Estimate the strength
of this spring action by the length and volume of the candle. Small violations with little
participation will quickly evolve into more rangebound action. But long-legged dojis that print on
high volume may signal an immediate vertical break in the opposite direction. These can end the
congestion phase with no empty zone or other quiet interface.
The harami cross combines the inside day pattern with doji power. This special formation prints
when the harami real body has identical opening and closing prices. When one appears inside the
range of a prior tall bar, it can represent a significant turning point for that market. Look for a longlegged doji shadow to increase the odds of a strong reversal. Drill down to a lower time frame and
study the charting landscape below this pattern. It often reveals an embedded 2B reversal. Price
pushes into a new low or high but springs back through S/R by that bar’s close. This predictive
formation works best as a reversal, but consider pattern failure setups as well.
Ignore candle signals in all thin or flat markets. Filter volume closely when building watch lists to
keep these stocks out of consideration. Single bars become meaningless in these environments
because wide spreads, noise, and manipulation draw many false patterns. Expand to a weekly or

longer chart view, but only for general investment decisions. Move on to other timing tools if
considering this type of stock as a short-term trading vehicle.

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Aggressive traders can sell short at doji tops and go long at doji bottoms in recognition of this
candlestick’s hidden power. Place a stop loss just outside the bar’s range because any violation
negates the reversal signal. More profitable setups often appear a few bars later. Most new reversals
face at least one test before they yield to substantial price change. After a finger event, look for a
double top or bottom to form in the next-lower time frame. This will complete the reversal pattern
and point to a low-risk execution level.
Pullback tests to finger highs or lows often take place within three to five bars. Expect price to
expand sharply when the finger breaks, especially if overbought-oversold indicators show no
divergence. Specifically look for the new trend to surge as it passes the extreme of the wave
generated by the initial candle reversal. Shift down one time frame when the finger holds and trade
the setup according to classic double-bottom or top strategy.
Examine any gap created by the bar after a candle event. If price action printed a gap just before the
candle, this gap echo completes an island reversal in the lower time frame and an abandoned baby
pattern on the signal chart. In either case, those gaps should offer solid support or resistance on the
pullback. Therefore they represent a potential low-risk entry level.
Combine candlestick analysis with technical indicators to reduce whipsaws and improve
profitability. Use short-term Stochastics to verify that a stock sits at an extreme overboughtoversold level when an apparent reversal prints. Look for the MACD Histogram to change direction
at the same time. Find support through MA ribbons that confirm the changing patterns. But above
all else, combine candles with Bollinger Bands to confirm or refute trading signals.
Major finger reversals should strike through Bollinger Band extremes or the center band itself. Price
action at the outer bands often rings a louder signal than the center plot. Shadows should pierce the
band sharply while the real body stays within the boundary. Look for the band to remain
perpendicular to the candle after the immediate crossover. This reveals strong resistance to further
movement in that direction. Sometimes candles will align on band edges through several time
frames. This predicts an immediate and significant reversal opportunity.
Watch the first wave out of a candle bottom or top. Its extension reveals which trend the finger
event is trying to reverse. The move after a doji or hammer often completes a first rise/first failure
pattern within the smaller time frame. If it succeeds, it greatly reduces the odds that a return test will
fail. Also examine the angle of the initial thrust. The stock may print a V-bottom or top and offer no
pullback opportunity before the new wave continues.

FIGURE 10.3
Finger finders trigger powerful signals when combined with Bollinger Bands. Long candle shadows throughout
this 60-minute Mercury chart point to pullbacks and reversals when they push outside of the band extremes.
Notice how the 4/24 action reveals the start of a major rally through two long shadows at the lower band’s edge
within a well-defined island reversal pattern.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

APPLICATIONS
Trade the finger finder with one eye on the time frame below the chart of interest. Judge the extent
of the reversal through other charting landscape features and use the signal wisely. Finger events
often play out within two to three bars. Consider whether a test of the finger extreme is likely from
its location and the price action on the subsequent bar. Always keep Bollinger Bands in view when
examining finger finder setups. Action at the extremes offers more opportunity than swings through
less dynamic price zones.

HIDDEN 100
Finger finder signals may uncover impending first rise/first failure events in the time frame below
the chart. These allow low-risk entry after price violates the 62% retracement on its thrust towards
100%. The reward for this last 38% must be high enough to justify a position. The setup also
generates profits when other dynamics allow entry before price passes the 62% retracement.
Description
•
•

Signal candle range will be well above normal for that market.
Signal candle shadow will reach through Bollinger Band extremes and reverse.

•
•

The length of the shadow will not exceed 62% of the price swing that terminates at the
candle extreme.
Look for vertical V-bottom or V-top price movement with few retracements in the smaller
time frame chart.

The setup works because of V-bottom and V-top trend dynamics. Pass on the trade if the
retracement already exceeds 62% in the smaller time frame. This dissipates the potential reward
because the signal comes on closing price and entry must wait for an open market. Manage the
setup defensively—many reversals will fail right at 62% rather than complete the FR/FF pattern.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 10.4)
•
•
•

Newport prints a bearish head and shoulders pattern.
Price breaks the neckline (1) and the selloff carries into a test of the psychotic trendline (2),
where it bounces strongly.
The rally (3) ejects in vertical movement and returns to a test of the head and shoulders
neckline (1) from below.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 10.5)

A tight symmetrical triangle (2) starts to form as the market closes on the signal day.
The triangle sits right below the neckline (5) and the 62% retracement.
The prior short-term lows print horizontal resistance (1) at whole number 40.
Aggressive traders can enter the triangle breakout as it pierces the neckline. The small move sets
up a pattern failure event for those still short the head and shoulders formation and generates
substantial buying power. Place a tight stop loss just under the apex of the triangle at 35.
Price bases for 4 hours above 62% (3) but below horizontal resistance (1). Top Bollinger Band
opens to higher prices.
Enter long on the morning gap above 40 with a stop several ticks below (1). Exit at market as
close to the 100% retracement (6) as possible.
Market shows a complete V-bottom pattern (4).
Reward:Risk

The setup goes against classic head and shoulders rules, which view the first pull-back to the
neckline as a low risk short-sale opportunity. The triangle tells the swing trader to make other plans
and watch for pattern failure. The four bars above the 62% retracement strongly suggest that a
further decline is unlikely and the next morning’s gap presents low-risk long entry.

2B FINGER
Finger finder shadows may point to small 2B bottoms or tops that mark important reversals through
several time frames. View this pattern in different chart lengths to focus setup timing. The smaller
price action often points to a major profit opportunity one or two bars ahead of the crowd.
Description

•
•
•
•

Signal candle range will be well above normal for that market.
Signal candle shadow will reach through Bollinger Band extremes and reverse.
Shadow reaches past an intermediate high or low but the candle real body closes within S/R.
Chart pattern within the same time frame as the signal shows a potential reversal within the
next two to four bars.
FIGURE 10.4

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

This setup illustrates the importance of location and timing in the interpretation of finger finder
signals. While the candle focuses on events in the next-lower time frame, the proximity to larger
breakout and reversal levels aligns the setup into a 3D event that carries greater profit potential.

FIGURE 10.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Setup Tactics (FIGURE 10.6)
•
•
•
•
•
•

Antec completes a first failure pattern (1) on the signal bar.
A declining trendline (2) marks progress on the 6-week selloff.
The finger pierces an 8-day triple bottom (3) but closes well above the violated low in a 2B
reversal that also signals a pattern failure on a small descending triangle (4).
The signal bar rises to the declining trendline that now converges with the last high (5) and
whole number 40.
Highs at (6) and (7) mark resistance and price targets if price breaks out of the downtrend.

FIGURE 10.6

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 10.7)

Place a Fib grid over the correction to track the new uptrend.
First bar after the finger signal sits below the trendline and offers little evidence of the imminent
breakout.
The next bar breaks the down trendline (3) and price carries to the center Bollinger Band, where
it forms a small harami (1) on the daily chart.
Initial breakout entry requires fast reflexes as the market carries much higher in the next few
hours. The best opportunity comes at the top of the small 3rd watch pattern (4) that forms
whole number resistance at 40.
The harami triggers a buy signal when the next bar gaps up (5). The gap prints right at 50% and
raises the possibility that it represents a continuation gap which will carry the market
through a first rise retracement.

Trend mirrors (6) generate strong whipsaws between the 38% and 62% barriers that make lowrisk entry difficult to locate.
Price reaches 100% retracement at the Bollinger Band top (2) (8).

FIGURE 10.7

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk

The market offers no narrow-bar entry prior to the trendline break. This forces momentum tactics
that buy morning strength or stand aside to wait for a good pullback. The 3rd watch may present a
small window of opportunity on the 5-minute or 60-minute chart. Many whipsaws shake out weak
hands between 41 and 46. Overall the setup favors position traders that hold about 1 week and
protect profits with a loose trailing stop. But shorter-term traders never face a loss greater than 2-½
points.

DEATH STAR

Bollinger Bands and the shooting star candle often combine forces to signal a major reversal after a
strong rally. Together they flag an overbought market and high odds short sale that requires a very
strong stomach. Death stars uncover volatile markets that trap the momentum crowd and offer no
escape. Keep in mind that this setup should trigger a quick selloff. Get out without hesitation when
price just sits there or starts to whipsaw.

Description
•
•
•
•
•
•

Vertical expansion bars precede the finger signal.
Price pierces the upper Bollinger Band on two or more candles before the signal.
The signal prints a long-legged shooting star with a tall upper shadow and small real body
close to the candle’s low.
The signal prints a candle close to 100% outside the upper band.
The bar after the signal goes no higher than one-half the range of the shooting star.
The bar after the signal closes within the upper Bollinger Band limits.
FIGURE 10.8

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Always review new death stars through examination of the lower time frame to identify natural
short sale entry levels. Look for a double top test before price moves substantially lower. Profitable
execution can be quite difficult because this pattern occurs in very volatile market conditions.
Maintain a tight stop loss and consider a longer or shorter holding period to escape the whipsaws.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 10.8)
•
•
•
•
•
•

Apple Computer starts a 3-day vertical rally in the low 120s.
Price carries to the top of a rising trendline (1) and breaks out strongly for two bars.
The last two bars before the finger signal expand out of the upper Bollinger Band.
The signal bar (2) opens outside the band (3) and closes right at its edge with the candle
range almost 100% outside the band.
The rally forms a complete five-wave structure (4).
The intraday price action (5) shows a small triangle breakout and major selloff during the
last hour.
FIGURE 10.9

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 10.9)

•
•

•

•

•
•
•
•

•

The reversal breaks through the center Bollinger Band (4) on the 60-minute chart before the
daily close. This sets up an aggressive short scalp as it carries below 138.
Better opportunity comes after the bounce at 38% (5). A weak rally rises to the 62%
retracement of the initial selloff (6). Note how the top Bollinger Band narrows toward the
high at 145.
Cross-verification signals an excellent short sale entry. Place a stop loss just above the apex
of the small triangle that prints before the 150 top. This also marks the upper Bollinger Band
level.
A bounce starts at 138 after a morning down gap but can’t reach the original entry. Use a
gap exit strategy to depart on the open or before the gap fills. Longer holds can consider an
exit near the double bottom test under 136.
An Adam and Eve reversal (9) breaks at 136. Short entry here faces several whipsaws but
pays off with an 11-point decline (8).
Price reverses off the 62% retracement and bounces strongly.
Review of the 60-minute price action reveals a possible ABC correction (7).
The daily chart focuses attention on horizontal S/R at 132 (1). Congestion forms under this
line (2) at the center Bollinger Band but shakes out short-term traders with violent whipsaws
for 8 days.
The congestion finally breaks and the selloff pierces the bottom Bollinger Band (3) after a
20-point drop and reverses.

Reward:Risk

This volatile setup presents greater risk for 1–3-day swing strategies than intraday or position
trades. Major whipsaws tend to shift through different time frames as a trend progresses. Swing
traders may need to respond quickly and shift holding period if their strategy becomes the current
shakeout target. This requires advanced trading skills and a well-developed sense of market timing.

11 CHAPTER
HOLE-IN-THE-WALL

CHARACTERISTICS
Active trends rarely flip over quickly. Crowds feed dying rallies and selloffs long after the real
move ends. As volatility slowly winds down, cash finally dries up and a new primary impulse
erupts in the opposite direction. So it goes with most market cycles. But under rare circumstances,
shock events can sharply quicken this evolutionary process so that a new trend begins in a single
bar.

TRADE MECHANICS
The greedy crowd drives rallies higher and higher. But when the herd runs for the hills, markets will
fall from their own weight. The hole-in-the-wall setup recognizes this dynamic process in
action. After reaching a new intermediate high in an uptrend, the stock gaps sharply out of a rally
as external force shocks the bull psyche and damages it. Volume on the decline exceeds the last
rally impulse and flags a sudden new downtrend.
The hole-in-the-wall ends the preceding trend and may trigger profitable trading conditions.
Measure opportunity through the width of the gap, the participation intensity, and the relative
strength just before the event. Study the intense conflict from one side of the trend to the other. This

reveals whether that market might rally back into gap resistance or just roll over and head lower.
This bell offers several natural short sale entry points. It also presents long-side swings for more
aggressive traders.
FIGURE 11.1
A hole-in-the-wall gap ends Breakaway’s 50-point rally. These sudden breaks allow swing traders to quickly shift
strategy and prepare for a downtrend well ahead of the crowd. Note how the hole violates a major trendline and 20-day
EMA support as it sets up a classic head and shoulders reversal pattern.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Not all holes ignite significant downtrends. The subsequent action may signal the start of a dynamic
trend in the opposite direction. Or it may represent an intermediate move that flags sideways
conditions until price fills the gap and carries higher. These different outcomes reflect the intensity
of the shock and subsequent price tests. Even in minor events, the first pullback into the gap should
not fill. This offers a consistent short sale opportunity regardless of the eventual trend. Every hole
has different strength characteristics. Take the time to measure the potential outcomes before
committing long-term positions.
Mindless hole selling may end on the first bar in an exhaustion move or continue for some time.
The short-term direction after the gap determines the nature of the opportunity. The best hole setup
generally occurs on a pullback to test the break, but a tight sell stop placed just above the open may
produce fast and substantial profits. In either case, swing traders must understand the mechanics at

work to pick the best spots for execution. Most strategies should stand aside as the gap occurs and
follow price bars to the first bottom. Then draw a Fibonacci grid from this low to the last high and
see how the gap fits in the retracement scheme.
Edwards and Magee indirectly point out the hole-in-the-wall in Technical Analysis of Stock Trends.
They highlight the important second gap that completes an island reversal pattern in their discussion
on trend theory. This presents one variation of the hole. Although they refer to this violation as a
countertrend breakaway gap, it doesn’t meet the rules they list for that event. In fact, the hole
doesn’t match characteristics for any of the three classic trend gaps.
Edwards and Magee categorize gaps by their physical momentum properties and forecasting value.
Breakaway, continuation, and exhaustion gaps define clear focal points for price action that appear
over and over again through dynamic trends. But beyond these few formations, the authors dismiss
other gap phenomena as having little value. This is simply not true. While these classic definitions
were once adequate, the swing trader now requires fresh gap tactics.
Hole-in-the-wall adds a new gap into the trader’s toolbox. The pattern looks like an exhaustion gap
that sits on the wrong side of a high. This raises the possibility that the event may actually print a
breakaway gap in the opposite direction. But those shocks generally require a basing period before
the big break, so the hole fits into its own niche within pattern analysis. But rather than being a new
phenomenon, this classic gap has been hiding in stock charts for years.
FIGURE 11.2
Breakaway prints a June hole on the 60-minute chart. Intraday strategies short first-hour gaps to take advantage of
new breakdowns before position traders see the closing bar. Apply momentum tactics that follow the intraday
decline with a tight trailing stop. Then draw a Fib grid and sell the first test into the hole when resistance crossverifies at a major retracement level.
