
68

Currency Strategy

the fact that we can buy a mutual fund or unit trust that focuses on Thai or New Zealand stocks,
safe in the knowledge that money transfer, clearing, settlement and broker account processes
are all seamless. Where we travel, we presume now also that we can invest. All this, we take for
granted. Yet, to our grandparents, this would be a wholly foreign idea. It was not that long ago
that capital investment focused domestically rather than abroad. Over the last 30 years, just as
trade has expanded so has the means by which to ﬁnance that trade, which is of course where
capital ﬂows come in. Indeed, since the war, it is only in the last 30 years that the proportion of
trade within the overall US economy has grown signiﬁcantly, from around 10% to 15%. As US
companies have expanded abroad, so their need for ﬁnancing abroad has also grown. So-called
“natural” hedging involves the matching of assets and liabilities. Thus, a US company may
invest in a factory in Poland and wish to ﬁnance that asset by raising Polish zloty debt, as an
example. Previously, it was not possible to do this kind of funding operation given regulations
against foreigners within emerging markets. In the developed world, also, regulations against
capital raising and movement also inhibited commercial trade for much of this century. As
barriers to trade have fallen away, so have the barriers to capital as a means to ﬁnance that
trade. Further, as these barriers have fallen, capital ﬂow growth has been a multiple of trade
growth. This can only be sufﬁciently explained by an anecdote. Every day, the equivalent of
a year’s worth of global trade passes through the global currency market! Every week, the
currency market trades the equivalent of the Gross Domestic Product of the United States! The
development of capital ﬂow began as a natural ally and accompaniment to commercial trade.
In the past two or three decades, it has far outgrown it.
A second trend has been the realization of the growing importance of capital ﬂow with
respect to the various emerging market crises that have occurred in the 1990s. It had also been
assumed that capital ﬂows were a wholly beneﬁcial thing, that they helped a country to grow,
indeed that they were the fuel for economic growth, not just at a national but at a global level.
For this reason, when capital outﬂows were seen as responsible for the ﬁnancial and economic
collapse of Mexico in 1994–1995, much of Asia in 1997–1998, Russia in 1998, Brazil in 1999
and Turkey in 2001 there was an understandable backlash. Having been seen as the saviour
of emerging markets, helping them to emerge from the poverty of the early post-war years,
capital ﬂows were suddenly portrayed as a heartless villain, preying on the weak. The reality of
course is that they were never an entirely beneﬁcial force in the ﬁrst place, just as they are not
now the villain. To ascribe to capital ﬂows human characteristics is to miss the point. Capital
ﬂows are neither trying to beneﬁt nor are they trying to hurt a country. The only reason for
them to be there is to make a return, to make money. If they can make a sufﬁcient return, they
will be attracted to a country and stay there. If they cannot make a return, they will leave. It is
that simple. They are neither moral nor immoral. They are amoral — and that is exactly how
it should be.
When national leaders have not been busy blaming money or “capitalism” — or the most
efﬁcient way of exchanging money — for all manner of ills, they have been blaming the money
“changers”. This is nothing new. National “leaders” have been doing this since before Christ.
Historically, “traders” or “moneychangers” have been looked down upon by polite society from
the time of the Romans. Thus, it was no surprise to see during the “big bangs” that took place
in the 1970s and 1980s in the US and the UK that people from less privileged backgrounds
grabbed the opportunity to participate in those ﬁnancial revolutions with both hands. Skills
that were learned in the back streets of Brooklyn or the East End were every bit if not more
useful — if given the opportunity — than belonging to the right school or club. Only when these
individuals made enough money at trading to be noticed did that polite society pay attention,

Flow

69

but only grudgingly. Society was not alone in looking down on such people. Governments
and national leaders did the same and always have done — and probably always will do.
Thus, when the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Dr. Mahathir, railed against foreign exchange
speculation, shouting that it should be “banned”, at the IMF meetings in Hong Kong in 1997,
this should not be seen as an isolated incident but part of a rich seam and history of conﬂict
between governments and traders. Mahathir is far from alone in thinking or voicing such views.
Some years earlier, after the 1993 ERM crisis, none other than the Chancellor of Germany at the
time, Helmut Kohl, was reported as saying foreign exchange speculation was an Anglo-Saxon
conspiracy against the goal of a united and single Europe, presumably forgetting in the process
the origin of the word “Saxon”.
When economic or ﬁnancial calamity occurs, it is not surprising that governments react
against this, not least because they do not want to seem to be blamed themselves and thus
seek to blame others. In the context of capital ﬂows, however, there seems to be a double
standard. Governments are usually quite happy to receive large amounts of capital inﬂow. It is
only when that capital starts to ﬂow out again, putting pressure on exchange and interest rates,
that governments protest against “speculation”. From this, we arrive at a simple capital ﬂow
model:
A buyer = an investor
A seller = a speculator
This is of course nonsense and a gross simpliﬁcation of what is actually a complex issue.
Nonetheless, it is an attitude that is widely prevalent among national governments. Whatever
the case, the perception that capital outﬂows have been behind the economic and ﬁnancial
collapse of a number of countries has produced outrage in these countries. Meanwhile, it has
also had the somewhat more beneﬁcial effect of causing supranational organizations such as
the IMF and the World Bank, along with central banks, to spend a substantial amount of time
and effort in studying capital ﬂows and their effect.

3.1 SOME EXAMPLES OF FLOW MODELS
The ﬁeld of currency analysis has in the past few years developed a number of models to
track capital ﬂows, the number of which has grown in line with increasing transparency of the
available data. Most currency trading takes place in the “over-the-counter” market; that is to
say over the phone between bank dealers. However, until relatively recently banks did not think
to track their own transactions for the purpose of prediction. The market was thought to be
a vast pool of transactions and sentiment, which it was virtually impossible to track. No one
model could hope to track the entire currency market. In addition, it was doubtful that banks
would be prepared to hand over their ﬂow data to an outside party and risk it getting into the
hands of their competitors. Thus, the ﬁrst ﬂow models came from the available data at the time,
either from the “open outcry” exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange, the Chicago
Board of Trade or the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, or from ofﬁcial data sources such as the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the US Treasury or the Bank of England. For instance, the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange produces every week its IMM (International Money Market)
Commitments of Traders report.

70

Currency Strategy

3.1.1 Short-Term Flow Models
The IMM Commitments of Traders Report
Unlike the OTC data that is currently available, there are two major advantages with data
from open outcry exchanges — it is available relatively quickly after the trade is made and it
is transparent. The rules of the exchange concerned require not only full documentation for
each trade, but also the type of account making the trade. The weekly IMM Commitments of
Traders report collates trades made in currency futures contracts through the IMM trading pit
in Chicago by various types of accounts. For our purposes, the most useful type of account
that we are interested in is what the IMM euphemistically calls “non-commercial accounts”.
In layman’s terms, this means speculators or accounts that trade currencies on their own with
no attached underlying asset.
Granted, the volumes that go through the IMM currency futures’ contracts pale by comparison with the regular interbank market. However, here again, the advantage is that the IMM data
is transparent. Moreover, given that the non-commercial account trades represent the activity
of the speculative community on the IMM, this can be used as a reﬂection of overall speculative activity in those currencies. Indeed, one can go further and say that precisely because
IMM volumes are small relative to the interbank market, a notable speculative position in a
currency pair on the IMM may actually be reﬂective of a similar but much larger position in
the interbank market. Before going on further, it is probably useful to take a look at an actual
IMM Commitments of Traders report and seek to analyse it, just as a currency analyst would
for their traders and clients. In Table 3.1 we present the IMM Commitments of Traders report
as of November 20, 2001.
As the table shows, this report reﬂects the total long and short open positions that IMM
speculators have in these currencies at any one time (in this case as of November 20, 2001).
This is very useful information. If a speculative position becomes too large, we know from
our work looking at the speculative cycle that it may eventually be reversed. Thus, using this
information, traders, investors or corporations can position accordingly to anticipate such a
reversal. In addition, it is a relatively simple matter to graph this against the spot exchange
rate. If we accept that the speculative community’s open position in IMM currency futures is a
rough reﬂection of what it might be in the much larger interbank market, this might well give
us a much more useful picture of what are the outstanding positions in the market, and thus
the outstanding risk and vulnerability.
Table 3.1 IMM Commitments of Traders (non-commercial accounts) as of November 20, 2001
EUR

JPY

CHF

GBP

CAD

AUD

MXN

Gross longs
17,899
13,491
8,473
3,162
3,288
3,729
16,393
Gross shorts
18,185
32,377
8,234
9,220
28,663
428
1,064
Net position
−286
−18,886
+239
−6,058
−25,375
+3,301
+15,329
Net position
+484
−4,231
+5,219
+1,755
−28,089
+12
+14,322
from prior
week
Five-year high
31,666
67,229
48,332
48,014
46,780
20,859
12,641
(longs)
(28/08/01) (08/31/99) (10/19/99) (10/19/99) (11/12/96) (05/11/99) (03/20/01)
Five-year high
34,328
69,715
54,553
43,767
41,327
11,484
4,159
(shorts)
(02/01/00) (05/18/99) (05/04/99) (07/13/99) (10/17/00) (08/31/99) (07/01/97)

@Team-FLY

Flow

71

From this table, we can extract a variety of speciﬁcally useful information. For a start, we
can compare the net speculative position of the week being analysed to the previous one. In
addition, we can compare this ﬁgure with multi-year highs and lows. Moreover, if we overlay
this data with the actual spot rate, we can see how net changes in the IMM speculative position
for each exchange rate correlate with the actual price action. To be sure, the IMM data is not
a perfect representation of what goes on in the currency market as a whole, as its volumes are
small on a relative basis and IMM-based speculators are not necessarily the same ones that
operate in the larger currency market context. That said, the fact that one can use IMM data
to generate excess returns suggests that the strong correlation, albeit with a lag, between the
IMM data and the actual exchange rate price action does indeed reﬂect a predictive capacity of
the data itself. A large number of banks now regularly use the IMM Commitments of Traders
report, both as an analytical and a predictive tool for their own trading desks and for their clients.
For example, if we look at the available data we see that the speculative community has
built up a substantial short yen position (against the US dollar). The base currency for the
IMM data is always the dollar, thus if they were short yen futures, that means they were short
yen against the dollar. IMM net positions can of course be easily graphed, either on their
own or perhaps more usefully against the dollar–yen exchange rate. If we do that, we see that
speculators had in fact been substantially long yen futures for October and much of November.
This is also useful to know as it suggests that a potentially important trend reversal has just
happened. If we consider this as a reﬂection in the overall currency market, we get a picture of
speculators having been substantially short dollar–yen (i.e. long yen) and of that speculative
short position having been gradually eliminated initially and then increasingly reversed. This
actually occurred in line with a move higher in the dollar–yen exchange rate, as one might
expect as a result of the buying required to close out those short positions. One thing that can
be noticed from this example is conﬁrmation that the IMM speculative position was indeed
reﬂective of a much larger outstanding position in the overall currency market. After all, if that
were not true, the closing out of the IMM position would have had no effect whatsoever on the
price action. You might think this coincidence, but the correlation between changes in IMM
speculative positions and short-term moves in the spot exchange rate is too high to be that.
While the reversal in the IMM speculative position in the yen may be a notable change
and thus may last for some time, there is a further point to be made, namely that the larger
the speculative position becomes, the more vulnerable it in turn becomes to reversal and
retracement. Indeed, this is entirely in line with the conclusions of our speculative cycle model,
which suggests that the longer a currency price trend lasts, the more speculative it becomes and
the more vulnerable to a sharp and violent reversal. In line with this, the larger the outstanding
speculative position, the more laboured the price action becomes in favour of the prevailing
trend. This is not to say the prevailing trend cannot continue for some time. It is to say however
that the momentum of that trend will continue to slow as the size of the outstanding position
in favour of that trend increases. It is also to say the longer the trend lasts, the more explosive
the eventual reversal.
Returning to our IMM example, looking at the dollar–yen exchange rate, the IMM data tells
us that speculators were at the time becoming increasingly bullish on the dollar vs. the yen.
Here, it helps to add some fundamental explanation to the available ﬂow information. It is a
key theme of this book that analytical disciplines, which focus on the currency market, are best
used in combination rather than in isolation. That way they give a much more powerful — and
therefore potentially proﬁtable — signal. In this example, the Japanese authorities, in the form
of both the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance, had signalled that they were in favour of

72

Currency Strategy

a weaker yen, in line with the weak Japanese economic picture. The ability of either monetary
or ﬁscal policy to be eased further had been all but eliminated. The only lever left for further
policy easing was the yen itself. This idea caught on within the speculative community, with the
result that speculators closed out their short dollar–yen positions and created an increasingly
large long dollar–yen position, as reﬂected by the IMM data. As an analyst or as a currency
market practitioner such as a corporation or an investor, one can use this information in the
following ways:

r Analyst — Review the ﬂow and fundamental economic data to come up with an overall
picture of the short-term ﬂow and fundamental dynamics in the dollar–yen exchange rate
and thus the ability or not of the prevailing trend to continue.
r Trader — As the prevailing trend continues and increases in the dollar–yen exchange rate,
position to take advantage of the reversal when it comes.
r Investor — Use the combination of ﬂow and fundamental data as a guide in determining yen
exposure and hedging policy with regard to that exposure.
r Corporation — Use the combination of ﬂow and fundamental data as a guide for short-term
hedging policy.
To reinforce the point of the usefulness of this data, let’s quickly look at another example. If
we look at the position in Euro futures, we see that the net position as of November was net
short −286 contracts. On the face of it this may suggest that there is no directional bias for
the Euro–dollar exchange rate near term. However, it is important to note that the speculative
community had a net long Euro position in the IMM futures contract for much of August
through mid-November. Indeed, the Five-year high for Euro longs was hit on August 28 at
31,666 contracts. Since then, there was a gradual reduction in the speculative long position in
Euro futures. In line with this, spot Euro–dollar came under increasing selling pressure. Thus,
noting that there was such a large net long Euro position at the end of August, one could have
positioned to anticipate a retracement in spot Euro–dollar in anticipation of those positions
being closed out. Equally, the fact that this net long Euro position switched to a small net short
conversely gave the Euro-dollar exchange rate some support as this overhang of long positions
had thus been eliminated.
Proprietary Flow Models
Nowadays, a large number of commercial and investment banks have their own proprietary
ﬂow models, which track the foreign exchange activity of their global client base. Depending
on the size of the bank and therefore of that client base, these can be very useful and informative
models. The model that largely started this process off is the CitiFX Flows advisory service,
which tracks the foreign exchange ﬂow activity of the Citigroup global client base. Within this,
there are three types of model, which are used concurrently to generate the results:

r Simple linear models — These are autocorrelation models, which are based on the shortterm momentum of ﬂow. Thus, this type of model suggests for instance that if there were
buyers yesterday in a speciﬁc currency, there is consequently an increased chance of buyers
appearing tomorrow and so forth.
r Complex non-linear models — These are error-correction models, which focus on ﬂow that
has been carried out in the past, but is not yet fully reﬂected in the price.

Flow

73

r Time-delay models — This focuses on the ﬂow that has passed through in the recent past
having important information about the future movement in the exchange rate.
CitiFX Flows analyses foreign exchange client ﬂows globally in order to try to decipher two
hidden trends:

r Client ﬂow as an indicator of the underlying currency market momentum
r Client ﬂow as an indication of outstanding positions in the currency market
Client ﬂow has become an important component of the overall strategic view, in line with the
increasing opinion to see ﬂow as an important explanatory factor for price change. Liquidity
has become a much-discussed topic and ﬂow models are now a critical input of the overall
currency strategy process.
Proprietary FX ﬂow models generally produce:

r Trading signals based on one month’s worth of ﬂow data
r Overweight or underweight indicators based on six months’ or one year’s worth.
In line with this, such FX ﬂow models are also frequently used as trading models, using the
client ﬂow data as trading signals.
In the example in Figure 3.1, CitiFX Flows shows global client ﬂow going through the
Euro–dollar exchange rate over the time period from August to October 2001, comparing
that ﬂow against the spot Euro–dollar exchange rate. Looking at the last month’s worth of
ﬂow in this example, we see a consistent picture of the ﬂow model’s client base selling the
Euro–dollar exchange rate. As an example, in the wake of this, the ﬂow model issued a sell
recommendation on Euro–dollar. Such sell recommendations last for one month. Since their
inception, such bank proprietary ﬂow models based on client ﬂow have frequently generated
consistent excess returns.

Figure 3.1 CitiFX Flows: example 1a

74

Currency Strategy

Figure 3.2 CitiFX Flows: example 1b

Such ﬂow models also frequently publish more medium-term exposure indicators, the aim
of which is to look for large over- or underexposures which may over time “revert to mean”.
This is again most easily explained using a chart. While Figure 3.1 provided a good ﬂow
picture over the short term, showing increasingly heavy selling of the Euro–dollar exchange
rate by the ﬂow model’s global client base, Figure 3.2 takes a longer-term perspective of
ﬂow trends. More speciﬁcally, it compares the Euro trade-weighted exchange rate against
the medium-term Euro exposure indicator. Obviously, before the January 1, 1999 start to
the Euro as a tradable currency both measures are synthetic. Here we see that the model’s
client base exposure to the Euro has continued to move to a medium-term underweight
from mid-2000 onwards, despite the fact that during this time the trade-weighted Euro remained relatively stable. We can derive from this that at some stage reversion to mean will
require Euro buying to close that signiﬁcant underweight exposure of 1.5 standard deviations.
What such a chart does not tell us, unfortunately, is when that might happen. Combining
the two charts, however, we get a picture both of the short-term ﬂow momentum and of the
medium-term positional considerations. Together they can help to provide a relatively exhaustive ﬂow picture of an exchange rate. This in turn can provide both trading and hedging
signals.
In order to reinforce the point, it is probably useful to conduct the same exercise using
another currency. In the following example, we look at the Japanese yen. Figure 3.3 looks at
the short-term ﬂow picture against spot price action in the dollar–yen exchange rate. Figure 3.4
looks at the medium-term exposure indicator of the market as reﬂected by the model’s client
base as against the medium-term trend in the trade-weighted value of the yen.
Comparing the two charts, we get a very informed picture of the ﬂow vs. the spot price
action in the Japanese yen. In the case of Figure 3.3, the thing to note is that the ﬂow was
largely in line with the spot dollar–yen price action. More interesting is the fact that the
ﬂow continued to show heavy selling of dollars against the yen even in the face of adverse
