
38


THE 100-PIP TRADER

the time and then I just forgot about it. In fact I completely forgot
about it until much later on.

: That’s very interesting, because not everyone who is success-
ful at trading actually majored in anything remotely related to it in
college.

A : Yes, exactly, and I never actually took any economics classes
in college at all. The big scary class at BYU [Brigham Young Uni-
versity] when I was an undergraduate was Economics 101 and it
seemed so daunting from all the horror stories I heard about it.
So, although I was interested in business—and, by that time, I was
once again interested in the markets—I was just too fearful at the
time to really take the plunge and study economics in college. I
missed the opportunity to get a really good foundation, which I
think would have assisted me later on in my trading career.

Q.:s0 then you went on to study law?

A: That is correct. As soon as I graduated from BYU with a degree
in Italian, my wife and I moved to San Francisco where I started
law school.

Q.- was that because of parental pressure?

A : Mostly, yes. I think it’s unfair to blame the decision on my
parents, but in my mind, I really did enroll in law school because I
believed, from my upbringing, that it was the “safe” route. That’s
exactly the reason why I went. I think I was strongly encouraged by
my parents to pursue a traditional occupation that would allow or
enable me to support my family. And any pressure I felt from my
parents was positive—they were excited for me to go to law school
and told me that they believed I would do very well. They were
probably more excited than I was about law school. It was never
forced on me, and I sort of followed that path because I had come

39


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

to the conclusion that that’s what I wanted to do and I had a vision
of a legal career that was quite different than what’s practically
possible as an attorney. It did not take long for me in law school to
realize that I would have no interest in practicing law.

Q.: what kind of law were you studying?

A : Well, in law school it’s just so general that at the beginning
you don’t get a lot of chances to specialize in anything. So I took
courses ranging from criminal to constitutional to business law.
When I was in law school, I took a summer job at an investment
bank in San Francisco and my wife worked for a hedge fund. The
exposure to these jobs started me thinking again about a career
in the markets. So I started picking courses in transactional law
or corporate law and found that I was once again fascinated by
the idea of trading and realized that I had caught the bug a long
time ago and I just couldn’t shake it and I kept coming back to the
same thing. One day while working at the investment bank, I met
a trader. Later on that same day, someone told me that the trader
I'd met made $600,000 the year before. That seemed to me to be
way more money than I could make practicing law. Then I was told
that this trader would probably make over $1 million in the current
year. I started wondering what the heck I was doing in law school.

: That’s really interesting that you took an internship at an
investment bank because people who study law usually take in-
ternships in some of the big law firms. What made you take it?

A : That’s a good question. It’s very kind of you to even ask that
question, that you would assume that a big law firm would have
had any interest in me, which they did not. I made the decision
to work at an investment bank mainly because I didn’t have an
alternative available to me. Although I was fortunate to get into
a good law school, my grades were absolutely terrible. I was un-
interested in a legal career from nearly the very beginning and

40


THE 100-PIP TRADER

my grades seriously reflected that lack of interest. So I took a job
where I could get one, and the place I could get a job was as a
lowly staff-assistant-type position at Montgomery Securities in San
Francisco and I absolutely loved the environment. I was actually
working at Montgomery Securities on the day they helped take
Netscape public. Everybody in the office, especially in the oper-
ations department, was fascinated by the idea that this company
with no revenues could be taken public. I remember people telling
me that this new company was doomed to failure and there was no
way it could ever survive. Well, we know now that the founders of
the company were made very rich and that the company was sold
to AOL in 1998 for $4 billion. The day Netscape went public, we
watched as the stock kept going up and everybody made predic-
tions as to how far back down it would go. But it really never did
go down for as long as I was there. And I think that was one of my
formative experiences, where I realized that the markets were an
amazing vehicle for wealth creation and they made people wealthy
very quickly. Maybe that’s not a great lesson, but it certainly was
one of the things that attracted me to the markets once again. And
I never lost interest for longer than a day after that.

: Did you ever finish your law degree or did you switch careers
before that?

A : I did finish law school. I could honestly say that there are
very few regrets in my life, but one of those would be that I did
not take a job as a trading assistant at Montgomery Securities but
rather continued my legal studies and went all the way through
and finished law school.

Q. When did you decide to switch careers?

A : Once again my not-so-fantastic grades in law school threw me
an opportunity to look elsewhere. I had job offers after law school
to work in law firms, and what I realized at that point was that it

41


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

just simply wasn’t going to work for me. So I attempted to enroll
in a Ph.D. program on the East Coast. My wife and I moved to
the East Coast and when I decided that the Ph.D. program wasn’t
for me, I actually worked at several jobs, whatever I could do to
earn money and support my family. Anything to avoid law. I was
happier making one-third the amount of money in other jobs. Once
again the markets came back up and within just a couple of years
I had been introduced to a private currency trader in southern
California. That’s when I really sort of realized that I didn’t need
to work in an investment bank to be involved in the markets. I
didn’t need to have a business degree. I didn’t need to have a lot
of special connections. What I really needed was a good Internet
connection and some information on how to get started and the
perseverance to make it through the bad times, the hard lessons
that we all seem to go through. So that was the beginning of my
currency trading career.

Qu seems like your wife at the time was extremely supportive
or at least very flexible to be moving around with you?

A : Well, she’s never been the type of person who would encourage
me to do something that wouldn’t make me happy and money was
never our first concern as a married couple. The first concern
was quality of life and whether we are doing things with our time
on earth that allows us to spend time together and allows us to
feel comfortable and good about what we're doing. As long as
I was moving forward in those plans, money wasn’t going to be
a problem. Because of this, I’m very familiar with the dilemma
that a new trader has in attempting to work a full-time job and
try to trade at the same time. We were deeply in debt after law
school. I defaulted on student loans to pursue currency trading as
a career. We experienced enormous financial pressures, including
the inability to pay our rent or make our car payment or really have
enough money for basic essentials. But we decided that was the
direction that we were going to go and once I made that decision
I wasn't going to give up. I didn’t have any special training or a

42


THE 100-PIP TRADER

trading account funded by parents. This was something that we
had to do from scratch.

OQ: s0 you started immediately in FX, in Forex, or did you first
dabble in futures or stocks or something else?

A : I've never made an equity trade in my life, except in ninth
grade when I bought Pioneer stock and it went down at least 10
points by the end of the semester.

Q.tenl us about this trader from southern California? How did
he get you involved in the markets?

A : [was introduced to the trader in southern California through a
friend of mine who had been very successful in business. My friend
said, “You know, if you're interested in trading, you should talk to
this guy who’s trading my money.” At the time, my friend said that
he loaned this currency trader in southern California approximately
a million dollars, and this currency trader was paying my friend
between 6 and 8 percent per month in interest. I thought, well
here’s something: this trader is amazing! He must be throwing
off enough gains to produce that 6 percent in interest monthly
and still have enough profit left over. In fact, my friend at the
time had received back the entire amount of his principal over the
course of about 12 months and now was receiving basically interest
payments. So I thought, if somebody is so successful at currency
trading that they can do that type of thing, that they can borrow
money at ridiculous interest rates, then that’s something I want
to learn about. One thing led to another, and this currency trader
introduced me to his methodologies, which seemed too good to
be true. And you know what they say about that. We discovered
later on was that he was raising money and making payments to
the people who had given him money in the first place by raising
more money on the side. Eventually that game caught up with him.
By the time I found out that he wasn’t for real, I had already sort

43


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

of lost my first account and had decided that I could figure it out
myself if I spent the time necessary to do so.

: It must have been pretty scary to be in such a financial strain
and then not to trade well when you first started. How did you find
the confidence to keep on doing it?

A : I wasn’t very good at practicing law when I first started, or
doing much of anything else that I first started in life, and I always
approached things from that perspective. I mean on the first day
that I drove a car when I was 15 years old, I wasn’t very good at
driving, but over the course of time I became comfortable and suc-
cessful at driving and that didn’t happen overnight. I understood
that there were going to be some losses, and so the financial pres-
sure came for the reasons that you feel financial pressure. Meaning
if you get an eviction notice or if you can’t make your car payment
you naturally feel pressure. But I don’t think I felt pressure to
figure out trading immediately. I think I'd met enough traders in
San Francisco and spoken to enough people who helped me real-
ize that this was not going to be any different than playing sports
or having a first job or learning to drive. There was going to be
learning period during which I felt uncomfortable, made a lot of
mistakes, and had to learn for myself some of the things that you
simply can’t learn by reading a book or listening to someone else
as much as they try to help you.

Q. pid you make a lot of mistakes in the beginning?

A : Oh, certainly, yes! Do you have a page limit for the book? I
made every mistake that you can possibly think of. Here’s the basic
list:

1. I made too many trades.

2. I traded with lot sizes that were way to big—I was risking 5 to
10 percent of my account on each trade when I should have been
risking less than 1 percent.

44


THE 100-PIP TRADER

3. I traded multiple systems at the same time.

4. I traded any currency pair that I liked.

5. I traded at all times of the day.

6. I traded long-term and short-term.

7. I read way too many books about systems and far too few books
about discipline.

Q:p id you take any classes?

A. No. I did read a lot of books, but I never took any classes. I
think the best book I read at the early stages was Reminiscences
of a Stock Operator, which most people know to be the not-so-
secret biography of Jesse Livermore. I also found a lot of wisdom
in biographies of successful people, including John Rockefeller,
Gandhi, George Washington and other Founding Fathers. In many
cases, I found more trading wisdom in the biographies than in the
trading books.

Q.: How long did it take you to get it right?

A : Eleven months. During that time I tested my brains out. I
built my own trading systems and tested them endlessly. I tested
for hours and hours every day. I traded with a demo account and
a small live account.

Q.:p id you at any point feel like giving up?

A : Probably every day [laughter]. I probably felt that way on a
regular basis at the beginning and some of it was because I was also
working at the time. I would develop Web sites. I took a job selling
T1 lines or Internet service at the very infancy of the Internet. I
took a job as financial recruiter, a headhunter. The one thing that
I would not consider doing was taking a job working in a law firm
and that was simply because I didn’t want to get sucked into the
lifestyle and go down a path that I felt really uncomfortable with

45


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

for the long-term. So I did a lot of things on the side and as much
as I could just to make sure we could stay afloat during the time
that I tried to learn how to trade.

Q: 0 you worked full time while you were trading? Or was it
more like part time?

A : I’m absolutely positive that I worked full-time hours, and some
of those hours were the 9-to-5 type while some were side projects
where I did consulting work like write a contract or help with a
web site. I looked for whatever work I could find that I would be
able to do in the middle of the night ideally.

Q:s0 how did you manage to trade while working full time?

A : [just didn’t get a lot of sleep. The only answer I can come up
with, looking back on it now, is that I woke up at 2 or 3 o'clock in
the morning and I would watch the London or European sessions.
The reason I did that was because I had been first introduced
to currency trading from someone who was taking trades in the
middle of the night and trading during those sessions, so that’s the
session that I was drawn to. And so I would get up really early and
then by the morning I would be ready to work or do whatever else
it was that I was doing to earn actual money and then I would come
home and I would try to sleep and spend time with my wife and
get up early again. So I literally made it work by just getting very
little sleep.

: Do you think that was the key that you felt like you had to
make this work?

A : Yes, I made a decision one time, like I do with most things. I
made a decision that I was going to make it work. It was clear to me
that other people could trade for a living, and if it was possible for
other people to do it, then I could persevere long enough to figure

46


THE 100-PIP TRADER

it out. I knew it might take me longer than someone else, but I
wasn’t in competition with someone to do it faster. I knew that I
wouldn't have a large account like someone else might have, but
I wasn’t in competition to have a certain size account. I was just
trying to figure it out so I could be consistently profitable. I also
had a very good friend who was a financial planner, who told me
that the secret was to grind out regular profits on a regular basis.
The goal wasn’t to hit the jackpot or pull the slot machine or win
the lottery, the goal was to consistently grind out profits week after
week, and if I could be profitable each week, the amounts that I
made wouldn’t matter as it would prove that I was able to keep
what I had earned. And I think I just decided that was the main
focus—if it was just $50 week or it was even just $25 week—at
the beginning the amounts were irrelevant and really figuring it
out was more relevant. Then, later on, I figured I could find more
money to trade with if I had to. I can’t emphasize this enough. The
big lesson for me here was that I didn’t have to make $1,000 per
day or even per month. I just needed to make something and not
give it back. I learned that if I took care of my trading capital, the
rest would take care of itself.

Q.: How much did you start trading with?

A: $2,500. It was partially mine and partially an investment that a
good friend made in me. In the first few days of trading, I made 10
percent in the account. I should have closed the trading software
down and not opened it up again for a month.

Q what happened?

A : L almost remember it exactly; the account went from $2,500
to about $2,752 and some change and I had a 10 percent gain in
the account and I should have shut it off and walked away for at
least a week. I was positively euphoric. I was the Warren Buffett of
currency trading. I remember, I had heard these stories about guys,

47


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

returning 6 to 8 percent a month or more, and I figured I could just
continue to do something like that. But I didn’t stop. Two weeks
later I took a trade, placed no stop-loss, and 72 hours later I had
lost 90 percent of my capital. I remember drawing it down to the
point where it was at $2,500 and saying to myself, “Maybe I can get
out at breakeven and it will be like the bad trade never happened.
Then it was down $2,000 and then it was $1,500 and by the time it
got down to that level, I just thought it can’t get any worse so I just
might as well just leave it open. And of course it would get worse.

Q:s0 what do you do differently now?

A : I try my hardest to not lose money. That's my first concern.
I know this sounds heretical, but making the money isn’t the hard
part. When I first started trading, I was in a very bad spot financially.
A close friend who had been very successful in business took me
aside, looked me in the eye, and said, “Rob, you've convinced
yourself that making money is difficult.” Then he said, “Making
money is easy. Keeping it is difficult.” He wasn’t speaking about
trading, but he could have been and he was right.

Ihave found that it’s not terribly difficult to develop a profitable
trading system. What requires real grit is the ability to hold onto the
profits, to not overtrade, or increase the size of the trades beyond
what is an acceptable risk. So the name of the game for me has
been to not lose money first, and then just grind out profits week
after week as a second goal.

: How long did it take you to figure out that you needed to
trade defensively?

A : It was 11 months into my trading that I really started prac-
ticing this. After losing that $2,500, I spent 11 months testing
and experimenting and reading not just about trading systems or
methodologies. I tried to learn and adopt the principles that would

48


THE 100-PIP TRADER

guide me from a mental standpoint from then on. I was deter-
mined to never fall into a trance on a losing trade, what I call
possum trading, where you sort of fall asleep and act like if you
don’t watch it, it will all get better. I promised that I would never
let that happen again. That was the big goal, and it took 11 months
not just to figure out entries and exits, but really get to the point
where I could trade on a practice account consistently enough that
I wasn’t gambling with the account any longer. And so the central
goal became to never lose the starting capital. If I could keep my
capital, I could stay in the game. Trading is a game of survivability.

Q.: What was the process like in terms of teaching yourself?
Did you teach yourself basic chart reading, or did you learn about
fundamentals first?

A : I exclusively started with technical analysis. Economics in-
timidated me, so I at first avoided fundamental analysis. Instead
of reading about economics, I took a copy of Alexander Elder’s
Trading for a Living, and I read about moving averages. During
that 11-month stretch of time, I literally sat at the charts and back
tested and experimented exclusively with moving averages. At the
end of 11 months, I actually remember somebody asking me if had
chosen one of my moving averages as the 62-moving average be-
cause it was “Fib” ratio and I asked them, I didn’t understand what
the word “Fib” meant. I hadn’t actually done much other analysis
except for my own testing and experimentation with moving aver-
ages. I would plot moving averages on the charts. I would move
forward one candle at a time. I would experiment with different
timeframes, different currency pairs, until I had accumulated just
an enormous amount of research of my own in how price inter-
acted with those moving averages and what I could expect from
a given type of trade. I wanted to be able to open a trade and
answer the questions: What could I expect to lose? What could
I expect to win? And when those win/loss ratios became accept-
able and I could trade the strategy consistently week after week
after week—profitably—then I knew I was defending my account.

49


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

I knew that I was consistently grinding out some profits week after
week and trading with a system that might not have been perfect,
but certainly produced gains on a regular basis.

Q.:s0 the way you essentially back tested is to go back into the
price charts and look for examples of what you thought was going
to happen, right?

A: Yes.

: You didn’t use some sort of programming language to me-
chanically back test?

A : Right. That’s the other part about it. At a number of levels
I was really too uneducated or stupid to know at the time that
you could even program anything like that. I wasn’t even aware
that there was some type of programming language or charting
platform that would allow me to back test that stuff automatically
or mechanically. And now I’m happy I didn’t have any of those
tools because I gained a lot by watching the charts and not doing
it in such a mechanical way. I became familiar with the way that
price moved on the chart for the British pound/U.S. dollar. I got
familiar with the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen. I became accustomed
to looking at the price move up and down in regular, repeatable
patterns. I seared into my memory the trends, the ranges, and just
a few currency pairs became familiar like friends.

Q:Ddo you think that’s still the way you primarily back test at the
moment, because we're sure there are a lot of new traders who find
things like Easy Language very, very daunting in the beginning.
