
- 271 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"No," he said. Waiting? He'd been dreaming of this for years. He took a
chair, crossed his legs, saw the shoes, then put his feet under the chair. He
was certain that he was being watched from a dozen different camera angles
now, and that was fine. Maybe they would recognize Backman sitting in the
lobby, maybe they wouldn't. He could almost see them up there, gawking at
the monitors, scratching their heads, saying, "Don't know, he's much thinner,
gaunt, even."
"And the hair. It's obviously a bad coloring job."
To help them Joel removed Giovanni's tortoiseshell glasses.
Five minutes later, a stern-faced security type in a much lesser suit
approached him from nowhere and said, "Mr. Lazzeri, would you follow
me?"
They rode a private elevator up to the third floor where Marco was led into a
small room with thick walls. All the walls seemed to be thick at Rhineland
Bank. Two other security agents were waiting. One actually smiled, the
other did not. They asked him to place both hands on a biometric fingerprint
scanner. It would compare his fingerprints to the ones he left behind almost
seven years ago, at this same place, and when the perfect match was made
there would be more smiles, then a nicer room, a nicer lobby, the offer of
coffee or juice. Anything, Mr. Backman.
He asked for orange juice because he'd had no breakfast. The security agents
were back in their cave. Mr. Backman was now being serviced by Elke, one
of Mr. Van Thiessen's shapely assistants. "He'll be out in just a minute," she
explained. "He wasn't expecting you this morning."
Kinda hard to make appointments when you're hiding in toilet stalls. Joel
smiled at her. Ol' Marco was history now. Finally laid to rest after a good
two-month run. Marco had served him well, kept him alive, taught him the
basics of Italian, walked him around Treviso and Bologna, and introduced
him to Francesca, a woman he would not soon forget.
But Marco would also get him killed, so he ditched him there on the third
floor of the Rhineland Bank, while looking at Elke's black stiletto heels and
waiting on her boss. Marco was gone, never to return.
Mikel Van Thiessen's office was designed to smack his visitors with a
powerful right hook. Power in the massive Persian rug. Power in the leather
sofa and chairs. Power in the ancient mahogany desk

- 272 -

John Grisham

The Broker

that wouldn't have fit in the cell at Rudley. Power in the array of electronic
gadgets at his disposal. He met Joel at the powerful oak door and they shook
hands properly, but not like old friends. They had met exactly once before.
If Joel had lost sixty pounds since their last visit, Van Thiessen had found
most of it. He was much grayer too, not nearly as crisp and sharp as the
younger bankers Joel had seen on the streetcar. Van Thiessen directed his
client to the leather chairs while Elke and another assistant scurried around
to fetch coffee and pastries.
When they were alone, with the door shut, Van Thiessen said, "I've been
reading about you."
"Oh really. And what have you read?"
"Bribing a president for a pardon, come on, Mr. Backman. Is it really that
easy over there?"
Joel couldn't tell if he was joking or not. Joel was in an upbeat mood, but he
didn't exactly feel like swapping one-liners.
"I didn't bribe anyone, if that's what you're suggesting."
"Yes, well, the newspapers are certainly filled with speculation." His tone
was more accusatory than jovial, and Joel decided not to waste time. "Do
you believe everything you read in the newspapers?"
"Of course not, Mr. Backman."
"I'm here for three reasons. I want access to my security box. I want to
review my account. I want to withdraw ten thousand dollars in cash. After
that, I may have another favor or two."
Van Thiessen shoved a small cookie in his mouth and chewed rapidly. "Yes,
of course. I don't think we'll have a problem with any of that."
"Why should you have a problem?"
"Not a problem, sir. I'll just need a few minutes."
"For what?"
"I'll need to consult with a colleague."
"Can you do so quickly?"
Van Thiessen practically bolted from the room and slammed the door behind
him. The pain in Joel's stomach was not from hunger. If the wheels came off
now, he had no plan B. He'd walk out of the bank with nothing, hopefully
make it across the Paradeplatz to a streetcar, and once on board he would
have no place to go. The escape would be

- 273 -

John Grisham

The Broker

over. Marco would be back, and Marco would eventually get him killed.
As time came to an abrupt halt, he kept thinking about the pardon. With it,
his slate was wiped clean. The US. government was in no position to
pressure the Swiss to freeze his account. The Swiss didn't freeze accounts!
The Swiss were immune from pressure! That's why their banks were rilled
with loot from around the world.
They were the Swiss!
Elke retrieved him and asked if he would follow her downstairs. In other
days, he would've followed Elke anywhere, but now it was only downstairs.
He'd been to the vault during his prior visit. It was in the basement, several
levels below ground, though the clients never knew how deep into Swiss soil
they were descending. Every door was a foot thick, every wall appeared to
be made of lead, every ceiling had surveillance cameras. Elke handed him
off to Van Thiessen again.
Both thumbs were scanned for matching prints. An optical scanner took his
photo. "Number seven," Van Thiessen said, pointing. "I'll meet you there,"
he said, and left through a door.
Joel walked down a short hallway, passing six windowless steel doors until
he came to the seventh. He pushed a button, all sorts of things tumbled and
clicked inside, and the door finally opened. He stepped inside, where Van
Thiessen was waiting.
The room was a twelve-foot square, with three walls lined with individual
vaults, most about the size of a large shoe box.
"Your vault number?" he asked.
"L2270."
"Correct."
Van Thiessen stepped to his right, bent slightly to face L2270. On the vault's
small keypad he punched some numbers, then straightened himself and said,
"If you wish."
Under Van Thiessen's watchful eyes, Joel stepped to his vault and entered
the code. As he did so, he softly whispered the numbers, forever seared in
his memory: "Eighty-one, fifty-five, ninety-four, ninety- three, twentythree." A small green light began blinking on the keypad. Van Thiessen
smiled and said, "I'll be waiting at the front. Just ring when you're finished."
When he was alone, Joel removed the steel box from his vault

- 274 -

John Grisham

The Broker

and pulled open the top. He picked up the padded mailing envelope and
opened it. There were the four two-gigabyte Jaz disks that had once been
worth $1 billion.
He allowed himself a moment, but no more than sixty seconds. He was, after
all, very safe at that time, and if he wanted to reflect, what was the harm?
He thought of Safi Mirza, Fazal Sharif, and Farooq Khan, the brilliant boys
who'd discovered Neptune, then wrote reams of software to manipulate the
system. They were all dead now, killed by their naive greed and their choice
of lawyer. He thought of Jacy Hubbard, the brash, gregarious, infinitely
charismatic crook who had snowed the voters for an entire career and finally
gotten much too greedy. He thought of Carl Pratt and Kim Boiling and
dozens of other partners he'd brought into their prosperous firm, and the
lives that had been wrecked by what he was now holding in his hand. He
thought of Neal and the humiliation he'd caused his son when the scandal
engulfed Washington and prison became not only a certainty but a
sanctuary.
And he thought of himself, not in selfish terms, not in pity, not passing the
blame to anyone else. What a miserable mess of a life he'd lived, so far
anyway. As much as he'd like to go back and do it differently, he had no
time to waste on such thoughts. You've only got a few years left, Joel, or
Marco, or Giovanni, or whatever the hell your name is. For the first time in
your rotten life, why don't you do what's right, as opposed to what's
profitable?
He put the disks in the envelope, the envelope in his briefcase, then replaced
the steel box in the vault. He rang for Van Thiessen.
Back in the power office, Van Thiessen handed him a file with one sheet of
paper in it. "This is a summary of your account," he was saying. "It's very
straightforward. As you know, there's been no activ
ity."
"You guys are paying one percent interest," Joel said. "You were aware of
our rates when you opened the account, Mr. Backman."
"Yes, I was."
"We protect your money in other ways."

- 275 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Of course." Joel closed the file and handed it back. "I don't want to keep
this. Do you have the cash?"
"Yes, it's on the way up."
"Good. I need a few things."
Van Thiessen pulled over his writing pad and stood ready with his fountain
pen. "Yes," he said.
"I want to wire a hundred thousand to a bank in Washington, D.C. Can you
recommend one?"
"Certainly. We work closely with Maryland Trust."
"Good, wire the money there, and with the wire open a generic savings
account. I will not be writing checks, just making withdrawals."
"In what name?"
"Joel Backman and Neal Backman." He was getting used to his name again,
not ducking when he said it. Not cowering in fear, waiting for gunfire. He
liked it.
"Very well," Van Thiessen said. Anything was possible.
"I need some help in getting back to the US. Could your girl check the
Lufthansa flights to Philadelphia and New York?"
"Of course. When, and from where?"
"Today, as soon as possible. I'd like to avoid the airport here. How far away
is Munich by car?"
"By car, three to four hours."
"Can you provide a car?"
"I'm sure we can arrange that."
"I prefer to leave from the basement here, in a car driven by someone not
dressed like a chauffeur. Not a black car either, something that will not
attract attention."
Van Thiessen stopped writing and shot a puzzled look. "Are you in danger,
Mr. Backman?"
"Perhaps. I'm not sure, and I'm not taking chances."
Van Thiessen pondered this for a few seconds, then said, "Would you like
for us to make the airline reservations?"
"Yes."
"Then I need to see your passport."
Joel pulled out Giovanni's borrowed passport. Van Thiessen studied it for a
long time, his stoic banker's face betraying him. He was

- 276 -

John Grisham

The Broker

confused and worried. He finally managed, "Mr. Backman, you will be
traveling with someone else's passport."
"That's correct."
"And this is a valid passport?"
It IS.
"I assume you do not have one of your own."
"They took it a long time ago."
"This bank cannot take part in the commission of a crime. If this is stolen,
then-"
"I assure you it's not stolen."
"Then how did-"
"Let's just say it's borrowed, okay?"
"But using someone else's passport is a violation of the law."
"Let's not get hung up on US. immigration policy, Mr. Van Thiessen. Just
get the schedules. I'll pick the nights. Your girl makes the reservations using
the bank's account. Deduct it from my balance. Get me a car and a driver.
Deduct that from my balance, if you wish. It's all very simple."
It was just a passport. Hell, other clients had three or four of them. Van
Thiessen handed it back to Joel and said, "Very well. Anything else?"
"Yes, I need to go online. I'm sure your computers are secure."
"Absolutely."
His e-mail to Neal read:
Grinch-With a bit of luck, I should arrive in US. tonight. Get a new
cellphone today. Don't let it out of your sight. Tomorrow morning call the
Hilton, Marriott, and Sheraton, in downtown Washington. Ask for Giovanni
Ferro. Thats me. Call Carl Pratt first thing this morning, on the new phone.
Push hard to get Senator Clayburn in D. C. We will cover his expenses. Tell
him it's urgent. A favor to an old friend. Don't take no for an answer. No
more e-mails until I get home. Marco
After a quick sandwich and a cola in Van Thiessen's office, Joel Backman
left the bank building riding shotgun in a shiny green BMW

- 277 -

John Grisham

The Broker

four-door sedan. For good measure, he kept a Swiss newspaper in front of
his face until they were on the autobahn. The driver was Franz. Franz
fancied himself a Formula One hopeful, and when Joel let it be known that
he was in somewhat of a hurry, Franz slipped into the left lane and hit 150
kilometers per hour.

- 278 -

John Grisham

The Broker

At 1:55 p.m., Joel Backman was sitting in a lavishly large seat in the firstclass section of a Lufthansa 747 as it began its push back from the gate at the
Munich airport. Only when it started to move did he dare pick up the glass
of champagne he'd been staring at for ten minutes. The glass was empty by
the time the plane stopped at the end of the runway for its final check. When
the wheels lifted off the pavement, Joel closed his eyes and allowed himself
the luxury of a few hours of relief.
His son, on the other hand, and at exactly the same moment, 7:55 Eastern
Standard time, was stressed to the point of throwing things. How the hell
was he supposed to go buy a new cell phone immediately, then call Carl
Pratt again and solicit old favors that did not exist, and somehow cajole a
retired and cantankerous old senator from Ocracoke, North Carolina, to drop
what he was doing and return immediately to a city he evidently disliked
immensely? Not to mention the obvious: he, Neal Backman, had a rather full
day at the office. Nothing as pressing as rescuing his wayward father, but
still a pretty full docket with clients and other important matters.

- 279 -

John Grisham

The Broker

He left Jerry's Java, but instead of going to the office he went home. Lisa
was bathing their daughter and was surprised to see him. "What's wrong?"
she said.
"We have to talk. Now."
He began with the mysterious letter postmarked from York, Pennsylvania,
and went through the $4,000 loan, as painful as it was, then the smartphone,
the encrypted e-mails, pretty much the entire story. She took it calmly, much
to his relief.
"You should've told me," she said more than once.
"Yes, and I'm sorry."
There was no fight, no arguing. Loyalty was one of her strongest traits, and
when she said, "We have to help him," Neal hugged her.
"He'll pay back the money," he assured her.
"We'll worry about the money later. Is he in danger?"
"I think so."
"Okay, what's the first step?"
"Call the office and tell them I'm in bed with the flu."
Their entire conversation was captured live and in perfect detail by a tiny
mike planted by the Mossad in the light fixture above where they were
sitting. It was wired to a transmitter hidden in their attic, and from there it
was relayed to a high-frequency receiver a quarter of a mile away in a
seldom-used retail office space recently leased for six months by a
gentleman from D.C. There, a technician listened to it twice, then quickly emailed his field agent in the Israeli embassy in Washington.
Since Backman's disappearance in Bologna more than twenty- four hours
ago, the bugs planted around his son had been monitored even more closely.
The e-mail to Washington concluded with "JB's coming home."
Fortunately, Neal did not mention the name "Giovanni Ferro" during the
conversation with Lisa. Unfortunately, he did mention two of the three
hotels-the Marriott and the Sheraton.
Backman's return was given the highest priority possible. Eleven Mossad
agents were located on the East Coast; all were ordered to D.C. immediately.

- 280 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Lisa dropped their daughter off at her mother's, then she and Neal sped south
to Charlottesville, thirty minutes away. In a shopping center north of town
they found the office for US. Cellular. They opened an account, bought a
phone, and within thirty minutes were back on the road. Lisa drove while
Neal tried to find Carl Pratt.
Aided by generous helpings of champagne and wine, Joel managed to sleep
for several hours over the Atlantic. When the plane landed at JFK at 4:30
p.m., the relaxation was gone, replaced by uncertainties and a compulsion to
look over his shoulder.
At immigration, he at first stepped into line with the returning Americans, a
much shorter line. The mob waiting across the way for non-U.S. was
embarrassing. Then he caught himself, glanced around, began cursing under
his breath, and hustled over to the foreigners.
How stupid can you be?
A thick-necked uniformed kid from the Bronx was yelling at people to
follow this line, not that one, and hurry up while you're at it. Welcome to
America. Some things he had not missed.
The passport officer frowned at Giovannis passport, but then he'd frowned at
all the others too. Joel had been watching him carefully from behind a pair
of cheap sunglasses.
"Could you remove your sunglasses, please?" the officer said.
"Certamente," Joel said loudly, anxious to prove his Italianness. He took off
the sunglasses, squinted as if blinded, then rubbed his eyes while the officer
tried to study his face. Reluctantly, he stamped the passport and handed it
over without a word. With nothing to declare, the customs officials barely
looked at him. Joel hustled through the terminal and found the line at the taxi
stand. "Penn Station," he said. The driver resembled Farooq Khan, the
youngest of the three, just a boy, and as Joel studied him from the backseat
he pulled his briefcase closer.
Moving against the rush hour traffic, he was at Penn Station in forty-five
minutes. He bought an Amtrak ticket to D.C., and at 7:00 left New York for
Washington.

- 281 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The taxi parked on Brandywine Street in northwest Washington. It was
almost eleven, and most of the fine homes were dark. Back- man spoke to
the driver, who was already reclining and ready for a nap.
Mrs. Pratt was in bed and struggling with sleep when she heard the doorbell.
She grabbed her robe and hurried down the stairs. Her husband slept in the
basement most nights, mainly because he snored but also because he was
drinking too much and suffering from insomnia. She presumed he was there
now.
"Who is it?" she asked through the intercom.
"Joel Backman," came the answer, and she thought it was a prank.
"Who?"
"Donna, it's me, Joel. I swear. Open the door."
She peeped through the hole in the door and did not recognize the stranger.
"Just a minute," she said, then ran to the basement where Carl was watching
the news. A minute later he was at the door, wearing a Duke sweat suit and
holding a pistol.
"Who is it?" he demanded through the intercom.
"Carl, it's me, Joel. Put the gun down and open the door."
The voice was unmistakable. He opened the door and Joel Backman walked
into his life, an old nightmare back for more. There were no hugs, no
handshakes, hardly a smile. The Pratts quietly examined him because he
looked so different-much thinner, hair darker and shorter, strange clothing.
He got a "What are you doing here?" from Donna.
"That's a good question," he said coolly. He had the advantage of planning.
They were caught completely off guard. "Will you put that gun down?"
Pratt put the gun on a side table.
"Have you talked to Neal?" Backman asked.
"All day long."
"What's going on, Carl?" Donna asked.
"I don't really know."
"Can we talk? That's why I'm here. I don't trust phones anymore."
"Talk about what?" she demanded.

- 282 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Could you make us some coffee, Donna?" Joel asked pleasantly.
"Hell no."
"Scratch the coffee."
Carl had been rubbing his chin, assessing things. "Donna, we need to talk in
private. Old law firm stuff. I'll give you the rundown later."
She shot them both a look that clearly said, Go straight to hell, then stomped
back up the stairs. They stepped into the den. Carl said, "Would you like
something to drink?"
"Yes, something strong."
He went to a small wet bar in a corner and poured single malts- doubles. He
handed Joel a drink and without the slightest effort at a smile said, "Cheers."
"Cheers. It's good to see you, Carl."
"I bet it is. You weren't supposed to see anyone for another fourteen years."
"Counting the days, huh?"
"We're still cleaning up after you, Joel. A bunch of good folks got hurt. I'm
sorry if Donna and I aren't exactly thrilled to see you. I can't think of too
many people in this town who'd like to give you a hug."
"Most would like to shoot me."
Carl gave a wary look over at the pistol.
"I can't worry about that," Backman continued. "Sure, I'd like to go back and
change some things, but I don't have that luxury. I'm running for my life
now, Carl, and I need some help."
"Maybe I don't want to get involved."
"I can't blame you. But I need a favor, a big one. Help me now, and I
promise I'll never show up on your doorstep again."
"I'll shoot the next time."
"Where's Senator Clayburn? Tell me he's still alive."
"Yes, very much so. And you caught some luck."
"What?"
"He's here, in D.C."
"Why?"
"Hollis Maples is retiring, after a hundred years in the Senate. They had a
bash for him tonight. All the old boys are in town."
"Maples? He was drooling in his soup ten years ago."

- 283 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Well, now he can't see his soup. He and Clayburn were as tight as ticks."
"Have you talked to Clayburn?"
"Yes." '
"And?"
"It might be a tough one, Joel. He didn't like the sound of your name.
Something about being shot for treason."
''Whatever. Tell him he can broker a deal that will make him feel like a real
patriot."
"What's the deal?"
"I have the software, Carl. The whole package. Picked it up this morning
from a vault in a bank in Zurich where it's been sitting for more than six
years. You and Clayburn come to my room in the morning, and I'll show it
to you."
"I really don't want to see it."
"Yes you do."
Pratt sucked down two ounces of scotch. He walked back to the bar and
refilled his glass, took another toxic dose, then said, "When and where?"
"The Marriott on Twenty-second Street. Room five-twenty. Nine in the
morning."
"Why Joel? Why should I get involved?"
"A favor to an old friend."
"I don't owe you any favors. And the old friend left a long time ago."
"Please, Carl. Bring in Clayburn, and you'll be out of the picture by noon
tomorrow. I promise you'll never see me again."
"That is very tempting."
He asked the driver to take his time. They cruised through Georgetown,
along K Street, with its late-night restaurants and bars and college hangouts
all packed with people living the good life. It was March 22 and spring was
coming. The temperature was around sixty- five and the students were
anxious to be outside, even at midnight.
The cab slowed at the intersection of I Street and 14th and Joel could see his
old office building in the distance on New York Avenue. Somewhere in
there, on the top floor, he'd once ruled his own little

- 284 -

John Grisham

The Broker

kingdom, with his minions running behind him, jumping at every command.
It was not a nostalgic moment. Instead he was filled with regret for a
worthless life spent chasing money and buying friends and women and all
the toys a serious big shot could want. They drove on, past the countless
office buildings, government on one side, lobbyists on the other.
He asked the driver to change streets, to move on to more pleasant sights.
They turned onto Constitution and drove along the Mall, past the
Washington Monument. His youngest child, Anna Lee, had begged him for
years to take her for a springtime walk along the Mall, like the other kids in
her class. She wanted to see Mr. Lincoln and spend a day at the Smithsonian.
He'd promised and promised until she was gone. Anna Lee was in Denver
now, he thought, with a child he'd never seen.
As the dome of the Capitol drew nearer, Joel suddenly had enough. This
little trip down memory lane was depressing. The memories in his life were
too unpleasant.
"Take me to the hotel," he said.
