
No, I don't know about reversal days.
That brings to mind a classic example of hysteria. In late 1979-early 1980, the gold market
witnessed an incredible accelerated advance. Did you go short that market?
Yes, I sold gold at $675.
That was almost $200 too early!
I told you I'm not a good trader. I'm nearly always too early, but it was only about four days before
the top.
I didn't say you were way off timewise, but pricewise it must have been a pretty scary ride.
When you do a trade like that, isn't there a point where you have second thoughts?
Yes, when it goes to $676 [he laughs].
But you stayed with the trade?
Yes, in that case, because it was chaos. It was something that couldn't last. It was the gold market's
dying gasp.
Was that a matter of recognizing the fingerprint of a market in its final blowoff, or was it a
matter of gold being overpriced?
Both. Gold was overpriced, but basically it was—I like your terminology—the "fingerprint" of
hysteria. Just about every time you go against panic, you will be right if you can stick it out.
So when you see panic, do you automatically go against it?
The panic, the hysteria, in and of itself is only a catalyst to make me look to see what is going on. It
doesn't mean I'm going to do anything. In the case of the early 1980 gold market, I had a view of
the world that was bearish for gold. Volcker had just become the Federal Reserve Chairman a few
months earlier and said that we were going to beat inflation. I believed he meant it. I also happened
to be bearish on oil at the time, and I knew that if oil went down, gold would go down as well.
Was that because you thought gold and oil should move together, or because you thought the
rest of the world believed that?
At that time, everybody in the world believed that.
But, did you believe that the relationship was true?
I knew that it was not true.
The reason I asked is that I have always felt that the relationship between gold and oil was a
coincidental correlation.
Yes, that was all it was. For one very short period of time, gold and oil moved together.
Does that mean you will sometimes do a trade based on a relationship you know doesn't
really make any sense, simply because you think that the rest of the world believes it?
Rarely. I usually like to look at what I think is the fact, the truth. The main item then was that I
thought Volcker meant it when he said he was going to break the back of inflation. The fact that oil
was ready to go down anyway was just the kicker.
Actually, the decisive step came in October 1979, when the Fed changed its policy from
controlling interest rates to controlling money supply growth. Yet the gold market apparently
didn't believe it, because it went up for several months after that point. In situations like that,
are the markets too wound up in their hysteria to pay attention to changing fundamentals?
Absolutely. It is ama/ing how sometimes something important will happen, and the market will
keep going despite that. Now, I am experienced enough to know that just because I see something
doesn't mean that everyone sees it. A lot of people are going to keep buying or selling just because
that has been the thing to do.
So, just because the market doesn't respond to some important news, such as the October
1979 change in Fed policy, doesn't mean that it isn't important.
All the better. If the market keeps going the way it shouldn't go, especially if it is a hysterical
blowoff, then you know an opportunity will present itself.
141

Can you think of a more recent example?
Yes, October 1987. October 19 is my birthday, by the way. At the end of 1986 and the beginning of
1987,1 had predicted that we would have one more big move up in the stock market and then
witness the worst bear market since 1937. But I didn't know it was going to happen on my birthday.
It was the best birthday present I ever had.
Did you have any idea that the break could be as large as it was?
When John Train interviewed me in January 1987,1 told him, "Somewhere along the way, the
market is going to go down 300 points in one day." He looked at me as though I were a madman. I
envisioned that the Dow would be around 3,000, and 300 points would only be 10 percent. In 1929,
the market went down 12 percent in one day. Ten percent in one day was not such a big move,
given the kind of markets we were having then. The market had already seen a number of 3,4, and
5 percent days. So I said, "Why can't the market go down 300 points in a day?" Little did I know it
would be 508 points.
Why did you pick 1937 as a comparison in your prediction for a stock market collapse?
Because in 1937, the Dow went down 49 percent in six months. What I was trying to say was that
we were going to have a major, fast, deep, horrible collapse, as opposed to say 1973-1974, when
the market went down 50 percent, but it took two years.
Why did you use 1937 as an analogy as opposed to 1929-1930?
Because 1929-1930 went on to be a major depression. I knew we were going to have a bear market
caused by a major financial collapse. I was not convinced we were going to have a depression. I
was differentiating between a financial and economic collapse.
Why were you expecting a financial collapse?
It was the atmosphere. Money was flooding the world. Every stock market in the world was at an
all-time high. You had all these stories of young guys, three years out of school, making half a
million dollars a year. That is not reality. Whenever you see that in a market, you are near a top. So,
I went into the summer positioned for a collapse.
Were you short stocks or long puts?
I was short stocks and short calls. I don't buy options. Buying options is another fast way to the
poorhouse. Someone did a study for the SEC and discovered that 90 percent of all options expire as
losses. Well, I figured out that if 90 percent of all long option positions lose money, that meant that
90 percent of all short option positions make money. If I want to use options to be bearish, I sell
calls.
When did you cover your positions?
During the week of October 19. If you remember, by that time, everybody thought that the financial
structure of America was over.
Did you cover then because we had hysteria going the other way?
That is exactly right. That week was a textbook case of hysteria. Under those kind of conditions, if
you are still solvent, you have to step in there and go against it. Maybe that was going to be the one
time it was the end of the world, and I would have been wiped out too. But 95 percent of the time
when you go against that kind of hysteria, you are going to make money.
Between October 1987 and January 1988,1 didn't have any shorts. That was one of the few times in
my whole life that I didn't have any shorts. Whether I am bullish or bearish, I always try to have
both long and short positions—just in case I'm wrong. Even in the best of times, there is always
somebody fouling up, and even in the worst of times, there is somebody doing well.
Are you implying that after the collapse, you couldn't find any stocks you wanted to be short?
I thought that if I were right and the world wasn't coming to an end right away, everything was
going to go up—including those stocks that I knew, fundamentally, were coming apart at the
seams. In January [ 1988], I started putting a couple of shorts back on, and even though I am losing
money on one of those shorts, I am happy to do it because I feel more comfortable having the
protection of some short positions.
142

A lot of people blame the October 1987 break on program trading. Do you consider that
scapegoatism?
Absolutely. The people who blame it on that do not understand the market. Politicians and people
who lose money always look for scapegoats. In 1929, they blamed the crash on short sellers and
margin requirements. There were lots of good reasons why the stock market went down. What they
should focus on is why there were sellers on October 19, but no buyers.
I remember why I became even more bearish on the weekend before October 19. The week before,
[Federal Reserve Chairman] Alan Greenspan announced that the balance of trade was getting much
better and things were under control. Two days later, the balance of trade figures came out, and
they were the worst in the history of the world. Right away I said, "This guy is either a fool or a
liar. He doesn't have any idea what is going on." Then on the weekend before October 19, you had
[Treasury Secretary] Baker telling the world we were going to stick it to the Germans by letting the
dollar go, because the Germans weren't loosening monetary and fiscal policy as Baker had
demanded. It looked like the trade wars of the 1930s all over again.
I was in a panic—and I was already short! I called Singapore that Sunday night to add to my shorts.
[Singapore opens earlier than we do.] So all those guys who came in on Monday to sell had very,
very good reasons to sell, and there were no buyers around. There were no buyers, because there
was no reason for people to buy. Even the buyers were scared and bearish that Monday.
Are you saying the crash was caused by Greenspan and Baker?
There were a lot of causes: Greenspan, Baker, the fact that money was tight, the steady worsening
of the balance of trade, and you had a market that had spiked up to 2,700 six weeks earlier. If you
check, you will see that, during 1987, while the S&P and the Dow were going up, the rest of the
market was quietly eroding away. In December 1986,1 shorted the financial stocks, and throughout
1987,1 didn't lose any money, even though the Dow and the S&P were going through the roof.
Were there any times you faded hysteria and lost?
Yes, one of my greatest lessons happened in my early days and taught me about bear markets. In
January 1970, a time when I still bought options, I took all the money I had—which wasn't very
much—and bought puts. In May 1970, the market caved in, and the day the market hit bottom, I
sold my puts. I had tripled my money. I was a genius! "I'm going to be the next Bernard Baruch," I
said to myself.
My plan then was to wait for the market to rally and this time to sell short instead of buying puts so
that I would make money faster. Sure enough the market rallied, and I took everything I had and
went short. Needless to say, two months later, I was completely wiped out because I didn't know
what I was doing.
One of the stocks I had shorted was Memorex. I sold Memorex at 48. In those days, I didn't have
the staying power—psychologically, emotionally, and, most important, financially. I ended up
covering my shorts at 72. Memorex eventually went to about 96 and then went straight down to 2.
I was dead right, absolutely, flat-out, perfectly right to short that stock at 48.1 just ended up getting
completely wiped out. The market didn't care that I was dead right. That is one of the reasons that I
now know about hysteria.
What did you learn from that particular experience?
That the market is going to go higher than I think it can and lower than I think it will. I had a
tendency to think that if I knew something, everybody knew it. I would just read things in the
paper; I didn't have any inside information. What I now know is that they don't know what I know.
Most people don't have the foresight to look six months, one year, or two years out. The Memorex
experience taught me that anything can happen in the stock market, because there are a lot of
people in the market who don't understand what is going on.
Are you looking for a very pronounced bear market beyond what we have already seen?
Yes, eventually I expect the market to break the October 1987 low.
Do you expect a very deep recession as well?
Right now [April 1988], I'm still looking mainly for a financial collapse. However, the politicians
may foul it up and turn it into an economic collapse.
143

Can we get a financial collapse without actually having a very serious recession?
Sure. It has happened lots of times. That is why I used 1937 as an example before. I don't expect
the economy to collapse because as the dollar keeps getting weaker—which is what I expect—
many parts of the American economy will do well—steel, agriculture, textiles, mining.
So even if the stock market falls below the October low, you can still see the economy doing
well?
Absolutely. Unless the politicians foul it up.
By doing what?
Raising taxes, tariffs, protectionism. There are lots of things the politicians can do to foul it up, and
I'm sure they will—they always have. I know we will have a financial crisis. And, if the politicians
get it wrong, we may get an economic collapse as well.
What is going to trigger the financial collapse?
The trade figures will start getting worse again, and this will eventually precipitate another dollar
crisis.
What do you see as the main cause of the trade deficit?
The budget deficit, by and large, causes the trade deficit. You are not going to get rid of the trade
deficit until you get rid of the budget deficit.
Given the magnitude of the deficit problem, is there anything that can be done at this point?
The basic problem in the world today is that America is consuming more than it is saving. You
need to do everything you can to encourage saving and investment: Eliminate taxation of savings,
the capital gains tax, and dual taxation of dividends; bring back the more attractive incentives for
IRAs, Keoghs, and 401Ks. At the same time, you need to do everything you can to discourage
consumption. Change our tax structure to utilize a value added tax, which taxes consumption rather
than saving and investing. Cut government spending dramatically—and there are lots of ways of
doing it without hurting the economy too badly. We would have problems, but the problems would
not be nearly as bad as when they are forced on us. If we don't bite the bullet, then we are going to
have a 1930s-type collapse.
Your answer implies that there are relatively painless ways to cut government spending
"dramatically." Could you provide some specific examples?
I'll give you two examples; I could give you a dozen. The U.S. government spends $5 billion a year
to support the domestic price of sugar so that Americans can pay 22 cents a pound wholesale, when
it is selling for 8 cents a pound in the world market. Five billion dollars! We would be better off if
the government told every sugar grower, "We'll give you $100,000 a year for the rest of your life, a
condominium, and a Porsche if you just get out of the sugar business." We would save billions of
dollars a year, and the whole country would be better off because we would all be paying less for
sugar.
If you really want to save a big number, do you know what our annual balance of trade deficit is?
One hundred and fifty billion dollars. Do you know what it costs us each year to keep American
troops stationed in Europe? One hundred and fifty billion dollars. American troops were sent there
as an army of occupation forty-three years ago! Most people in this country weren't even born
when the decision was made to send our troops to Europe. They are doing nothing there but sitting
around, drinking beer, getting fat, and chasing girls. The GAO has said that we don't have enough
bullets to fight even a thirty-day war in Europe. Yet it costs us $150 billion a year to keep those
guys there. I would submit to you that if we stop spending that $150 billion a year and bring those
troops home, the Europeans would defend themselves. And the kicker is: Do you know who they
would buy their guns from? They would buy their guns from us, because they don't have a very
good defense industry establishment.
But those are very unlikely actions. No politicians are even talking about those solutions.
I understand that. With the present cast of jerks in Washington, it is not going to happen. The
politicians are going to foul things up. They are not going to do what has to be done. They are
going to be more concerned about keeping their votes and winning the next election. That is going
144

to continue until we are forced into solving our problems. Then it is going to be a disaster.
If the politicians don't act, do we eventually face a choice between very high inflation or a
deep recession?
It is going to be an extreme. What I suspect will happen—and I am just speculating, I don't have to
make this decision yet—is that somewhere along the line a recession will develop. Initially, the
politicians will say, "We've got to bite the bullet and suffer through this. This is good for us; it will
help clean out our system." People are going to buy that for a while. Then it is going to start to hurt.
Then it is really going to start to hurt. At that point, the politicians are going to give up, and they
are going to start to inflate their way out of it. But the only way to inflate your way out at that point
is to really print money!
In that scenario, we start off with a recession and end up with very high inflation.
Right, but we could have wild inflation first and then deflation. Another very real possibility is that
we will eventually have exchange controls. Fortunately, I don't have to make my investment
decisions for two or three years forward right now.
What kind of exchange controls?
By exchange controls I mean limitations on capital flows. If you want to go to Europe, you can't
take more than $1,000. You can't ship money out of the country without the government's approval.
What happens to the relative values of currencies in a situation like that?
The dollar disappears. What would bring on exchange controls is the dollar getting weaker and
weaker. The politicians would then try to bring in Draconian exchange controls, which would just
make the situation worse.
When you say disappear, are you talking about the dollar becoming like the Argentine peso?
Why not? Why couldn't it happen? Remember the Civil War expression, "I don't give a damn about
a greenback dollar."
You talk about the collapse of the dollar as if it's an inevitability.
In 1983, we were the largest creditor nation in the world. In 1985, we became a debtor nation for
the first time since 1914. By the end of 1987, our foreign debts were greater than all of the foreign
debts of every nation south of the Rio Grande put together: Brazil, Mexico, Peru, Argentina, and all
the rest.
Can I paraphrase the chain of events you imply as follows: Nothing meaningful will be done
to change the budget deficit situation. The continued budget deficit will guarantee that the
trade deficit situation stays bad or even gets worse. That, in turn, guarantees that sooner or
later, the dollar will come under extreme pressure.
Absolutely. That's why I'm not long the dollar.
How does the bond market fit into this scenario?
At some point, foreigners are going to stop putting money into this country because of the
weakening dollar. That means the American public will have to finance the debt. We have only a 3
to 4 percent savings rate. To get the American public to finance that debt, interest rates would have
to be very high. If the Federal Reserve tries to avoid high rates by printing more money, then the
dollar just disappears and the Fed loses control completely. That is the case where you get
hyperinflation and 25 to 30 percent interest rates. Either way, we are going to have high rates. You
might start out with lower rates first if the politicians decide to bite the bullet by having a recession.
But then, they will eventually give up and start printing money.
But, sooner or later, the bond market collapses.
Absolutely. Sooner or later, we repeat the English experience of not having a long-term bond
market. But I don't know when sooner or later is. It could be three years; it could be ten.
How far did British bonds fall in the situation you are referring to?
About 70 percent.
What kind of things do you look at in deciding which scenario will happen first: deflation or
145

inflation?
Money supply, government deficits, trade deficits, inflation figures, the financial markets, and
government policy. I look at all those things for the U.S. and key foreign countries as well. It is one
big, three-dimensional puzzle. However, if you had a three-dimensional puzzle, you could
eventually put it together. But this puzzle is not one in which you can spread out the pieces on a
great big table and put them all together. The picture is always changing. Every day some pieces
get taken away and others get thrown in.
While we are on the topic of scenarios, do you have a long-term outlook for gold?
In 1934, they set the price of gold at $35 an ounce and gold production declined every year
between 1935 and 1980. Production kept going down because there was no incentive to look for
gold. During that whole forty-five-year period, the consumption of gold kept going up, especially
during the 1960s and 1970s, when we had the electronic revolution. Demand got bigger and bigger,
while at the same time, the supply was going down. You would have had a great bull market in
gold in the 1970s, no matter what. Even if inflation was at zero percent, you still would have had a
big bull market in gold during the 1970s, because of supply and demand.
The situation has changed entirely in the 1980s. There is nothing like taking the price of gold from
$35 to $875 to make people go into the gold business. Gold production has gone up every year
since 1980. Just based on known projections for mine openings and expansions, gold production is
scheduled to go up every year until at least 1995. At the same time, there have been major
technological advances in the recovery processes for gold. In short, there is much more gold
available than there used to be, and that trend will continue at least into the mid-1990s.
I own some gold as an insurance policy, but I don't think gold is going to be the great inflation
hedge of the 1990s that it was in the 1970s, because supply and demand is so different. I don't
know what the inflation hedge of the 1990s will be yet, but fortunately, I don't have to decide
today.
The supply/demand picture you are painting for gold is obviously negative. But if you put
that together with a situation in which, using your own words, "the dollar disappears,"
wouldn't such an event swamp the internal supply/demand balance of gold?
Certainly, gold may keep its purchasing power. It may do better, it may do worse, but it's not going
to be the best market.
In other words, gold was yesterday's inflation hedge.
Generals always fight the last war. Portfolio managers always invest in the last bull market. The
idea that gold has always been the great store of value is absurd. There have been many times in
history when gold has lost purchasing power—sometimes for decades.
I should add something else about gold. Remember that three-dimensional puzzle I was talking
about, where there are always pieces being removed and added. Don't forget South Africa in that
puzzle. Gold is more complicated because of the South African situation. I fully expect South
Africa to eventually blow up, because I think that the government has painted itself too far into a
corner. If there were a revolution tomorrow and the blacks took over, the South African whites
would dump all their gold. So the price would actually go down a lot.
In a situation like that, I would think the price of gold would go up sharply, because of the
panic related to disruptions in mine production.
While the revolution is going on, the price will go up, but after that, it will go down. The move
down will completely confuse everybody. They will ask, "Why is the price of gold moving down?"
But you will want to buy after that move down, because the euphoria of the revolution will also
bring chaos.
We have talked about your long-term views for the stock market, bonds, currencies, and gold.
Any thoughts about oil?
Yes, when the recession hits—and I guarantee it will some day—the price of oil is going to go way
down. You can put that in writing; I don't mind saying that. It certainly is going to go under $12.
Whether that is $11 or $7 or $3,1 don't know. [The price of oil was approximately $16 at the time
of this interview.]
146
