his instructions, spread the delusion over the country, and established in all the principal
towns of France, "Societies of Harmony," for trying experiments and curing all diseases
by means of magnetism. Some of these societies were a scandal to morality, being joined
by profligate men of depraved appetites, who took a disgusting delight in witnessing
young girls in convulsions. Many of the pretended magnetisers were notorious libertines,
who took that opportunity of gratifying their passions. An illegal increase of the number
of French citizens was anything but a rare consequence in Strasburg, Nantes, Bourdeaux,
Lyons, and other towns, where these societies were established.
At last the Commissioners published their report, which was drawn up by the illustrious
and unfortunate Bailly. For clearness of reasoning and strict impartiality it has never been
surpassed. After detailing the various experiments made, and their results, they came to
the conclusion that the only proof advanced in support of Animal Magnetism was the
effects it produced on the human body -- that those effects could be produced without
passes or other magnetic manipulations - that all these manipulations, and passes, and
ceremonies never produce any effect at all if employed without the patient's knowledge;
and that therefore imagination did, and animal magnetism did not, account for the
phenomena.
This report was the ruin of Mesmer's reputation in France. He quitted Paris shortly after,
with the three hundred and forty thousand francs which had been subscribed by his
admirers, and retired to his own country, where he died in 1815, at the advanced age of
eighty-one. But the seeds he had sown fructified of themselves, nourished and brought to
maturity by the kindly warmth of popular credulity. Imitators sprang up in France,
Germany, and England, more extravagant than their master, and claiming powers for the
new science which its founder had never dreamt of. Among others, Cagliostro made good
use of the delusion in extending his claims to be considered a master of the occult
sciences. But he made no discoveries worthy to be compared to those of the Marquis de
Puysegur and the Chevalier Barbarin, honest men, who began by deceiving themselves
before they deceived others.
The Marquis de Puysegur, the owner of a considerable estate at Busancy, was one of
those who had entered into the subscription for Mesmer. After that individual had quitted
France, he retired to Busancy with his brother to try Animal Magnetism upon his tenants,
and cure the country people of all manner of diseases. He was a man of great simplicity
and much benevolence, and not only magnetised but fed the sick that flocked around him.
In all the neighbourhood, and indeed within a circumference of twenty miles, he was
looked upon as endowed with a power almost Divine. His great discovery, as he called it,
was made by chance. One day he had magnetised his gardener; and observing him to fall
into a deep sleep, it occurred to him that he would address a question to him, as he would
have done to a natural somnambulist. He did so, and the man replied with much clearness
and precision. M. de Puysegur was agreeably surprised: he continued his experiments,
and found that, in this state of magnetic somnambulism, the soul of the sleeper was
enlarged, and brought into more intimate communion with all nature, and more especially
with him, M. de Puysegur. He found that all further manipulations were unnecessary;
that, without speaking or making any sign, he could convey his will to the patient; that he

could, in fact, converse with him, soul to soul, without the employment of any physical
operation whatever!
Simultaneously with this marvellous discovery he made another, which reflects equal
credit upon his understanding. Like Valentine Greatraks, he found it hard work to
magnetise all that came - that he had not even time to take the repose and relaxation
which were necessary for his health. In this emergency he hit upon a clever expedient. He
had heard Mesmer say that he could magnetise bits of wood -- why should he not be able
to magnetise a whole tree? It was no sooner thought than done. There was a large elm on
the village green at Busancy, under which the peasant girls used to dance on festive
occasions, and the old men to sit, drinking their vin du pays on the fine summer evenings.
M. de Puysegur proceeded to this tree and magnetised it, by first touching it with his
hands and then retiring a few steps from it; all the while directing streams of the magnetic
fluid from the branches toward the trunk, and from the trunk toward the root. This done,
he caused circular seats to be erected round it, and cords suspended from it in all
directions. When the patients had seated themselves, they twisted the cords round the
diseased parts of their bodies, and held one another firmly by their thumbs to form a
direct channel of communication for the passage of the fluid.
M. de Puysegur had now two hobbies - the man with the enlarged soul, and the magnetic
elm. The infatuation of himself and his patients cannot be better expressed than in his
own words. Writing to his brother, on the 17th of May 1784, he says, "If you do not
come, my dear friend, you will not see my extraordinary man, for his health is now
almost quite restored. I continue to make use of the happy power for which I am indebted
to M. Mesmer. Every day I bless his name; for I am very useful, and produce many
salutary effects on all the sick poor in the neighbourhood. They flock around my tree;
there were more than one hundred and thirty of them this morning. It is the best baquet
possible; not a leaf of it but communicates health! all feel, more or less, the good effects
of it. You will be delighted to see the charming picture of humanity which this presents. I
have only one regret - it is, that I cannot touch all who come. But my magnetised man -my intelligence - sets me at ease. He teaches me what conduct I should adopt. According
to him, it is not at all necessary that I should touch every one; a look, a gesture, even a
wish, is sufficient. And it is one of the most ignorant peasants of the country that teaches
me this! When he is in a crisis, I know of nothing more profound, more prudent, more
clearsighted (clairvoyant) than he is."
In another letter, describing his first experiment with the magnetic tree, he says, "Yester
evening I brought my first patient to it. As soon as I had put the cord round him he gazed
at the tree; and, with an air of astonishment which I cannot describe, exclaimed, 'What is
it that I see there?' His head then sunk down, and he fell into a perfect fit of
somnambulism. At the end of an hour, I took him home to his house again, when I
restored him to his senses. Several men and women came to tell him what he had been
doing. He maintained it was not true; that, weak as he was, and scarcely able to walk, it
would have been scarcely possible for him to have gone down stairs and walked to the
tree. To-day I have repeated the experiment on him, and with the same success. I own to
you that my head turns round with pleasure to think of the good I do. Madame de

Puysegur, the friends she has with her, my servants, and, in fact, all who are near me, feel
an amazement, mingled with admiration, which cannot be described; but they do not
experience the half of my sensations. Without my tree, which gives me rest, and which
will give me still more, I should be in a state of agitation, inconsistent, I believe, with my
health. I exist too much, if I may be allowed to use the expression."
In another letter, he descants still more poetically upon his gardener with the enlarged
soul. He says, "It is from this simple man, this tall and stout rustic, twenty-three years of
age, enfeebled by disease, or rather by sorrow, and therefore the more predisposed to be
affected by any great natural agent, -- it is from this man, I repeat, that I derive instruction
and knowledge. When in the magnetic state, he is no longer a peasant who can hardly
utter a single sentence; he is a being, to describe whom I cannot find a name. I need not
speak; I have only to think before him, when he instantly understands and answers me.
Should anybody come into the room, he sees him, if I desire it (but not else), and
addresses him, and says what I wish him to say; not indeed exactly as I dictate to him, but
as truth requires. When he wants to add more than I deem it prudent strangers should
hear, I stop the flow of his ideas, and of his conversation in the middle of a word, and
give it quite a different turn!"
Among other persons attracted to Busancy by the report of these extraordinary
occurrences was M. Cloquet, the Receiver of Finance. His appetite for the marvellous
being somewhat insatiable, he readily believed all that was told him by M. de Puysegur.
He also has left a record of what he saw, and what he credited, which throws a still
clearer light upon the progress of the delusion. ["Introduction to the Study of Animal
Magnetism," by Baron Dupotet, p. 73.] He says that the patients he saw in the magnetic
state had an appearance of deep sleep, during which all the physical faculties were
suspended, to the advantage of the intellectual faculties. The eyes of the patients were
closed; the sense of hearing was abolished, and they awoke only at the voice of their
magnetiser. "If any one touched a patient during a crisis, or even the chair on which he
was seated," says M. Cloquet, "it would cause him much pain and suffering, and throw
him into convulsions. During the crisis, they possess an extraordinary and supernatural
power, by which, on touching a patient presented to them, they can feel what part of his
body is diseased, even by merely passing their hand over the clothes." Another
singularity was, that these sleepers who could thus discover diseases -- see into the
interior of other men's stomachs, and point out remedies, remembered absolutely nothing
after the magnetiser thought proper to disenchant them. The time that elapsed between
their entering the crisis and their coming out of it was obliterated. Not only had the
magnetiser the power of making himself heard by the somnambulists, but he could make
them follow him by merely pointing his finger at them from a distance, though they had
their eyes the whole time completely closed.
Such was Animal Magnetism under the auspices of the Marquis de Puysegur. While he
was hibiting these fooleries around his elm-tree, a magnetiser of another class appeared in
Lyons, in the person of the Chevalier de Barbarin. This person thought the effort of the
will, without any of the paraphernalia of wands or baquets, was sufficient to throw
patients into the magnetic sleep. He tried it and succeeded. By sitting at the bedside of his

patients, and praying that they might be magnetised, they went off into a state very
similar to that of the persons who fell under the notice of M. de Puysegur. In the course
of time, a very considerable number of magnetisers, acknowledging Barbarin for their
model, and called after him Barbarinists, appeared in different parts, and were believed to
have effected some remarkable cures. In Sweden and Germany, this sect of fanatics
increased rapidly, and were called spiritualists, to distinguish them from the followers of
M. de Puysegur, who were called experimentalists. They maintained that all the effects of
Animal Magnetism, which Mesmer believed to be producible by a magnetic fluid
dispersed through nature, were produced by the mere effort of one human soul acting
upon another; that when a connexion had once been established between a magnetiser
and his patient, the former could communicate his influence to the latter from any
distance, even hundreds of miles, by the will! One of them thus described the blessed
state of a magnetic patient: -- "In such a man animal instinct ascends to the highest
degree admissible in this world. The clairvoyant is then a pure animal, without any
admixture of matter. His observations are those of a spirit. He is similar to God. His eye
penetrates all the secrets of nature. When his attention is fixed on any of the objects of
this world -- on his disease, his death, his well-beloved, his friends, his relations, his
enemies, -- in spirit he sees them acting; he penetrates into the causes and the
consequences of their actions; he becomes a physician, a prophet, a divine!" [See
"Foreign Review, Continental Miscellany," vol. v. 113.]
Let us now see what progress these mysteries made in England. In the year 1788, Dr.
Mainauduc, who had been a pupil, first of Mesmer, and afterwards of D'Eslon, arrived in
Bristol, and gave public lectures upon magnetism. His success was quite extraordinary.
People of rank and fortune hastened from London to Bristol to be magnetised, or to place
themselves under his tuition. Dr. George Winter, in his History of Animal Magnetism,
gives the following list of them: -- "They amounted to one hundred and twenty-seven,
among whom there were one duke, one duchess, one marchioness, two countesses, one
earl, one baron, three baronesses, one bishop, five right honourable gentlemen and ladies,
two baronets, seven members of parliament, one clergyman, two physicians, seven
surgeons, besides ninety-two gentlemen and ladies of respectability." He afterwards
established himself in London, where he performed with equal success.
He began by publishing proposals to the ladies for the formation of a Hygeian Society. In
this paper he vaunted highly the curative effects of Animal Magnetism, and took great
credit to himself for being the first person to introduce it into England, and thus
concluded:-- "As this method of cure is not confined to sex, or college education, and the
fair sex being in general the most sympathising part of the creation, and most
immediately concerned in the health and care of its offspring, I think myself bound in
gratitude to you, ladies, for the partiality you have shown me in midwifery, to contribute,
as far as lies in my power, to render you additionally useful and valuable to the
community. With this view, I propose forming my Hygeian Society, to be incorporated
with that of Paris. As soon as twenty ladies have given in their names, the day shall be
appointed for the first meeting at my house, when they are to pay fifteen guineas, which
will include the whole expense."

Hannah More, in a letter addressed to Horace Walpole, in September 1788, speaks of the
"demoniacal mummeries" of Dr. Mainauduc, and says he was in a fair way of gaining a
hundred thousand pounds by them, as Mesmer had done by his exhibitions in Paris.
So much curiosity was excited by the subject that, about the same time, a man, named
Holloway, gave a course of lectures on Animal Magnetism in London, at the rate of five
guineas for each pupil, and realised a considerable fortune. Loutherbourg, the painter, and
his wife followed the same profitable trade; and such was the infatuation of the people to
be witnesses of their strange manipulations, that, at times, upwards of three thousand
persons crowded around their house at Hammersmith, unable to gain admission. The
tickets sold at prices varying from one to three guineas. Loutherbourg performed his
cures by the touch, after the manner of Valentine Greatraks, and finally pretended to a
Divine mission. An account of his miracles, as they were called, was published in 1789,
entitled "A List of New Cures performed by Mr. and Mrs. de Loutherbourg of
Hammersmith Terrace, without Medicine; by a Lover of the Lamb of God. Dedicated to
his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury."
This "Lover of the Lamb of God" was a half-crazy old woman, named Mary Pratt, who
conceived for Mr. and Mrs. de Loutherbourg a veneration which almost prompted her to
worship them. She chose for the motto of her pamphlet a verse in the thirteenth chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles: "Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish! for I will work a
work in your days which ye shall not believe though a man declare it unto you."
Attempting to give a religious character to the cures of the painter, she thought a woman
was the proper person to make them known, since the apostle had declared that a man
should not be able to conquer the incredulity of the people. She stated that, from
Christmas 1788 to July 1789, De Loutherbourg and his wife had cured two thousand
people, "having been made proper recipients to receive Divine manuductions; which
heavenly and Divine influx, coming from the radix God, his Divine Majesty had most
graciously bestowed upon them to diffuse healing to all, be they deaf, dumb, blind, lame,
or halt."
In her dedication to the Archbishop of Canterbury, she implored him to compose a new
form of prayer to be used in all churches and chapels, that nothing might impede this
inestimable gift from having its due course. She further entreated all the magistrates and
men of authority in the land to wait on Mr. and Mrs. de Loutherbourg, to consult with
them on the immediate erection of a large hospital, with a pool of Bethesda attached to it.
All the magnetisers were scandalised at the preposterous jabber of this old woman, and
De Loutherbourg appears to have left London to avoid her; continuing, however, in
conjunction with his wife, the fantastic tricks which had turned the brain of this poor
fanatic, and deluded many others who pretended to more sense than she had.
From this period until 1798, magnetism excited little or no attention in England. An
attempt to revive the doctrine was made in that year, but it was in the shape of mineral
rather than of animal magnetism. One Benjamin Douglas Perkins, an American,
practising as a surgeon in Leicestersquare, invented and took out a patent for the
celebrated "Metallic Tractors." He pretended that these tractors, which were two small

pieces of metal strongly magnetised, something resembling the steel plates which were
first brought into notice by Father Hell, would cure gout, rheumatism, palsy, and in fact,
almost every disease the human frame was subject to, if applied externally to the afflicted
part, and moved about gently, touching the surface only. The most wonderful stories soon
obtained general circulation, and the press groaned with pamphlets, all vaunting the
curative effects of the tractors, which were sold at five guineas the pair. Perkins gained
money rapidly. Gouty subjects forgot their pains in the presence of this new remedy; the
rheumatism fled at its approach; and toothache, which is often cured by the mere sight of
a dentist, vanished before Perkins and his marvellous steel plates. The benevolent
Quakers, of whose body he was a member, warmly patronised the invention. Desirous
that the poor, who could not afford to pay Mr. Perkins five guineas, or even five shillings,
for his tractors, should also share in the benefits of that sublime discovery, they
subscribed a large sum, and built an hospital, called the "Perkinean Institution," in which
all comers might be magnetised free of cost. In the course of a few months they were in
very general use, and their lucky inventor in possession of five thousand pounds.
Dr. Haygarth, an eminent physician at Bath, recollecting the influence of imagination in
the cure of disease, hit upon an expedient to try the real value of the tractors. Perkins's
cures were too well established to be doubted; and Dr. Haygarth, without gainsaying
them, quietly, but in the face of numerous witnesses, exposed the delusion under which
people laboured with respect to the curative medium. He suggested to Dr. Falconer that
they should make wooden tractors, paint them to resemble the steel ones, and see if the
very same effects would not be produced. Five patients were chosen from the hospital in
Bath, upon whom to operate. Four of them suffered severely from chronic rheumatism in
the ankle, knee, wrist, and hip; and the fifth had been afflicted for several months with
the gout. On the day appointed for the experiments, Dr. Haygarth and his friends
assembled at the hospital, and with much solemnity brought forth the fictitious tractors.
Four out of the five patients said their pains were immediately relieved; and three of them
said they were not only relieved, but very much benefited. One felt his knee warmer, and
said he could walk across the room. He tried and succeeded, although on the previous day
he had not been able to stir. The gouty man felt his pains diminish rapidly, and was quite
easy for nine hours, until he went to bed, when the twitching began again. On the
following day the real tractors were applied to all the patients, when they described their
symptoms in nearly the same terms.
To make still more sure, the experiment was tried in the Bristol Infirmary, a few weeks
afterwards, on a man who had a rheumatic affection in the shoulder, so severe as to
incapacitate him from lifting his hand from his knee. The fictitious tractors were brought
and applied to the afflicted part, one of the physicians, to add solemnity to the scene,
drawing a stop-watch from his pocket to calculate the time exactly, while another, with a
pen in his hand, sat down to write the change of symptoms from minute to minute as they
occurred. In less than four minutes the man felt so much relieved, that he lifted his hand
several inches without any pain in the shoulder!
An account of these matters was published by Dr. Haygarth, in a small volume entitled,
"Of the Imagination, as a Cause and Cure of Disorders, exemplified by fictitious

Tractors." The exposure was a coup de grace to the system of Mr. Perkins. His friends
and patrons, still unwilling to confess that they had been deceived, tried the tractors upon
sheep, cows, and horses, alleging that the animals received benefit from the metallic
plates, but none at all from the wooden ones. But they found nobody to believe them; the
Perkinean Institution fell into neglect; and Perkins made his exit from England, carrying
with him about ten thousand pounds, to soothe his declining years in the good city of
Pennsylvania.
Thus was magnetism laughed out of England for a time. In France, the revolution left
men no leisure for such puerilities. The "Societes de l'Harmonie," of Strasburg, and other
great towns, lingered for a while, till sterner matters occupying men's attention, they were
one after the other abandoned, both by pupils and professors. The system thus driven
from the first two nations of Europe, took refuge among the dreamy philosophers of
Germany. There the wonders of the magnetic sleep grew more and more wonderful every
day; the patients acquired the gift of prophecy - their vision extended over all the surface
of the globe -- they could hear and see with their toes and fingers, and read unknown
languages, and understand them too, by merely having the book placed on their bellies.
Ignorant clodpoles, when once entranced by the grand Mesmeric fluid, could spout
philosophy diviner than Plato ever wrote, descant upon the mysteries of the mind with
more eloquence and truth than the profoundest metaphysicians the world ever saw, and
solve knotty points of divinity with as much ease as waking men could undo their shoebuckles!
During the first twelve years of the present century, little was heard of Animal
Magnetism in any country of Europe. Even the Germans forgot their airy fancies; recalled
to the knowledge of this every-day world by the roar of Napoleon's cannon and the fall or
the establishment of kingdoms. During this period, a cloud of obscurity hung over the
science, which was not dispersed until M. Deleuze published, in 1813, his "Histoire
Critique du Magnetisme Animal." This work gave a new impulse to the half-forgotten
delusion; newspapers, pamphlets, and books again waged war upon each other on the
question of its truth or falsehood; and many eminent men in the profession of medicine
recommenced inquiry, with an earnest design to discover the truth.
The assertions made in the celebrated treatise of Deleuze are thus summed up: [See the
very calm, clear, and dispassionate article upon the subject in the fifth volume (1830) of
"The Foreign Review," page 96, et seq.] -- "There is a fluid continually escaping from the
human body," and "forming an atmosphere around us," which, as "it has no determined
current," produces no sensible effects on surrounding individuals. It is, however, "capable
of being directed by the will;" and, when so directed, "is sent forth in currents," with a
force corresponding to the energy we possess. Its motion is "similar to that of the rays
from burning bodies;" "it possesses different qualities in different individuals." It is
capable of a high degree of concentration, "and exists also in trees." The will of the
magnetiser, "guided by a motion of the hand, several times repeated in the same
direction," can fill a tree with this fluid. Most persons, when this fluid is poured into
them, from the body and by the will of the magnetiser, "feel a sensation of heat or cold"
when he passes his hand before them, without even touching them. Some persons, when
