
Spotting One-Time Charges That Aren’t
Spotting outright corporate fraud using just the publicly available financial
statements can be very difficult. If a company lies to you and fabricates portions of the financial statements, you are at a huge disadvantage as a fundamental analyst. Fortunately, corporate fraud, while more common than I’d
like to see, still remains rare overall.
What’s much more common, though, are companies that pad results using
perfectly legal tricks you need to watch out for.
My top suggestion on detecting when a company is using little tricks to boost
earnings is by comparing a company’s net income with its free cash flow. I step
you through this very important analysis, in detail, in Chapter 11. If you didn’t
read that section during the first swing through this book, you might want to
flip back and check it out now.
Another thing to be aware of as a fundamental analyst is when companies
routinely take so-called one-time or restructuring charges. By classifying a
charge as one-time or nonrecurring, some analysts might overlook the costs,
assuming they are unusual and not indicative of the company’s core business. But when you see a company constantly taking one-time charges, be
careful.
One of the companies that seemed to make one-time charges a regular phenomenon was technology firm, i2 Technologies. As of late 2001, the company
made reporting one-time charges a quarterly event. And these charges were
significant. In fact, at some points the company’s nonrecurring charges were
larger than its revenue.
Detecting companies reporting incessant one-time charges can tip you off to
an overly aggressive management team.
And certainly at i2, the chronic one-time charges were a red flag worth paying
attention to as they were symptomatic of deeper problems. In June 2004,
the company agreed to pay $10 million to wronged investors for a pattern of
misstating its results for a five-year period ended in 2002, according to the

28 506455-ch20.indd 316

9/24/09 10:43:04 PM

Chapter 20: Ten Examples of Unearthing Financial Secrets

317

Securities and Exchange Commission. The company’s improper accounting
techniques gave investors the impression the company’s revenue and profits
were rising, when in fact, its results were “increasingly negative,” the SEC says.
You can spot a company reporting excessive one-time charges yourself in the
earnings press release or the income statement, as described in Chapter 5.
But MSN Money, a Web site that consolidates financial information, makes it
even easier to find one-time charges. Enter a stock symbol at money.msn.com,
click the Get Quote button and choose the Financial Results option, and then
Statements. You’ll see a row called “Total Extraordinary Items.” If that item is
consistently high relative to revenue, be wary.

Spotting Financial Distress a Mile Away
There are many ways to protect yourself from buying a car that’s a lemon.
You can look up the company’s history and even get a warranty. When it
comes to avoiding a dud in investing, though, fundamental analysis is one of
your best weapons.
The best way to know whether a company is unlikely to survive is by carefully studying the financial statements, covered in Chapters 5, 6 and 7 and the
financial ratios, discussed in Chapter 8.
There’s a shortcut, though, to finding whether a company is unlikely to make
it. It’s called the Altman’s Z-score. The Z-score is a long formula that crunches
down many of the things you look for and puts it into a single number.
Z-Score = (0.717 * A) + (0.847 * B) + (3.107 * C) + (0.42 * D) + (0.998 * E)
Where:
A: (Current assets – current liabilities) / total assets
B: Retained earnings / total assets
C: Earnings before interest and taxes / total assets
D: Shareholders’ equity / total liabilities
E: Revenue / total assets
Calculating the Z-score is just a matter of mostly pulling the data off the financial
statements and plugging them into the formula. You can find out how to obtain
all the data listed above from a company’s financial statements in Chapters 5
through 7. But to make it easy, I’ve listed their locations in Table 20-1.

28 506455-ch20.indd 317

9/24/09 10:43:04 PM

318 Part V: The Part of Tens
Table 20-1

Where To Find The Numbers You Need For Z-Score

You will find . . .

. . . on the . . .

Current assets

Balance sheet

Current liabilities

Balance sheet

Total assets

Balance sheet

Retained earnings

Balance sheet. This is the amount of a company’s
earnings that it keeps, rather than distributing
them to shareholders as dividends.

Earnings before interest and
taxes (or EBIT)

Income statement. You’ll need to calculate EBIT.
Chapter 8 tells you how.

Shareholders’ equity

Balance sheet

Revenue

Income statement

Once you calculate the Z-score, you might wonder what it means. One of the
beauties of the Z-score is that you just see where it fits on a chart, as shown
in Table 20-2, and get a quick interpretation.

Table 20-2

Reading the Z-Score

If a company’s Z-Score is . . .

. . . Then it’s considered . . .

Less than 1.2

Highly likely to fail

Between 1.2 and 2.9

In so-so condition

Higher than 2.9

Unlikely to fail

Consider the example of Nortel Networks. The telecommunications company stunned many long-term investors who figured the company was too
big to fail, when it became the second largest public company bankruptcy in
January 2009, says BankruptcyData.com.
But fundamental analysts monitoring the Z-score saw this colossal wipeout
coming. Nortel’s Z-score dipped below 1.2 in the second quarter of 2001,
coming in at a -1.74, says Capital IQ. The Z-score never pulled above 1.2 again.
Talk about a huge warning.
The Z-score is really a quick-and-dirty way to assess a company’s health. Don’t
rely on it solely when making a financial decision, instead, be sure to fully analyze the company’s health.

28 506455-ch20.indd 318

9/24/09 10:43:04 PM

Chapter 20: Ten Examples of Unearthing Financial Secrets

319

Sidestepping the Financial Crisis
Every once in a while, perhaps once every generation, there comes a shock
to the financial and economic system so severe, you really don’t want to get
caught in the middle of it. The banking crisis that began in 2007 with the subprime mortgage crisis was one of those brutal economic events you didn’t
want to have anything to do with.
The crisis stunned many investors because much of the damage hit shares
of banks, which for many years, had been considered safe and steady investments. While the severity of the crisis caught many investors off guard, there
were some clues available to fundamental analysts that at least showed there
were problems brewing.
A good place to have noticed the financial crisis gaining steam was reading
the risks section of the 10-Ks filed by top financial institutions. Chapter 12,
for instance, shows how AIG was taking blatant risks that caused the firm to
implode.
But there were other tip-offs for fundamental investors. Consider the fate of
Cleveland’s National City Corp. The regional bank, founded in 1845, grew into
one of the nation’s largest originators of mortgages. National City’s dividends
and earnings were all steady. So was the stock for many years, as it marched
to nearly $37 a share at the end of 2006.
Turns out the steady results were a mirage. National City was eventually
bought by rival bank PNC in a distress situation in 2008, for just $1.92 a share.
Investors were shocked at how a seemingly strong bank could weaken so
quickly.
But they shouldn’t have been so surprised. Basic industry analysis provided a clue, had investors picked up the regulatory filings released by
National City’s nearby Akron, Ohio-based rival FirstMerit. As far back as 2003,
FirstMerit, which serves many of the same communities as National City, constantly alerted investors it was aware of some shaky mortgages on its books
and was taking action to get rid of them.
Back in 2003, FirstMerit told investors it was selling off some of its most risky
loans. And again, in the 2006 letter to shareholders, the CEO of FirstMerit said
the company was actively identifying potentially problematic loans and dealing with them immediately. All these warnings came well before the mortgage
crisis hit in force in 2007.
But even as FirstMerit was paring troubled assets, National City’s 2006 annual
report to shareholders was glowing. “Our competitors face the same issues

28 506455-ch20.indd 319

9/24/09 10:43:04 PM

320 Part V: The Part of Tens
as we do, but we believe we’re better-positioned than most in this tougher
environment,” then-CEO David Daberko wrote in a letter to shareholders in
the 2006 annual report.
Savvy fundamental analysts might have wondered why FirstMerit was making
such a dramatic effort to reduce its risk, while nearby rival National City
hardly made a mention of troubles until it was too late.

Seeing Companies with Potential
Environmental Issues
Rising concerns about the environment are increasing awareness by consumers, regulators and investors about how companies are treating the planet.
Without getting into the ethical issues connected with how companies use
natural resources, investors need to be aware of the potential for financial
risk connected with pollution or other environmental factors. Companies
might face large fines or consumer backlashes if caught violating environmental rules and regulations.
Don’t expect a company to give you a nice neat list of all the potential sites
they may have polluted that could come back to haunt it. However, again, the
10-K can give fundamental analysts a head’s-up of potential environmental
concerns.
My favorite example of this is Pacific Gas & Electric’s 1994 10-K. Buried deep
in this filing are the allegations from a lawsuit claiming the company’s power
station in San Bernardino County, California, was causing serious contamination. The suit alleged the plant was exposing residents to chromium. The
company also disclosed a number of environmental measures that would
cost it up to $55 million over five years. Does this sound familiar? Well, these
allegations were the basis of the movie Erin Brockovich. Of all the 10-Ks in the
world, this might be one of the most famous ones.

Staying Away from Investment Fads,
Like the Dot-Bombs
Up until the financial crisis, the biggest implosion of the financial markets
had to be the Internet bubble. Investors ignoring the fundamentals of companies rushed to buy stock of companies that didn’t make any money and
sometimes didn’t even have revenue.

28 506455-ch20.indd 320

9/24/09 10:43:04 PM

Chapter 20: Ten Examples of Unearthing Financial Secrets

321

Even to this day, the absurdity of the dot-com bubble remains one of the
best reasons why anyone who buys individual stocks should take the time to
understand the fundamentals. Investors who blindly jumped into technology
and Internet stocks blindly got a beating of a lifetime.
More than 117 dot-com companies collapsed between September 1999 and
October 2000, according to Boston Consulting Group. Of those, 12 of the failures resulted in bankruptcies, 63 shut down their Web sites completely, and
the rest struggled in various forms. But in each case, investors lost nearly all,
if not all, their money.
Online pet supply store Pets.com, in hindsight, provides some of the best
lessons on how fundamental analysis can help you avoid getting sucked into
investment fads. The company’s story sounded great. The site allowed consumers to buy things they needed for their pets over the Internet. Great, right?
But fundamental analysis revealed the true story. Turns out the company’s
survival was nearly impossible. Pets.com lost 19 cents on every $1 in revenue
it posted in the third quarter of 2000, reported USA TODAY. And that didn’t
even include overhead costs. In other words, the more product the company
sold, the more money it lost. You can’t do that very long before going out of
business. And it didn’t. Pets.com liquidated itself roughly one year after going
public.
It turns out that Pets.com wasn’t alone. Nearly 60 of the 729 Internet companies in late 2000 were selling products for less than what they paid for them,
USA TODAY found. If you want a telltale sign of a mania, this is it.

Pinpointing Companies Fooling Investors
When trying to detect accounting fraud, there’s only so much a fundamental
analyst can do. After all, you have to believe the numbers to some degree,
since you don’t have the authority to go inside a company to verify its books
and records yourself.
But there are some aspects of accounting that are so commonly abused, they
are worth constantly being on a lookout for. So-called channel stuffing would
be at the top of my list of early fraud warnings.
A company can boost its revenue and profit by enticing customers to buy
products now, even thought they don’t want them yet, in order to boost
results in the short term. Often, a company might cut customers slack in how
quickly they must actually pay for the merchandise. That way, the company

28 506455-ch20.indd 321

9/24/09 10:43:04 PM

322 Part V: The Part of Tens
may book the revenue, even though no cash is collected. Clearly, this practice
causes a problem for the company in the future, since consumers don’t order
because they have more than enough product.
Sunbeam is a classic example of alleged channel stuffing. The SEC accused
the company’s management of providing customers with lucrative deals in
1997 to coax them to buy product ahead of time. And the channel stuffing
technique wasn’t enough to keep the fraud going, so the company resorted to
even more aggressive means to prop up results, the SEC says.
Again, techniques in this book could have at least shown you something was
amiss. Fundamental analysis of the company’s accounts receivable turnover in
days, discussed in Chapter 8, would have provided clues. This financial ratio
tells you how many days it takes for a company to collect amounts owed to it
by customers. In 1996, Sunbeam collected its accounts receivable in 79 days.
But that period shot up to 92 days in 1997, which was a gigantic red flag.
Always be suspicious when you see accounts receivable turnover in days
jump up like that.

Seeing through Distortions Caused
by Stock Buybacks
Stock buybacks occur when a company uses its cash to buy back shares
of its own stock. There are many reasons why companies might do this, as
explained in Chapter 18.
But these buybacks can create enormous distortions to financials. While
there’s nothing nefarious about stock buybacks, investors might come to
false conclusions unless they use fundamental analysis. Since buybacks
reduce a company’s number of shares outstanding, they can inflate a company’s earnings per share. Remember earnings per share is calculated by
dividing net income by the number of shares outstanding. So if the number of
shares falls, the denominator falls, and the earnings per share rises.
The distortions caused by stock buybacks to a company’s earnings per share
aren’t fraudulent. They’re merely the result of mathematics. Still, the effect can
dramatically alter how investors perceive a company’s results.
Take, for instance, Automatic Data Processing. The company has been financially strong for a long time, and is one of the few nonfinancial firms to earn
the coveted AAA-credit rating from Standard & Poor’s. The company had

28 506455-ch20.indd 322

9/24/09 10:43:05 PM

Chapter 20: Ten Examples of Unearthing Financial Secrets

323

been long known for its unstoppable consistency. Back in January 2003, the
company touted it had extended its “streak” of posting higher earnings per
share for 166 straight quarters. ADP’s streak gave it the reputation of being a
solid and dependable generator of consistent growth.
But fundamental analysts who took a closer look saw that while the company
was telling the truth, there was more to the story. Certainly, the company’s
earnings per share indeed rose 2% to 43 cents a share during the December
2002 quarter. However, that increase in earnings per share was largely due
to the fact the company reduced its number of shares outstanding by spending $80 million buying back 2 million shares of its stock during the quarter.
Stripping out the effect of buybacks, by looking at net income, tells the real
story. ADP’s net income fell 1.1% in the quarter to $262 million. No, it wasn’t a
big drop, but the number puts ADP’s streak into more context.

Knowing a Trend Will Come to an End
It never fails. Every couple of years, there’s a company that captures the
imagination of investors. Crocs, the maker of plastic shoes that had been
used mainly by gardeners and boaters, became that new darling. After debuting its shares as an initial public offering in February 2006, the company
could do no wrong.
Crocs’ revenue soared at a neck-turning pace, rocketing from just $1.2 million
in 2003 to $847.4 million in 2007. And investors didn’t miss a step, driving
shares from their first day’s closing price of $14.28 in Feb. 2006 to $74.75 on
Oct. 31, 2007. Investors figured the company could expand into all sorts of
new footwear and keep up the growth.
Fundamental analysts, though, knew better. For one thing, Crocs’ compound
average annual growth rate of 415.5% between 2003 and 2007 wasn’t sustainable, just by using logic. If Crocs were to grow keep growing that fast, it would
have exceeded the revenue of Nike in two years. You can find out how to calculate compound average annual growth rates in Chapter 17.
But fundamental analysis also gave investors clues the momentum at Crocs
was petering out. As early as the first quarter of 2007, the company’s revenue
and earnings growth both fell, breaking a streak of quarterly increases in
growth. Even if investors missed this first sign of trouble, there were more,
including when the company posted a net loss of $4.5 million in the first quarter of 2008. Even at that time, fundamental investors could get out, as Crocs’
stock was still trading for $17.47 a share in March 2008.

28 506455-ch20.indd 323

9/24/09 10:43:05 PM

324 Part V: The Part of Tens
But ignoring the fundamentals proved to be very hazardous. While Crocs
posted a small profit in the second quarter of 2008, it swung to large losses
in the third and fourth quarters. At the end of 2008, Crocs shares fell to $1.24.
And then, in 2009, the company’s auditor publicly questioned whether Crocs
could survive as the company’s revenue fell to $126.1 million in the fourth
quarter of 2008, down from $224.8 million in the fourth quarter of 2007.

Separating the Strong
from the Weak Players
Savvy fundamental analysts know economic downturns can be as much as an
opportunity as it is a threat.
If a company can survive, while its key rivals do not, it will likely be better off
once the economy heals. A great example of this occurred in the consumer
electronics business in 2008. Clearly, the slowdown in the economy caused
consumers to cut back their spending on big-screen TVs and MP3 players.
And that caused a big problem for archrivals Circuit City Stores and Best Buy.
But fundamental analysis removed any doubt which company would survive.
A free cash flow analysis, as described in Chapter 11, told the story. During
the fiscal year ended Feb. 2007, Circuit City’s free cash flow was just $34 million, and it actually burned $355 million in cash in the fiscal year ended Feb.
2008. Considering the company only had $296.1 million in cash in February
2008, fundamental analysis told you Circuit City had a big problem. Circuit
City filed for bankruptcy protection on Nov. 10, 2008, making it the 13th largest public company bankruptcy in 2008, says BankruptcyData.com.
Contrast Circuit City’s standing with the situation at Best Buy. Best Buy had a
sizeable chunk of cash, $1.4 billion, in the bank at the end of its fiscal year in
March 2008. And while Best Buy felt the negative impact of the economy, as
did Circuit City, it still generated $1.2 billion in free cash flow in its fiscal year
ended March 2008. Clearly, Best Buy was in a position to survive.
Correctly choosing which company can withstand a tough economic period
can be lucrative once the weaker rivals drop off. With Circuit City out of the
way, Best Buy reported better-than-expected 9.7% revenue growth in the quarter ended Feb. 28, 2009.

28 506455-ch20.indd 324

9/24/09 10:43:05 PM

Chapter 20: Ten Examples of Unearthing Financial Secrets

325

Watching for Market Saturation
When companies start out, investors can’t help but expect limitless growth.
Many of the most successful stocks in history include brand-new concepts
for stores, such as Home Depot and Starbucks, which seemed to have no end
in sight as to where they could open stores.
Guess what? There were limits. Especially in retail, investors at first get
overly optimistic about how many cities and communities can support a new
concept. Investors rush into the stock, assuming its blistering pace of opening new stores will never end. But inevitably, as fundamental analysts know,
it’s possible to build one too many locations. After time, market saturation
sets in.
Starbucks remains a classic example of a chain which has tremendous growth
prospects, but there were still limits. Since being founded in 1971 with its first
store, Starbucks seemed able to open as many stores as it wanted, and then
open even more. The company added hundreds of stores a year starting in
1994 and by 2007 there were nearly 16,000 Starbucks locations worldwide.
But in July 2008, the first signs of market saturation become apparent when
the company said it would close about 600 company-owned stores in the U.S.
Investors, used to Starbucks turning coffee into liquid gold by constantly
opening new stores, didn’t like what they heard. Shares of Starbucks fell
nearly 40% from the July announcement through the end of 2008, trailing the
rest of the stock market by about 10 percentage points amid a tough time for
the economy.
Fundamental analysts, though, saw this market saturation coming. And it
didn’t take any fancy financial formulas to spot these warnings. In the quarter ended March 2008, Starbucks reported its largest decline in net income
growth, 28%, since 1998.
And even more alarming, the company’s return on assets fell to an uncharacteristically low 7% for Starbucks. That was half the return the company
earned on its assets in the quarter ended Dec. 2007. It was clear the company
wasn’t getting the kinds of returns it traditionally did from its stores and
assets.
