0.018

MACD
USD

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

1.05

1.1

1.15

Pr
USD
1.2

Nov

25Mar98 - 01Nov01

Technical Analysis
99

100

Currency Strategy

making gains, the MACD reading has clearly failed well ahead of its previous high and is
heading lower. This suggests bearish divergence on MACD and a potentially bearish signal
as well for the Euro–dollar exchange rate. MACD oscillates above and below a zero level.
When it is above zero, it means the 12-day moving average is higher than the 26-day moving
average, which is potentially bullish as it suggests that “current” expectations (as reﬂected by
the 12-day moving average) are more bullish than those expectations made prior to the 12-day
moving average. Equally, when the MACD falls below zero, it suggests a bearish divergence
between the moving averages. In our example, the MACD reading is still above zero, but it is
heading lower towards that level.
Moving averages and MACD are examples of lagging technical indicators as they reﬂect
previous price action and are particularly useful when an exchange rate trends over a long
period of time. On the other hand, leading technical indicators give some indication of a price
being overbought or oversold, thus RSI is an example of a leading indicator. Divergence occurs
when the exchange rate trend does not agree with the trend of the technical indicator of that
exchange rate. Hence, Figure 4.8 shows a clear example of bearish divergence using MACD.

4.4 SCHOOLS OF (TECHNICAL) THOUGHT
Having gone through the basic building blocks of technical analysis and the technical indicators
that are used, we will now look at the major technical schools of thought that have dominated
the way technical analysts and traders look at price patterns. The ﬁrst one to focus on is the
Fibonacci school of thought, named after Leonardo Fibonacci, an Italian mathematician born
in 1170. Fibonacci discovered a series of numbers such that each number is the sum of the two
previous numbers:
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233 and so on . . .
To some, these numbers may seem more or less random. In fact, they are actually far from
random, containing important interrelationships, and they are found in a surprising number of
real-life examples. Indeed, it is not too much of an exaggeration to suggest that these numbers
represent the mathematical building blocks of life. For a start, note that any given number is
roughly 1.618 times the previous one. Equally, any number is 0.618 times the following number.
As it stands, this does not answer the question of how Fibonacci happened to found, albeit
inadvertently, a type of technical analysis. For this, we have to look ﬁrst at Fibonacci’s so-called
“rabbit problem”, which relates to his attempt to demonstrate the application of Hindu–Arabic
numerals through the example of rabbits. The mathematical problem that Fibonacci posed is
that if two rabbits were put in an isolated place, how many pairs of rabbits could be produced
from that pair in a year if every month each pair produces a new pair, which itself from the
second month also becomes reproductive? At the start of the ﬁrst month, there would only be
the ﬁrst pair. By the start of the second month, there would be the original pair plus one new
pair, resulting in two pairs of rabbits. However, during that second month, the original pair
will again produce another pair while the second pair is maturing. Thus, at the start of the third
month, there should be three pairs, which brings us back to the Fibonacci number series. In
terms of a mathematical formula, this can be expressed as:
X n+1 = X n + X n−1
where X n is the number of pairs of rabbits after n months.
@Team-FLY

Technical Analysis

101

This became known as the Fibonacci sequence, as coined by the French mathematician
Edouard Lucas (1842–1891). As the Fibonacci sequence progresses, a clear relationship between the numbers becomes apparent, as reﬂected by the 0.618 and 1.618 ratios mentioned
above. The very fact that there can be a consistent ratio between numbers is itself “statistically
signiﬁcant”, conﬁrming that there is more in this than just a random series of numbers. Note
also that if you take any number and divide it by the number two higher in the sequence the
ratio comes to 0.382. Not coincidentally, 38.2% and 61.8% are major Fibonacci retracement
levels within the Fibonacci school of technical analysis.
While we look to Fibonacci and Lucas as the founders of modern-day Fibonacci analysis, it
appears that long before them the importance of this sequence of numbers and ratios was well
known and appreciated. Indeed, these ratios appear to have been used in the construction of
both the Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt and the Parthenon in Greece. The 0.618 or 1.618 ratio,
also known as the Golden ratio, is commonly viewed in mathematics as one of the building
blocks of natural growth patterns — in geometry as in life. Even the human body can be shown
to contain elements of the Golden ratio, measuring the distance from the feet to the navel and
in turn from the navel to the top of the head as a ratio. The basic building blocks of human
beings, the DNA double helix, also contains the Golden ratio.
The link between Fibonacci and ﬁnancial markets comes through another school of thought
for technical analysis, Elliott Wave Theory, named after Ralph Nelson Elliott (1871–1948).
Elliott ﬁrst made the connection between his Wave Theory and the Fibonacci sequence of
numbers in his book Nature’s Law — The Secret of the Universe (1946). Elliott Wave Theory
suggests ﬁnancial markets move in ﬁve waves of progression followed by three waves of
regression. As such a 5–3 wave move completes a wave cycle. The ﬁve “up” waves are
labelled 1–5, while the three “down” waves are labelled a–c. Of necessity, waves 1, 3 and 5
are seen as impulsive waves while waves 2 and 4 are seen as corrective.
Remembering the Fibonacci sequence, it should be immediately obvious that 1, 3 and 5 are
Fibonacci numbers. Furthermore, if we break each wave down into sub-waves, we notice two
things, ﬁrstly that each sub-wave conforms to the 5–3 wave pattern and secondly that when
we add up these sub-waves we come to 21 impulsive and 13 corrective waves, making 34 in
total. Once again, 13, 21 and 34 are all Fibonacci sequence numbers.
Fibonacci sequence numbers are also used in other technical indicators, such as in moving
averages — e.g. 5, 13 and 21 moving averages, 21, 34 and 55 or 31, 55 and 144. Within the
ﬁnancial markets, the most widely used application of the Golden ratio is through the Fibonacci
retracement, which relates to the fact that corrective waves have retraced the previous wave by
38.2%, 50% or 61.8%. Fibonacci fan lines provide key support or resistance corresponding to
the Fibonacci retracement levels. Once such a Fibonacci fan line support or resistance has been
broken, this tends to suggest the extension of a correction and thus a potential wave reversal.
In sum, Fibonacci levels can provide crucial tops and bottoms in the market and are widely
watched by both short- and medium-term currency market participants.
A ﬁnal school of thought is Gann Theory, created by W.D. Gann (1878–1955), which
seeks to predict future prices using speciﬁc geometric angles. Gann angles or Gann lines can
be created by graphing price against time. The basic Gann angle or line is created by assuming
an increase in one unit for both price and time, resulting in a line which is at a 45◦ angle to both
axes. Because of the price and time increases involved, this is called a 1 × 1 angle. Gann lines
are drawn off major price tops and bottoms. If the price is above the 1 × 1 line, this signals a
bullish trend and conversely if it breaks below the line this signals a bearish reversal. Including
the 1 × 1 angle, Gann identiﬁed nine signiﬁcant angles or lines relating to price and time:

102

Currency Strategy

r 1 × 8 — 82.5 degrees
r 1 × 4 — 75 degrees
r 1 × 3 — 71.25 degrees
r 1 × 2 — 63.75 degrees
r 1 × 1 — 45 degrees
r 2 × 1 — 26.25 degrees
r 3 × 1 — 18.75 degrees
r 4 × 1 — 15 degrees
r 8 × 1 — 7.5 degrees
Each of the angles or lines can provide a support or resistance depending on the trend. Generally
speaking, the 1 × 1 angle as reﬂected by a trend-line is not sustainable given the steepness of
the angle involved. Prices cannot continue appreciating at a 45◦ angle forever. The 3 × 1 angle
is generally viewed as more sustainable in terms of price trends over the long term.

4.5 TECHNICAL ANALYSIS AND CURRENCY
MARKET PRACTITIONERS
The various techniques of technical analysis, which we have only brieﬂy touched on here, have
been widely practiced by traders for a very long time — centuries rather than years. The ﬁrst
futures market was created in Japan in the early 1800s and the Japanese candlestick charting
theory is seen as having emerged on the back of this. The very fact that we can chart US
Treasuries back to the American Civil War conﬁrms that the art of charting is also hardly a
new phenomenon in the US either. While currency, equity and ﬁxed income traders have long
followed technical signals, corporations and asset managers have on the whole been somewhat
more reticent to do so, either because of scepticism as to the merits of technical analysis or
a lack of knowledge of how it works — or both. The best advance of any type of analytical
discipline is that it actually works in practice; that it is capable of predicting exchange rates in
this case and therefore using it one can generate excess returns. As Osler shows in her piece
“Support for resistance: technical analysis and intraday exchange rates”,3 empirical evidence
demonstrates that technical analysis can help in exchange rate prediction over and above the
results available by simply using a random walk theory. Simply put, there is something to this.
Looking at a slightly longer time frame, can a corporate Treasurer or an investor use technical
analysis as part of their currency risk decision? The answer in this case is also, yes they can.
While the primary focus of technical analysis is short term, it is fully capable of predicting
multi-month of even multi-year moves. As an example, at the end of 1999, when the dollar–rand
exchange rate was trading at around 6, the CitiFX Technicals team put out a buy signal, based
on a combination of Elliott Wave Theory and the “golden cross” between the 55- and 200-day
moving averages, with a multi-year target of 9.4 The exchange rate hit 9.00 on September
27, 2001. Again, the sceptical may see this as coincidence. However the fact is that skilful
application of technical analysis principles correctly forecasts a move in the exchange rate
that no interpretation of the “fundamentals” would have provided. At the very least, technical
3
Carol L. Osler, “Support for resistance: technical analysis and intraday exchange rates”, Economic Policy Review, 6(2) (July
2000). For other studies of technical analysis, look at Helen Allen and Mark Taylor, “The use of technical analysis in the foreign
exchange market”, Journal of International Money and Finance, June 1992; Kevin Chang and Carol Osler, “Methodical madness:
technical analysis and the irrationality of exchange rate forecasts”, Economic Journal, October 1998; John Murphy, Technical Analysis
of the Futures Market: A Comprehensive Guide to Trading Methods, Prentice Hall, 1986.
4
Martin Armitage-Smith/Tom Fitzpatrick, CitiFX Technicals Bulletin.

Technical Analysis

103

analysis should be a consideration for all types of currency market practitioner. Short-term
traders are likely to use it as their primary analytical tool ahead of fundamental analysis
because it is better suited to predicting short-term exchange rate moves than the traditional
fundamental exchange rate models. Corporations and asset managers can use it as a crosscheck of their fundamental views and also in terms of timing their hedging activity. The fact
that traders watch technical levels and that traders make up the majority of currency market
participants automatically makes those levels important.
What we have attempted in this chapter is to look at the basic principles and schools of
thought within technical analysis, along with how and why it works. Having looked at pricing
patterns, it is also important to look at the structural dynamics that determine that price. That
is to say, one can look at a chart of an exchange rate, but it is also important to know how
that price has been created and under what circumstances. Indeed, the type of exchange rate
regime can render virtually worthless for periods of time most types of analysis, distorting
both the fundamental and the technical signals that might otherwise be read. Thus, in the next
chapter we take a look at the types of exchange rate regime and how each type might impact
the exchange rate itself.

Part Two
Regimes and Crises

@Team-FLY

5
Exchange Rate Regimes:
Fixed or Floating?
To most modern-day readers, at least those within the developed markets, the exchange rate
norm is and has always been freely ﬂoating. All sectors of society have become used to
volatile exchange rates and have learned to plan accordingly. Individuals plan vacations when
the currencies of their planned vacation destination are perceived as cheap. Businesses seek to
hedge their transactional or translational risk according to a combination of their business needs
and market conditions. Politicians have a mixed record with ﬂoating exchange rates, frequently
viewing exchange rate strength as a sign of national economic virility — and exchange rate
weakness consequently as a test of their own administration. Yet, it is not that long ago that
such a test would have been inconceivable. Freely ﬂoating exchange rates are themselves a
relatively recent phenomenon. Indeed, the period since 1973 and the break-up of the Bretton
Woods exchange rate system has been the ﬁrst sustained time in history in which the world’s
major currencies have not been pegged to some form or other of commodity. Such a world of
freely ﬂoating exchange rates, massive private capital ﬂows ﬁnancing current account deﬁcits
and markets dictating government monetary and ﬁscal policies was completely inconceivable
in 1944 when Bretton Woods was created. To recap, under this, member countries pledged to
maintain their currencies within narrow bands against the US dollar, while the dollar itself was
pegged to gold (at USD35 per ounce). Some degree of ﬂexibility was allowed, but there was
never any suggestion — or conception — that governments were not in charge. For 27 years,
the Bretton Woods system held in place, helping to provide a foundation for economic growth
in the 1950s and 1960s.
Then, as the value of the US dollar peg to gold came under ever increasing pressure, the
US eventually scrapped its gold peg, trying in the process to create a slightly more ﬂexible
exchange rate system under the Smithsonian Agreement. In 1973, the effort to defend this
too was exhausted and collapsed under the weight of its own contradictions. Thus, since
1973, we have had for the ﬁrst time an international monetary system which has for the
most part been characterized by freely ﬂoating exchange rates among the major industrial
countries, free of ofﬁcial intervention or commodity-related pegs, with “the market” taking an
increasingly important role, both relative to before 1973 and also to ofﬁcial government policy.
Granted, since then, there have been several attempts, such as the Exchange Rate Mechanism
(ERM), to shackle exchange rates within narrow bands. For the most part, such attempts to reassert government control over the market have given way to some degree of accommodation
between the two sides, with freely ﬂoating exchange rates allowed but ofﬁcial intervention
seen as appropriate at times of extreme volatility or where prices have “overshot” economic
fundamentals. This accommodation has resulted in speciﬁc victories of a sort for both sides. The
ERM itself, having barely survived the 1992 crisis, was forced under extraordinary pressure in
1993 to widen its bands to ±15% from ±2.25%. However, since then, member countries have
relinquished their national currencies in favour of the Euro, thus eliminating the question of

108

Currency Strategy

ﬁxed or ﬂoating at the national level. The Euro itself is still however a freely ﬂoating currency,
as its volatile movements have born testimony.
Still, for the most part, the question of having a ﬁxed or ﬂoating exchange rate regime has
increasingly become a redundancy for the world’s industrial countries, particularly as barriers
to trade and capital have been broken down. The US dollar, Euro, yen, sterling and others
all ﬂoat against each other, for the most part without ofﬁcial interference. While there are
still occasional bouts of intervention by the central bank, these are nowadays a relative rarity.
What has become far more common is that central banks will attempt to guide the market
through “verbal intervention”. The extent of the accommodation arrived at by the market and
the ofﬁcial community is such that this for the most part works well enough, though to be
sure there are times when it is not enough and substantial foreign exchange intervention in
the market has to be undertaken. For currency market practitioners in the industrial countries
however, such as corporations or institutional investors, the question of the type of exchange
rate regime is largely (though perhaps not completely) no longer relevant. National currencies
may bind together to become regional currencies, but the bottom line is that they are still freely
ﬂoating and not artiﬁcially pegged.

5.1 AN EMERGING WORLD
This is not the case in the “emerging markets” or “developing countries”. While there has
undoubtedly been a gradual trend towards freely ﬂoating exchange rates within the emerging
markets, whether willingly or otherwise, many still have some form of peg arrangement,
depending to some degree upon their state of development. Thus the question of the type of
exchange rate system — ﬁxed or ﬂoating — remains particularly pertinent for currency market
practitioners who are involved in the emerging markets. In order to suggest how currency
market practitioners might deal with exchange rate system issues, it might be useful to explain
ﬁrst why these exchange rate systems came about in the wake of the developments of 1973
and how each type works.
When — or if — one thinks about the 1970s, it is usually from a political perspective, as a
time of war and revolt against war, as a time of political and social revolution. Nowadays, many
of the protestors of that time are in business. Politically, much has changed. The economic
world has also changed massively, to some extent in line with some of these political shifts. The
decline of the Soviet Union coincided with the decline of the socialist attempt at economics.
People who were ﬁnally able to turn on their television in the Warsaw Pact countries and tune
them to Western stations found they had been lied to for a generation. The triumph of capitalism
was conﬁrmed. From that time, when West and East no longer glared down the barrel of a gun
at each other (or more aptly the nose cone of an ICBM), such terms as “market economy” and
“globalization” have developed. Just as we now take for granted ﬂoating exchange rates, so we
also take for granted free trade and capital mobility, yet many of these were the direct result
of the end of the Cold War.
With the decline of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, emerging market countries
have been able to move away from being mere chess pieces in a bi-polar world. Crucially, the
breaking down of barriers to trade and capital, which began in the late 1980s and accelerated
in the 1990s, has allowed them to participate to an increasing degree in the global economy. As
the role of the emerging markets has increased within the global economy, and perhaps more
speciﬁcally within global ﬁnancial markets, so the pressure has grown on them over time to

Exchange Rate Regimes

109

adopt more ﬂexible exchange rate systems to be able to absorb the periodic shocks that free
trade and free capital markets entail.

5.2 A BRIEF HISTORY OF EMERGING MARKET
EXCHANGE RATES
The history of emerging market currencies and exchange rate systems can most usefully be
divided into four main periods — 1973–1981, 1982–1990, 1991–1994 and 1995–2001.
1973–1981
For the most part, this period saw relative exchange rate stability, not least because most emerging market currencies were not freely convertible either on the current or capital accounts. There
was a steady if modest capital outﬂow from the industrial countries to the emerging markets,
which were mostly at that time dependent on commodities rather than the manufacturing bases
they would become.
1982–1990
If the previous period was characterized by stability, that of 1982–1990 was one of anarchy
followed by a gradual attempt at restructuring. Massive tightening of monetary policy in the US
and a consequent dramatic rise in the US dollar, plunging commodity prices and a reversal in
capital ﬂows out of the emerging markets combined to trigger ﬁrst emerging market currency
devaluations and then defaults, most notably in Mexico and also elsewhere in Latin America.
Given ensuing capital ﬂight, many emerging market countries sought to impose capital controls,
driving interest rates artiﬁcially low in response. The gradual debt restructuring process during
1985–1990 helped restore some stability to emerging markets, helped in part by lower interest
rates in the US and a sharp fall in the value of the US dollar. The currency devaluations and
then low nominal interest rates — and negative real rates — as capital controls were imposed,
resulting in very poor returns for passive currency investors.
1991–1994
This was the heyday for the emerging markets. As the Berlin Wall was torn down, so the East
was opened up to investment. Latin America had a slightly better time of it as economies
gradually recovered in the wake of the Brady bond restructuring programme. Capital controls
were lifted, largely as demanded by the IMF, and domestic interest rates, which had been kept
artiﬁcially low, were set free to the whim of market forces. “Privatization” of state assets was
greatly accelerated, supporting budget balances and helping to attract capital inﬂows. Rising
interest and exchange rates greatly boosted total returns for currency investors during this
period. In light of this, the Mexican peso devaluation of December 1994 came as rather a rude
awakening.
1995–
This last period has been characterized above all by volatility, on the one hand by huge
capital inﬂows and on the other hand by frequent currency devaluations. One by one, pegged
