
crime. If it has happened that, on any occasion, these parliaments, and the Parliament of
Normandy among the rest, have condemned the guilty to a less punishment than that of
death, it was for the reason that their guilt was not of the deepest dye; your Majesty, and
the Kings your predecessors, having left full liberty to the various tribunals to whom they
delegated the administration of justice, to decree such punishment as was warranted by
the evidence brought before them.
"After so many authorities, and punishments ordained by human and divine laws, we
humbly supplicate your Majesty to reflect once more upon the extraordinary results
which proceed from the malevolence of this sort of people -- on the deaths from unknown
diseases, which are often the consequences of their menaces -- on the loss of the goods
and chattels of your subjects -- on the proofs of guilt continually afforded by the
insensibility of the marks upon the accused -- on the sudden transportation of bodies from
one place to another -- on the sacrifices and nocturnal assemblies, and other facts,
corroborated by the testimony of ancient and modern authors, and verified by so many
eye-witnesses, composed partly of accomplices, and partly of people who had no interest
in the trials beyond the love of truth, and confirmed, moreover, by the confessions of the
accused parties themselves; and that, Sire, with so much agreement and conformity
between the different cases, that the most ignorant persons convicted of this crime have
spoken to the same circumstances, and in nearly the same words, as the most celebrated
authors who have written about it, all of which may be easily proved to your Majesty's
satisfaction by the records of various trials before your parliaments.
"These, Sire, are truths so intimately bound up with the principles of our religion, that,
extraordinary although they be, no person has been able to this time to call them in
question. If some have cited, in opposition to these truths, the pretended canon of the
Council of Ancyre, and a passage from St. Augustin, in a treatise upon the 'Spirit and the
Soul', it has been without foundation; and it would be easy to convince your Majesty that
neither the one nor the other ought to be accounted of any authority; and, besides that, the
canon, in this sense, would be contrary to the opinion of all succeeding councils of the
church, Cardinal Baronius, and all learned commentators, agree that it is not to be found
in any old edition. In effect, in those editions wherein it is found, it is in another
language, and is in direct contradiction to the twenty-third canon of the same council,
which condemns sorcery, according to all preceding constitutions. Even supposing that
this canon was really promulgated by the Council of Ancyre, we must observe that it was
issued in the second century, when the principal attention of the Church was directed to
the destruction of paganism. For this reason, it condemns that class of women who said
they could pass through the air, and over immense regions, with Diana and Herodias, and
enjoins all preachers to teach the falsehood of such an opinion, in order to deter people
from the worship of these false divinities; but it does not question the power of the devil
over the human body, which is, in fact, proved by the Holy Gospel of Jesus Christ
himself. And with regard, Sire, to the pretended passage of St. Augustin, everybody
knows that it was not written by him, because the writer, whoever he was, cites Boetius,
who died more than eighty years after the time of St. Augustin. Besides, there is still
more convincing proof in the fact, that the same father establishes the truth of witchcraft
in all his writings, and more particularly in his 'City of God;' and in his first volume,

question the 25th, wherein he states that sorcery is a communion between man and the
devil, which all good Christians ought to look upon with horror.
"Taking all these things into consideration, Sire, the officers of your Parliament hope,
from the justice of your Majesty, that you will be graciously pleased to receive the
humble remonstrances they have taken the liberty to make. They are compelled, for the
acquittal of their own consciences and in discharge of their duty, to make known to your
Majesty, that the decrees they passed against the sorcerers and witches brought before
them, were passed after a mature deliberation on the part of all the judges present, and
that nothing has been done therein which is not conformable to the universal
jurisprudence of the kingdom, and for the general welfare of your Majesty's subjects, of
whom there is not one who can say that he is secure from the malevolence of such
criminals. We therefore supplicate your Majesty to suffer us to carry into effect the
sentences we passed, and to proceed with the trial of the other persons accused of the
same crime; and that the piety of your Majesty will not suffer to be introduced during
your reign an opinion contrary to the principles of that holy religion for which you have
always employed so gloriously both your cares and your arms."
Louis, as we have already mentioned, paid no attention to this appeal. The lives of the old
women were spared, and prosecutions for mere witchcraft, unconnected with other
offences, were discontinued throughout France. In 1680 an act was passed for the
punishment, not of witches, but of pretenders to witchcraft, fortune-tellers, divineresses,
and poisoners.
Thus the light broke in upon Germany, France, England, and Scotland about the same
time, gradually growing clearer and clearer till the middle of the eighteenth century,
when witchcraft was finally reckoned amongst exploded doctrines, and the belief in it
confined to the uttermost vulgar. Twice, however, did the madness burst forth again as
furious, while it lasted, as ever it had been. The first time in Sweden, in 1669, and the
second in Germany, so late as 1749. Both these instances merit particular mention. The
first is one of the most extraordinary upon record, and for atrocity and absurdity is
unsurpassed in the annals of any nation.
It having been reported to the King of Sweden that the little village of Mohra, in the
province of Dalecarlia, was troubled exceedingly with witches, he appointed a
commission of clergy and laymen to trace the rumour to its source, with full powers to
punish the guilty. On the 12th of August 1669, the commissioners arrived in the
bewitched village, to the great joy of the credulous inhabitants. On the following day the
whole population, amounting to three thousand persons, assembled in the church. A
sermon was preached, "declaring the miserable case of those people that suffered
themselves to be deluded by the devil," and fervent prayer was offered up that God would
remove the scourge from among them.
The whole assembly then adjourned to the rector's house, filling all the street before it,
when the King's commission was read, charging every person who knew anything of the
witchery, to come forward and declare the truth. A passion of tears seized upon the

multitude; men, women, and children began to weep and sob, and all promised to divulge
what they had heard or knew. In this frame of mind they were dismissed to their homes.
On the following day they were again called together, when the depositions of several
persons were taken publicly before them all. The result was that seventy persons,
including fifteen children, were taken into custody. Numbers also were arrested in the
neighbouring district of Elfdale. Being put to the torture, they all confessed their guilt.
They said they used to go to a gravel-pit that lay hard by the cross-way, where they put a
vest upon their heads, and danced "round and round and round about." They then went to
the cross-way, and called three times upon the devil; the first time in a low still voice; the
second, somewhat louder; and the third, very loudly, with these words, "Antecessor,
come, and carry us to Blockula!" This invocation never failed to bring him to their view.
He generally appeared as a little old man, in a grey coat, with red and blue stockings,
with exceedingly long garters. He had besides a very high-crowned hat, with bands of
many-coloured linen enfolded about it, and a long red beard, that hung down to his
middle.
The first question he put to them was, whether they would serve him soul and body? On
their answering in the affirmative, he told them to make ready for the journey to
Blockula. It was necessary to procure, in the first place, "some scrapings of altars and
filings of church clocks." Antecessor then gave them a horn, with some salve in it,
wherewith they anointed themselves. These preparations ended, he brought beasts for
them to ride upon, horses, asses, goats, and monkeys; and, giving them a saddle, a
hammer, and a nail, uttered the word of command, and away they went. Nothing stopped
them. They flew over churches, high walls, rocks, and mountains, until they came to the
green meadow where Blockula was situated. Upon these occasions they carried as many
children with them as they could; for the devil, they said, "did plague and whip them if
they did not procure him children, insomuch that they had no peace or quiet for him."
Many parents corroborated a part of this evidence, stating that their children had
repeatedly told them that they had been carried away in the night to Blockula, where the
devil had beaten them black and blue. They had seen the marks in the morning, but they
soon disappeared. One little girl was examined, who swore positively that she was carried
through the air by the witches, and when at a great height she uttered the holy name of
Jesus. She immediately fell to the ground, and made a great hole in her side. "The devil,
however, picked her up, healed her side, and carried her away to Blockula." She added,
and her mother confirmed her statement, that she had till that day "an exceeding great
pain in her side." This was a clencher, and the nail of conviction was driven home to the
hearts of the judges.
The place called Blockula, whither they were carried, was a large house, with a gate to it,
"in a delicate meadow, whereof they could see no end." There was a very long table in it,
at which the witches sat down; and in other rooms "there were very lovely and delicate
beds for them to sleep upon."
After a number of ceremonies had been performed, by which they bound themselves,
body and soul, to the service of Antecessor, they sat down to a feast, composed of broth,

made of colworts and bacon, oatmeal, bread and butter, milk and cheese. The devil
always took the chair, and sometimes played to them on the harp or the fiddle, while they
were eating. After dinner they danced in a ring, sometimes naked, and sometimes in their
clothes, cursing and swearing all the time. Some of the women added particulars too
horrible and too obscene for repetition.
Once the devil pretended to be dead, that he might see whether his people regretted him.
They instantly set up a loud wail, and wept three tears each for him, at which he was so
pleased, that he jumped up among them, and hugged in his arms those who had been
most obstreperous in their sorrow.
Such were the principal details given by the children, and corroborated by the confessions
of the full-grown witches. Anything more absurd was never before stated in a court of
justice. Many of the accused contradicted themselves most palpably; but the
commissioners gave no heed to discrepancies. One of them, the parson of the district,
stated, in the course of the inquiry, that on a particular night, which he mentioned, he had
been afflicted with a headach so agonizing, that he could not account for it otherwise than
by supposing he was bewitched. In fact, he thought a score of witches must have been
dancing on the crown of his head. This announcement excited great horror among the
pious dames of the auditory, who loudly expressed their wonder that the devil should
have power to hurt so good a man. One poor witch, who lay in the very jaws of death,
confessed that she knew too well the cause of the minister's headach. The devil had sent
her with a sledge hammer and a large nail, to drive into the good man's skull. She had
hammered at it for some time, but the skull was so enormously thick, that she made no
impression upon it. Every hand was held up in astonishment. The pious minister blessed
God that his skull was so solid, and he became renowned for his thick head all the days of
his life. Whether the witch intended a joke does not appear, but she was looked upon as a
criminal more than usually atrocious. Seventy persons were condemned to death on these
so awful yet so ridiculous confessions. Twenty-three of them were burned together, in
one fire, in the village of Mohra, in the presence of thousands of delighted spectators. On
the following day fifteen children were murdered in the same manner; offered up in
sacrifice to the bloody Moloch of superstition. The remaining thirty-two were executed at
the neighbouring town of Fahluna. Besides these, fifty-six children were found guilty of
witchcraft in a minor degree, and sentenced to various punishments, such as running the
gauntlet, imprisonment, and public whipping once a week for a twelvemonth.
Long after the occurrence of this case, it was cited as one of the most convincing proofs
upon record of the prevalence of witchcraft. When men wish to construct or support a
theory, how they torture facts into their service! The lying whimsies of a few sick
children, encouraged by foolish parents, and drawn out by superstitious neighbours, were
sufficient to set a country in a flame. If, instead of commissioners as deeply sunk in the
slough of ignorance as the people they were sent amongst, there had been deputed a few
men firm in courage and clear in understanding, how different would have been the
result! Some of the poor children who were burned would have been sent to an infirmary;
others would have been well flogged; the credulity of the parents would have been
laughed at, and the lives of seventy persons spared. The belief in witchcraft remains in

Sweden to this day; but, happily, the annals of that country present no more such
instances of lamentable aberration of intellect as the one just cited.
In New England, about the same time, the colonists were scared by similar stories of the
antics of the devil. All at once a fear seized upon the multitude, and supposed criminals
were arrested day after day in such numbers, that the prisons were found too small to
contain them. A girl, named Goodwin, the daughter of a mason, who was hypochondriac
and subject to fits, imagined that an old Irishwoman, named Glover, had bewitched her.
Her two brothers, in whose constitutions there was apparently a predisposition to similar
fits, went off in the same way, crying out that the devil and Dame Glover were
tormenting them. At times their joints were so stiff that they could not be moved, while at
others, said the neighbours, they were so flexible, that the bones appeared softened into
sinews. The supposed witch was seized, and, as she could not repeat the Lord's Prayer
without making a mistake in it, she was condemned and executed.
But the popular excitement was not allayed. One victim was not enough: the people
waited agape for new disclosures. Suddenly two hysteric girls in another family fell into
fits daily, and the cry of witchcraft resounded from one end of the colony to the other.
The feeling of suffocation in the throat, so common in cases of hysteria, was said by the
patients to be caused by the devil himself, who had stuck balls in the windpipe to choke
them. They felt the pricking of thorns in every part of the body, and one of them vomited
needles. The case of these girls, who were the daughter and niece of a Mr. Parris, the
minister of a Calvinist chapel, excited so much attention, that all the weak women in the
colony began to fancy themselves similarly afflicted. The more they brooded on it, the
more convinced they became. The contagion of this mental disease was as great as if it
had been a pestilence. One after the other the women fainted away, asserting, on their
recovery, that they had seen the spectres of witches. Where there were three or four girls
in a family, they so worked, each upon the diseased imagination of the other, that they
fell into fits five or six times in a day. Some related that the devil himself appeared to
them, bearing in his hand a parchment roll, and promising that if they would sign an
agreement transferring to him their immortal souls, they should be immediately relieved
from fits and all the ills of the flesh. Others asserted that they saw witches only, who
made them similar promises, threatening that they should never be free from aches and
pains till they had agreed to become the devil's. When they refused, the witches pinched,
or bit, or pricked them with long pins and needles. More than two hundred persons
named by these mischievous visionaries, were thrown into prison. They were of all ages
and conditions of life, and many of them of exemplary character. No less than nineteen
were condemned and executed before reason returned to the minds of the colonists. The
most horrible part of this lamentable history is, that among the victims there was a little
child only five years old. Some women swore that they had seen it repeatedly in company
with the devil, and that it had bitten them often with its little teeth, for refusing to sign a
compact with the Evil One. It can hardly increase our feelings of disgust and abhorrence
when we learn that this insane community actually tried and executed a dog for the same
offence!

One man, named Cory, stoutly refused to plead to the preposterous indictment against
him. As was the practice in such eases, he was pressed to death. It is told of the Sheriff of
New England, who superintended the execution, that when this unhappy man thrust out
his tongue in his mortal agony, he seized hold of a cane, and crammed it back again into
the mouth. If ever there were a fiend in human form, it was this Sheriff; a man, who, if
the truth were known, perhaps plumed himself upon his piety -- thought he was doing
God good service, and
"Hoped to merit heaven by making earth a hell!"
Arguing still in the firm belief of witchcraft, the bereaved people began to inquire, when
they saw their dearest friends snatched away from them by these wide-spreading
accusations, whether the whole proceedings were not carried on by the agency of the
devil. Might not the great enemy have put false testimony into the mouths of the
witnesses, or might not the witnesses be witches themselves? Every man who was in
danger of losing his wife, his child, or his sister, embraced this doctrine with avidity. The
revulsion was as sudden as the first frenzy. All at once, the colonists were convinced of
their error. The judges put a stop to the prosecutions, even of those who had confessed
their guilt. The latter were no sooner at liberty than they retracted all they had said, and
the greater number hardly remembered the avowals which agony had extorted from them.
Eight persons, who had been tried and condemned, were set free; and gradually girls
ceased to have fits and to talk of the persecutions of the devil. The judge who had
condemned the first criminal executed on this charge, was so smitten with sorrow and
humiliation at his folly, that he set apart the anniversary of that day as one of solemn
penitence and fasting. He still clung to the belief in witchcraft; no new light had broken
in upon him on that subject, but, happily for the community, the delusion had taken a
merciful turn. The whole colony shared the feeling; the jurors on the different trials
openly expressed their penitence in the churches; and those who had suffered were
regarded as the victims, and not the accomplices of Satan.
It is related that the Indian tribes in New England were sorely puzzled at the infatuation
of the settlers, and thought them either a race inferior to, or more sinful than the French
colonists in the vicinity, amongst whom, as they remarked, "the Great Spirit sent no
witches."
Returning again to the continent of Europe, we find that, after the year 1680, men became
still wiser upon this subject. For twenty years the populace were left to their belief, but
governments in general gave it no aliment in the shape of executions. The edict of Louis
XIV. gave a blow to the superstition, from which it never recovered. The last execution in
the Protestant cantons of Switzerland was at Geneva, in 1652. The various potentates of
Germany, although they could not stay the trials, invariably commuted the sentence into
imprisonment, in all cases where the pretended witch was accused of pure witchcraft,
unconnected with any other crime. In the year 1701, Thomasius, the learned professor at
the University of Halle, delivered his inaugural thesis, "De Crimine Magiae," which
struck another blow at the falling monster of popular error. But a faith so strong as that in
witchcraft was not to be eradicated at once: the arguments of learned men did not

penetrate to the villages and hamlets, but still they achieved great things; they rendered
the belief an unworking faith, and prevented the supply of victims, on which for so many
ages it had battened and grown strong.
Once more the delusion broke out; like a wild beast wounded to the death, it collected all
its remaining energies for the final convulsion, which was to show how mighty it had
once been. Germany, which had nursed the frightful error in its cradle, tended it on its
death-bed, and Wurzburg, the scene of so many murders on the same pretext, was
destined to be the scene of the last. That it might lose no portion of its bad renown, the
last murder was as atrocious as the first. This case offers a great resemblance to that of
the witches of Mohra and New England, except in the number of its victims. It happened
so late as the year 1749, to the astonishment and disgust of the rest of Europe.
A number of young women in a convent at Wurzburg fancied themselves bewitched; they
felt, like all hysteric subjects, a sense of suffocation in the throat. They went into fits
repeatedly; and one of them, who had swallowed needles, evacuated them at abscesses,
which formed in different parts of the body. The cry of sorcery was raised, and a young
woman, named Maria Renata Sanger, was arrested on the charge of having leagued with
the devil, to bewitch five of the young ladies. It was sworn on the trial that Maria had
been frequently seen to clamber over the convent walls in the shape of a pig -- that,
proceeding to the cellar, she used to drink the best wine till she was intoxicated; and then
start suddenly up in her own form. Other girls asserted that she used to prowl about the
roof like a cat, and often penetrate into their chamber, and frighten them by her dreadful
howlings. It was also said that she had been seen in the shape of a hare, milking the cows
dry in the meadows belonging to the convent; that she used to perform as an actress on
the boards of Drury Lane theatre in London, and, on the very same night, return upon a
broomstick to Wurzburg, and afflict the young ladies with pains in all their limbs. Upon
this evidence she was condemned, and burned alive in the market-place of Wurzburg.
Here ends this frightful catalogue of murder and superstition. Since that day, the belief in
witchcraft has fled from the populous abodes of men, and taken refuge in remote villages
and districts too wild, rugged, and inhospitable to afford a resting-place for the foot of
civilization. Rude fishers and uneducated labourers still attribute every phenomenon of
nature which they cannot account for, to the devil and witches. Catalepsy, that wondrous
disease, is still thought by ignorant gossips to be the work of Satan; and hypochondriacs,
uninformed by science of the nature of their malady, devoutly believe in the reality of
their visions. The reader would hardly credit the extent of the delusion upon this subject
in the very heart of England at this day. Many an old woman leads a life of misery from
the unfeeling insults of her neighbours, who raise the scornful finger and hooting voice at
her, because in her decrepitude she is ugly, spiteful, perhaps insane, and realizes in her
personal appearance the description preserved by tradition of the witches of yore. Even in
the neighbourhood of great towns the taint remains of this once widely-spread contagion.
If no victims fall beneath it, the enlightenment of the law is all that prevents a recurrence
of scenes as horrid as those of the seventeeth century. Hundreds upon hundreds of
witnesses could be found to swear to absurdities as great as those asserted by the
infamous Matthew Hopkins.
