
STUART WALTON

didn't want to leave her. Therefore, I took a job at the New York
branch of another Canadian company, Wood Gundy. One attraction
of the new job was that they offered to get me a green card; I had
been in the United States on a temporary visa.
What was the job you got?
It was a little bit less of a flunky job. I went through Wood Gundy's
training program and was placed on the equity desk. I was just an
order taker, which was very boring. The customer was making the
decision, and the floor broker was executing the trade; I was nothing
more than an intermediary. I always laugh when brokers on the sell
side of the stock business call themselves traders. Well they are not
traders; they are just order takers. None of them are taking positions
for the house or with their own money.
At that point, I made the first trade for my own account. My girlfriend, who later became my wife, worked for Liz Claiborne. She kept
telling me how great her company was doing: "I don't even have to
call my customers, they're calling me." Since I didn't have any money

to invest, I called my father for a loan. "Dad," I said, "I have a great
idea; you just have to lend me some money." He loaned me $10,000,
and I put it all into Liz Claiborne stock. The stock quickly went up
three points, and I took my profits. But the worst thing you can do as
a beginning trader is to have your first trade work. Within three
weeks, I had lost not only all my profits from the Liz Claiborne trade,
but also all the money my father had lent me.
How did you do that?
I was so taken with the success of my first trade that I started listening to all sorts of tips and rumors. The guy delivering my coffee in the
morning could tell me about a stock, and I would buy it. I was
cleaned out in three weeks. It took me five years, a little bit at a time,
to pay back my father.
What did your father say when you told him you had lost the
money?
"Well, I thought that you would," he said, "but I appreciated that you
had an idea and wanted to follow through on it." Ironically, the Liz
Claiborne stock, for which I had originally borrowed the money, continued to go straight up, quintupling in a year.

What was your next trading experience?
The Wood Gundy equity desk was another version of New York verbal
abuse. Once again, I found myself at a job where the guys on the desk
were constantly yelling at me. It was just regular day-to-day business,
but I hated it. When I looked across the room to the bond trading
desk, I noticed that everyone was very quiet. They weren't shouting at
each other; they were very civil. That appealed to me. I got permission to switch to the bond trading desk.
At the time, Wood Gundy was trying to become a major dealer in
the U.S. bond market, and they had brought in a bunch of hired-gun
traders. These guys were just blowing up left, right, and center. There
were huge losses everywhere. One trader even hid his tickets to conceal his losses. Eventually almost everyone was fired, though I was
still left, along with a few others.
Were you happier on the bond desk?
I had mixed feelings. I was certainly happy to get away from the verbal abuse. Also, the bond desk was very exciting because it traded
huge position sizes compared with the equity desk. I liked the idea
that I could make or lose five times as much as twenty people combined on the equity desk. But I didn't like being responsible for
trading all sorts of illiquid issues, most of which were overseas
bonds.
The Japanese would call me at 2 or 3 A.M., and I would have to
make bids or offers on huge sums of illiquid bonds without even
knowing where the market was. And because I was sleepy, it was possible to give them the wrong quote. If you gave them a quote that was
off by 100 basis points, they would hold you to it. You could have a $ 1
million loss on an obvious error, and they would still insist on the
trade being valid.
Did that ever happen to you?
Oh yes.
You had a $ 1 million error?
Well I didn't have a $1 million error, but I had a $300,000 error.

Just because you gave them the wrong quote.
I was sleepy. I thought the yield was 9.5 percent when it was really
10.5 percent.

BACK FROM T H E A

Is it normal to be held on a trade on a quote that is obviously an
error.''
It certainly wouldn't be considered normal in North America, and I
doubt that it would be the case anymore in Japan.
How did you do on balance in your trading?
I did well and was promoted as the youngest vice president at Wood
Gundy.
On what basis were you making buy and sell decisions?
I didn't have any methodology. I almost got to the point where I
thought the market was random.
But you must have been doing something right if you were making money. Was it just a matter of gut feel?
All the trading I do involves gut feel. But at that point in my life, I
think I was bailed out because there was a major bull market in
bonds, and my instincts were apparently good enough to keep me off
the short side for the most part. In my best year, I made about
$700,000 for the desk, which is really nothing, considering it has to
be split among so many different people.
One time, over drinks with my boss, I said, "We're not really trading these bonds; we're really investing, just like one of our accounts.
And if that is what we're doing, there are better things to invest in."
"Don't go off half-cocked," he said. "We just have to keep dodging
and weaving."
It was at that point, after three years, that I really started to burn
out. I went as long as I did because it was exciting having the responsibility of trading that much money.
By that point, had you developed a passion for trading?
Yes, I knew it was something I loved to do. I liked the idea that it was
me against the markets. I just didn't care for the markets I was trading. One major source of frustration was that the bond issues we were
trading in New York were highly illiquid. I decided to transfer to the
main office of Wood Gundy in Toronto because there I could trade
Canadian government bond securities, which were far more liquid. At
first I was very happy to be in the main office, trading liquid bond
markets, with lots of activity. After six months, however, I realized
that I didn't want to work in Canada. It's a country club environment

where success has more to do with politics than with your performance. I was also getting very sick of bonds and interest rates.
Why?
Because it is such a commodity. At our morning meeting a standard
question always was: "What is going to happen today?" All the participants would give this spiel about why they thought the market was
going up or down. They would talk about the influence of currency
rate movements, fiscal and monetary policy, interest rate trends in the
United States and other countries, and so on. When my turn came, I
would simply say, "1 think the market is going down today." When
they asked me why, I would answer, "Because it went up yesterday."
They didn't know whether to take me seriously or not. I had reached
the point where I thought the market was so efficient that if the price
went up big one day, it was just as likely to go down the next day.
One morning I woke up and realized that I didn't want to worry
about interest rates again for the rest my life. I knew that I couldn't
stand to trade another bond. I walked into work and quit, even
though I had moved to Canada only seven months earlier. They
couldn't believe it.
You quit even though you didn't have another job?
Oh yeah, I just couldn't stand it anymore. The ironic thing is that my
wife called me the same day to tell me that she had quit her job, and
I hadn't even hinted to her that I was going to quit mine. I knew she
had been unhappy, but I didn't think she was on the verge of quitting.
It was amazing that we both quit our jobs independently on the same

day We decided to delay looking for new jobs so that we could take
six months to travel across the United States, going from ski resort to
ski resort.
When we were at Lake Tahoe, we took a side trip to San Francisco. We loved the city and decided to move there. When we
returned to Toronto after the end of our trip, we thought it would be a
good idea to revisit San Francisco before actually moving, just to
make sure that we still liked it as much as we had on our visit. While
we were there, we looked for jobs, and we were both offered positions. We even found a house we liked and put in a bid that was
accepted. We thought we were set. We flew back to Toronto, rented a

truck, and moved our stuff to San Francisco. But when we got there,
we found out that both jobs had fallen through.
What was the job you thought you had?
I had interviewed with a small venture capital firm. The person who
interviewed me had also graduated from McGill.
You must have thought that gave you the inside track.
Yes, he was very enthusiastic. "Oh sure, we can use you. Come
back out, and we will set you up." When I arrived in San Francisco,
I kept calling him, but didn't receive any return phone calls. When
I finally got through to him, he said, "Oh, we're not hiring M.B.A.s
this year." It was a complete reversal from what he had told me

before.
I had put my life savings into the down payment for the house, so
we hardly had any money left. Initially we weren't worried because we
thought we would get jobs in a month or two. Month after month
went by, however, and neither one of us got a job offer. I couldn't
believe it. I started drinking cheap beer and sleeping late.
Were you depressed?
No, I'm not that kind of person. It was just too stressful for me to get
up in the morning and pound the pavement. I couldn't believe that
after having a successful career in New York, I couldn't even get a hint
at a job offer. I was so desperate that I even went to insurance companies to interview for sales jobs.
Sounds as if that is a job you would have hated.
Absolutely, but I was desperate. I would have taken anything. I
needed money to pay my mortgage, and I didn't want to ask my family
for help.
What was your wife's attitude during this ordeal?
She was pretty positive. She felt we would come up with something.
Did you run out of money?
We did. Then after we had been there tor six months, my wife got the
first job, a retail sales position at J. Crew, which was a large step down
for her after having been a merchandise manager for Liz Claiborne.
She also had reached the point where she was willing to take virtually
any job. We had just run out of money that month, and she used her
first paycheck to pay the mortgage.

Were you panicking before she got her job at the last minute?
I had given up hope. My attitude was that whatever happens, happens. Take the house. I don't care. I was very distraught. That's when
I first learned about San Francisco. They're not impressed if you're
from New York, L.A., or London. It's not a transient city like New
York or L.A., where it is okay to come from other cities and get a job.
San Francisco is more of a community. People want to see that you
have lived in the area for a while. Now I really appreciate that aspect
of the city, but at the time it was very frustrating.
Do you mean the jobs you were applying for would go to people
who were local?
Absolutely, although there wasn't a huge slew of jobs anyway. I
couldn't believe that I had gone from a status position to the verge
of working at Starbucks. I went to the library and microfiched every
financial-sounding company and sent them my resume. Eventually,
I got a call from someone who liked my resume. "I don't have a job
for you myself," he said, "but I have a friend who I think might be
interested."
What about your resume appealed to him?
He liked the variety—a combination of financial jobs and artistic
interests.
Before you got that job nibble, I imagine this must have been the
low point of your life.
No it wasn't. The low point is coming up. The person who had
received my resume convinced his friend who ran the sales and trading unit for Volpe, Welty & Co., a regional brokerage firm, to give me
a shot at an interview. When I arrived at the interview, I had no idea
what to expect. He asked me about my background, and I told him
what I've just told you.
He then asked me, "How much do you want to make?"
I added $200 to my mortgage and answered, "$2,500 a month."
"How about $4,000?," he asked.
"That would be good too." I answered.

Did he know your predicament?
No, but he saw the jobs I'd held previously, and I don't think he felt
right offering me as little as I was asking.

What job did he hire you for?
I was hired to be an institutional stockbroker, but I had no accounts. I
had to cold-call in front of other people, which really got to me. I had
gone from being Mister Bond Trader, whom everybody wanted to take
out to dinner, to cold-calling no-name institutions to buy our lousy
stock ideas.
When you were cold-calling, I guess a lot of people just hung up
on you.
Absolutely. I used to do waves of calls. I had a list of people to call,
and I just put my head down and started dialing. I don't have an
aggressive nature, so I tried drawing people in by just being a nice guy.
That didn't work too well. It was a relentless day-after-day process. It
was difficult watching other people doing business while I was making these phone calls, knowing that it was obvious to them whenever
someone hung up on me. I would have a five-second conversation,
put the phone down, and look around. Then I would have to go on to
the next phone call. It was such a demeaning process. I hated it,
hated it. I didn't know when I would ever be able to cover my draw. I
couldn't generate a trade.
You don't mean that literally?
Yes I clo. I had zero trades.

How long did this go on?
I probably didn't have a single account or trade for eight months.
You cold-called for eight months without a single sale! That
sounds brutal. Was this your low point?
No, this wasn't the low point [he laughs]. The low point happened
shortly afterward. Regardless of my lack of success in selling, I knew
there was a big difference between trading and selling. Eventually,
after watching the markets, I decided I had to start trading again.
Although I didn't have any money, I realized that I could take out a
home-equity loan and do whatever I wanted with the money. I said to
myself, "I can liquefy my house and invest it."
I can see it coming . . .
I started selling stocks that I thought were up too high—powerhouse
stocks like Liz Claiborne and the Gap—and buying stocks that I

thought were down too low. In effect, I was shorting good companies
and buying bad companies.
How much of a home-equity loan did you take out?
I had placed a down payment of $75,000 on the house, and I took out
a loan of $50,000 against it. Within three weeks of taking out the
loan, I had lost 75 percent of the money.
How did your wife react to this turn of events?
She had no idea.
She didn't know that you took out a home-equity loan?
She knew about the loan, but she didn't know what I did with the
money.
What did you tell her you were going to do with the money?
I did tell her that I was going to invest it, but I told her that I was
going to invest it in a conservative dividend play that would give us a
greater return than the rate we had to pay on the home-equity loan.
That was my intention. But once I had the money I thought, "I'm not
going to put this into some boring dividend play to make a few dollars
on the spread between the dividend income and my loan rate."
When you are at a brokerage firm, there is always something exciting going on. There is always some stock doubling or tripling. You
can't avoid the frenzy. I was listening to the stories being pitched all
around me. The salesmen could make any story sound great.
So apparently you had failed to learn your lesson about not listening to tips and rumors. You made the same mistake all over again.
Absolutely. I couldn't bring myself to tell my wife that I had lost
almost all the money. I had trouble sleeping the entire month. I made
up all these excuses why I was looking so sickly. I told my wife that I
had the flu. She was worried, but she had no idea what the truth was.
One day a buddy who worked beside me gave me a tip to buy
Commodore Computer. "I think this story is really going to work," he
said. "We're hearing that their latest game is going to be a high-flier." I
was so desperate that I told myself, "I'm going to do it." I took everything that was left in my account, leveraged it at 200 percent, and
bought the stock.
That was the low point in my life. The $75,000 I had put into my

S11MHRT W A I T O N
house was my entire savings. The thought that because of some gambling 1 could lose everything that I had built up in ten years of saving
really scared me. It was the black abyss.
The stock went from $10 to $17, and I got out. After I liquidated,
the stock reached as high as the low twenties, but it eventually went
back down to zero when the company went bankrupt. That single
trade was enough to almost make me whole again.
You actually were salvaged by pure luck, by a tip that could have
been a disaster because the stock eventually ended up going to
zero. You just happened to catch it during the right time window.
It was just luck. To this day, I look back at pivotal points in my life,
and I don't know whether they were due to luck or intelligence, but I
never care about the difference. It's funny how things work out. I
always tell people that luck is a very important factor in this business.
Maybe you have to put yourself in the position to be lucky, but I think
we all get our fair share of luck—both good and bad. We just have to
take it as it comes.
That Commodore trade saved me. You might think my attitude
would have been: "That tip worked, so I'm going to listen to other
tips." But at the time, I recognized the luck involved. I realized that I
was being bailed out by the stock market gods. I did learn my lesson.
From that point on, 1 traded so much better.
Did you say, "Thank God, I won't sin again"?
Exactly. Even though everything worked out, the stress was incredible. Therefore, when I made it back, it was a godsend. Then I just
started to chip away at it. Of course, I still had a lot to learn, but at
least I had that experience behind me. I think it's important to get
that low and see the abyss.
How did that help you?
The shock of the experience gave me clarity. I understood that
stocks don't go up and stay up because of stories, tips, or people's
opinions; they go up for specific reasons. I was determined to find
those reasons, shut out the world, and then act on my own knowledge. I started to do that, and over time, my record got better and
better.

This was really the first time in your life that you were trading
stocks with any success. What types of things were working?
The theme I noticed back then that has persisted through bull and
bear markets is: Good companies, on balance, continue to go up.
Grandmothers in Kansas City know that.
And how do you find these good companies?
I look for companies that have been blessed by the market. They may
be blessed because of a long string of quarters they've made [quarters
in which the company's reported earnings reached or exceeded expectations], or for some other reason. You can identify these stocks by
how they act. For some reason, the market goes to some stocks, and it
doesn't go to others, no matter how many brokers tell their clients to
buy these other stocks because they are cheap.
In effect, you actually reversed what you had been doing before:
Instead of buying bargains and selling stocks that had gone up a

lot, you were buying the expensive stocks.
That theme has continued to this day. The hardest thing to do is to
buy a high-flying stock or to sell a stock that has gone down a lot, but
I always find that the hardest thing to do is the right thing to do. It's a
difficult lesson to learn; I'm still learning it now.
What tells you—to use your word—that a stock is "blessed"?
It's a combination of things. The fundamentals of the stock are only
about 25 percent of it.
What is the remaining 75 percent?
Another 25 percent is technical.
What are you looking at on the technical side?
I like stocks that show relative linearity in their trend. I don't want
stocks that are swinging all over the place.
That's 50 percent, and you have already gone through fundamental and technical. What's left?
Another 25 percent is watching how a stock responds to different
information: macroeconomic events, its own news flow. I also pay
attention to how a stock reacts to going to round numbers: $20, $30,

etcetera. I try to get a feel whether a company has that special shine
to it.

S T U A R T WALTOfl

What kind of response are you looking for?
I want to see a stock move higher on good news, such as a favorable
earnings report or the announcement of a new product, and not give
much ground on negative news. If the stock responds poorly to negative news then it hasn't been blessed.
That's 75 percent. What's left?
The last 25 percent is my gut feeling for the direction of the market as
a whole, which is based on my sense of how the market is responding
to macroeconomic news and other events. It's almost like looking at
the entire market as if it were an individual stock.
How long do you typically hold a stock once you buy it?
I don't day trade, but I only hold a stock for an average of about a few
weeks. Also, when I buy a stock, even if it's a core position of a few
hundred thousand shares, I might be in and out of it twice in the same
day and six times in the same week, trying to get a feel about whether
I'm doing the right thing. If I'm not comfortable with the way the stock
is trading, I get out. That's one thing I love about running a hedge
fund. I don't have to worry about my customers seeing the schizophrenia in my trading. I used to work for a company where the customers
received a confirmation statement for every trade that I did. They
would go nuts. They would call up and say, "Are you crazy? What are
you doing? I thought you were supposed to be doing real research."
What prompts you to get out of a stock?
I get out either because the stock looks as though it's rolling over, and
I am in danger of losing what I have made, or because the stock has
made too much money in too short a period of time.
Would you then look to buy back the stock on a correction?
Yes.
Does that work, or do you often end up missing the rest of the
move?
I often end up missing the rest of the move because the stocks I am
buying are good companies, and they usually continue to go up.
Have you considered changing your trading approach so that you
hold stocks longer?
I have changed gradually over the years, but to this day, I still fall prey
to the mistake of getting out too early.

R A C K F R O M T:
