
Chapter 20: Trading for Others: Obtaining Trading Licenses and Certifications

Chartered Mutual Fund Counselor
The Chartered Mutual Fund Counselor (CMFC) designation is issued by the
College for Financial Planning. No work experience is required for this certification. Candidates must complete a nine-module, self-study course that
totals 72 to 90 hours. Course topics include open- and closed-end mutual
funds, risk, return, asset allocation, selecting mutual funds for a client, retirement planning, and ethics, integrity, and professional conduct.

Personal Financial Specialist
The Personal Financial Specialist (PFS) is a professional designation issued
by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) (www.
aicpa.org). Prerequisites for taking the examination include membership
in the AICPA, an unrevoked Certified Public Accountant certificate issued by
a state authority, and accrual of at least 100 points in the PFS point system.
Points in the PFS system are awarded for work experience, passing the PFS
exam, and continuing education. Topics covered on the PFS exam include
professional responsibilities, personal financial planning processes, personal
income tax planning, risk management planning, investment planning, retirement planning, and estate planning. In addition, candidates must submit
references and other documentation that prove their business experience in
personal financial planning–related services.
Initial certification is granted for a period of three years. During that time
(and every three years thereafter), PFS designees must earn a combined total
of 60 PFS points to maintain their certifications. The PFS points system is
based on continuing personal financial business experience and other learning activities that meet the PFS requirements.

Registered Financial Consultant
The Registered Financial Consultant (RFC) designation is issued by the
International Association of Registered Financial Consultants (www.iarfc.
org). An RFC candidate must have an undergraduate or graduate financial
planning degree or have earned an AAMS, CFA, CFP, ChFC, CLU, or CPA
designation. In addition to the educational requirement, candidates must
meet licensing requirements for securities and life and health insurance if
they’re operating on a commission basis. If they’re operating on a fee-only

331

332 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
basis and not licensed, then they must be registered as an investment advisor. Candidates must also complete four years of full-time work as a financial
planning practitioner. If candidates have completed an approved IARFC
examination process, they’ve met their examination requirements; otherwise,
they must pass the RFC Challenge Examination. After an RFC designation,
consultants must complete 40 hours of continuing education each year.

The Licenses and Certifications You
Need When Trading for Others
If you decide you want to trade for others as well as for yourself, you need to
become a registered representative. The most comprehensive test you can
take is the NASD’s Series 7 Exam, and you’ll need a sponsoring broker. Most
times, when you sign up for the required coursework for this examination,
either through self-study courses online or through a nearby training school,
the school can help you locate a sponsoring broker if you don’t have one.
This license enables you to purchase and/or sell all securities products,
including corporate securities, municipal securities, municipal fund securities, options, direct participation programs, investment company products, and variable contracts. Most of the other representative exams are
taken whenever you want to sell only a specific type of security rather than
the broader options that a Series 7 certification enables you to market.
Professional certifications are not required to sell securities. Most pros
who seek these certifications do so to show their clients that they have
attained a level of proficiency and met or exceeded the standards within
their specialties.
As you read through the requirements and courses mentioned in this chapter, you may have found subjects that can help you improve the management
of your own funds. Many schools that train people for professional designations provide ways for others like you to take the coursework, even if you
don’t plan to get the license or certification. You can even study for many of
these courses at home online. Some of the schools offering online education
services in the securities and financial advisor area include the following:
✓ American Investment Training (www.aitraining.com), which offers
self-study training for all the FINRA licenses
✓ The American College (www.theamericancollege.edu/), which
offers online coursework toward the ChFC, CLU, and CFP designations
along with other financial services education

Chapter 20: Trading for Others: Obtaining Trading Licenses and Certifications
✓ College for Financial Planning (www.cffp.edu), which offers online
coursework for the CFP and CMFC designations along with other financial services education
✓ Empire Stockbroker Training Institute (www.empirestockbroker.
com), which offers courses online for all the FINRA Series licenses
✓ FINRA, which provides detailed outlines of the content that must
be covered for all its examinations online at www.finra.org/
Industry/Compliance/Registration/QualificationsExams/
RegisteredReps/p011051
As you probably realize by now, selling securities is a highly regulated field
that requires considerable training before you can sell even your first share
of stock. Although some people privately trade for others, they risk the possibility of an investigation by the NASD or their state regulators whenever they
do so without registering at the state or federal level. Be sure that the trading
activities you do for others fit within the law, or you can end up in a legal mess
facing significant fines.

333

334 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise

Part VI

The Part of Tens

W

In this part . . .

e join in the For Dummies tradition of showing you
some special lists of ten (or so) important and key
factors that help you with your trading. We review ten
common and huge trading mistakes and how to avoid
them, and we describe ten basics strategies necessary for
your survival and long-term financial well-being as a
trader.

Chapter 21

Ten (Or More) Huge Trading
Mistakes
In This Chapter
▶ Trying to trade tops and bottoms (no, this isn’t X-rated)
▶ Becoming attached to your trading systems and your stocks
▶ Making decisions on the fly
▶ Losing too much

T

his chapter introduces you to ten (more, actually) huge trading mistakes
that befall experienced and novice traders. We offer suggestions for helping you recognize the mistakes and for avoiding and even correcting them.

Fishing for Bottoms
Bottom fishing — trying to catch a stock as it bottoms out — is a great way to
get soaked and lose a bucketful of money. In a bear market, stocks get much
cheaper than most of us ever expect or want. They won’t stop falling until
they’ve run out of gas.
The psychology of a bear market is perverse. As long as traders remain interested in a stock, many are the moments when it seems like the stock may
recover. The thing is, stocks rarely turn on a dime and head higher. Only
after the momentum crowd loses interest does the stock’s downward price
slide end. When value investors, who can’t resist a bargain, begin nibbling,
the stock begins to stabilize; however, it also may spend a very long time
bouncing around in a trading range.
Traders have few, if any, reasons for entering the market when a stock is
trading in a range. Your best opportunity for profit occurs when the stock
breaks out of its trading range. Chapter 9 shows how to identify these trading-range breakout patterns. Instead of risking your trading capital on unreliable bottoming patterns, wait until you’re sure.

338 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Timing the Top
Tops and bottoms share something in common. They rarely arrive when
they’re supposed to. When traders and investors are exuberant, they keep
buying even after doing so no longer makes fundamental sense. That’s why
shorting a stock that’s trending higher makes no sense, even if its price is far
beyond reasonable.
You don’t have to have a lengthy memory or an encyclopedic knowledge of
stock market history to remember what happened to Internet stocks in the
late 1990s. Those were heady days. Stocks went in only one direction — up.
Some of those magically levitating companies had modest revenues, but few
had earnings. Nevertheless, traders bid hundreds of dollars per share for
some worthless junk. Just like the recent housing bubble, Internet stocks
were a case of mass hysteria, mob mentality, market madness, or all three.
Call it what you will, when a bubble is inflating definitely is not a time to
short related stocks. Sure, these stocks eventually crashed and burned, but
not before depleting the trading accounts of a den full of bearish short sellers. Don’t guess. Wait for reliable trading signals, like the ones discussed in
Chapters 9 and 10, before entering a position.
You might be asking if there were reliable trading signals before the Internet
bubble burst. Not before; traders aren’t fortune tellers (see Chapter 8).
However, the risks at the time were well known. And when stocks began
heading lower early in 2000, you had all the information you needed to protect your profits and trading capital, and begin selling short. The signals were
also there in early 2008 that the market was set for another fall. Chapter 13
uses the NASDAQ bubble as an example to show how to evaluate market risk
and adjust your trading strategy as the market transitions from a rising to a
falling market.

Trading Against the Dominant Trend
Trading against the dominant trend in the market leads to costly mistakes.
Unfortunately, misidentifying the trend by focusing on the chart in front of
you and forgetting to look at the next higher level chart is an easy thing to
do. You may see a promising uptrend occur with a pullback on the intraday
charts. But on the daily chart, the trend you saw on the intraday chart actually turns out to be a consolidation rally during a strong downtrend. The
promising pullback actually is the beginning of the next leg down on the daily
chart. If you buy long in a situation like this one, hoping to capture the next
leg up, your position will be swamped (and so will your trading capital) by
the flood of sell orders coming from traders who recognize the implications
of the longer-term stronger trend.

Chapter 21: Ten (or More) Huge Trading Mistakes
Regardless of the specific indications of the chart you’re looking at, always
confirm your analysis by looking at charts that are one time period higher.
For example, if you’re studying daily charts, confirm your analysis on the
weekly charts. If you’re studying intraday charts, confirm your analysis on
the daily charts. Always know which part of the market cycle you’re in and
what types of industries excel in that part of the cycle. See Chapters 10 and
13 for additional information.
Don’t try to buy long based on a brief intraday move, when the dominant
trend on the daily charts is down. Doing so is a great way of giving up your
trading capital to someone else.

Winging It
Traders get into big trouble when they wing it. Maybe you heard the guy on
business TV say the stock was hot and heading higher. Maybe you saw the
news that a new product was bound to be a big hit. Although that may sound
like great information, instead it’s only a reason to look into the fundamental
and technical conditions of a company’s stock, but not a reason to buy today.
Devise a strategy. We think that’s such great advice, we’ll say it again. Devise
a strategy. Develop and test a trading system that matches your goals and
personality (see Chapter 15). Plan your trades and execute your plan. Wait
patiently for your signals to trigger your trades. Pick your entry and exit
points before entering your order. Have a plan and stick to it.
Traders also get into trouble when they start second-guessing their trading
plans. Sometimes, even in the middle of executing a trade, you need to make
a decision but won’t be sure which decision is right.
When in doubt, close the position. It’s easier to think clearly when your
money isn’t at risk. You can always buy back the stock if further analysis confirms it’s the right thing to do.

Taking Trading Personally
A losing trade is bad for your trading account, but you can’t let it get to you.
Sure, it makes you feel bad, but a losing trade doesn’t impugn your honor
or disparage your heritage. A bad trade may reduce your net worth, but it
shouldn’t damage your self-esteem. Entering a losing trade certainly doesn’t
mean that you’re a nincompoop or blockhead — any more than closing a winning trade signals your brilliance and mastery of all you survey.

339

340 Part VI: The Part of Tens
The market isn’t out to get you; it’s out to get your money. Don’t take trading
personally. A losing trade is just another losing trade. You’ll have plenty of
them. Get used to it.

Falling In Love
Trading is a business. Your stocks are your inventory. Smart business owners
don’t fall in love with their inventory. It’s there to sell, at a profit if possible,
at a loss if necessary. And smart businesspeople don’t fall in love with their
business models. If it isn’t working, they change it; otherwise, they’ll be out of
business before you can say “liquidation sale.”
When you fall in love with your stock, you risk large losses. When you fall
in love with your trading plan, you risk many more losses. It’s easy to fall in
love. After doing hours of research and analysis, you want to be right. You
want your trades and your trading plans to generate profits, but hoping
doesn’t make it so.
Be smart. Don’t fall in love. Your trading system doesn’t have feelings and
your stock won’t love you back. Be prepared to jettison positions and trading
systems that don’t do what they’re supposed to do. See Chapter 12 for more
about trading as a business and effectively managing your inventory.

Using After-Hours Market Orders
When the market opens and it’s off to the races, the market order that you
placed last night before going to bed is going to be swept up in a wave of
frantic trading. Bad fills are sure to be the result. You’re likely to pay considerably more to buy a stock that you want or to sell one for considerably less
than you’d planned. You should never place a market order when entering
trades after the market is closed (after-hours). Instead, define how much
you’re willing to buy or sell a stock for by using a stop order, a limit order,
or a stop-limit order. Chapter 14 discusses the mechanics of entering these
types of orders.

Chasing a Runaway Trend
If you miss the breakout entry point for a stock that you want, waiting is
better than entering a position as a trend accelerates. See Chapter 10 for
information about identifying and trading a trend. Often, stocks will pull back
and test the breakout point. Wait for that point, or wait for the stock to take

Chapter 21: Ten (or More) Huge Trading Mistakes
a short breather after its first leg up. If you’re still interested, that’s a better
entry point than chasing a stock as it accelerates into the trend. Like a fine
wine, you sometimes need to let a stock breathe.
On the other hand, if you already have a position in a runaway stock, try
planning your exit so that you leave a little money on the table. Capturing
every last nickel of the trend is almost impossible, anyway, so don’t try.
Instead, consider trimming your position as the stock reaches for the stratosphere. If you’re using margin, consider taking some profit off the table and
reducing your leverage a bit. We discuss this strategy further in Chapter
13, and the mechanics of using margin are covered in Chapter 14. When a
runaway stock stops going up and everyone wants out at the same time, the
speed at which the price falls is remarkable. Be ready to jettison stocks that
rally too fast at the first sign of trouble.

Averaging Down
Averaging down is a below-average idea. You sometimes hear advisors suggesting it as a way of reducing your cost basis, but it’s merely a technique to
throw good money after bad. The logic of averaging down is completely contrary to the logic of trading. Traders sell losers. They don’t reward them with
infusions of trading capital.
However, averaging up makes some sense. Traders call it pyramiding. The
idea is to add to your winning positions when your trading system triggers
new trading signals in the direction of the trend. Pyramiding is a good way
of building a large position in a strongly trending stock. Be aware of the risk,
though. The larger your position, the more it hurts when the trend ends and
the stock’s price begins to fall. Be ready to trim your pyramid position at the
first sign of trouble.

Ignoring Your Stops
Talking yourself out of honoring your stops is an easy thing to do. You’ll be
tempted when a trade goes against you. You’ll look at your indicators and the
support levels on your charts, and you’ll be certain that the stock soon will
stop falling. When you start thinking you want to give a position a little room
to work its way out of losing territory, you’re on your way toward a trading
debacle. It’s wishful thinking, it’s hoping against hope, and it’s a good way to
lose a lot of money. Unless you’re omniscient, close the position when the
price hits your stop. Take your loss. Chapter 14 discusses stop orders and
how to use them.

341

342 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Diversifying Badly
Exposing all your capital in one trade is a bad idea, and so is trading hundreds of stocks simultaneously. A happy medium can be found somewhere in
between.
You can monitor only so many positions and do it well. You need only so
many positions to diversify your risk. And although you can have too few or
too many stocks in your trading portfolio, no perfect number — one that is
right for every trader — exists. That said, you nevertheless have to figure out
what the right number is for you. Start with 10 or 15 positions. You may end
up deciding that eight is enough. The Bradford family did. However, unless
you have an extremely large portfolio, imagining why you’d need any more
than 20 positions is difficult.
The simple wisdom is this: Don’t put all your eggs in one basket. And don’t
chop your eggs into little pieces and spread them across many dozens of baskets. You want to diversify, just not too much.

Enduring Large Losses
To trade is to lose. No matter how good your trading system is, no matter
how experienced you are, and no matter which stocks you pick, you’re going
to have losing trades. Your success as a trader depends on how you handle
those losing trades. If you dispose of the losers quickly, you can become a
very successful trader. But if you hold on to those losing positions, you can
lose so much money that it may knock you right out of the trading business.
Using margin (see Chapter 14) exacerbates the problem of losing trades.
Margin is a wonderful thing, because with careful application, it can magnify
your profits. But on the flip side, with indiscriminate use, it can also magnify
your losses. If you want to turn your pool of trading capital into a puddle,
leverage a lot of losing trades.
Small losses won’t hurt you much, but large losses will. If you use margin and
fail to cut your losses, you won’t be a trader for long.

Chapter 22

Top Ten Trading Survival
Techniques
In This Chapter
▶ Building your tool chest
▶ Understanding and using averages
▶ Developing your own trading system
▶ Taking profits and avoiding losses
▶ Buying on strength, selling on weakness
▶ Reviewing your journal

T

rading is not a risk-free activity. Although all traders know that losses are
inevitable, they want to minimize those losses and be around to trade
another day. In this chapter, we review ten of the top trading survival techniques that can help you enter the world of trading and enable you to continue to trade for a long time to come.

Build Your Trading Tool Chest
Before you buy that first share of stock, that first option or futures contract,
or any other security, you need to be certain that you have the right mix of
trading software, hardware, and Internet access to be successful. You need
the right tools to identify trading candidates; display and interpret charts;
research trading opportunities; screen stocks for technical or fundamental
constraints; and monitor and analyze your portfolio, open positions, market
indexes, sectors, and trading statistics. In summary, the proper tools are
critical to finding the right trades and then monitoring those positions after
you’ve found and entered them.

344 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Even after you’ve found them, if you don’t have the right tools, you may not
be able to enter and exit positions efficiently, control or track your orders,
track your profits and losses, analyze your trading history, or monitor economic reports, earnings, and other business news.
The proper tools help you evaluate your trading system and test your trading ideas. They enable you to keep trading logs to review your trading performance. You also can use tools to stay in touch with other traders and
exchange ideas that ultimately may help you improve your trading skills and
discover new trading opportunities.
Tools are the core of any good trader’s business. Without the right ones,
your chances of success drop dramatically. Don’t scrimp on the tools you
select for your trading activities. (For more information, see Chapter 4.)

Use Both Technical and
Fundamental Analyses
You may have heard that all traders use technical analysis and believe that
fundamental analysis is a waste of time. Don’t believe it. Although technical analysis is crucial to finding the right entry and exit points, fundamental
analysis improves your ability to make the right stock choices, given market
and economic conditions.
You’ll find as a trader that knowing the current state of the economy and the
state of the market is critical. You obviously want to buy stocks in the bull
market and sell them, or short them, in a bear market, but do you know how
to recognize when the market is entering a period of transition so you can
make your moves when the opportunity for making profitable trades or minimizing potential losses is greatest?
Using a combination of fundamental and technical analyses, your chances
of identifying bull and bear markets and finding phases of transition and
consolidation improve dramatically. Your best trading opportunities are at
the beginning of these phases of change, so be sure that you understand the
six phases of the market and know which sectors offer you the best trading
opportunities within each of those phases. (For more information, see Parts
II and III.)
