
Ending Bull Markets
As has previously been noted, the Broadening Top is rare and is not infallible but,
when it does work, it is exceedingly important, and generally marks a critical turn
from a ‘‘bull’’ to a ‘‘bear’’ market. This is comforting to the technical student because
it means that there is still an ample swing for profit on the downside even after he
has waited for some time to be sure that the Broadening Top was a bona-fide reversal pattern.
Figure IV.15 shows the Broadening Top which preceded the long decline in US
Steel from the vicinity of 60 to 37 in the Spring of 1934. It will help the student to recognize the Broadening Top when, as and if it shows up in his charts, if we take the
time to analyze the pattern in ‘‘Big Steel’’ as carefully as we did that in Air Reduction.
The first reversal in trend appears at point 1, when a three-day reaction carried the
stock from 573/8 back to 551/8. The second reversal here (at 2) sent the price up again
in two days to 583/8 (at 3A). Here we had what promised to be our third reversal but
note that the reaction from 3A carried only back down to 555/8 (at 3B) before prices
turned up again. The reversal at 3A was, therefore, not ‘‘confirmed’’ and could not
be counted as the third reversal in our Broadening Top picture. The upward movement continued to 583/8 (at 3C) before another reversal appeared. Now we have to
disregard the turns at both 3A and 3B and look upon 3C as our third reversal if it
should be confirmed by prices falling below the level of the second reversal at 2. The
reaction from 3C did carry down to 541/2 and 3C was thereby established as the third
reversal in what might become a Broadening Top.
The fourth turn (at 4) had to be similarly confirmed by a movement to a level
higher than 3C before we could count it as the fourth of the five reversals of a Broadening Top. This confirmation came in short order for the price of ‘‘Steel’’ worked up
quickly to 597/8 on February 19 (point 5). The movement of prices on that day suggests a one-day reversal. A week later the price had dropped to 541/8, lower than the
– 137 –

STUDY I V

level of the fourth reversal; the fifth reversal (at 5) had been confirmed and the
Broadening Top pattern was complete. Two brief rallies followed, which we have
noted as being quite characteristic of this reversal formation, but they ‘‘got
nowhere’’. Nothing short of a recovery to 60 or better would have spoiled our Broadening Top. The ensuing movement needs no comment.

Rally Following Completion of Broadening Top
We have referred in the paragraph above, as well as on page 136, to the partial recovery which usually follows the completion of a Broadening Top pattern. This rally, we
have noted, frequently carries prices about half way back to the level of the last top
or fifth reversal point of the pattern. In the Air Reduction top (see Fig. IV.14) the rally
from H to J retraced almost exactly half the decline from G to H. In the US Steel top
(Fig. IV.15) the Broadening Top formation was completed on March 1 when the price
touched 53 after having attained 597/8 at the fifth reversal point. The rally on March
2 carried to 563/4, again half the extent of the preceding decline.
Naturally, we cannot expect such a close approximation of the half-way level on
every rally after a Broadening Top has formed nor, for that matter, can we expect a
rally of any extent always to follow promptly after the decline from the fifth reversal point has carried prices below the fourth reversal. In most cases a rally will
develop shortly after the level of the fourth reversal has been ‘‘broken’’, and in most
cases this rally will carry prices about half way back, but the exceptions are frequent
enough to suggest the practical danger of counting
When it comes to taking on it, and to advise the immediate sale of any ‘‘long’’
stock as soon as the Broadening Top is completed
a “short” position wait
for a rally and sell when without waiting for a rally. When it comes to taking
a ‘‘short’’ position, however, a more conservative
prices have recovered
and frequently more profitable policy is to wait for
about 40%.
a rally and to sell when prices have recovered about
40% of the preceding decline which completed the
Broadening Top. Since these rallies are usually very short-lived, it is also good policy to place an order with one’s broker to sell short at the specified price – the level
to which the hoped-for rally might be expected to carry – as soon as the requirements for a Broadening Top formation have been carried out and before the rally has
actually started.

Distinction Between ‘‘Long’’ and ‘‘Short’’ Trading
This distinction in policy between disposing of ‘‘long’’ stock and selling ‘‘short’’
when a top reversal pattern appears on the charts, is based upon all important con– 138 –

Fig. IV.15
5

3C

X

59

59

3A

58

58
1

57

57

56

56
3B

55

55

2

THOUSANDS OF SHARES

DAILY HIGH AND LOW CLOSING PRICES

4
54

54

53

53

52

52

51

51

50

50

49

49

48

48

47

47

46

46

45

45

44

44

43

43

42

42

41

41

40

40

39

39

38

38

37

37

100

100

75

75

50

50

25

25

WEEKS
ENDING

6

13

20

JAN
1934

27

3

10

17
FEB

24

3

10

17

24

31

7

MAR

14

21

APR

US STEEL

28

5

12

19

MAY

26

2

9

16
JUN

23

30

STUDY I V

siderations of safety. Needless to say, it is better to miss a dozen opportunities to
trade through following the rules of caution, than to suffer an actual loss by holding
out for a rally which may never come. Technical patterns are not infallible, a fact we
must keep ever in mind. The Broadening Top is an important and remarkably reliable reversal formation yet it may fail. The trader who sells his long stock as soon as
a Broadening Top signals a reversal of the previous up-trend, loses only a part of his
hoped-for profit if the reversal does not eventuate. On the other hand, the trader
who waits for a rally before selling short is just that much better off in case the trend
should go against him.

Broadening Bottoms Extremely Rare
The Broadening Bottom has appeared so rarely in the charts that any discussion of
it may be considered as almost entirely theoretical. It is, of course, simply the same
chart picture as the Broadening Top but coming at the end of a long down trend and
signaling the reversal into an extensive upward movement. The first of its five turns
must, naturally, be an upward one, reversing the previous major decline.
Since a broadening formation by its very nature
can be built up only by a fairly active market such as
It is better to miss a
does not ordinarily exist at the end of a ‘‘bear’’ trend,
dozen opportunities to
we can understand why true Broadening Bottoms so
trade than to suffer an
seldom appear. The few bottom patterns which have
actual loss.
conformed to the analytical requirements of a
Broadening Bottom, have also presented as a rule
other and more obvious patterns of bottom reversal.
The student may, therefore, safely forget the Broadening Bottom – at least, he need
waste no time trying to find it.

Broadening Formations Which Fail
We have stated that the Broadening Top is not infallible; also that a formation which
apparently starts out to be a Broadening Top may fail of ultimate completion. Such
uncompleted and violated Broadening Tops seem, nevertheless, to have a practical
significance for the technical student. For the very attempt of a stock to make a
Broadening Top seems to be a reliable warning that an important reversal is soon to
be expected. There were, for example, many stocks which showed in their charts
what promised at first to be typical Broadening Tops in the Spring of 1929. These formations failed of completion and prices moved up out of them in the final drive of
the 1929 market, but they gave technical students cause to anticipate an impending
break and to be prepared for genuine reversal patterns.
– 140 –

IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS, CTD.

In the same way, many stocks tried but failed to make Broadening Bottoms in January and February of 1932, just a few months before the actual bottom of the long
‘‘bear’’ market was reached.

Possible Explanation for the Broadening Top
It may serve no very useful purpose to attempt to deduce the market factors which
produce a Broadening Top in the chart of a stock. The value of the formation is sufficiently demonstrated even if a satisfactory explanation is difficult to find. However, a study of the history of the stock market at those times when Broadening Tops
have appeared, suggests an explanation which seems logical and is very likely correct. The Broadening Top forms apparently in very active and excited markets after
professional traders have already distributed their important holdings and have
stepped aside. Heavy public participation, however, keeps the market active; prices,
out of professional control, fluctuate in ever widening swings until it becomes evident that there is no real support or basis for further advance; no buyers appear for
the shares the public now wishes to sell and the market collapses. Such conditions
develop only at or near the end of fast ‘‘bull’’ markets that have run completely out
of bounds.
As for the rule of five reversals, there is no conceivable logical basis for it, yet experience and a critical examination of many hundreds of stock charts indicate that a
fifth reversal, in other types of congestion as well as in the Broadening Top, more
often than not terminates a reversal pattern and signals the final exhaustion of technical strength.

A Brief Review
We have examined and studied in this section of our Course three types of technical
patterns which are important as indicating a reversal in price trend of major proportions.
The Multiple Formations, of which the commonest manifestations are the Double
Top and Double Bottom, are reliable when they conform quite strictly to certain
specifications. The tops (or bottoms) must be made with a fair interval of time and a
fair price movement between them, and the ‘‘valley’’ between the tops must be broken before the formation is complete.
The Complex Formations, closely related to the simple Head and Shoulders, are
among the most reliable of all reversal forecasters, and would qualify for top place
among reversal patterns if they appeared more frequently.
The Broadening Top is an even rarer formation, requiring careful analysis, and is
not as dependable as the Head and Shoulders and the Complex patterns. But it is
– 141 –

STUDY I V

definitely indicative of a long and important movement in the new trend when it
does form at a reversal, and it is this indication which warrants our including it
among the important technical reversal formations.

– 142 –

Study V

MINOR REVERSAL
FORMATIONS
■ Summary of the Major Reversal Pat-

■ Interpretation Like that of Triangle

terns
■ Reversal Patterns of Less Frequent
Appearance
■ The Inverted Triangle
■ Differences Between Inverted and
Normal Triangles
■ The Symmetrical Inverted Triangle
■ A More Typical and Less Profitable
Example
■ Inverted Right-angle Triangles
■ The Inverted Triangle with Descending Hypotenuse
■ Difficulty of Trading on Inverted Triangles
■ The Inverted Triangle with Rising
Hypotenuse
■ Explanation for Inverted Triangles
■ The Diamond Formation
■ Examples of Diamond Reversals
■ At the 1936 April Tops
■ Diamond Bottom Reversals
■ The Rectangle as a Reversal

■ Rectangular Bottom Reversals
■ Importance of the Rectangle
■ The Rectangle as a Top Reversal
■ Break Out of Dormancy
■ A Common Long-term Bottom Pic-

ture
■ A Quick Change in the Technical Picture
■ Relative Dormancy in an Active
Stock
■ The Island Formation
■ A First Look at Gaps
■ The Island Formation Described
■ Gaps Should Form at Same Level
■ A Powerful Island Reversal
Example
■ One-day Island Forecasts
■ Other Island Manifestations
■ Explanation for Island Formation
■ Two Interesting and Spectacular
Charts
■ Continuation Formations Next

– 143 –

MINOR REVERSAL FORMATIONS

Summary of the Major Reversal Patterns
In the three preceding studies we have analyzed seven types of technical formations
which occur at reversals in stock price trends and have discussed their usefulness in
forecasting. Of these seven, five are of major importance because of their frequent
appearance, or great reliability, or both. These are:
1. The Head and Shoulders
2. The Common or Rounding Turn
3. The Triangle
a. Symmetrical
b. Right-Angle, Ascending and Descending
4. The Multiple Tops and Bottoms
5. The Complex Patterns
The other two formations – the Wedge and the Broadening Tops – were studied
with the above not because of their major importance but rather because of their pictorial relation to the major types.

