
8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 72

• 72 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

followed his new rules. He had been patient in waiting for the big
turn in the market. He had started with small positions, sending
out probes into the market to confirm that he was right. And
finally, when everything was in his favor, he had done what he
loved best: He plunged big time, like a king cobra.
His paper profits and his stock positions were so large near the
end of the day, as a result of his pyramiding, that he now had an
even bigger decision to make. Morgan’s announcement to inject
cash had solved only one problem: It reestablished liquidity—solvency among the brokers. But the other major problem was that
there was still no demand. Livermore looked over the market near
the close, and found there were simply no bids for stocks. Nobody
wanted to buy stocks at any price.
Livermore knew that he could perpetrate a monumental raid by
starting to sell at the opening the next day. The downward pressure
of his hammering the key stocks would cause a further decline. His
margin now was ever increasing; his profits had pyramided, risen as
the market had fallen. He was in a position to begin the day by
selling short 10,000 shares of Union Pacific, the market darling at
the time. He could follow by selling half a dozen other stocks that
were considered the bluest of the blue chips. He now had the
account margin and the trading skills to hammer those issues into
oblivion. He was looking at not $1 million profit, but $10 million,
$20 million, if he hit the market hard the next morning.
Now it would be his turn to make the big decision. Would he
support the market or drive it down and down and down, until the
board of governors had to close the exchange, maybe forever?
Before the close of the trading day, while Livermore was studying his next move, a friend of his, Warren Augustus Reed, paid
him a visit. During the panic that day Livermore had explained to
his friend, who was a banker in a powerful investment banking
house, exactly what would happen. Reed had watched Livermore

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 73

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 73 •

operate in the past and was a believer in his market skill and deadly
prowess.
Reed disappeared for a while when he was called away to see his
boss, the president of the firm.
Reed returned and explained to Livermore, “J.L., I’ve been
asked to talk to you about the market and request that you refrain
from any more short selling. I understand that you are looking at
even bigger profits for yourself if you hammer away, but sometimes
we have to look at the greater good.”
“Auggie, this comes from your boss?” Livermore asked.
“No. It comes from a person more powerful than my boss,” he
answered.
Livermore knew whom he meant—J. P. Morgan. “You sure?”
“I’m sure. It came from him personally. I was in the office when
it happened and heard the conversation.”
Livermore thought for a minute. “You know these same men
have been selling into this market for months now—feeding stock
to the public, knowing that the decline was coming, only interested in looking after themselves, killing the public?”
“Yes, I know, but J.L., isn’t that always the way, when prices get
too high? The smart, market-savvy people sell to the less-smart
people, the public.”
“Yes.”
“J.L., if we are to get this market under control then we will
have to stop the bleeding, the selling, and staunch the supply, or
there will be no market left. There will only be chaos.”
Livermore pondered his position for a few minutes. “Tell your
boss that I am in agreement with what he says. I will not sell any
more stock today. I will cover my short positions in the morning
by buying in the stock. After that, I will start to aggressively buy
additional stocks on the opening. I understand the gravity of the
situation.”

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 74

• 74 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“Thanks, J.L., I’ll report this back to the man himself.”
Livermore had already analyzed the situation carefully before his
friend had shown up. The carnage this day had been horrific, and
Livermore felt the exchange was due for a rally on a technical
rebound basis, provided it was not raided. Plus, he had some monumental short positions that would have to be covered in a liquid
market to preserve his profits.
Finally, he had altruistic reasons for agreeing. Further raiding
would severely hurt the country. He was astounded that he had
this power in his hands, the raiding power and skill to actually
drive the market into oblivion. He was 31 years old.
The next morning Livermore fueled the rally by covering his
short positions. As the market continued to rally, he bought
another 100,000 shares of various companies, which he fed back
into the market that same day as the public jumped in. When the
day was over he was worth $3 million—not in paper profits, but in
cold, hard cash.
“What a life,” he thought. Broke three times before he was 30
years old and, at the age of 31, potentially able to batter the New
York Stock Exchange into oblivion. He smiled to himself. He had
shared power with J. P. Morgan for one day. Morgan had the
power to save the market from oblivion, and Livermore had the
power to hammer it into oblivion—even Morgan could not have
stopped him. He had gone from being thrown out of bucket shops
to being asked by the most powerful banker in America to lay off
Wall Street, stop the punishment. His reputation was growing, and
he had held the financial welfare of the nation in his hands for one
day. What a thrill!
He later told his sons that this had been one of the most important events of his life, when J. P. Morgan asked a favor of him during the crash of 1907. But for Livermore there was no satisfaction
in this raw power. The satisfaction, the exhilaration, came from

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 75

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 75 •

beating the Street. Finally, after thousands of trades and hundreds
of hours examining his trading techniques, he knew he was right.
The big money was made in the big swings. Clipping points had
served him well in establishing a stake, but the big money was in
the big swings. He only could catch the big swings if he was
patient and waited until they came along, waited until his judgment had been confirmed.
He believed he had advanced over these two days from the gambler class of trader to being a true speculator who looked ahead,
evaluated the general conditions, and moved prudently—testing
first, and plunging only after he was convinced that all the factors
were in his favor.
The Boy Plunger was no longer a plunger at all. At least in his
own mind, he was a speculator. From the public’s point of view he
was still considered a wild plunger, because they saw only the last
10 minutes of a three-act play—they had no interest in Act 1 or
Act 2, which were done in secret anyway. It was the results they
watched and wanted to emulate.
Livermore now had a plan, an investment strategy that he
believed worked, and he knew that one essential secret of success
was at its core—the hard work of never-ending analysis.
Now he had to see if this had been a fluke or if he really did
have the beginnings of a solid trading approach to the market. But
he needed a rest first. He decided to try a vacation again, to enjoy
himself. He bought a yacht and was about to head south. He
wanted to go fishing, his favorite sport.
But it was not to be, not yet. For Livermore studied and played
the commodities market just as he did the equities market.
Livermore was soon as sure that a crash was coming in the commodities market as he had been in the stock market. So before
heading out for his vacation and enjoying his new yacht, he set out
his probes and finally wound up short 10 million bushels of wheat

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 76

• 76 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

and 10 million bushels of corn. The wheat did what it was supposed to do—plummeted. But corn was rising in the face of cascading commodity prices. Livermore soon found out why: Arthur
Cutten, a brilliant trader, was running a corner on corn.
In the early 1900s, running a corner was common. A pool of
people, or sometimes a powerful individual, would determine
what the short position was on a commodity or a stock. Then they
would launch an assault and buy every single share of stock or, in
this case, bushel of corn. This would leave the people who held
the short positions with no stock to buy to cover their short positions. These people would then have to accept whatever stock was
offered at whatever price it was offered. When a corner happened,
it happened fast. Corners had ruined many traders who went in to
cover their short positions and simply found that nothing was
available or that it was available only at huge losses.
Arthur Cutten was born in Guelph, Ontario, in 1870, seven
years before Livermore. Cutten was later to be called the Great
Bull as Livermore was to be called the Great Bear. He was built
like Livermore—slim and of average height. But unlike Livermore,
who dressed in the finest fashions, Cutten dressed in plain clothes
of the best value.
It took Cutten five years of hard work as a teenager on the family farm where he was born to save $50. He took the $50 and journeyed to Chicago. There he got a clerical job with A. S. White
and Company, at the wage of $4 a week. Cutten was frugal and
watched every penny—this remained with him all his life. He was
tenacious, diligent, and hard-working. It took him another five
years to save up $1,000. He was now 25. But he had more than just
$1,000—he also had five years of intensive experience in trading
commodities for White.
He and Livermore also had the same code of silence and secrecy.
Whenever Cutten could, he hung out in the “Pigeon Roost,” a

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 77

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 77 •

small area above the wild and wooly grain pits of Chicago. He
carefully studied the floor traders and the actions of the customers
in White’s offices. He, like Livermore, worked every night on
sheets of long columnar paper looking for trends, patterns, and
timing mechanisms.
After five years of hard work for his employer, and for himself in
his off-hours, he went to White and said, “I would like to open a
trading account here.”
“For whom?” White asked.
“For myself,” Cutten answered.
“You are a smart young man, Arthur. You must know that a
man of modest means cannot trade in the commodities market. It
would be sheer lunacy.”
“But sir . . .”
“Never mind, you must heed my advice and you will thank me
for it later. My advice is to avoid the commodities market, avoid
the stock market. It is a fool’s game and you know that a fool and
his money are soon parted.”
Cutten wondered to himself how the fool got the money in the
first place, but he was not about to argue with the severe White.
“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”
On his lunch break he went to another firm and opened an
account with his $1,000 in cash.
Three months later, he entered White’s office. He had his alpaca
jacket in his hand. White was on the phone and motioned for
young Cutten to sit down. Cutten remained standing and gently
placed his alpaca jacket, his trading uniform jacket, on White’s
desk.
White hung up the phone and looked at the jacket lying on his
desk. “What’s going on here, Arthur?”
“I’ve been elected to membership in the Chicago Board of
Trade, sir.”

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 78

• 78 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“Arthur, we’re busy here. Make sense.”
“I’ve purchased a seat on the exchange.”
“How?”
“With my trading profits, sir.”
White sat dumbstruck. He finally spoke. “So, you are resigning.”
“Yes, sir. And I expect I will never work for another man for the
rest of my life.”
Cutten closed the door on a shocked White. True to his words,
Cutten never did work for another person.
Twelve years later, in 1907, Cutten was a legend in the Chicago
grain pits. Secretive, tenacious, holding only his own counsel, he
was considered a very formidable force. He and Livermore were
kindred spirits.
Cutten had found out about Livermore’s position. He had Livermore, his only equal, in his clutches. Livermore was short 10
million bushels of corn. For every 10 cents Cutten drove the price
of corn upward, it cost Livermore $1 million. He had Livermore
cornered.
The thoughts of a nice vacation in Florida were far from a reality now. It was survival mode for Livermore again. On the positive
side, he saw the price of wheat decline as he had predicted, so he
had a profit in wheat. But it could all be wiped out—he could be
wiped out—if he did not correct his problem with corn. He
needed a strategy to defeat Cutten and extricate himself from this
sinkhole. He knew Cutten was aware of his huge short position
and would pull out all the stops to annihilate him.
That night, as he lay in bed, an idea came to him based on
something he had heard. He moved swiftly. Livermore knew the
corner was false; there was plenty of corn available from the farmers, so there was no underlying reason why the price of corn
should go up. Cutten was playing with the market. In particular,
he was playing with Livermore’s financial life.

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 79

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 79 •

The first thing Livermore did was to cover the 10 million
bushels of wheat he was short at a good profit. This gave him cash
in his account to trade with. He had heard that Cutten had begun
cornering the oat market along with the corn market. In the oat
market, Cutten was up against Chicago’s powerful Armour family,
trying to catch them in a corner. Livermore confirmed this as soon
as he could.
Then Livermore made his major move. He sold 50,000 bushels
of oats at the market, then another 50,000, then another, then
another—200,000 bushels in all. The price of oats dropped drastically with these sales. He figured the traders would believe what
they saw and conclude that the Armours were at work to break
Cutten’s oat corner. They would also conclude that the Armours
would move in to bust up the corn corner next.
The traders did as Livermore had predicted. When they saw the
price of oats breaking, the traders jumped into the corn market,
selling their positions while the price was high. Livermore was
there to buy. He bought all they could shovel his way. He covered
the 6 million bushels he was short in 10 minutes and the rest
before the market closed that day. He also closed out the 200,000
bushels of oats before the market closed.
His total loss, with his profit in wheat, was $25,000. Within
days, Cutten ran the price of corn up another 25 cents. This would
have been a loss of at least $2.5 million for Livermore, if he had not
been able to cover.
Now he was really ready for his vacation!
He was also ready for a better lifestyle. He moved into a beautiful furnished apartment at 194 Riverside Drive. He had already
purchased his first yacht, the Anita Venetian, and sent it down to
Palm Beach. He was in good company. George Jay Gould, the heir
to Jay Gould’s fortune, had a similar yacht, the Atlantic, a 300-foot,
steel-hulled, triple-screw yacht; and J. P. Morgan traveled the globe

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 80

• 80 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

in his yacht, the Corsair, the largest yacht afloat anywhere in the
world.
The Anita Venetian was a 202-foot steam schooner of first-class
construction. She carried the red, white, and blue pennant of the
Columbia Yacht Club. Livermore purchased a snappy brassbuttoned blue blazer for wearing on board, along with gray flannel
slacks and a handmade captain’s hat. He was a dapper captain,
ready for fun.
Livermore headed down to Palm Beach to board the waiting
Anita. He loved Palm Beach and the Palm Beach society. He had a
great passion for fishing the waters off South Florida, trolling in
the deep, dark blue waters of the Gulf Stream, a current in the
ocean that moves up from the coast of South America.
The Gulf Stream comes in closest to the Florida coast off Palm
Beach, sometimes getting within three miles of the white sandy
beaches of the rich. The pelagic fish, the big wanderers, travel
inside the stream, using the 3- to 4-knot current to speed their way
north. It was these fish that Livermore was interested in, the big
fish, just as he was only interested in the big swings in the market.
The giant bluefin tuna; the world-class monster sharks, hammerheads, tigers, and makos; the run of sailfish; the occasional marlin,
wahoo, or king mackerel; and the tarpon down in Key West—
these were his prey, the challenging, unpredictable, hard-fighting
gypsy fish of the great Atlantic Ocean.
He spent his days on board the Anita basking in the warm
Florida sun, fishing, and enjoying life. At night he would eat in the
great watering holes of Palm Beach, such as the Palm Beach Inn.
Located directly on the beach, it contained 425 rooms. He would
eat exquisite meals there and adjourn to the ocean-side gallery to
have cigars and brandy and chat with his Wall Street friends.
Most nights after dinner he would wander down to the famous
Beach Club, or Bradley’s, as it was sometimes called after its

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 81

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 81 •

owner, Edward Bradley, a well-known gambler whose own horses
would later go on to win four Kentucky Derbies. Bradley was
quiet and secretive like Livermore, but, unlike Livermore, he had
a checkered past that stretched all the way out to the Wild West,
where he had known Billy the Kid and Wyatt Earp. He had been
an army scout during the Apache wars and was credited with aiding in the capture of Geronimo.
“Billy the Kid used to borrow money from me to bet on the
Indian pony races,” Bradley would tell Livermore, laughing.
“Who wouldn’t give him money? He’d shoot you dead if you
didn’t.” Livermore used to love to tell this to his sons.
In Palm Beach, Bradley had a secret deal with Henry Flagler,
John D. Rockefeller’s partner in Standard Oil and a churchgoing
Christian. Flagler built the Florida East Coast Railway, which
eventually ran the entire length of Florida, all the way down to
Key West. Flagler also built four major hotels in Palm Beach. His
clientele loved to gamble, so he was willing to strike a deal with
Bradley and leave him alone. Bradley’s Beach Club ultimately
became the longest-running illegal gambling casino in the history
of the United States.
Bradley’s was simple, but elegant. After 7 P.M. the most informal
attire for men was a tuxedo, with no exceptions. White tie and tails
were preferred, and there was no smoking in the gaming room.
The food was five-star. Bradley paid his chef $25,000 for the season, which was a king’s ransom at the turn of the century. His
clientele included the elite of the U.S. financial, entertainment,
and political worlds. The entrance door was painted white, with a
square frosted-glass panel in the center that said “B.C.,” for Beach
Club.
He and Livermore quickly became fast friends, although they
both were reticent and not quick to expose their true feelings. They had a mutual respect and admiration for each other.

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 82

• 82 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Livermore loved to gamble at Bradley’s. Bradley was also known as
“Bet-on-Anything Bradley.” Even so, he rarely lost.
He once told Livermore that luck was a real thing. It went right
along hand-in-hand with hard work. He said, “A person either
works for a living or gambles for a living. In fact life is a gamble,
but if a person chooses to take up gambling for a living it has to be
studied intelligently and worked at least twice as hard as any other
profession.” Livermore repeated this to Dorothy, his wife.
Bradley often walked around with over $100,000 on him.
When major players wanted to cash out after winning, he would
walk up to them, smile, congratulate them, and peel off $1,000
bills while the croupier collected their chips. The main test for
membership was approval by Bradley himself. He would interview
prospective members at length and, if he liked them, he would
find out the answer to the final, most important question: Could
they pay their bills if they lost?”
Armed Pinkerton guards posted everywhere protected Bradley’s
while remaining inconspicuous. The game room had a trap door
installed in case the place was ever raided—the tables could be slid
out of view. A guard with a rifle protected the counting room.
The guard was positioned at a small window that provided a full
view of the gaming room. The guard was a crack shot instructed
to shoot anyone who tried to rob the place. The same instructions
were given to the Pinkerton agents. Since Bradley’s was located on
Palm Beach, actually an island, there was no place to run. Thieves
gave Bradley’s a wide berth and the staff members were very discreet; any talk about the clientele and they were immediately fired.
Bradley kept spies on his staff to keep him informed of everything.
Livermore passed many a pleasant evening at the Beach Club
playing one of the three games of chance available: hazard, chemin
de fer, and roulette. The limits at Bradley’s were even higher than
those at the casinos in Monte Carlo.

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 83

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 83 •

It was on one of these nights at Bradley’s that he heard the news
of the failure of one of the great cotton players. Ed Hutton was
there and told him how Percy Thomas, the Cotton King, had tried
to run a corner on cotton and been annihilated. He went broke in
March cotton.
Hearing about Thomas triggered an interest in cotton for Livermore. On his return to New York in his private rail car, he studied the trade papers. It became clear that everyone was bearish on
July cotton. As July approached, Livermore started to buy cotton.
He knew that there was little time left to cover short positions. It
was May, and he had no trouble establishing a long position of
120,000 bales. Shortly after he bought, the market turned upward;
but the volume was sluggish, and Livermore had a big position, a
position hard to sell in this limited time frame.
So Livermore performed one of his famous trading tricks: In the
last 10 minutes of trading on Saturday, he stepped in and sent out
four separate orders to buy 5,000 bales. This ran the Chicago price
up 30 points on the close. Livermore knew this would drive the
London market up on Monday to establish parity with the New
York market. He knew he was trading on the line of least resistance, but he also knew he was carrying a huge illiquid position.
His strategy worked, and the London cotton market opened
strongly—only it was not 30 points higher, it was 50 points higher.
Nevertheless, the trading on Monday was strong in Chicago, but
not strong enough for Livermore to get rid of his large position.
He became worried.
The next morning on his way to work, he met a friend who
showed him the front page of the New York World. The headline
read: “July Cotton Cornered by Jesse Livermore.”
Livermore always denied he knew anything about the story, but
the market soared on the news. Taking his good luck as it was
offered, Livermore sold out his entire position of 140,000 bales.
