
2 that the rate of ascent is
not sustainable. A trend-
line that is too flat (line
3) suggests that the
uptrend is too weak and
probably suspect. Many

3 technicians use 45 degree
lines from previous tops
or bottoms as major
trendlines.

line on the chart from a prominent high or low and use this as a
major trendline. The 45 degree line was one of the techniques
favored by W. D. Gann. Such a line reflects a situation where
prices are advancing or declining at such a rate that price and
time are in perfect balance.

If a trendline is too steep (see line 1 in Figure 4.12), it usu-
ally indicates that prices are advancing too rapidly and that the
current steep ascent will not be sustained. The breaking of that
steep trendline may be just a reaction back to a more sustainable
slope closer to the 45 degree line (line 2). If a trendline is too flat
(see line 3), it may indicate that the uptrend is too weak and not
to be trusted.

How to Adjust Trendlines

Sometimes trendlines have to be adjusted to fit a slowing or an
accelerating trend. (See Figure 4.13 and Figures 4.14a and b.) For
example, as shown in the previous case, if a steep trendline is bro-
ken, a slower trendline might have to be drawn. If the original
trendline is too flat, it may have to be redrawn at a steeper angle.
Figure 4.13 shows a situation where the breaking of the steeper
trendline (line 1) necessitated the drawing of a slower line (line 2).


78 Chapter 4

Figure 4.13 Example
of a trendline that is too

2 steep (line 1). The original
up trendline proved too
steep. Often the breaking of
a steep trendline is only an
adjustment to a slower and
more sustainable up trend-
line (line 2).

In Figure 4.14a, the original trendline (line 1) is too flat
and has to be redrawn at a steeper angle (line 2). The uptrend
accelerated, requiring a steeper line. A trendline that is too far
away from the price action is obviously of little use in tracking the
trend.

In the case of an accelerating trend, sometimes several
trendlines may have to be drawn at increasingly steeper angles. In
my experience, however, where steeper trendlines become neces-
sary, it is best to resort to another tool—the moving average—
which is the same as a curvilinear trendline. One of the advantages

Figure 4.14a
Example of an up
trendline that is too
flat (line 1). Line 1

1 proved too slow as
the uptrend accelerat-
ed. In this case, a
second and steeper
trendline (line 2)
should be drawn to
more closely track the
rising trend.



Basic Concepts of Trend 79

08/05/94 (*SPX) S&P 500 Stock index 02/27/98

Weekly Bar Chart 4000

Figure 4.14b An accelerating uptrend requires the drawing of steeper
trendlines as shown in this chart. The steepest trendline becomes the most
important one.

of having access to several different types of technical indicators is
being able to choose the one most appropriate for a given situation.
All of the techniques covered in this book work well in certain sit-
uations, but not so well in others. By having an arsenal of tools to
fall back on, the technician can quickly switch from one tool to
another that might work better in a given situation. An accelerated
trend is one of those cases where a moving average would be more
useful than a series of steeper and steeper trendlines.

Just as there are several different degrees of trend in effect
at any one time, so is there a need for different trendlines to mea-
sure those various trends. A major up trendline, for example,
would connect the low points of the major uptrend, while a short-
er and more sensitive line might be used for secondary swings. An
even shorter line can measure the short term movements. (See
Figure 4.15.)


80 Chapter 4

Figure 4.15 Different trendlines are used to define the different degrees of
trend. Line 1 in the above example is the major up trendline, defining the
major uptrend. Lines 2, 3, and 4 define the intermediate uptrends. Finally,
line 5 defines a shorter term advance within the last intermediate uptrend.
Technicians use many different trendlines on the same chart.

THE CHANNEL LINE

The channel line, or the return line as it is sometimes called, is
another useful variation of the trendline technique. Sometimes
prices trend between two parallel lines—the basic trendline and
the channel line. Obviously, when this is the case and when the
analyst recognizes that a channel exists, this knowledge can be
used to profitable advantage.

The drawing of the channel line is relatively simple. In an
uptrend (see Figure 4.16a), first draw the basic up trendline along


Basic Concepts of Trend 81

Figure 4.16a
Example of a
trend channel.
Once the basic up
trendline is drawn
(below points 1
and 3) a channel,
or return, line
(dotted line) can
be projected over
the first peak at
2, which is paral-
lel to the basic up
trendline.

the lows. Then draw a dotted line from the first prominent peak
(point 2), which is parallel to the basic up trendline. Both lines
move up to the right, forming a channel. If the next rally reaches
and backs off from the channel line (at point 4), then a channel
may exist. If prices then drop back to the original trendline (at
point 5), then a channel probably does exist. The same holds true
for a downtrend (Figure 4.16b), but of course in the opposite
direction.

Figure 4.16b
A trend channel
in a downtrend.
The channel is
projected down-
ward from the
first low at point
2, parallel to the
down trendline
along the 1 and 3
peaks. Prices will
often remain
within such a
trend channel.



82 Chapter 4

1/70 (*DWU) Dow Utilities 02/28/95

260
Monthly Line Chart 240

Long Term Channel Lines

51 42 9a 7a 75 ve 77 7a 70 ‘oo 1 2 3s bs 85 be 87 8 89 bo by b2 bs be”
MET ing Vien

Figure 4.16c Notice how prices fluctuated between the upper and lower
parallel channels over a period of 25 years. The 1987, 1989, and 1993 tops
occurred right at the upper channel line. The 1994 bottom bounced off the
lower trendline.

The reader should immediately see the value of such a sit-
uation. The basic up trendline can be used for the initiation of
new long positions. The channel line can be used for short term
profit taking. More aggressive traders might even use the channel
line to initiate a countertrend short position, although trading in
the opposite direction of the prevailing trend can be a dangerous
and usually costly tactic. As in the case of the basic trendline, the
longer the channel remains intact and the more often it is suc-
cessfully tested, the more important and reliable it becomes.

The breaking of the major trendline indicates an impor-
tant change in trend. But the breaking of a rising channel line has
exactly the opposite meaning, and signals an acceleration of the
existing trend. Some traders view the clearing of the upper line in
an uptrend as a reason to add to long positions.


Basic Concepts of Trend 83

Figure 4.17

The failure to reach
the upper end of the
channel is often an
early warning that
the lower line will
be broken. Notice
the failure to reach
the upper line at
point 5 is followed
by the breaking of
the basic up trend-
line at point 6.

Another way to use the channel technique is to spot fail-
ures to reach the channel line, usually a sign of a weakening trend.
In Figure 4.17, the failure of prices to reach the top of the channel
(at point 5) may be an early warning that the trend is turning, and
increases the odds that the other line (the basic up trendline) will
be broken. As a general rule of thumb, the failure of any move
within an established price channel to reach one side of the chan-
nel usually indicates that the trend is shifting, and increases the
likelihood that the other side of the channel will be broken.

The channel can also be used to adjust the basic trendline.
(See Figures 4.18 and 4.19.) If prices move above a projected ris-
ing channel line by a significant amount, it usually indicates a
strengthening trend. Some chartists then draw a steeper basic up
trendline from the last reaction low parallel to the new channel
line (as demonstrated in Figure 4.18). Often, the new steeper sup-
port line functions better than the old flatter line. Similarly, the
failure of an uptrend to reach the upper end of a channel justi-
fies the drawing of a new support line under the last reaction low
parallel to the new resistance line over the past two peaks (as
shown in Figure 4.19).


84

Chapter 4

Figure 4.18
When the upper
channel line is
broken (as in
wave 5), many
chartists will
redraw the basic
up trendline par-
allel to the new
upper channel
line. In other
words, line 4-6 is
drawn parallel to
line 3-5. Because
the uptrend is
accelerating, it
stands to reason
that the basic up
trendline will do
likewise.

Figure 4.19
When prices fail
to reach the upper
channel line, and
a down trendline
is drawn over the
two declining
peaks (line 3-5), a
tentative channel
line can be drawn
from the low at
point 4 parallel to
line 3-5. The
lower channel
line sometimes
indicates where
initial support
will be evident.


Basic Concepts of Trend 85

Channel lines have measuring implications. Once a break-
out occurs from an existing price channel, prices usually travel a dis-
tance equal to the width of the channel. Therefore, the user has to
simply measure the width of the channel and then project that
amount from the point at which either trendline is broken.

It should always be kept in mind, however, that of the two
lines, the basic trendline is by far the more important and the
more reliable. The channel line is a secondary use of the trendline
technique. But the use of the channel line works often enough to
justify its inclusion in the chartist’s toolkit.

PERCENTAGE RETRACEMENTS

In all of the previous examples of uptrends and downtrends, the
reader has no doubt noticed that after a particular market move,
prices retrace a portion of the previous trend before resuming the
move in the original direction. These countertrend moves tend to
fall into certain predictable percentage parameters. The best
known application of the phenomenon is the 50% retracernent.
Let's say, for example, that a market is trending higher and trav-
els from the 100 level to the 200 level. Very often, the subsequent
reaction retraces about half of the prior ‘move, to about the 150
level, before upward momentum is regained. This is a very well-
known market tendency and happens quite frequently. Also,
these percentage retracements apply to any degree of trend—
major, secondary, and near term.

Besides the 50% retracement, there are minimum and max-
imum percentage parameters that are also widely recognized—the
one-third and the two-thirds retracements. In other words, the price
trend can be divided into thirds. Usually, a minimum retracement
is about 33% and a maximum about 66%. What this means is that,
in a correction of a strong trend, the market usually retraces at least
a third of the previous move. This is very useful information for a
number of reasons. If a trader is looking for a buying area under
the market, he or she can just compute a 33-50% zone on the chart
and use that price zone as a general frame of reference for buying
opportunities. (See Figures 4.20a and b.)


86 Chapter 4

2006
190
180
170
WOO J me mm mmr
150 —— 50% Retracement __
uw | Jf)

1300 Do fe ee
120
110
100

Figure 4.20a Prices often retrace about half of the prior trend before
resuming in the original direction. This example shows a 50% retracement.
The minimum retracement is one-third and the maximum, two-thirds of the
prior trend.

The maximum retracement parameter is 66%, which
becomes an especially critical area. If the prior trend is to be main-
tained, the correction must stop at the two-thirds point. This then
becomes a relatively low risk buying area in an uptrend or selling
area in a downtrend. If prices move beyond the two-thirds point,
the odds then favor a trend reversal rather than just a retrace-
ment. The move usually then retraces the entire 100% of the prior
trend.

You may have noticed that the three percentage retrace-
ment parameters we've mentioned so far—50%, 33%, and 66%—
are taken right from the original Dow Theory. When we get to the
Elliott Wave Theory and Fibonacci ratios, we will see that follow-
ers of that approach use percentage retracements of 38% and
62%. I prefer to combine both approaches for a minimum retrace-
ment zone of 33-38% and a maximum zone of 62-66%. Some
technicians round off these numbers even further to arrive at a
40-60% retracement zone.


Basic Concepts of Trend 87

03/12/97 (*DWI1 X) Dow Industrials

uf ai

38%

‘li

i 62%
| % Retracements
Ww 7 x 5 o

% y

a
Figure 4.20b = The three horizontal lines mark the 38%, 50%, and 62%
retracement levels measured from the April 1997 low to the August high. The
first decline fell to the 38% line, the second decline to the 62% line, and the
third near the 50% line. Most corrections will find support in the 38% to
50% retracement zones. The 38% and 62% lines are Fibonacci retracements
and are popular with chartists.

Students of W. D. Gann are aware that he broke down the
trend structure into eighths—!/g 2/g, 3/, 4/s, 5/s, %/e 7/8, 8/g.
However, even Gann attached special importance to the 3/g (38%),
4/, (50%), and 5/g (62%) retracement numbers and also felt it was
important to divide the trend into thirds—1/, (33%) and 2/3 (66%).

SPEED RESISTANCE LINES

Speaking of thirds, let’s touch on another technique that com-
bines the trendline with percentage retracements—speedlines. This
technique, developed by Edson Gould, is actually an adaptation


88 Chapter 4

of the idea of dividing the trend into thirds. The main difference
from the percentage retracement concept is that the speed resis-
tance lines (or speedlines) measure the rate of ascent or descent of
a trend (in other words, its speed).

To construct a bullish speedline, find the highest point in the
current uptrend. (See Figure 4.21a.) From that high point on the
chart, a vertical line is drawn toward the bottom of the chart to
where the trend began. That vertical line is then divided into thirds.
A trendline is then drawn from the beginning of the trend through
the two points marked off on the vertical line, representing the
one-third and two-thirds points. In a downtrend, just reverse the
process. Measure the vertical distance from the low point in the
downtrend to the beginning of the trend, and draw two lines from
the beginning of the trend through the one-third and two-thirds
points on the vertical line. (See Figures 4.21a and b.)

(2) 2/3 Speedline

{3) 1/3 Speedline

ql)

Figure 4.21a Examples of speed resistance lines in an uptrend. The verti-
cal distance from the peak to the beginning of the trend is divided into thirds.
Two trendlines are then drawn from point 1 through points 2 and 3. The upper
line is the 2/; speedline and the lower, the 1/3. The lines should act as support
during market corrections. When they’re broken, they revert to resistance lines
on bounces. Sometimes these speedlines intersect price action.


Basic Concepts of Trend 89

Figure 4.21b  Speedlines ina downtrend.

Each time a new high is set in an uptrend or a new low
in a downtrend, a new set of lines must be drawn (because there
is now a new high or low point). Because the speedlines are
drawn from the beginning of the trend to the one-third and
two-thirds points, those trendlines may sometimes move
through some of the price action. This is one case where trend-
lines are not drawn under lows or over highs, but actually
through the price action.

If an uptrend is in the process of correcting itself, the
downside correction will usually stop at the higher speedline (the
2/, speedline). If not, prices will drop to the lower speedline (the
1/, speedline). If the lower line is also broken, prices will probably
continue all the way to the beginning of the prior trend. In a
downtrend, the breaking of the lower line indicates a probable
rally to the higher line. If that is broken, a rally to the top of the
prior trend would be indicated.

As with all trendlines, speedlines reverse roles once they
are broken. Therefore, during the correction of an uptrend, if the
upper line (2/3 line) is broken and prices fall to the 1/3 line and
rally from there, that upper line becomes a resistance barrier. Only
when that upper line is broken would a signal be given that the
old highs will probably be challenged. The same principle holds
true in downtrends.


90 Chapter 4

GANN AND FIBONACCI FAN LINES

Charting software also allows the drawing of Gann and Fibonacci
fan lines. Fibonacci fan lines are drawn in the same fashion as the
speedline. Except that Fibonacci lines are drawn at 38% and 62%
angles. (We’ll explain where those 38% and 62% numbers come
from in Chapter 13, “Elliott Wave Theory.”) Gann lines (named
after the legendary commodity trader, W.D. Gann) are trendlines
drawn from prominent tops or bottoms at specific geometric
angles. The most important Gann line is drawn at a 45 degree angle
from a peak or trough. Steeper Gann lines can be drawn during an
uptrend at 633/, degree and 75 degree angles. Flatter Gann lines
can be drawn at 261/, and 15 degree lines. It’s possible to draw as
many as nine different Gann lines.

Gann and Fibonacci lines are used in the same way as
speedlines. They are supposed to provide support during down-
ward corrections. When one line is broken, prices will usually fall
to the next lower line. Gann lines are somewhat controversial.
Even if one of them works, you can’t be sure in advance which
one it will be. Some chartists question the validity of drawing geo-
metric trendlines at all.

INTERNAL TRENDLINES

These are variations of the trendline that don’t rely on extreme
highs or lows. Instead, internal trendlines are drawn through the
price action and connect as many internal peaks or troughs as
possible. Some chartists develop a good eye for this type of trend-
line and find them useful. The problem with internal trendlines is
that their drawing is very subjective; whereas the rules for draw-
ing of more traditional trendlines along the extreme highs and
lows are more exact. (See Figure 4.21c.)

REVERSAL DAYS

Another important building block is the reversal day. This particu-
lar chart formation goes by many names—the top reversal day,


Basic Concepts of Trend 91

08/10/95 (“DWI X) Dow Industriats 07/31/97

Daily Bar Chart

Example of Intemal Trendline

ananeah’ Ooi

Pegg TT a a rromenenanae*)

Figure 4.21¢ Internal trendlines are drawn through the price action
connecting as many highs and lows as possible. This internal trendline’
drawn along the early 1996 highs provided support a year later during the
spring of 1997.

the bottom reversal day, the buying or selling climax, and the key
reversal day. By itself, this formation is not of major importance.
But, taken in the context of other technical information, it can
sometimes be significant. Let's first define what a reversal day is.

A reversal day takes place either at a top or a bottom. The
generally accepted definition of a top reversal day is the setting of
a new high in an uptrend, followed by a lower close on the same
day. In other words, prices set a new high for a given upmove at
some point during the day (usually at or near the opening) then
weaken and actually close lower than the previous day's closing.
A bottom reversal day would be a new low during the day followed
by a higher close.

The wider the range for the day and the heavier the vol-
ume, the more significant is the signal for a possible near term


92 Chapter 4

trend reversal. Figures 4.22a-b show what both would look like on
a bar chart. Note the heavier volume on the reversal day. Also
notice that both the high and low on the reversal day exceed the
range of the previous day, forming an outside day. While an out-
side day is not a requirement for a reversal day, it does carry more
significance. (See Figure 4.22c.)

The bottom reversal day is sometimes referred to as a sell-
ing climax. This is usually a dramatic turnaround at the bottom of
a down move where all the discouraged longs have finally been
forced out of the market on heavy volume. The subsequent
absence of selling pressure creates a vacuum over the market,
which prices quickly rally to fill. The selling climax is one of the
more dramatic examples of the reversal day and, while it may not
mark the final bottom of a falling market, it usually signals that a
significant low has been seen.

wlll LL

Figure 4.22a Example of a Figure 4.22b Example of a
top reversal day. The heavier bottom reversal day. If volume is
the volume on the reversal day especially heavy, bottom reversals
and the wider the range, the are often referred to as “selling

more important it becomes. climaxes.”


Basic Concepts of Trend 93

psv2ae7 (‘DWI X) Dow Industrials 02/25/98

yi i
i! a uly he ah i
wt ny | I Y WW Va

Upside Reversal Day

t

Volume “1600004
Heavy Volume 420000

lionel dng btn

Figure 4.22c The chart action of October 28, 1997 was a classic exam-
ple of an upside reversal day or a “selling climax.” Prices opened sharply
lower and closed sharply higher. The unusually heavy volume bar for that
day added to its importance. Two less dramatic upside reversal days (see
arrows) also marked price bottoms.

Weekly and Monthly Reversals

This type of reversal pattern shows up on weekly and monthly
bar charts, and with much greater significance. On a weekly
chart, each bar represents the entire week’s range with the close
registered on Friday. An upside weekly reversal, therefore, would
occur when the market trades lower during the week, makes a
new low for the move, but on Friday closes above the previous
Friday’s close.

Weekly reversals are much more significant than daily
reversals for obvious reasons and are watched closely by chartists
as signaling important turning points. By the same token, month-
ly reversals are even more important.


94 Chapter 4

PRICE GAPS

Price gaps are simply areas on the bar chart where no trading has
taken place. In an uptrend, for example, prices open above the
highest price of the previous day, leaving a gap or open space on
the chart that is not filled during the day. In a downtrend, the
day's highest price is below the previous day’s low. Upside gaps are
signs of market strength, while downside gaps are usually signs of
weakness. Gaps can appear on long term weekly and monthly
charts and, when they do, are usually very significant. But they
are more commonly seen on daily bar charts.

Several myths exist concerning the interpretation of gaps.
One of the maxims often heard is that “gaps are always filled.”
This is simply not true. Some should be filled and others should-
n't. We'll also see that gaps have different forecasting implications
depending on which types they are and where they occur.
