
37. CONSENSUS AND COMMITMENT INDICATORS

147

It is not enough to know whether a certain group is short or long. Commercials
often short futures because many of them own physical commodities. Small traders
are usually long, reflecting their perennial optimism. To draw valid conclusions from
the CFTC reports, you need to compare current positions to their historical norms.

Legal Insider Trading
Officers and investors who hold more than 5 percent of the shares in a publicly
traded company must report their buying and selling to the Securities and Exchange
Commission. The SEC tabulates insider purchases and sales, and releases this data to
the public.
Corporate insiders have a long record of buying stocks when they’re cheap and
selling them high. Insider buying emerges after severe market drops, and insider selling accelerates when the market rallies and becomes overpriced.
Buying or selling by a single insider matters little: an executive may sell shares
to meet major personal expenses or he may buy them to exercise stock options.
Analysts who researched legal insider trading found that insider buying or selling
was meaningful only if more than three executives or large stockholders bought or
sold within a month. These actions reveal that something very positive or negative is
about to happen. A stock is likely to rise if three insiders buy in one month and to fall
if three insiders sell within a month.
Clusters of insider buying tend to have a better predictive value than clusters of
selling. That’s because insiders are willing to sell a stock for many reasons (diversification, buying a second home, sending a kid to college) but they are willing to buy
for one main reason—they expect their company’s stock to go up.

Short Interest
While the numbers of futures and options contracts held long and short is equal
by definition, in the stock market there is always a huge disparity between the two
camps. Most people, including professional fund managers, buy stocks, but very few
sell them short.
Among the data reported by exchanges is the number of shares being held short
for any stock. Since the absolute numbers vary a great deal, it pays to put them into
a perspective by comparing the number of shares held short to that stock’s float (the
total number of publicly owned shares available for trading). This number, “Short
Percent of Float,” tends to run about one or two percent. Another useful way to
look at short interest is by comparing it to the average daily volume. By doing this,
we ask a hypothetical question: if all shorts decided to cover, while all other buyers
stood aside and daily volume remained unchanged, how many days would it take for
them to cover and bring short interest down to zero? This “Days to Cover” number
normally oscillates between one and two days.
When planning to buy or short a stock, it pays to check its Short Percent of Float
and Days to Cover. If those are high, they show that the bearish side is overcrowded.

148

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

FIGURE 37.2â•… AAPL and GMCR shorting data. (Source: Shortsqueeze.com)

Short Interest and Days to Cover
Compare short interest data for two popular stocks on the day I’m editing this chapter.
“Short Percent of Float” is 1.86% for Apple, Inc. (AAPL), but nearly 26% for Green Mountain Coffee Roasters, Inc. (GMCR). “Days to Cover” are 0.9 for AAPL but over 15 for GMCR.
These numbers reflect much more aggressive shorting of GMCR. Not to forget, each and
every one of those shorts at some point will need to buy in order to cover his short position.
Perhaps savvy shorts know something very bad about GMCR, but what if its stock rallies even a little? Many bears will run for cover, and as they scramble to cover shorts, the
stock may soar. Whatever its long-term prospects, it could be sent flying in the near term.

A rally may scare those bears into panicky covering, and send the stock sharply higher.
That would be good for bulls but bad for bears.
Fear is a stronger emotion than greed. Bulls may look for bargains but try not to
overpay, while squeezed bears, facing unlimited losses, will pay any price to cover.
That’s why short-covering rallies tend to be especially sharp.
Whenever you look for a stock to buy, check its Short Percent of Float and Days
to Cover. The usual, normal readings don’t provide any great information, but the
deviations from the norm often deliver useful insights (Figure 37.2).
High shorting numbers mark any stock as a dangerous short. By extension, if your
indicators suggest buying a stock, its high short interest becomes an additional positive factor—there is more fuel for a rally. It makes sense for swing traders to include
the data on shorting when selecting which of several stocks to buy or sell short.
I always review these numbers when working up a potential trade.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 7

Trading Systems

A

system is a set of rules for finding, entering, and exiting trades. Every serious
trader has one or more systems. Compare this to a surgeon who has systems
for performing operations. He doesn’t waste time and energy deciding whether to
order anesthesia, where to make the cut, or how to find the sick organ. He follows a
well-established routine, which leaves him free to think about strategic issues, finesse
his technique, or deal with any complications.
Some people use strictly defined systems that leave very little room for personal
judgment—we call them mechanical traders. Others use systems that leave plenty
of room for personal decisions—we call them discretionary traders. There is a very
thoughtful discussion on matching one’s personality type to various trading styles in
Richard Weissman’s book Mechanical Trading Systems. Whatever approach you take,
the key advantage of any system is that you design it when the markets are closed
and you feel calm. A system becomes your anchor of rational behavior amidst the
turbulence of the market.
It goes without saying that a proper system is written down. This needs to be
done because it’s easy to forget some essential steps when stressed by live markets.
Dr. Atul Gawande in his remarkable book The Checklist Manifesto makes a convincing
case for using checklists to raise performance levels in a large variety of demanding
endeavors, from surgery and construction to trading.
A mechanical trader develops a set of rules, back-tests them on historical data,

and then puts his system on autopilot. Going forward, his software starts flashing
orders for entries, target, and stops, and a mechanical trader is supposed to
149

150

TRADING SYSTEMS

place them exactly as shown. Whether he’ll stick to his plan or attempt to tweak
or override those signals is another story, but that’s how the system is supposed
to work.
An amateur feels relieved that a mechanical system, either his own or purchased
from a vendor, will relieve him from the stress of decision making. Unfortunately,
market conditions keep changing, and mechanical systems eventually get out of gear
and start losing money. The market is not a mechanical entity that follows the laws
of physics. It is a huge crowd of people acting in accordance with imperfect laws of
mass psychology. Mechanical methods can help, but trading decisions must take psychology into account.
A professional trader with a mechanical system continues to monitor its performance like a hawk. He knows the difference between a normal drawdown and a
period when a system goes out of gear and has to be shelved. A professional trader
can afford to use a mechanical system precisely because he is capable of discretionary trading! A mechanical system is an action plan, but some degree of judgment is
always required, even with the best and most reliable plans.
A discretionary trader approaches each day in the markets afresh. He tends to

examine more factors than a mechanical trader, weigh them differently at different
times, and be more attuned to changes in current market behavior. A good discretionary system, while giving you plenty of freedom, includes several inviolate rules,
especially in the area of risk management.
Both approaches have pluses and minuses. On the plus side, mechanical trading
can be less emotionally tense. You build your system, turn it on, and go about your
life without watching every tick. On the minus side, these living and breathing markets have a sneaky way of changing their tunes and behaving differently from how
they did when you built your system.
The main plus of discretionary trading is the openness to fresh opportunities. Its
biggest minus is that people’s judgment tends to slip under stress, when they become
excited by greed or frightened by sharp moves.
In my experience, mechanical traders tend to deliver more steady results, but the
most successful traders use discretionary methods.Your choice is likely to depend on
your temperament.That’s how we make some of our most important decisions in life—
where to live, what career to pursue, whom to marry. Our key choices stem from the
innermost core of our personalities rather than rational thought. In trading, cooler
and more obsessional people tend to gravitate toward mechanical trading, while the
more swashbuckling types turn to discretionary trading.
Paradoxically, at the high end of performance, these two approaches begin to
converge. Advanced traders combine mechanical and discretionary methods. For example, a friend who is a died-in-the-wool mechanical trader uses three systems in
his hedge fund but keeps rebalancing capital allocated to each of them. He shifts millions of dollars from System A to System B or C, and back again. In other words, his
discretionary decisions augment his systematic trading. I am a discretionary trader,
but follow several strict rules that prohibit me from buying above the upper channel
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

38. SYSTEM TESTING, PAPER TRADING, AND THE THREE KEY DEMANDS FOR EVERY TRADE

151

line, shorting below the lower channel line, or putting on trades against the Impulse
system (described below). These mechanical rules reduce the number of bad discretionary trades.
Much of this book deals with discretionary trading, but you can use the tools
described in it for mechanical trading. I wrote this book to help both types of
traders.

■■38. System Testing, Paper Trading, and

the Three Key Demands for Every Trade

Before trading real money with a system, you need to test it, whether you developed
it yourself or bought it from a vendor. This can be done in one of two ways. One is
backtesting: apply your system’s rules to a stretch of historical data, usually several
years’ worth. The other is forward-testing: trade small positions with real money.
Serious traders begin with backtesting, and if its results look good, switch to forward-testing; if that works well, they gradually increase position size.
Looking at printouts of historical results is a nice start, but don’t let good numbers lull you into a false sense of security. The profit-loss ratio, the longest winning
and losing streaks, the maximum drawdown, and other parameters may appear
objective, but past results don’t guarantee the system will hold up in the real world
of trading.
You may see a very nice printout, but what if, once you begin to trade real money,
that system delivers five losses in a row? Nothing in your paper testing will have prepared you for that, but it happens all the time.You grit your teeth and put on another
trade. Another loss.Your drawdown is deepening, and then the system flashes a new
signal. Will you put on the next trade? Suddenly, an impressive printout looks like a
very thin reed on which to hang the future of your account.
There is a cottage industry of programmers who back-test systems for a fee. Some
traders, too suspicious to disclose their “sure-fire methods,” spend months learning
to use testing software. In the end, only one kind of backtesting prepares you to
trade—manual testing. It is slow, time-consuming, and cannot be automated, but
it’s the only method that comes close to modeling real decision making. It consists
of going through historical data one day at a time, scrupulously writing down your
trading signals for the day ahead, and then clicking one bar forward and recording
new signals and trades for the next day.
Begin by downloading daily price and volume data for your trading vehicle for a
minimum of two years (for futures you may use continuous contracts). Open a chart
and, without looking, swing immediately to its very beginning. Open your spreadsheet, write down your system’s rules at the top of the page, and create columns for
dates, prices, and signals. Open two windows in your analytic program—one for
your weekly chart and its indicators, the other for the daily chart. The two most important keyboard keys for testing are <Alt> and <Tab> because they let you switch
between windows and programs.

152

TRADING SYSTEMS

As you click forward, one day at a time, trends and trading ranges will slowly
unfold and challenge you. At that point, you’ll be doing much more than testing a set
of rules. Moving ahead one day at a time will test and improve your decision-making
skills. This one-bar-at-a-time testing is vastly superior to what you can get from
backtesting software.
How will you deal with gap openings, when the market leaps above your buy level
or drops below your stop at the opening bell? What about limit moves in futures?
Clicking forward one day at a time and writing down your signals and decisions will
get you as close to real trading as you can without risking cash. It’ll keep you focused
on the raw right edge of the market. You’ll never get that from a neat printout of
a system test. Manual testing will improve your ability not only to understand the
markets but to make decisions.
If one-bar-at-a-time testing shows positive results, start trading small positions
with real money. These days, with brokerage commissions as low as $1 for buying
or selling 100 shares, you can test your indicators and systems while risking tiny
amounts. Be sure to keep good records, and if your real-money results continue
positive, start increasing the size of your trades. Do it in steps, all the way up to your
normal trade size.

Paper Trading
Paper trading means recording your buy and sell decisions and tracking them like
real trades, but with no money at risk. Beginners may start out paper trading, but
most people turn to it after getting beat up by the markets. Some even alternate between real and paper trades and can’t understand why they seem to make money on
paper but lose whenever they put on a real trade. There are three reasons.
First, people are less emotional with paper trades, and good decisions are
easier to make with no money at risk. Second, in paper trades, you always get
perfect fills, unlike real trading. Third and most important, good trades often
look murky when you consider them. The easy-looking ones are more likely to
lead to problems. A nervous beginner jumps into obvious-looking trades and loses money, but paper trades the more challenging ones. It goes without saying that
hopping between real and paper trades is sheer nonsense. You either do the one or
the other.
Psychology plays a huge role in how your trades turn out, and that’s where paper
trading fails to deliver. Pretend-trading with no money at risk is like sailing on a
pond—it does little to prepare you for real sailing on a stormy sea.
There is only one good reason to paper trade—to test your discipline as well as
your system.
If you can download your data at the end of each day, do your homework, write
down your orders for the day ahead, watch the opening and record your entries,
then track your market each day, adjusting your profit targets and stops—if you can
do all of this for several months in a row, recording your actions, without skipping
a day—then you have the discipline to trade real money. An impulsive person who
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

38. SYSTEM TESTING, PAPER TRADING, AND THE THREE KEY DEMANDS FOR EVERY TRADE

153

trades for entertainment will not be able to paper trade that way because it requires
real work.
You may open an account with one of several websites set up for paper trading.
Enter your orders, check whether they have been triggered, and write down those
“fills.” Enter all paper trades in your spreadsheet and your trading diary. If you have
the willpower to repeat this process daily for several months, then you have the discipline for successful real trading.
Still, there is no substitute for trading real money because even small amounts rev
up emotions more than any paper trade. You’ll learn much more from even small
real trades than from months of paper trading.
In recent years, I’ve had a front row seat watching traders progress from paper
trading to profitable real-money trading. In SpikeTrade.com, we reduce fees for
members who contribute picks, creating an incentive to do homework. The discipline of submitting a weekly trade plan with entry, target, and stop gets people
into the habit of being organized and focused. As their picks improve, they start
earning performance bonuses in our weekly competition. At that point, I may receive an e-mail saying that while they’re doing well in the competition, their private
trading lags behind. I tell them they’re on the right track and to continue what
they’re doing. Sure enough, several months later their new skills migrate into real
trading. Now they may write that their private trading is better than their performance in the competition. Sure—I reply—it’s because you pay more attention to
real-money trades!
Speaking of trade setups, it’s essential to write down all relevant numbers before
you enter a trade.You’re more objective before you put any money at risk; once in a
trade, you’ll be tempted to give it “more room to run.” That’s how losers turn small
drawdowns into disasters. I once consulted a man who refused to take a $200 loss
until it ran into a $98,000 wipeout.
We’ll focus on risk and money management in a later chapter when I discuss the
concept of â•›“The Iron Triangle of risk control.” At this point, I only want to make
clear that risk management is the essential part of serious trading. Forget the days
when you would look at the ceiling and say, “I’ll trade 500 shares,” “I’ll trade a thousand shares,” or any other arbitrary number. Later in this book, you’ll learn a simple
formula for sizing your trades, based on your account and risk tolerance.
At the time of this writing, I have three strategies that I trade. My favorite is a false
breakout with a divergence. My second choice is a pullback to value during a powerful trend—that’s the strategy of the trade shown on the screen (Figure 38.1). Last, I
occasionally “fade an extreme”—bet on a reversal of an overstretched trend. Each of
these strategies has its rules, but the key point is this—I’ll only take a trade that fits
one of them. No chasing of random cars for this old dog!

Three Key Demands for Every Trade
There are three essential angles that must be considered for every planned trade.
We’ll briefly review them here and then elaborate in the chapters on specific trading

154

TRADING SYSTEMS

A
A
B

C

FIGURE 38.1â•… Three key demands for every planned trade.(Source: SpikeTrade.com)

This is a screenshot of a trade plan I drew several days prior to writing this chapter (you
can see how I implemented it in Chapter 55). Notice several essential features that belong
in every trade plan:
A. Trade setup—write down the three key numbers for every trade: your entry, target,
and stop. Before entering the market you need to decide how much you’ll pay, how
much you’ll risk, and how much you expect to gain. The ratio of potential reward
to risk should normally be better than two to one. The only time to deviate from
this rule is when technical signals are especially strong. Of course, don’t fudge your
target to turn a borderline trade into an acceptable one. Your target needs to be
realistic.
B. Risk management—decide in advance how many dollars you’re prepared to risk on
this trade. Divide that amount by your risk per share—the distance from your entry to
your stop. This will give you the number of shares you may trade.
C. Last but not least, every single trade must be based on a specific system or strategy.
“It looks good to me” isn’t a system! It’s easy to become excited after hearing a stock
tip or seeing a runaway trend, but the days of chasing stocks like a pup chases cars
are over. If you want to trade for a living, you need to define your trade plans, strategies, or systems—call them what you like—and enter only those trades that fit their
criteria.

systems and risk management. The discipline of these three demands is essential for
anyone serious about trading.

■■39. Triple Screen Trading System
I developed this system and first presented it to the public in an April 1986 article
in Futures magazine. I’ve been using it for trading since 1985, and it stood the test of
time. I continue to tweak it, adding or changing minor features, but its basic principle remains unchanged: making trading decisions using a sequence of timeframes
and indicators.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

39. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM

155

Triple Screen applies three tests or screens to every trade. Many trades that seem
attractive at first are rejected by one or another screen.The trades that pass the Triple
Screen test are much more likely to succeed.
The Triple Screen combines trend-following indicators on long-term charts with
counter-trend oscillators on the intermediate charts. It uses special entry techniques
for buying or selling short as well as tight money management rules. The Triple
Screen is more than a trading system: it is a method, a style of trading.

Trend-Following Indicators and Oscillators
Beginners often look for a magic bullet—a single indicator for making money. If
they get lucky for a while, they feel as if they discovered the royal road to riches.
When the magic dies, amateurs give back their profits with interest and look for another magic tool.The markets are too complex to be analyzed with a single indicator.
Different indicators give contradictory signals in the same market.Trend-following
indicators rise during uptrends and give buy signals, while oscillators become overbought and give sell signals. Trend-following indicators turn down in downtrends and
give signals to sell short but oscillators become oversold and give buy signals.
Trend-following indicators are profitable when markets are moving but lead to
whipsaws in trading ranges. Oscillators are profitable in trading ranges, but give
premature and dangerous signals when the markets begin to trend. Traders say: “The
trend is your friend,” and “Let your profits run.” They also say: “Buy low, sell high.”
But why sell if the trend is up? And how high is high?
Some traders try to average out the signals of trend-following indicators and oscillators, but those votes are easy to rig. Just as Republicans and Democrats in the United
States keep redrawing electoral districts to create “safe” seats, traders keep selecting
indicators that deliver the votes they want to see. If you use more trend-following
tools, the vote will go one way, and if you use more oscillators, it’ll go the other way.
A trader can always find a group of indicators telling him what he wants to hear.
The Triple Screen trading system is designed to filter out the disadvantages of
trend-following indicators and oscillators, while preserving their strengths.
