
Since the technical approach is based on the theory that the price is a
reflection of mass psychology, or the crowd in action, it attempts to forecast
future price movements on the assumption that crowd psychology moves
between panic, fear, and pessimism on one hand arid confidence, excessive
optimism, and greed on the other. As discussed here, the art of technical
analysis is concerned with identifying these changes at an early phase, since
these swings in emotion take time to accomplish. Studying these market

trends enables technically oriented investors and traders to buy or sell with
a degree of confidence in the principle that once a trend is set in motion,
it will perpetuate itself.

Classification of Price Movements

Price movements may be classed as primary, intermediate, and short term.
Major movements, sometimes called primary or qyclical, typically work



x
RM!

'
ey:
:

N

Technical Analysis Explained

\ themselves out in a period of 1 to 3 years and are a reflection of investors’
/attitudes toward the business cycle. Intermediate movements usually develop

over a period of 6 weeks to as many months, sometimes longer. Although
not of prime importance, they are nevertheless useful to identify. It is clearly
important to distinguish between an intermediate reaction in a bull market
and the first downleg of a bear market, for example. Short-term movements,
which last less than 3 or 4 weeks, tend to be random in nature. Secular or
very long term trends embracing several primary trend movements and

intraday trends lasting a few minutes to a few hours round out the Ppossi-
bilities for price movements.

Discounting Mechanism
of the Market

All price movements have one thing in common: They are a reflection of the trend
in the hopes, fears, knowledge, optimism, and greed of market participants, The sum
total of these emotions is expressed in the price level, which is, as Garfield
Drew noted, “never what they [stocks] are worth, but what people think they
are worth,”!

This process of market evaluation was well expressed by an editorial in
The Wall Street Journal:?

The stock market consists of everyone who is “in the market” buy-
ing or selling shares at a given moment, plus everyone who is not
“in the market,” but might be if conditions were right. In this sense,
the stock market is potentially everyone with any personal savings.

It is this broad base of participation and potential participation
that gives the market its strength as an economic indicator and as
an allocator of scarce capital. Movements in and out of a stock, or
in and out of the market, are made on the margin as each investor
digests new information. This allows the market to incorporate all
available information in a way that no one person could hope to.
Since its judgments are the consensus of nearly everyone, it tends
to outperform any single person or group... . [The market] mea-

‘Garfield Drew, New Methods for Profit in the Stock Market, Metcalfe Press, Boston 1968, p. 18.
*The Wall Street Journal, Oct. 20, 1977. Reprinted by permission of the Wall Street Journal.
Copyright Dow Jones & Co., Inc. 1977. All rights reserved.

sures the after-tax profits of all the companies whose shares are
listed in the market, and it measures these cumulative profits so far
into the future one might as well say the horizon is infinite. This
cumulative mass of after-tax profits is then, as the economists will
say, “discounted back to present value” by the market. A man does
the same thing when he pays more for one razor blade than
another, figuring he’ll get more or easier shaves in the future with
the higher-priced one, and figuring its present value on that basis.
This future flow of earnings will ultimately be affected by busi-
ness conditions everywhere on earth. Little bits of information are
constantly flowing into the market from around the world as well
as throughout the United States, and the market is much more
efficient in reflecting these bits of news than are government sta-
tisticians. The market relates this information to how much
American business can earn in the future. Roughly speaking, the
general level of the market is the present value of the capital stock
of the U.S.
oy inplles that investors and traders are looking ahead and taking
action so that they can liquidate at a higher price when the anticipated news
or development actually takes place. If expectations concerning the devel-
opmentare better or worse than originally thought, then investors sell either
sooner or later through the market mechanism, depending on the partic-
ular circumstances. Thus, the familiar maxim sell on good news applies on
when the good news is right on or below the market's (that is, the investors )
expectations. If the news is good, but not as favorable as expected, a quick
reassessment will take place, and the market (other things being equal) will
fall. If the news is better than anticipated, the possibilities are obviously more
favorable. The reverse will, of course, be true in a declining market. This
process explains the paradox of equity markets peaking when economic con-

The principle of discounting is not confined to equities alone, but can be
applied to any freely traded entity.
rae uN
2

Pie



Technical Analysis Explained

The reaction of any market to news events can be most instructive because
if the market, as reflected by price, ignores supposedly bullish news and sells
off, it is certain that the event was well discounted, that is, already built into
the price mechanism, and the reaction should therefore be viewed bearishly.
If a market reacts more favorably to bad news than might be expected, this
in turn should be interpreted as a positive sign. There is a good deal of wis-
dom in the saying, “A bear argument known is a bear argument understood.”

The Financial Markets
and the Business Cycle

The major movements in bond, stock, and commodity prices are caused by
long-term trends in the emotions of the investing public. These emotions
reflect the anticipated level and growth rate of future economic activity, and
the attitude of investors toward that activity.

For example, there is a definite link between primary movements in the
stock market and cyclical movements in the economy because trends in cor-
porate profitability are an integral part of the business cycle. If basic eco-
nomic forces alone influence the stock market, the task of determining the
changes in primary movements would be relatively simple. In practice, it is
not, and this is due to several factors.

First, changes in the direction of the economy can take some time to mate-
Tialize. As the cycle if olde: other psychological considerations, such as
Political developments or purely internal factors like a speculative buying
wave or selling pressure from margin calls, can affect the equity market and
result in misleading rallies and reactions of 5 to 10 percent or more.

Second, changes in the market usually precede changes in the economy
by 6 to 9 months, but the lead time can sometimes be far shorter or longer.
In 1921 and 1929, the economy turned before the market did.

Pe
Third, even when an economic recovery is in the middle of jts cycle, ¢~ %

doubts about its durability often arise. When these doubts coincide with |

political or other adverse developments, sharp and confusing counter- “*

cyclical price movements usually develop.

Fourth, profits may increase, but investors’ attitudes toward those profits
may change. For example, in the spring of 1946 the DJIA stood at 22 times
the price/earnings ratio. By 1948, the comparable ratio was 9.5 when mea-
sured against 1947 earnings. In this period, profits had almost doubled and
price/earnings ratios had fallen, but stock prices were lower.

Changes in bond and commodity prices are linked much more directly
to economic activity than are stock market prices, but even here, psycho-

yee

Vo

logical influences on price are very important. Currencies do not fit en ae
business cycle analysis. Although data reported several months sie es ct
are very good at explaining currency movements, technical analysis as -
most useful for timely forecasts and the identification of emerging trends.

Technical Analysis and
Trend Determination

.¥ Since technical analysis involves a study of the action of markets, it is =
D concerned with the difficult and subjective tasks of forecasting trends in the

economy, or assessing the attitudes of investors toward those a,

Technical analysis tries to identify turning points in the market's assessmen:
ctors.

ee mace analysis can be applied successfully to any freely weer

entity such as stocks, market averages, commodities, bonds, SE ies, a

so on, I will frequently use the term security as a generic on embracing al

of these entities, thereby avoiding unnecessary repetition.

The approach taken here differs from that found in standard ee
tions of technical analysis. The various techniques used to determine tren
and identify their reversals will be examined in Part L “Trend-Determining
Techniques,” which deals with price patterns, trendlines, moving averages

mentum, and so on. ;

ee aie Structure,” is principally concerned with analysis of bee
U.S. equity market, although examples using other securities are ae ec
to demonstrate that the principles are universally applicable. All ns
required are the appropriate data. This section offers a more detailed exp! ~
nation of the various indicators and indexes. It also shows how they can
combined to build a framework for determining the quality of the internal
structure of the market. A study of market character is a cornerstone of tech-
nical analysis, since reversals of price trends in the major averages are —
always preceded by latent strength or weakness in the market structure. Jus'
as a careful driver does not judge the performance of a car from the



10 Technical Analysis Explained

speedometer alone, so technical analysis looks further than the price trends
of the popular averages. Trends of investor confidence are responsible for
price movements, and this emotional aspect is examined from four view-
points or dimensions, namely, price, time, volume, and breadth.

Changes in prices reflect changes in investor attitude, and price, the first
dimension, indicates the level of that change.

Time, the second dimension, measures the recurrence and length of cycles
in investor psychology. Changes in confidence go through distinct cycles,
some long and some short, as investors swing from excesses of optimism
toward deep pessimism. The degree of price movement in the market is usu-
ally a function of the time element. The longer it takes for investors to move
from a bullish to a bearish extreme, the greater the ensuing price change
is likely to be. The examples in the two chapters on time relate mainly to
the U.S. stock market, but much of this material is equally valid for com-
modities, bonds, or currencies.

Volume, the third dimension, reflects the intensity of changes in investor
attitudes. For example, the level of enthusiasm implied by a price rise on
low volume is not nearly as strong as that implied by a similar price advance
accompanied by very high volume.

The fourth dimension, breadth, measures the extent of the emotion. This
is important because as long as stocks are advancing on a broad front, the
trend in favorable emotion is dispersed among most stocks and industries,
indicating a healthy and broad economic recovery and a widely favorable
attitude toward stocks in particular. On the other hand, when interest has
narrowed to a few blue-chip stocks, the quality of the trend has deteriorated,
and a continuation of the bull market is highly suspect.

‘Technical analysis measures these psychological dimensions in a number
of ways. Most indicators monitor two or more aspects simultaneously; for
instance, a simple price chart measures both price (on the vertical axis) and
time (on the horizontal axis). Similarly, an advance/decline line measures
breadth and time.

Part il, “Other Aspects of Market Behavior,” deals with more specialized
aspects. These include interest rates and the stock market, sentiment, auto-
mated trading systems, individual stock selection, and technical analysis as
applied to global markets.

Conclusion

Financial markets move in trends caused by the changing attitudes and
expectations of investors with regard to the business cycle. Since investors
continue to repeat the same type of behavior from cycle to cycle, an under-

11
The Market Cycle Model

standing of the historical relationships between certain price averages and
market indicators can be used to identify turning points. No sing] cin ice
tor can ever be expected to signal all trend reversals, so it is essential to

mber of them together to build up a consensus. ; a
‘ ‘This approach is by no means infallible, but a careful, patient, and objec
tive use of the principles of technical analysis can put the odds of suce s
very much in favor of the investor or trader who incorporates these prin
ples into an overall strategy.



PART |
Trend-

Techniques



| The Market
Cycle Model

In the Introduction, technical analysis was defined as the art of identifying
a trend reversal at a relatively early stage and riding on that trend until the
weight of the evidence shows or proves that the trend has reversed. In order
to identify a reversal, we must first know what a trend is. This chapter
explains and categorizes the various trends, and concludes with a discussion
of one of the basic trend-determining techniques, peak-and-trough pro-
gression. It is one of the simplest, and perhaps the most effective, trend-iden-
tification techniques used in technical analysis and forms a building block
for many of the other techniques discussed later.

Three Important Trends -

A trend is a time measurement of the direction in price levels covering dif-
ferent time spans. There are many trends, but the three that are most widely
followed are primary, intermediate, and short term.

Primary

The primary trend generally lasts between 9 months and 2 years and is a
reflection of investors’ attitudes toward unfolding fundamentals in the busi-
ness cycle. The business cycle extends statistically from trough to trough for
approximately 3.6 years, so it follows that rising and falling primary trends
(bull and bear markets) last for 1 to 2 years. Since building up takes longer
than tearing down, bull markets generally last longer than bear markets.

15



16 Part 1: Trend-Determining Techniques

_ The primary trend cycle is operative for bonds, equities, and commodi-
ties. Primary trends also apply to currencies, but since currencies reflect
investors’ attitudes toward the interrelationship of two different economies
an analysis of currency relationships does not fit neatly into the business
cycle approach discussed in Chapter 2.

The primary trend is illustrated in Fig. 1-1 by the thickest line. In an ide-
alized situation, the primary uptrend (bull market) is the same size as the
primary downtrend (bear market), but in reality, of course, their magnitudes
are different. Because it is very important to position both (short-term)
trades and (long-term) investments in the direction of the main trend, a sig-

nificant of this book i ith i ifyi i i
tote ape is concerned with identifying reversals in the pri-

Intermediate

Anyone who has looked at a price chart will notice that prices do not move
in a straight line. A primary upswing is interrupted by several reactions along
the way. These countercyclical trends within the confines of a primary bull
ene are known as intermediate price movements. They last anywhere from

weeks to as long as 9 months, sometimes even longer, but rarely shorter.
Intermediate-term trends of the stock market are examined in greater
detail in Chapter 4, and are shown as a thin solid line in Fig. 1-1.

9 months to 2 years

Approximately 4 years

»
>

The Market Cycle Model 17

It is important to have an idea of the direction and maturity of the pri-
mary trend, but an analysis of intermediate trends is also helpful for improv-
ing success rates in trading, as well as for determining when the primary
movement may have run its course. “

Short Term

Short-term trends typically last from 2 to 4 weeks, sometimes shorter and
sometimes longer. They interrupt the course of the intermediate cycle, just
as the intermediate-term trend interrupts primary price movements. Short-
term trends are shown in the market cycle model (see Fig. 1-1) as a dotted
line. They are usually influenced by random news events and are far more
difficult to identify than their intermediate or primary counterparts.

The Market Cycle Model

It is apparent by now that the price level of any market is influenced simul-
taneously by several different trends, and it is important to understand which
type is being monitored. For example, if a reversal in a short-term trend has
just taken place, a much smaller price movement may be expected than if
the primary trend had reversed.

Long-term investors are principally concerned with the direction of the
primary trend, and thus it is important for them to have some perspective
on the maturity of the prevailing bull or bear market. However, long-term
investors must also be aware of intermediate term and, to a lesser extent, short-term
trends. This is because an important step in the analysis is an examination
and understanding of the relationship between short- and intermediate-
term trends, and how they affect the primary trend. Also, if it is concluded
that the long-term trend has just reversed to the upside, it may pay to wait
before committing capital because the short-term trend is overextended on
the upside. A lack of knowledge of the short-term trend’s position by an
investor could therefore prove costly at the margin.

Short-term traders are principally concerned with smaller movements in
price, but they also need to know the direction of the intermediate and primary
trends. This is because surprises occur on the upside in a bull market and

fechnical Principle. As a general rule, the longer the time
in of the trend, :the easier it is to identify reversal. << 20°,



18 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

on the downside in a bear market. In other words, rising short-term trends
within the confines of a bull market are likely to be much greater in mag-
nitude than short-term downtrends and vice versa. A trading loss usually hap-
pens because the trader is positioned in a countercyclical position against
the main trend. In effect, all market participants need to have some kind of work-
ing knowledge of all three trends, although the emphasis will depend on
whether their orientation comes from an investment or a short-term trad-
ing perspective.

Intraday Trends

In recent years, computers and real-time trading have enabled traders to
identify hourly and even tick-by-tick movements. The principles of technical
analysis apply equally to these very short-term movements and are just as valid. There
are two main differences. First, reversals in the intraday charts have only a
very short term implication and are not significant for longer-term price
reversals. Second, extremely short-term price movements are much more
influenced by psychology and instant reactions to news events than are
longer-term ones. Decisions therefore have a tendency to be emotional,
knee-jerk reactions. Intraday price action is also more susceptible to manip-
ulation. As a consequence, price data used in very short-term charts are
much more erratic and generally less reliable than those that appear in the
longer-term charts.

The Secular Trend

The primary trend consists of several intermediate cycles, but the secular,
or very long-term, trend is constructed from a number of primary trends.
This super cycle, or long wave, extends over a substantially greater period,
usually lasting well over 10 years, and often as long as 25 years. It is discussed
more fully in Chapter 2. A diagram. of the interrelationship between a sec-
ular and a primary trend is shown in Fig. 1-2.

It is certainly very helpful to understand the direction of the secular trend.
Just as the primary trend influences the magnitude of the intermediate-term
rally relative to the countercyclical reaction, so the secular trend influences
the magnitude and duration ofa primary trend rally or reaction. For exam-
ple, in a rising secular trend, primary bull markets will be of greater mag-
nitude than primary bear markets. In a secular downtrend, bear markets will
be more powerful and will take longer to unfold than bull markets.

The Market Cycle Model =
Secular uptrend Secular downtrend
10-25 years 10-25 years

Beor markets ore longer in

Bull markets ore longer in secular, Gown phase

‘seculor up phase
Figure 1-2 The relationship between the secular and primary trends.

Peak-and-Trough Progression

ical analysis, as pointed out before, is the art of identifying a (price)

. em foe ae weight of the evidence. As in a court of law, a
trend is presumed innocent until proven guilty. The evidence is the objec-
tive element in technical analysis. It consists of a series of scientifically
derived indicators or techniques that work well mostof the time in the trend-
identification process. The art consists of combining these indicators into
an overall picture and recognizing when that picture resembles a market

T trough.

sceniiaptent use of computers has led to the development of some at
sophisticated trend-identification techniques in market analysis. Some o!

these indicators work reasonably well, but most do not. The continual search
for the “Holy Grail,” or perfect indicator, will undoubtedly continue, but it
is unlikely that such a technique will ever be discovered. Even if it were, news
of its discovery would soon be disseminated and the indicator would grad-

discounted. ,

ec o quest for sophisticated mathematical techniques, some of the sim-
plest and most basic techniques of technical analysis are often overlooked.
One simple, but basic technique that has been underused is peak-and-



rr ee

20 Part |: Trend-Determining Techniques

i} trough progression (see Chart 1-1), which relates to Charles Dow’s original
observation that a rising market moves in a series of waves, each rally and
reaction being higher than its predecessor. When the series of rising peaks
and troughs is interrupted, a trend reversal is signaled. To explain this
approach, Dow used an analogy with the ripple effect of waves on a seashore.
He pointed out that just as it was possible for someone on the beach to iden-
tify the turning of the tide by a reversal of receding wave action at low tide,
