
PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

51

in numbers. Glibly and routinely offering “great‑outlook‑for‑the‑U.S.” patter
to the investing public, they perhaps gave little thought to its accuracy.
The problems afflicting analysts’ recommendations were reduced somewhat
after the stock market had peaked. Some firms voluntarily instituted new rules
requiring that their analysts really make sell recommendations. Because of
Regulation FD, imposed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in
October 2000, analysts who had been critical of a company could no longer be
excluded from information meetings, which now had to be open to the general
public. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 mandated, among other things, that
research reports by analysts not be subjected to prepublication clearance by
persons involved with investment banking, that there not be any retaliation
against analysts whose research reports conflicted with an investment banking business, and that firms set up informational partitions between their
investment banking and securities analysis divisions. In 2003, the Securities
and Exchange Commission announced a $1.4 billion Global Analyst Research
Settlement for ten of the top investment firms in the United States, which
were accused of offering their customers deliberately biased analysis with the
aim of promoting their investment banking business. Of this sum, $80 million was earmarked for an investor education program. Analyst reports also
started to disclose the percentage of sell-neutral-buy recommendations to
provide context for investors reading the reports. This settlement appears to
have reduced the optimistic bias in earnings forecasts that existed during the
Millennium Boom, not only in the United States, but also, because of legal
spillovers, in many countries.19

The Expansion of Defined Contribution Pension Plans
Changes over time in the nature of employee pension plans during the
Millennium Boom encouraged people to learn about, and eventually accept,
stocks as investments. Although these changes did not inherently favor stocks
over other investments for retirement, they did—by forcing people to make
explicit choices among their retirement investments, choices that previously
were made for them—work in the direction of encouraging investment in
stocks. Making such choices taught people about stocks and increased their
level of familiarity with them.
The most revolutionary change in these institutions in the United States was
the expansion of defined contribution pension plans at the expense of defined
benefit plans. An important milestone came in 1981, when the first 401(k) plan
was created; it was soon ratified by a landmark ruling by the Internal Revenue
Service.20 Prior to that date, employer pension plans had usually been of the
defined benefit type, in which the employer merely promised a fixed pension
to its employees when they retired. Reserves to pay the defined benefit were

52

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

managed by the employer. With 401(k) plans (as well as such analogues as
403(b) plans), employees are offered the opportunity to have contributions to
a tax‑deferred retirement account deducted from their paychecks. They then
own the investments in their 401(k) accounts and must allocate them among
stocks, bonds, and money market accounts. The tax law began to encourage
employers to make matching contributions to their employees’ 401(k) accounts,
so there came to be a powerful incentive for employees to participate.
Various factors also encouraged the growth of defined contribution pension
plans since the bottom of the U.S. market in 1982. Labor unions traditionally
sought defined benefit plans for their members as a way of ensuring their
welfare in retirement, and the decline of unions meant diminishing support
for these plans. The importance of the manufacturing sector, long a stronghold
of labor unions and defined benefit pensions, was shrinking. Defined benefit
plans became less popular with management, because so‑called overfunded
plans sometimes make companies vulnerable to takeovers. On the flip side,
defined benefit plans could leave companies on the hook for growing and
uncertain obligations as workers live longer. Defined contribution plans came
to be seen as less costly to administer than defined benefit plans. Moreover,
defined contribution plans became more popular with those employees who
liked to monitor their investments, and therefore companies began to offer
the plans to all employees.
Through these tax incentives for participation in plans offering choices
between stocks and bonds, the government forced working people to learn
about the advantages of stocks versus bonds or money market investments.
Any incentive to learn about an investment vehicle is likely to boost demand
for it. In 1954, when the New York Stock Exchange carried out a marketing
study to understand how to promote public interest in the stock market, it
concluded that most people did not know very much about stocks: only 23% of
the public even knew enough to define what a share is. Moreover, the survey
revealed a vague public distrust of the stock market.21 So the exchange held a
series of public information seminars to try to remedy this lack of knowledge
and this prejudice against stocks as an investment. But no set of seminars that
the exchange could ever afford could compare with the learning‑by‑doing
effects of the defined contribution plan in encouraging public knowledge
about and interest in stocks.
If one’s attention to the stock market is filtered through the lens of a pension plan, it may encourage longer‑term thinking. The stated purpose of a
401(k) plan is to prepare for retirement, which is, for most workers, many
years away. A 401(k) plan sponsor does not call participants with tips about
short‑run investment opportunities, and statements about portfolio value are
mailed out only infrequently. The participant cannot check his or her portfolio
value every day in the newspaper. This longer‑term thinking may boost stock

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

53

market valuations by diverting investors from preoccupation with short‑term
fluctuations.
Encouraging longer‑term thinking among investors is probably, all in
all, a good thing. But an additional effect of 401(k) plans as they came, in
the Millennium Boom, to be structured may have been to boost demand for
stocks further through another psychological mechanism. By offering multiple
stock market investment categories for employees to choose among, employers
can create demand for stocks. An effect of categories on ultimate investment
choices was demonstrated by economists Shlomo Benartzi and Richard Thaler.
They found, using both experimental data and data on actual pension fund
allocations, that people tend to spread their allocations evenly over the available options, without regard to the contents of the options. For example, if a
401(k) plan offers a choice of a stock fund and a bond fund, many people will
put 50% of their contributions into each. If the plan instead offers a choice
between a stock fund and a balanced fund (with, say, 50% stocks and 50%
bonds in it), people will still tend to put 50% into each, even though they are
now really putting 75% of their portfolio into stocks.22
The options offered as part of 401(k) plans tended to be heavily weighted
in favor of stocks. In contrast, most 401(k) plans did not have any real estate
options. In this way the growth of 401(k) plans encouraged the growth of
public interest in the stock market relative to the real estate market. Indeed the
typical 401(k) plan in the 1990s offered choices among a stock fund, a balanced
fund (typically 60% stocks and 40% bonds), company stock (investments in the
employer itself), possibly a specialized stock fund (for example, a growth fund),
a bond fund, and a money market fund, as well as fixed‑income guaranteed
investment contracts. It is not surprising, from the findings of the Benartzi
and Thaler study, that people put proportionately more into the stock funds,
given that so many stock‑related choices were laid out before them. Moreover,
since there were more interesting “flavors” of stocks—just as, in the corner
liquor store, there are more varieties of wine than of vodka—more attention
is likely to be drawn to them.
It is in such subtle ways that the interest value or curiosity value of stocks,
not any kind of rational decision‑making process, encouraged investors during the Millennium Boom to want to buy more of them than they otherwise
would. And this seemingly unconscious interest has helped bid up the price
of the stock market.

The Growth of Mutual Funds
The Millennium Boom also coincided with a peculiar growth spurt in the
mutual fund industry and a proliferation of advertising for mutual funds. In
1982, at the beginning of the recent long‑term bull market, there were only

54

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

340 equity mutual funds in the United States. By 1998, there were 3,513—more
equity mutual funds than stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
In 1984, there were 8.9 million domestic equity mutual fund shareholder
accounts in the United States, about one for every ten U.S. households. By 2007,
there were 145 million such shareholder accounts, or well over one account
per household.23 After the 2007 peak in the stock market, the growth in the
number of accounts stalled, and by 2013 the number had fallen to 121.6 million
accounts, well below the number at the 2007 peak.
Mutual funds are a relatively new name for a very old idea. Investment
companies arose in the United States as early as the 1820s, though these were
not then called mutual funds.24 The Massachusetts Investors Trust, generally
regarded as the first mutual fund, was created in 1924. It was different from
the other investment trusts in that it published its portfolio, promised prudent investment policies, and was self‑liquidating when investors demanded
cash for their investments. But this first mutual fund got off to a slow start:
investors were not quick to appreciate its advantages. The 1920s bull market
instead saw the proliferation of many other investment trusts: investment
companies without the safeguards we associate with mutual funds today,
many of them dishonest operations, and some of them even, effectively, Ponzi
schemes (see Chapter 5).
After the stock market crash of 1929, many of these became even more
worthless than the market as a whole, and the public soured on investment
trusts. In particular, they felt betrayed by the managers of the trusts, who
were often pursuing their own interests in flagrant conflict with those of their
investors. The Investment Company Act of 1940, which established regulations
for investment companies, helped restore a measure of public confidence. But
people needed more than just government regulations; they needed a new
name, one that did not carry the unsavory associations of investment trusts.
The term mutual fund, with its similarity to the mutual savings bank and the
mutual insurance company—venerable institutions that had survived the stock
market crash largely untouched by scandal—was much more reassuring and
attractive to investors.25
The mutual fund industry was given new impetus by the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, which created Individual Retirement
Accounts. But the industry really took off after the bull market began in 1982.
Part of the reason that equity mutual funds proliferated so rapidly after
that date is that they are used as part of 401(k) pension plans. As people invest
their plan balances directly in mutual funds, they develop greater familiarity
with the concept; they are thus more inclined to invest their non‑401(k) savings in mutual funds as well.
Another reason for the funds’ explosive growth is that they have paid for
a great deal of advertising. During the Millennium Boom, television shows,

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

55

magazines, and newspapers frequently carried advertisements for them, and
active investors received unsolicited ads in the mail. Mutual funds encouraged
more naive investors to participate in the market by leading them to think
that the experts managing the funds would steer them away from pitfalls.
The proliferation of equity mutual funds therefore focused public attention
on the market, with the effect of encouraging speculative price movements
in stock market aggregates rather than in individual stocks.26 The emerging popular concept that mutual fund investing is sound, convenient, and
safe has encouraged many investors who were once afraid of the market to
want to enter it, thereby contributing to an upward thrust in the market. (See
Chapter 12 for a further discussion of public attitudes toward mutual funds.)

The Decline of Inflation and the Effects of Money Illusion
The outlook for U.S. inflation, as measured by the percentage change in the
Consumer Price Index, gradually improved over the course of the Millennium
Boom. In 1982, even though U.S. inflation was then around 4% a year, there
was still considerable uncertainty as to whether it would return to the high
level (nearly 15% for the year) experienced in 1980. The most dramatic stock
price increases of this bull market occurred once the inflation rate had settled
down into the 2–3% range in the mid‑1990s, and then it dropped below 2%.
The general public paid a lot of attention then to inflation, as late 1990s interview studies of public attitudes toward it revealed.27 People widely believed
that the inflation rate was a barometer of the economic and social health of a
nation. High inflation was perceived to signify economic disarray, loss of basic
values, and national disgrace before foreigners. Low inflation was viewed as
a sign of economic prosperity, social justice, and good government. Many of
these attitudes are still with us today, though probably not as strongly after
twenty years of less-worrisome inflation. It is not surprising, therefore, that
a falling inflation rate over the span of the Millennium Boom boosted public
confidence and hence stock market valuation.
But from a purely rational standpoint, this stock market reaction to inflation
is inappropriate. In 1979 economists Franco Modigliani and Richard Cohn
published an article arguing that the stock market reacts inappropriately to
inflation because people do not fully understand the effect of inflation on
interest rates.28 When inflation is high—as it was when they wrote, near the
bottom of the stock market in 1982—nominal interest rates (the usual interest
rates we see quoted every day) are high, because they must compensate investors for the inflation that is eroding the value of their dollars. Yet expected real
long-term interest rates (interest rates as corrected for the expected effects of
future long-term inflation) did not appear to be high then, and therefore there
should not have been any stock market reaction to the high nominal rates.

56

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

Modigliani and Cohn suggested that the market tends to be depressed when
nominal rates are high even when real rates are not high because of a sort of
“money illusion,” or public confusion about the effects of a changing monetary
standard. When there is inflation, we are changing the value of the dollar, and
therefore changing the yardstick by which we measure values. Faced with a
changing yardstick, it is not surprising that many people become confused.29
Public misunderstanding about inflation near the climax of the Millennium
Boom may have encouraged high expectations for real (inflation‑corrected)
returns. Most data on past long‑run stock market returns is reported in the
media in nominal terms, without correction for inflation, and people might
naturally be encouraged to expect that such nominal returns would continue
in the future. The (lagged ten-year average) inflation rate at the end of 1982
was over 8%; by the end of the Millennium Boom it was down to less than
3%. Therefore, expecting the same nominal returns in the late stages of that
boom was the equivalent of expecting a lot more in real terms.
Plots of historical stock price indices in the media are almost invariably
shown in nominal terms, not the real (inflation‑corrected) terms shown in the
figures in this book. By 2000, U.S. consumer prices had almost doubled since
1982. This inflation imparted a strong upward trend to long‑run historical
plots of stock price indices. Thus, the extraordinary behavior of the real stock
market at the turn of the millennium, the spike up in stock prices that was
visible in Figure 1.1, does not stand out in the long historical plots we see in
the media. In fact, viewing these plots encourages us to think that nothing at
all unusual was going on during the Millennium Boom in the stock market.
The reason news writers generally do not make corrections for inflation
is probably that they think such adjustments are esoteric and would not be
widely appreciated by their readers. And they are probably right. The general public has not by and large taken Economics 101, and those who did sit
through it have probably forgotten much of what they learned. Thus, they have
not assimilated the basic lesson that there is nothing natural about measuring prices in dollars when the quantity, and value, of those dollars has been
highly unstable. The public at large does not fully appreciate that the more
meaningful measure of the stock market level is in terms of some broad basket
of goods, as it is when corrected for consumer price inflation.30

Expansion of the Volume of Trade: Discount Brokers,
Day Traders, and Twenty‑Four‑Hour Trading
The turnover rate (the total shares sold in a year divided by the total number of shares) for New York Stock Exchange stocks nearly doubled between
1982 and 1999, from 42% to 78%.31 The NASDAQ market, which emphasizes
high‑tech stocks, showed an even greater turnover rate increase, from 88% in

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

57

1990 to 221% in 1999.32 The higher turnover rate may have been symptomatic
of increased interest in the market as a result of other factors mentioned here.
But another reason for the rise in turnover rate in the stock market was the
declining cost of making a trade. After competitive brokerage commissions
were mandated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in 1975,
there was an immediate drop in commission rates, and discount brokers
came into being. Technological and organizational changes were also set in
motion. Such innovations as the Small Order Execution System, introduced
by NASDAQ in 1985, and new order-handling rules issued by the SEC in 1997
have resulted in ever lower trading costs. SEC regulations encouraging equal
access to the markets spawned a growing number of amateur investors who
can “day trade,” that is, try to make profits by rapidly trading stocks using
the same order execution systems used by professionals.
The significant growth of online trading services coincides roughly with
the most spectacular increases in the stock market between 1997 and 2001.
According to a study by the SEC, there were 3.7 million online accounts in
the United States in 1997; by 1999 there were 9.7 million such accounts.33 The
growth of online trading, as well as the associated Internet‑based information
and communication services, may well have encouraged minute‑by‑minute
attention to the market. After‑hours trading on the exchanges also had the
potential to increase the level of attention paid to the market, as investors
could track changing prices in their living rooms during their leisure time.
Speculative prices seem to get a volatility nudge whenever markets are
open. The magnitude of price changes tends to be lower over two‑day intervals
that include a day when markets are closed (as, for example, during a time
when the New York Stock Exchange closed on Wednesdays).34 It is therefore
plausible to expect that the expansion of online trading and the opening of
markets for longer hours raised their volatility. Whether it should have raised
or lowered the level of prices is somewhat less certain.
There is, however, some evidence suggesting that more frequent exposure
to price quotes might in fact diminish demand for stocks. Economists Shlomo
Benartzi and Richard Thaler have shown that the time pattern of attention
to market prices can have important effects on the demand for stocks. In
experimental situations, if people are shown daily data on stock prices, they
express much less interest in investing in stocks than if they are shown only
longer‑run returns.35 Witnessing the day‑to‑day noise in stock prices apparently encourages more fear about the inherent risk of investing in stocks.
Thus, institutional innovations that encourage viewing the market price more
frequently might tend to depress the price level of the market.
In contrast, the increased frequency of reporting of stock prices caused
by recent institutional and technological changes may have just the opposite
effect to that observed in the experimental situation crafted by Benartzi and

58

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

Thaler. In a non-experimental setting, where people’s focus of attention is not
controlled by an experimenter, the increased frequency of price observations
may tend to increase the demand for stocks by attracting attention to them.
And changing public attention is a critical factor in the valuation of investments, a point that will be elaborated in Chapter 10.

The Rise of Gambling Opportunities
The prevalence of commercial and government-supported gambling was rising
around the world during the Millennium Boom.36 This increasing prevalence
parallels an increasing respect for markets and private property, as well as an
increasing admiration for “winners” and contempt for “losers.”
In the United States, commercial gambling, both legal and illegal, experi­
enced about a sixty-fold increase in real (inflation-corrected) terms between
1962 and 2000.37 According to a 2000 telephone survey, 82% of adults in the
United States gambled in the preceding year, up from 61% in a 1975 study.38
The amount lost on gambling by people in the United States in 2000 was more
than they spent on movie tickets, recorded music, theme parks, spectator
sports, and video games combined.39
Most forms of gambling and lotteries were outlawed by the states of this
country in the 1870s after a scandal in the Louisiana lottery, and the Louisiana
national lottery itself was effectively shut down by an 1890 act of Congress
prohibiting the sale of lottery tickets by mail. From then until 1970, opportunities to gamble legally were confined largely to racetracks, a form of gambling
that has limited public appeal and which, at the time, required travel to a
racetrack. But by 1975, there were thirteen state lotteries, and by 1999, there
were thirty‑seven, offering very convenient and easy means of wagering. Until
1990, legalized casinos operated only in Nevada and Atlantic City. By 1999,
there were nearly 100 riverboat and dockside casinos and 260 casinos on Indian
reservations. During the same interval, betting at racetracks also expanded
dramatically, with the development of off‑track betting relying on satellite
broadcasts of the races. Cable and Internet wagering on races was possible from
home. There was also a proliferation of electronic gambling devices, including slot machines, video poker, video keno, and other stand‑alone devices. In
some states, these could even be found at truck stops, convenience stores, and
lottery outlets. The ubiquity and convenience of gambling opportunities, and
the strength of the marketing campaign undertaken to promote gambling,
were unprecedented in history.
The rise of gambling institutions, and the increased frequency of actual
gambling, had potentially important effects on our culture and on changed
attitudes toward risk taking in other areas, such as investing in the stock market. The legalization of gambling in the form of state lotteries has sometimes
