The
Disciplined Trader
Developing Winning Attitudes
Mark Douglas

NEW YORK INSTITUTE OF FINANCE

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Douglas, Mark.
The disciplined trader: developing winning attitudes / by Mark Douglas.
p.
cm.
ISBN 0 13-215757-8
1. Stockbrokers—Attitudes. 2. Stock-exchange. I. Title.
HG4621.D68 1990
332.64—dc20
90-30237
CIP
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought
From a Declaration of Principles Jointly Adopted
by a Committee of the American Bar Association
and a Committee of Publishers and Associations
© 1990 by Mark Douglas
All rights reserved No part of this book may
be reproduced in any form or by any means without
permission in writing from the publisher
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8
New York Institute of Finance
A division of Simon & Schuster. Inc.
2 Broadway
New York. NY 10004-2207

2

To Paula Webb for her love, understanding and being
there throughout the process of writing this book.

3

Contents

Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments

6
8
13

Part I Introduction

1

1 Why I Wrote This Book
2 Why a New Thinking Methodology?

15
24

Part II The Nature of the Trading Environment
from a Psychological Perspective

37

3 The Market Is Always Right
4 There Is Unlimited Potential for Profit
and Loss
5 Prices Are in Perpetual Motion with No
Defined Beginning or Ending
6 The Market Is an Unstructured Environment
7 In the Market Environment, Reasons
Are Irrelevant
8 The Three Stages to Becoming a Successful
Trader
Part III Building a Framework for
Understanding Ourselves
9 Understanding the Nature of the Mental
Environment
4

39
41
43
49
56
61
72
76

10 How Memories, Associations, and Beliefs
Manage Environmental Information
11 Why We Need to Learn How to Adapt
12 The Dynamics of Goal Achievement
13 Managing Mental Energy
14 Techniques for Effecting Change
Part IV How to Become a
Disciplined Trader

88
105
119
132
141
151

15 The Psychology of Price Movement
16 The Steps to Success
17 A Final Note

152
166
184

Index

185

5

Foreword

My unique position in the financial community has allowed me the rare
opportunity to talk to and question thousands of traders, brokers, and trading
advisors since 1979. I am not a broker or a letter writer. I am the chief executive
officer of CompuTrac, a company that supplies technical analysis to stock and
futures traders. I perceive my position as being neutral, one that allows people
to open up and talk to me freely. I started trading for my own account in 1960
and very quickly became aware of the underlying psychological blocks to good
trading and money management. This realization has been confirmed by all who
have counseled with me.
As a result, I sincerely feel that success in trading is 80 percent psychological
and 20 percent one's methodology, be it fundamental or technical. For example,
you can have a mediocre knowledge of fundamental and technical information,
and if you are in psychological control, you can make money. Conversely, you
may have a great system, one that you have tested and has performed well for a
long period of time, yet if the psychological control is not there, you will be the
loser.
A good trader knows from experience that over a period of time he may
engage in more losing trades than winning ones. But money management,
and a careful assay of the risks protected by realistic stops, will keep the
trader out of trouble and ensure that on the "big" moves, he will profit.
Money management is composed of two essential elements: psychological
management and risk management. Risk management stems from the
psychological factors being truly understood by the trader and "in place"
before risk is even considered.
6

I would especially caution new traders and market participants that
reading and passively analyzing your motivations are certainly a necessity,
but the acid test comes with active trading under pressure. Start slowly.
Question every trade. What motivated it? How was the trade managed? Was
it successful? Why? Did you lose? Why? Write down your assessment and
refer to your comments before making your next trade.
At all major CompuTrac seminars I try to have a workshop leader address
the attendees on the psychological aspects of trading. The grim reaper who
kills off "your equity" and disappears with your profits is not the
mysterious and ubiquitous "they" but a simple misguided "you." Medea
said just before she murdered her children, "I know what evil I'm about to
do, but my irrational self is stronger than my resolution." If this sentiment
reflects your mind set when you trade, then The Disciplined Trader is
definitely the type of book you should be reading.
What a pleasure to read this book. My own education cost me a lot "the
hard way." I can read myself into the pages - that's me, that's me! Mark
has carefully fashioned his book into a comprehensive logical dialogue. It
reads as if you are at his side and he is explaining it as a friend, which I
know you will enjoy. You are fortunate because you are taking the time
now, before you have made a serious mistake, I hope, to learn about
yourself and to study your craft. The traders who take the time to reflect and
practice will survive and possibly prosper.

T IMOTHY S LATER
President
CompuTrac Software, Inc.

7

Preface

The Disciplined Trader is a comprehensive guide to understanding the
psychology of self-discipline and personal transformation needed to become
a successful stock or futures trader. This book will serve as a step-by-step
guide to adapting successfully to the unusual psychological characteristics of
the trading world.
I say "adapting" because most people venturing into the trading
environment don't recognize it as being vastly different from the cultural
environment in which they were brought up. Not recognizing these
differences, they would have no way of knowing that many of the beliefs
they acquired to enable them to function effectively in society will act as
psychological barriers in the trading environment, making their success as
traders extremely difficult to achieve. Reaching the level of success they
desire as traders will require them to make at least some, if not many,
changes in the ways they perceive market action.
Unlike other social environments, the trading arena has many
characteristics requiring a very high degree of self-control and self-trust
from the trader who intends to function successfully within it. However,
many of us lack this self-control because as children we learned to function
in a structured environment where our behavior was controlled by someone
more powerful than ourselves, whose purpose was to manipulate our behavior
to conform to society's expectations.
Thus, we were forced by external forces to behave in certain ways through
a system of rewards and punishments. As a reward, we would be given the
freedom to express ourselves in some desired manner. As a punishment, we
8

would either be prevented from getting what we wanted, causing emotional
pain, or we were inflicted with various forms of corporal punishment,
causing physical pain. As a result, the only form of behavior control that we
typically learned for ourselves was based on the threat of pain - either
emotional or physical - from someone or something we perceived as having
more power than ourselves. And since we were forced to relinquish our
personal power to other people, we naturally developed many of our
traditional resources for success (the particular ways in which we learned to
get what we want) from the same mental framework. Accordingly, we
learned that acquiring power to manipulate and force changes upon things
outside of us was the only way to get what we wanted.
One thing you will learn as a trader is that the mental resources you use
to get what you want in your everyday life will not work in the trading
environment. The power and control that are necessary to manipulate the
markets (make them do what you want them to do) are beyond all but a
handful of individuals. And the external constraints that exist in society to
control your behavior don't exist in the market environment. The markets
have absolutely no power or control over you, no expectation of your
behavior, and no regard for your welfare.
If, in fact, you can't control or manipulate the markets and the markets
have absolutely no power or control over you, then the responsibility for
what you perceive and for your resulting behavior resides only in you. The
one thing you can control is yourself. As a trader, you have the power
either to give yourself money or to give your money to other traders. And
the ways in which you choose to do this will be determined by a number of
psychological factors that have little or nothing to do with the markets.
And this will be so until you acquire some new skills and also learn how to
adapt yourself to suit conditions as they exist in the market environment.
To operate successfully in this environment you will need to learn how to
control yourself in ways that may be completely alien to you.
You will also have to learn how to grant yourself the mental freedom to
shift your perspective to notice alternative possibilities to getting what you
want in the trading arena, regardless of your expectations of how you are
going to get it. There are only a few traders who have come to the
realization that they alone are completely responsible for the outcome of
their actions. Even fewer are those who have accepted the psychological
implications of that realization and know what to do about it.
Rarely do any of us grow up learning how to operate in an arena that
allows for complete freedom of creative expression, with no external
structure to restrict it in any way. In the trading environment, you will
have to make up your own rules and then have the discipline to abide by
them. The problem is, price movement is fluid, always in motion, quite
unlike the highly structured events that most of us are accustomed to. In
the market environment, the decisions that confront you are as endless as
the price movements you intend to take advantage of. You don't just have
9

to decide to participate, you also have to decide when to enter, how long to
stay in, and under what conditions to get out. There is no beginning,
middle, or end - only what you create in your own mind.
In addition to the negative psychological implications that accompany
these decisions, you must be aware that even if you make the minimum
financial commitment of one contract per trade (as in the futures market),
there is an unlimited potential for profit as well as an unlimited potential
for loss. From a psychological perspective, this means that each trade has
the possibility of fulfilling your wildest dreams of financial independence,
and simultaneously presents you with the risk of losing everything you
own. The constantly changing price movement makes it extremely easy for
you to ignore the risk and tempt yourself into believing you don't have to
follow your own rules, this time.
Here is an environment that offers complete freedom of expression
combined with unlimited possibilities and unlimited risk. If you place in it a
participant who is oblivious to these psychological conditions (one who
operates from a mental framework oriented toward external structure,
constraints, and expectations), then what you have is a formula for
emotional and financial disaster.
This grim scenario certainly explains why so few people ever make
money as traders. Actually, almost all of those who make an attempt at
trading completely underestimate the difficulty and consequently
overestimate their ability to fulfill their inflated expectations. Therefore,
most, if not all, people who trade inflict some degree of psychological
damage upon themselves. I am defining "psychological damage" as any
mental framework that has potential for generating fear.
Fear results from any belief about environmental conditions that has the
potential to cause either physical or emotional pain such as stress, anxiety,
confusion, disappointment, or betrayal. Painful emotional conditions are
basically the result of unfulfilled expectations. Unfulfilled expectations
create a conflict between a person's beliefs about the way things should be
and the actual environmental conditions that don't match those beliefs.
This conflict is expressed through our emotions in the form of pain that we
generally label as stress, anxiety, confusion, and so on.
People seem to avoid pain instinctively by building up mental defenses
against the intrusion of environmental information that would confirm the
existence of any conflict. These defenses consist of denials, rationalizations,
and justifications - all of which will result in perceptual distortion.
"Perceptual distortion" occurs when our mental system automatically
distorts environmental information by shaping and selectively excluding
certain information to compensate for the conflict between what we expect
and what the environment is offering us. This will be done in such a way that
we will believe a shared reality exists between ourselves and the outside
environment, thus avoiding any pain. I am defining a "shared reality" as a
correspondence between one's beliefs about the environment and the
10

actual environmental conditions that exist.
If you are distorting market information, you are not sharing a reality
with the markets, and you are also indulging yourself in an illusion, to the
extent that you hide from the possibility of disappointment. At this point,
you would be setting yourself up for what could be called a "forced
awareness." Obviously, if the markets are doing something other than what
you are allowing yourself to perceive (because some, if not most, of the
information the markets have to offer won't validate what you want or
hope), then something has to give. These distortions will continue until
there is such a disparity between your acquired mindset and the conflicting
market information that the mental defenses (illusions) will break down.
This usually creates a state of shock, where you may wonder how things
could get so bad so quickly.
In such a situation, the market forces you to confront your illusions of a
shared reality, creating a painful forced awareness. At some point in your
trading career you will need to understand how all of us, because of our
common upbringing, try to control market events through our perception of
what we think will happen next and then rigidly hold on to these
expectations. This is where you need to learn how to gain the kind of mental
flexibility that allows you to shift your perspective to be aware of other
alternatives and possibilities. You may not be able to control the markets,
but you can control your perception of them in order to achieve a higher
degree of objectivity, resulting in a higher degree of shared reality with the
markets.
As painful as these forced awarenesses may be, they are not likely to
deter you from being attracted to the opportunities the markets have to
offer. However, the cumulative psychological effect on you will be very
negative. If you have suffered through several forced awarenesses, your
perception of market activity will eventually become heavily weighted
towards avoiding pain instead of seeking opportunity. Your fear of losing
money, being wrong, or missing an opportunity will become your primary
motivation to act or not act.
Now, there are several major problems that result when fear becomes a
motivation to do or not do something. First, it will limit your range of
perceived opportunities by narrowing your focus of attention, keeping it on
the object of your fear. This means that out of all available market
information, you will only perceive information that will, in effect, validate
what you fear the most. Your fear will systematically exclude from your
awareness market information that would indicate the existence of other
alternatives and opportunities.
As you begin to understand the negative relationship between fear and
perception, you might be surprised to learn that in your attempts to avoid
losses, you actually create them. Fear will also limit your range of responses
to any given situation. Many traders suffer considerably when they know
exactly what they want to do but, when the moment to execute arrives, find
11

themselves completely immobilized.
Before anyone can become successful in an environment with the
unstructured character of the trading environment, one needs to develop a
supreme sense of self-confidence and self-trust. I am defining selfconfidence as an absence of fear and self-trust: knowing what to do at the
moment it needs to be done, and then doing it without hesitation. Any
hesitation will only create self-doubt and fear. To whatever degree selfdoubt exists as a state of mind, to that same degree you will feel fear,
anxiety, and confusion.
The negative experiences that result from trading in a state of fear, anxiety,
and confusion, will create or add to an already-existing belief of inadequacy
and powerlessness. Regardless of how hard any of us may try to hide from
others what is going on, we obviously can't hide our results from ourselves
If the market's behavior seems mysterious to you, it's because your own
behavior is mysterious and unmanageable. You can't really determine what
the market is likely to do next when you don't even know what you will
do next, regardless of what you may perceive or want.
The few successful traders who have, in some way, transcended these
psychological obstacles have been generous with their one-line gems of
trading wisdom: "Learn to take a loss," "Go with the flow," "The trend is
your friend," "Cut your losses and let your profits run," "To know the
markets you need to know yourself," and on and on. The Disciplined
Trader fully explores, breaks down, and then organizes the psychological
components of this advice into a step-by-step learning process, a process
that takes you through the various stages necessary to orient yourself
successfully to the trading environment. This book will explain to you what
skills are necessary, why you need to understand them, and most
important, how to go about learning them.
This book is organized in four sections. The first consists of the first two
chapters and serves as an introduction. The second consists of Chapters 3
through 8 and defines the problems or challenges of becoming a successful
trader. The third section consists of six chapters that will give you the basic
insight you will need to identify what has to be changed in your mental
environment and what you can do to change it. The fourth section consists
of Chapters 15 and 16 which put everything together into a unified
framework to develop specific trading skills. You will learn how to observe
market action from an objective perspective, determine where you need to
limit yourself, and establish the steps you will need to take to expand
those limitations in a productive and psychologically healthy way.

12

Acknowledgments

Most people are probably well aware that writing a book is a very difficult
task, one that often requires the help and support of a number of people in
the author's life. There are a number of people I want to acknowledge as
being instrumental in helping me make this book a reality including my
parents, John and Helen Yosin; my brothers and sister - Craig, Dean, and
Sandy Yosin - for all their love and support; Brad Johnson, my partner in
Trading Behavior Dynamics, for all of his patience and kindness; Jim
Sutton, Bonnie Marlowe, Jake Bernstein, Elizabeth McKinsey, Michael
Headley, Steve Sukenik, and Jack Carl for helping me get started; all of the
traders that I have worked with over the last six years, especially Jim
Griswold, Jerry Stahlnecker, Jack Brassuel, Steve Bianucci, Mike Gamble, and
Chuck Pettet for their friendship and support; Tim Slater for giving me the
opportunity to express myself as a speaker and a writer; Rich Miller for his
support and being a good friend; Lori and Nikki Marlowe for the happiness
they brought into my life; and most of all, my friend and fellow author Kurt
Leland for everything he has taught me and for showing me the way.

13

PART I

Introduction

14

CHAPTER 1

Why I Wrote This Book

Since I started working on this book - in the summer of 1982 - nearly
every dimension of futures trading has exploded in growth. There are brand
new exchanges, new contracts, more advisory and news services, an
increasing variety of books and publications, and ever more sophisticated
technical trading systems, most all of them with computer applications to
make it easy to track the markets. However, even with this tremendous
growth in services related to trading, one inescapable fact remains: there is
still a very small group of sophisticated traders who take the greatest
percentage of profits out of the markets, making well over 90 percent of all
the other traders net losers year-in and year-out.
In futures trading for every dollar of profit gained by one trader, there has
to be an equivalent dollar lost by another trader. If a few traders are
consistently making money on a grand scale, then their profits have to be
coming directly out of the pockets of the thousands of other traders who
very faithfully contribute to their daily winnings. Some of these very
successful traders are public figures, but most are only known in the
Chicago or New York areas. Needless to say, everyone wants to know what
they do and how they do it.
There must be a difference between these two groups of traders - the
small minority of winners and the vast majority of losers who want to
know what the winners know. The difference is that the traders who can
make money consistently on a weekly, monthly, and yearly basis approach
trading from the perspective of a mental discipline. When asked for their
secrets of success, they categorically state that they didn't achieve any
15

measure of consistency in accumulating wealth from trading until they
learned self-discipline, emotional control, and the ability to change their
minds to flow with the markets.
First, I want to point out that self-discipline, emotional control, and
learning to change one's mind after making a commitment are all
psychological issues that have nothing to do with news services, advisory
services, new exchanges, or technical or fundamental trading systems computerized or not.
Second, from my trading experiences, observations, and research, I have
discovered that all traders - both winners and losers - seem to share some
very common experiences. Either in the beginning or at some point early in
their trading career, all traders experience confusion, frustration, anxiety,
and the pain of failure. The few-traders who pass through this phase to
accumulate wealth are those who eventually confront and work through
some very difficult psychological issues about what it means to be a trader,
and this process of realization and change normally takes several years, even
for the best of them.
If self-discipline and emotional control are the keys to success, they are
also not necessarily traits any of us are born with. On the contrary, they are
characteristics we acquire by learning certain mental skills. Acquiring these
mental skills is often the result of a trial-and-error learning process that can
be very costly financially and usually filled with emotional pain and
suffering. The biggest problem with a trial and error approach in trading is
that most people lose all their money before they get through the process.
And other traders who have enough money to keep on trading never fully
recover from the effects of the psychological trauma they have inflicted on
themselves to ever learn how to trade successfully on a consistent basis.
This leaves only a relatively small number of people who make it.
All the great traders, both past and present, have found it very difficult
to explain what it is they do, how they do it, and more important, the
progression of steps they took to get where they got. Many would gladly
share with others what they know about the market and its behavior but not
necessarily about their behavior as individuals. They would, however,
often caution those who sought their wisdom to understand that all the
market knowledge in the world won't do them any good until they learned
what can be called self-discipline and emotional control, without necessarily
being able to explain what they were.
For instance, "Cut your losses short" is great advice that is often given as
an axiom of trading wisdom. But how do you explain to someone the steps
needed to learn how to do that? Especially when he is interacting with an
environment that is in perpetual motion and will always offer him the
possibility that the market can come back and make him whole, if he is in a
losing trade. If you take into consideration that his money and self-esteem
are at stake and the market coming back is always a viable possibility,
regardless of how remote it may be, then you can see how difficult it is to
16
