
190

Trading Binary Options

1. Ten ATM Trades: The challenge here is to see how good you are in
timing entry. ATM trades are essentially momentum-based trades.
2. Ten ITM Trades: The challenge here is to join the crowd after confirming
a strong trend direction. The ITM trades cost more than $75. This makes
it more important to be right more often. The risk is that one or two
poor trades can wipe out your gains.
3. Ten OTM Trades: If you are a contrarian, OTM trades are for you.
They are low cost, about $15 to $30, but they pay out very large returns.
The key skill here is to understand price patterns signaling a breakout or
reversal. The trader is essentially betting against the crowd.
4. Ten DOOM Trades: Deep-out-of-the-money strategies are appropriately
named DOOM. It’s for high rollers who buy $10 to $20 ask prices. The
key is, what is your mathematics of performance? Are you on the right
side of your profitability curve? The mission here is to find out.
5. Ten DITM Trades: Deep-in-the-money trades are high-probability
wins, but there is a high cost to being wrong. The real challenge is to see
how good you really are at spotting a stable trend continuation.
6. Ten Gut Trades: Gut trades are trades based on the blink effect. This
is to quickly scan the markets and make an instinctive judgment about
direction. This exercise is designed to help avoid paralysis-by-analysis
syndrome. Don’t overanalyze. This exercise will often provide a
benchmark for your emotional intelligence.
7. Ten Headline Trades: Look at the headlines in the Financial Times,
Google, and Bloomberg and use your sentiment-assessment skills to find
the right trading direction.
8. Ten Contrarian Trades: In this performance challenge, the task is to
deliberately go against the crowd. The crucial question is: When is the
crowd wrong?
9. Ten Bounce Trades: Try to find sideways channels, and put on trades
anticipating a failure to break through both resistance and support.
10. Ten Breakout Trades: Try to find a sideways channel and put on a pair
of binary trades that anticipate a breakdown of support or a breakout of
resistance.
11. Ten Data Release Trades: Specifically locate the economic calendar for
an important data release, such as the non-farm payroll or a key central
bank report. Put on a binary play on the day of the release with a 50 percent
profit-taking target.
12. Thirty Mixed-Strategy Trades: After you have done the first 11 strategy
tests, look at the results and pick out the three best strategies and put on

Metrics for Improving Binary Trading Performance

191

30 trades (yes, three times the usual number), testing with 10 trades for
each of the three best strategies.
13. Ten Directional Trades: On the U.S. market opening, watch the S&P
500 and based on its direction, trade the same direction on the USD/
JPY. On the Shanghai Opening, watch the Shanghai Index and on the
direction of the opening, trade the same direction on the AUD/USD.
Watch the direction of U.S. crude (WTI) and trade the USD/CAD in
the opposite direction.
These performance challenges are designed to provide milestones for
evolving as a binary option trader. The results of each performance challenge set provide important data to assess strengths and weaknesses. Go to
www.binarydimensions.com for more performance challenges and to submit your results.
Performance Challenges for Trading High-Low Binaries

For binary option traders trading platforms that offer only the high-low type
of trades, the following performance challenges will help test your skills.
1. For one-minute binary expirations, turn on one-minute three-line break
charts and trade when you see a reversal of colors.
2. For five-minute binary expirations, wait for a parabolic curve to be
formed and trade the opposite direction once it reaches a peak and then
starts reversing. Trade a 15-minutes expiration.
3. For a 30-minute binary expiration, locate an underlying market that has
a sideways range of about 30 pips and place a double Bollinger Band on
it. Wait for the price to reach the outer band and then reverse. Then put
a 30-minute expiration on the direction of the reversal.
Analytical Challenges

While putting on trades is ultimately the best form of testing your skills, it’s
important to also challenge your analytical abilities. The following analytical
challenges are evergreen. They do not go out of date and can be done anytime.
• What is the sentiment of the market regarding the U.S. dollar (DXY)? Is it
risk averse or risk appetite, and why?

192

Trading Binary Options

• Scan the binary option underlying markets for markets that just reached
new weekly highs. What is the reason for the new highs?
• Among the floating currencies, what are the widest interest-rate differentials?
• What is your adjusted win/loss ratio (remove the highest gain and the highest loss, and then recompute the result)?
• Scan the four-hour charts of the underlying markets and select one that
has a compressed triangle forming. Put on a breakout trade around that
triangle.
• On Thursday, 10 a.m. EST, find three different underlying binary trade
option strike prices that are being offered at $75 and put one lot on each to
test the strategy of going with the crowd.
• Find the underlying market that hit new weekly lows. What is the reason
for the new lows?
• Compare the S&P 500, Shanghai Composite Index, and on their past
three-month performance. Which pair is the most divergent?
• On the next Wednesday, choose three underlying markets and find the
ATM bid/ask. Choose the one that is most likely, in your opinion, to go
from ATM to ITM and place a trade with a 50 percent profit limit.
• Find two underlying markets that have had a very narrow sideways channel
in the past month. Place a breakout trade on each market.
• Conduct a review of headlines on the U.S. dollar and develop your own
risk appetite/risk aversion sentiment ratio.
• Locate and review the nonfarm payroll jobless claims data and determine if
there is a trend up or down in the data.
• Determine on the economic calendar when the next Tankan report is
coming out.
• Do a scan of the currency pairs and evaluate their three-line break patterns.
Which pair has just experienced a three-line break reversal using the oneweek chart?
• Which of the underlying markets are experiencing a sideways one-week
channel?
• Find the appropriate ETF for the underlying market and locate the
at-the-money put/call ratio. Is it skewing to the bearish or the bullish side?
• Look at the gold/oil ratio. Is it at an extreme?
• Check the Shanghai Index and overlay it against the AUD/USD. Try to
predict next week’s direction.
• Go to the central bank of Switzerland (www.snb.ch) and read their
monetary policy. Find out when was the last time they raised interest
rates.

Metrics for Improving Binary Trading Performance

193

• Find the binary option strike prices that are near the 61.8 percent weekly
or daily Fibonacci resistance lines.
look Online
For more information on binary option trading analytical challenges, go to:
www.binarydimensions.com.
Useful strategies for charting can be found at:
www.livecharts.co.uk
www.prorealtime.com

Know Your Trading Personality

Part of the evolution of success in getting better at binary option trading is to
understand your own trader personality. The fact is it is impossible to separate
emotions from the trade. This is a fact of life and the challenge is to recognize
one’s own personality. This will help limit your risks by associating the trading strategy that calibrates to your personality. There are several personality
types and the field of psychological finance is devoting a lot of work to modeling emotions and how they become translated into the traits of a trader. In
fact, an entire new field called computational psychology and artificial chemistry
is focused on mapping how emotions result in behavior. A good place to
start to detect your trading personality is to consider which of the following
archetypes best calibrates with you.
The Gladiator/Samurai—This person loves to trade even more than
winning or losing. Being in the action is the objective. We call
them the gladiator-type because gladiators had no fear of death and
focused on the battle itself. A gladiator-type of binary option trader
has the advantage of being committed to the trade without being
frenetic about the result. The disadvantage of this personality is that
it can lead to overtrading and unnecessary losses. Few gladiators
survive for long!
The Warrior—This personality type loves trading but really wants to win.
He avoids trades that are not highly probable and has no allegiance to
any one market. This type of personality is comfortable with a mixed
binary option strategy, each one being a different weapon of choice.

194

Trading Binary Options

The Gunslinger/Surfer—He or she acts upon an emotional or gut
feeling to enter or exit a trade. This type of personality often likes
to surf and jump from one trading opportunity to another. At-themoney, momentum-type strategies attract this personality.
The Sniper—Analyzes the market and takes the trade only when the
market moves on the conditions they have specified. This trading
style is similar to swing trading or waiting for a key support or
resistance level to be tested. Many people do not have the patience,
or the wisdom, to be a sniper-trader. This type favors breakout
trades that provide out-of-the-money pricing.
The Lamb—This type of trader reacts to market moves by running with
the crowd. When a lot of such traders come into the market, they add
energy to the momentum of the prices, creating a contagion. Deepin-the-money binary option trades are favored by this personality.
The Black Sheep—The trading behavior of this personality is contrarian.
This type of trader doesn’t join the crowd and seeks an opposite
opportunity. It takes courage to be a black sheep. But when the
black sheep is right, profits are very large.
The Gambler—This person’s attitude toward trading is similar to that
of a gambler. The motivation is not to seek a profitable return. The
trader is in it as a search for excitement at the moment. He or she is
not distressed by losses.
The Eagle—This type of trader scans multiple markets and multiple
time frames to determine best possible trading opportunity. The
Eagle trader is a predator that is in impulsive.
The Donkey—The donkey trader experiences consecutive losses and
doesn’t change the strategy. He or she is stubborn like a mule.
Self-examination of one’s own trading personality will provide many
insights that can improve your results. Very often, the critical weakness
facing the binary option trader is not a lack of technical, or fundamental
analysis, but a lack of being aware of the psycho-dynamics relating to the
trade.
Targeting Total Returns

Trading performance can be viewed on a trade-by-trade basis, but it can also
be viewed from total-return perspective. This later approach is more a topdown approach and, in fact, makes a huge difference on how each trade is

Metrics for Improving Binary Trading Performance

195

viewed. The bottom-up approach looks at each trade as its own self-contained
opportunity. In contrast, the top-down approach views each trade as a component toward a total return per week or per month. Each trade is, metaphorically, a component in a trading factory. The question arises: What’s the
production of the factory for each week or month—in terms of total return.
There are different ways to approach binary option trading from a total
return perspective, and all are legitimate because they reflect the belief that traders have varying goals. Some traders seek the opportunity to put on a position
for a very high return. These traders are high rollers, with large risk appetites.
This kind of trader searches for binary contracts that offer the opportunity to
pay out a $100 on a risk of $20 (therefore delivering 5:1 returns in less than a
week). In contrast, the other group of traders is looking for high-probability
returns. For them, binary option contracts that cost $75 and higher are often
attractive. They offer less reward, but have a higher probability of success.
Whether one trades for high returns or high probability, there are two
distinctive total return perspectives. You can view binary options on a tradeby-trade basis and enjoy the experience. An analogy would be doing a round
of golf, but not keeping score. Another approach is a total return portfolio
approach. This means using binary options as a mechanism for achieving a
total-return goal.
The total-return approach, in effect, reverses the process of shaping the
binary option trade. Instead of starting with a scan of the market and identifying price patterns and opportunities, the trader starts by setting total return
portfolio goals. This approach is a manufacturing model. It views traders as
managers of a manufacturing process that produces profits per year, month,
and week. Here are three questions that help you shape a binary option portfolio return plan. Ultimately, all total-return strategies can become translated
into how you answer these questions.
1. What is your total return goal for a year?
2. What is your total return goal for a month?
3. What is your total return goal for a week?
For example, a 50-percent total return for one year of trading is a result
that is not only admirable, but that places one among the better traders in the
world. This results in a 4.1 percent return per month, or just over 1 percent
a week. Having shaped a performance goal for the week, the next step is to
develop a set of binary option trading strategies that contribute to that objective. Here is an example, in Table 10.2, of one week’s trades that resulted in a
1 percent return for the week.

196

Trading Binary Options

Table 10.2 Simulated Total Return Goal of 1 Percent per Week, Example for Week of

April 25 to 29

Binary Option Contracts Traded (Expiration)

Cost

Settlement

P/L

U.S. 500 (JUN). 1311.5 (4:15 p.m.)

Buy

1

83

100

17

EUR/USD. 1.4275 (3 p.m.)

Buy

2

85.5

100

14.5

USD/CHF. 0.8925 (3 p.m.)

Buy

2

26.5

100

253

USD/CHF. 0.8875 (3 p.m.)

Sell

1

21.5

100

21.5

GBP/JPY. 1.6275 (3 p.m.)

Buy

1

86

100

14

GBP/USD. 1.6275 (3 p.m.)

Buy

1

87.5

100

12.5

USD/CAD. 0.9425 (3 p.m.)

Buy

1

84

100

16

CRUDE OIL (JUN). 106.75 (2.30 p.m.)

Buy

5

89.5

100

52.5

CRUDE OIL (JUN). 116.75 (2.30 p.m.)

Sell

5

10.5

0

52.5

GOLD (JUN). 1486.5 (1:30 p.m.)

Buy

1

85.5

100

14.5

U.S. 500 (JUN). 1353.5 (4:15 p.m.)

Buy

1

25

51.5

26.5

The 1 percent-per-week results would be competitive with any worldclass manager, but by using the binary option trading tools, they are within
the reach of ordinary persons. The example represents a sample set of trades,
but it is still instructive. What can we learn from it? First, that binary option
trading strategies are not a single pure strategy. The trades represent a combination of deep-in-the-money trades, at-the-money, and breakout trades. Of
course, there are many combinations possible. Only after conducting a large
number of trades per strategy can the best personal mixed strategy for any
trader be developed.
Let’s look at a possible combination set of trades or recipe that would
result in a 1 percent return for the week (Figure 10.2). In reality, there are
many ways to accomplish this, but it is suggestive of what it takes. The inputs
are trades, and the trades result in a total cost. The output, if profitable, should
be enough winners with big enough size wins to result in a net profit. In a real
sense this is a recipe for a 1 percent weekly total return for a $10,000 account.
The results of the preceding hypothetical two-strategy combination provide insights into the challenges for the trader. Returns of 1 percent per week
are the kind of return potential that no one should ignore. Let’s consider the
mathematics of profitability using this combination. The deep-in-the-money
strategy needs to be 80 percent effective, and the deep-out-of-the-money
strategy needs to be 60 percent effective. The results are sensitive to the cost
of entry, of course. But you get the idea.

Metrics for Improving Binary Trading Performance

197

Figure 10.2 Simulated 1 Percent 1 Total Return in Week
Deep-in-the-Money

Deep-out-of-the-Money

10 Trades @ $85 Each

5 Trades @ $20

$85

$85

$85

$85

$20

$85

$85

$85

$85

$20

$85

$85

$20
$20
$20

Total cost for both strategies = $950
8 Winners @ $15 = $1202
2 Losers @ $85 = −$170

3 Winners @ $80 = $2402
2 Losers @ $20 = −$40

11 Winners = $150 Profit

Approximately 1.5%

While the example refers to a 1 percent return, the binary option market can in fact result in much larger returns. For example, during the week
of June 25 to 29, global markets moved greatly. Almost any binary option
strategy worked very well for that week. The lesson is that when markets
move in a synchronous direction and the trader is on the right side of the
direction, enormous returns are possible. These results also point to the power
of a mixed strategy. It provides a recipe for a variety of total return targets.
It places trading strategy as a tool for accomplishing a goal, and not just a
particular trade. But before a trader can effectively build and hone a binary
option trading strategy, she must know how to evaluate her own trading
performance.

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 11

Performance Tools and
Training for Improving
Binary Option Trading

This chapter provides guidance on how to move beyond a beginner’s level in
binary trading. As the binary trading industry has grown, so has the number
of robot programs and advisory services. We review key features of algorithmic
trading and other performance aids such as alerts and trading competitions.
Algorithmic Trading: Is It for You?

Algorithmic trading defines sets of rules that determine the entry and exit
points for positions. Automation of these rules helps traders achieve consistent returns while limiting both risk and emotion. Developing a system
to trade binary options is not easy, but it is certainly a tool of the future. A
binary trading and alert algorithm is now being developed using these principles and will soon be part of the binary options toolbox.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Automated Trading

Algorithmic trading, or automated trading, has several benefits, but it also has
downsides. In fact, at this juncture in the evolution of technical analysis and
trading, there is an ongoing debate. On one side are the “click traders,” who
make trades using their human instincts and intelligence. On the other side are
199

200

Trading Binary Options

