
New Frontiers in Technical Analysis: Effective Tools
and Strategies for Trading and Investing
by Paul Ciana
Copyright © 2011 Paul Ciana

CHAPTER 2

Everything Is Relative
Strength Is Everything
Julius de Kempenaer
Taler Asset Management Ltd. & RRG Ltd.

Everything is relative strength and relative strength is everything. What does
this mean? Let’s imagine we are listening to the beginning of a sales call:
JULIUS:

Hi, George, how are you? It’s Julius here. Have you got a few
minutes to go over some technical ideas in European sectors?
GEORGE: Sorry mate, I’m focusing on technology stocks this week. I’m meeting with the technology analysts of some major investment banks
as well as a few local companies who will all be bringing over their
best technology companies in a road show. So I’ll be really busy for
the next few days. If you could quickly give me your top ﬁve picks
in technology, that would be very helpful . . .
This type of conversation was typical, and probably still is today, for a lot of
sell-side analysts in the late 1990s and early 2000s. In an over-brokered market
in which every portfolio manager and buy-side analyst receives hundreds of
e-mails, reams of printed (research) reports, and dozens of phone calls every
day, you need to offer something unique, something that adds value for them,
and something they do not get anywhere else. You need to stand out from the
crowd, one way or another. The bank where I was employed organized special
training sessions to sharpen our “sales” skills. Let’s say that some of these
trainings were better than others, but one of the trainers had an appealing
49

50

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

slogan: “You’ve got to make the facts sizzle.” It could be the subject line of
your e-mail that determines whether the recipient is going to open the mail
at all, let alone read it. Or it could be your tone of voice when you leave a
voicemail or the way that you communicate your message when you get to
talk to a fund manager or an analyst in person.
In the early 2000s, I was working as a technical analyst on the trading
ﬂoor of a midsized investment bank in Amsterdam. My primary job was being
an analyst and producing technical reports for our institutional clients, and
it involved a lot of client contact. I was confronted with the issues described
above. Being the worst salesman in the business, I decided that my content
should be the “sizzle” factor. The content I identiﬁed to be of most use to
my clients was, and still is, Relative Strength Analysis. Over the years, the
methods I’ve used to give my clients this information have evolved into some
unique approaches, including the Relative Rotation Graph.
“This Time It’s Different”

One of the cornerstones of technical analysis is that history repeats itself. We
have seen that a lot of investors react to speciﬁc situations in a similar way.
They display the same characteristics over and over again, even if there are
generations between the occurrences of events. Recall these important events
in ﬁnancial history:
The Stock Market Crash of 1929
Black Monday, October 1987
The Russian Ruble Crisis of 1998
The Dot-com Bubble of 2000
The Credit Crunch of 2008
It is remarkable to see how similar the discussions and comments were
in the wake of these previous shocks. Perhaps the most-heard comment was
“This time it’s different.” Usually such a statement would be followed by a
discussion or explanation as to why the current crisis or shock could not be
compared to a previous one.
When such discussions develop, I usually bring up the following quote:
Today’s youth loves luxury. They are bad mannered, despise all authority,
show no respect and talk when they should be working. The youngsters do
not rise from their seats when elderly people enter, they go against their parents, chat in company, gobble down their food and tyrannize their teachers.

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything

51

Then I ask: “Do you subscribe to the statement?” followed by “Do you
think it applies today?” Most people will answer positively to both these
questions. These same people will be surprised when they ﬁnd out who I am
quoting: the Greek philosopher Socrates, in 400 B.C.
The point is, most of the time things are not different. They may look a
little different from the outside, but at the end of the day it is history repeating
itself. Investors just do not believe it. The cartoon in Figure 2.1 is a perfect
example. It comes from a 1934 edition of the Chicago Tribune and shows
striking similarities with the 2008 “credit crunch” situation.

What Is Comparative Relative Strength?

It did not take very long to ﬁgure out that institutional (equity) investors had
different needs from private investors. Obviously, the size of their portfolios
differs hugely, but also their investment goals or mandates are absolutely not
comparable. Private investors, 99 percent of the time, are looking for absolute
return, whereas institutional investors, most of the time, are interested in
relative returns.
A professional fund manager typically is given a benchmark for a portfolio
and his or her job is to beat that benchmark. The portfolio manager who
oversees the European equity portfolio within a large institution has only
to beat the benchmark attached to that speciﬁc portfolio—for example, the
Euro STOXX 50 index. In a very large institution, they may even have a
separate portfolio manager for each sector. The allocation to European equities
is not the manager’s decision but instead comes from a chief investment ofﬁcer
or an investment committee.
No matter where you are in the professional decision pyramid, professional investing, like many other things in life, is all about making choices.
A private investor has a choice as to whether to invest. For a professional investor who oversees a portfolio for a pension fund or an insurance company,
for example, not investing is not a real choice.
A lot of academic work, started by Brinson, Hood, and Beebower in
1986, has shown that the majority of the variance in the return of a typical
(pension fund) portfolio comes from asset allocation. It therefore makes sense
to follow a top-down approach, which creates a decision pyramid or tree. This
decision tree can be very simple or very complex.
Imagine a very simple asset allocation choice, as shown in Figure 2.2. The
choice that the fund manager is facing is whether she should invest in bonds or
equities, or perhaps more realistically, whether she should overweight bonds

52
FIGURE 2.1

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
1934 Chicago Tribune Cartoon: “Planned Economy or Planned

Destruction?”

Source: www.chicagotribune.com/health/sns-pod-1934-cartoon-pic,0,7114709.photo.

versus equities, or the other way around. In order to answer this question,
technical analysts have a toolbox full of a wide variety of graphs and indicators.
These range from very simple—for example, Figure 2.3 presents a plain-vanilla
bar-chart of the S&P 500 index—to very complex—for example, Figure 2.4
shows the same S&P 500 index, but now with a number of technical indicators
plotted below the price chart.

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.2

53

Simple Asset Allocation Choice

Using any type of chart or combination of graphs, any technician can
come up with a more-or-less informed opinion on the equity market or the
bond market. The problem is that these single security graphs will answer
only the question of whether to invest in that speciﬁc security. Viewing the
market in a broader context is more difﬁcult. In the technician’s toolbox there
is only one technique that helps to make choices and to distinguish between
two securities, and that is relative strength (RS). Relative strength, as used here,
should not be confused with Wilder’s Relative Strength Index (RSI), which is
a single-security indicator. Relative strength is used to measure the strength
of two securities or indices against each other. It is therefore often referred to
as comparative relative strength.

FIGURE 2.3

Simple Bar Chart of S&P 500 Index

54

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 2.4

Complex Chart of S&P 500 Index with Indicators
1500
1000
100
50
0
-400
-100
200
-200
60
20
-20
-200

1998 1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006 2007

2008 2009

2010

2011

The standard relative strength line is simply deﬁned as:
RS = close security A/close security B
The close can be the close of any timeframe from one-minute intraday
series to monthly or even longer data series. Very often such an RS line is
used to compare the performance of an individual stock against an index, for
example, or two stocks against each other. When plotted in combination with
a standard bar graph, the RS line appears as shown in Figure 2.5.
The interpretation of a RS line is very straightforward. If the RS line
moves up, security A is outperforming security B, and obviously if the RS line
is moving down, security B is outperforming security A.
All techniques, tools, and indicators as we know them in technical analysis
are used to make only one decision: “Do I buy or sell this security?” The RS
line is the only tool in the technician’s toolbox that can be used to make
wider choices. It helps to distinguish between two securities and to declare a
preference, for example, “Do I buy security A or security B?”
Figure 2.5 shows the price (bar) chart of the Euro STOXX 50 index in
the upper pane and the relative strength line of the Euro STOXX 50 index
against the 10-year Bund future (the benchmark bond market in Europe) in
the lower pane.

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.5

55

Euro STOXX 50 Index with RS Line against Bund Future

When we look at a number of these RS graphs, we can conclude that the
RS line moves and behaves like the price chart of a single security. This means
that an RS line can be analyzed as if it were a security in its own right. We
can draw trend lines on them, use moving averages (MA), use indicators, and
much more.
After a strong decline from mid-2007 into a low that was formed in
the beginning of 2009, the RS line started to move up, breaking the falling
trend lines and making higher highs and higher lows. That was enough to
indicate that equities were outperforming bonds again, therefore suggesting
a preference of equities over bonds in the asset allocation of a portfolio. The
relative up-trend continued until the beginning of 2010, when the RS line
failed to set a new higher high and then broke down through the rising trend
line.
The RS line can be drawn on different periodicities ranging from daily
to monthly, but also on intraday timeframes (5-minute periods, 10-minute
periods, hourly periods, etc.). During my career as a sell-side analyst, I primarily used the weekly timeframe in my reports. I found that it suited the
longer time horizon of most institutions and showed less noise than a daily
timeframe. Although I will usually use weekly graphs in the examples, please
bear in mind that the method can be used on every other timeframe as well.
Using a relative strength chart like the one in Figure 2.5 will help the
technical analyst to make an informed decision on the equity/bond choice.

56
FIGURE 2.6

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
More Complex Asset Allocation Decision Tree

If we then step down one level in the decision tree to where, for example,
a choice has to be made on which region to invest in (e.g., United States,
Europe, or Asia), our decision tree starts to look like the one in Figure 2.6.
The example with the United States, Europe, or Asia is still a universe
that is limited in the number of elements. Only a small number of charts have
to be studied to get guidance on the proper asset allocation or over-/underweighting of the various regions.
The relationships that have to be analyzed and decided upon in the three
regions can be found by using the matrix shown in Table 2.1.
The possible combinations that can be derived from the table are United
States versus Europe, United States versus Asia, or Europe versus Asia. Obviously we do not have to look at United States versus United States, but we
also may forget to look at Europe versus United States, as it is the reverse of
United States versus Europe, which we already included in our list. Therefore,
a 3 × 3 matrix presents three combinations for analysis.
TABLE 2.1

Matrix of Relationships to Be Analyzed
United States

United States
Europe
Asia

×

Europe

Asia

√

√

×

√
×

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything

57

The formula that can be applied to calculate the number of combinations
to analyze is:
[(Elements in the universe)2 − Elements in the universe] : 2
In this case
(32 − 3) : 2 = 3
Another level down in the decision tree, we could ﬁnd a sector decision
for each region, for example. Assume that for the U.S. region, the sector
universe consists of the 10 GICS level I economic sectors. This would give:
(102 − 10) : 2 = 45 charts to look at and 45 judgments to make.
In Europe, where the Euro STOXX family of (sector) indices is often
used, it comes down to:
(192 − 19) : 2 = 171 charts
Imagine going into the selection of individual equities. The ﬁrst thing to
do to get on the radar screen of a portfolio manager is to offer them a piece
of research that adds value to their process. As a technical analyst, I translated
that into a monthly technical research report based on relative strength. In a
very original mood, I dubbed it “The European Sector Report.” That report
formed the foundation for the relative rotation graphs that I will introduce
later in this chapter.
In the early days I used a very straightforward relative strength approach.
Figure 2.7 shows the weekly bar chart of the S&P 500 Financial sector
(1998–2003) and the RS line of the Financials sector against the S&P 500 index. Overall, the rising RS line from 2000 to 2003 tells us that ﬁnancial stocks
were outperforming the broader S&P 500 index. Considering the movements
in more detail, starting from the RS low in March 2000 through 2001, the
line was rising, or the ﬁnancials were outperforming the S&P 500. Toward
the end of 2001, the RS line began moving sideways, or equally performing
the S&P 500 index. During this time, the price of the ﬁnancial index was
making some lower highs and lower lows, but wasn’t underperforming the
benchmark. At the start of 2002 and into 2003, equal performance turned
back into outperformance. The broader market was declining more than this
sector. By 2003, the ﬁnancials index was at the same value as at the start of

58
FIGURE 2.7

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
S&P 500 Financials Index with RS Line against S&P 500 Index

2000. During that same period, the S&P 500 index dropped from highs near
1500 to lows around 800–900. Investors holding ﬁnancial stocks during that
period didn’t lose much at all, while those who owned the broader market lost
upward of 40 percent.
Although the RS line itself is already very helpful, it is still a fairly volatile
line. While it clearly shows relative trends, there is still a lot of noise present
and gauging the direction of “trend” remains a subjective call. In order to
overcome some of these issues, I reverted to the use of some “old friends” in
technical analysis, namely moving averages. Just as we use moving averages
on price charts and in many other indicators, we can use moving averages on
RS graphs in order to determine trends.
Figure 2.8 shows the weekly bar chart of the S&P 500 Energy sector
with the relative strength line against the S&P 500 index. Through the
RS line I have drawn two moving averages, one with a look-back period
of 10 weeks and one with a look-back period of 30 weeks.∗ The crossings
of the two trigger a change in the trend of the RS line. When the 10week moving average is above the 30-week moving average, we rate the RS
∗
I have been using the combination of 10- and 30-week look-back periods since 1994.
They continue to serve my purposes, but anyone can change these values according to their
preferences.

Everything Is Relative Strength Is Everything
FIGURE 2.8

59

S&P Energy Index with RS Line against the S&P 500 Index

line as being in an uptrend. When the 10-week moving average is below
the 30-week moving average, we rate the RS line as being in a downtrend.
This is the same application as applying moving averages to a price chart.
The only difference to keep in mind is that we are now looking at relative
movements. So when we have an RS line that is in an uptrend (10-week
above 30-week), then we could still have a situation where the security we are
looking at is dropping but the benchmark, for example, the S&P index, is
dropping even faster. Although the result will be negative in absolute terms, the
security is outperforming the benchmark, and that is exactly what professional
money managers are looking for. Clearly the reverse is true as well: When
the S&P index is rising, we are looking for sectors or stocks that are rising
even faster.
Interpreting the trend of the RS line on the basis of the position of
the moving averages takes a lot of the guesswork out of the analysis and
makes it less subjective. However, the use of moving averages, by deﬁnition,
introduces a lag. As a result, we can distinguish one more situation and that
is when the 10-week moving average has crossed above the 30-week moving
average, which signals an uptrend, but the raw RS line has already crossed
back below both the 10- and the 30-week moving average. Such a situation
will be seen as a warning signal that maybe something is cooking. So when

60

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

the 10-week average is still above the 30-week average, but the raw RS line
has dropped below both averages, the trend is rated neutral. The same goes
for the reverse when the 10-week average is below the 30-week average (a
downtrend), but the raw RS line has crossed above both of the moving
averages.
This is better illustrated in Figure 2.9. This is the same view as shown in
Figure 2.8, but zoomed in on the November 2007 to November 2008 period.
Up until August 2008, the 10-week moving average is clearly above the 30week moving average, indicating an uptrend, and thus an “outperformance”
condition for the Energy sector. At the ﬁrst dashed vertical line, the RS line
drops below both moving averages, while the 10-week moving average is still
above the 30-week moving average. This characterizes a “neutral” condition
(something is cooking). A few weeks later in September, at the second dashed
vertical line, the 10-week moving average crosses below the 30-week moving
average, triggering an “underperformance” condition. Finally in November, at
the third dashed vertical line, the RS line crosses above both moving averages,
triggering another neutral condition.
For a long time this was the type of chart that I used in communications
with institutional investors, and it served its purpose fairly well.
At the end of the 1990s, a number of these RS lines started to overshoot
to the upside, creating huge differences between the moving averages and
RS lines way above the 10- and 30-week moving averages. This created a
situation where the raw RS line, and therefore the price of the security, could
drop substantially before triggering a change in trend. Basically, they were
giving away a lot of the gains that were run up during the rally.
In an attempt to speed up the signals from my RS graphs in combination
with their moving averages, or at least to get an early warning signal, I started to
experiment with overlaying some other indicators on the raw RS line. I ended
up using the well-known moving average convergence/divergence (MACD)
technique. This indicator looks at and draws the difference between two
moving averages on a price chart (usually 12- and 26-periods, but they can be
varied to suit the individual investor’s needs), resulting in a line that oscillates
around zero. If the MACD reads positive, it means that the shorter moving
average lies above the longer moving average; that is, the market is moving up,
and vice versa. The higher the reading of the MACD, the bigger the difference
between the two moving averages, hence the more price action in the opposite
direction is needed to push the MACD line below (or above) the zero line.
In order to detect the moment where the difference between the shorter and
the longer moving averages is starting to decrease, a so-called trigger-line is

61

Nov

2007

FIGURE 2.9

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

S&P Energy Index

Apr

May

Jun
2008

Jul

S&P Energy Index with RS Line against S&P 500 Index, Close-Up View

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

0.36

0.38

0.40

0.42

0.44

0.46

0.48

0.50

300

350

400

450

500

550

600

650

700

62

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

drawn through the MACD line. This trigger-line is simply a 9-period moving
average of the MACD line (this timeframe can be varied). Therefore, in the
default setting, the MACD line crosses above and below the zero line when
the 12- and 26-period moving averages cross each other on the price chart.
The crossings of the MACD-line and its own trigger-line are then used as an
early warning indicator, alerting the trader that the distance between the two
moving averages is shrinking.
With slight modiﬁcation, this whole exercise can also be executed on a
raw RS line. I usually use a combination of the 10- and 30-period moving
averages on the raw RS line. If we draw a RS-MACD that looks at the
difference between the 10- and 30-period moving averages of the raw RS line,
we will get a line that oscillates around zero, indicating the strength of the
relative trend. The higher (or lower) the value of the RS-MACD line, the
stronger the trend of the underlying RS line. This RS-MACD line will then
cross above and below the zero line, when the 10- and 30-period moving
averages in the RS-graph cross each other. To get early warning signals and
detect the point in time when the distance between the two moving averages
starts to decrease, a trigger-line (9-period moving average of the RS-MACD
line) is drawn. A crossing of the RS-MACD line below its trigger-line indicates
that the relative uptrend is losing momentum and turning the other way. A
crossing of the RS-MACD line above its trigger-line indicates that the relative
downtrend is losing momentum and starting to turn around.
Figure 2.10 shows the same chart as in Figure 2.9, but now the RSMACD has been added in the bottom pane. The rally from early 2007 into
mid-2008 is a good example of a very strong market that starts to turn. Due
to the lag that’s introduced by using moving averages, the 10- and 30-week
averages on the RS line (middle pane in Figure 2.10) were very far apart. The
RS-MACD catches the deterioration in a very early stage by setting a peak
in mid-2008 (see label 1) and turning sharply down, giving an early warning
signal that the relative outperformance of this sector might have come to an
end. By the time the averages on the RS line are crossing each other (see label
2), the RS-MACD line crosses below zero.
