 At our annual town hall meeting in June 2008, I said that seen through my eyes Bridgewater was then, and always had been, “both terrible and terrific at the same time.” After about five years of rapid growth toward building Bridgewater as an institution, we had encountered our newest set of problems. This was nothing new. Since I started Bridgewater we always had some problems because we were always doing bold new things, making mistakes, and evolving quickly. For example, technology had changed so quickly during the years we’d built the company that we had literally switched from using slide rules to spreadsheet software to advanced artificial intelligence. With so much changing so fast, it had seemed pointless to focus on getting everything “just right” when something newer and better was sure to come along. So we built our technology in a light and flexible way, which made sense at the time but also created a number of hairballs that badly needed untangling. That same approach of moving quickly and flexibly had been true throughout the company, so several departments had become overstretched as we grew. It had always been fun being cutting-edge, but we were having a hard time becoming rock-solid, especially in the noninvestment side of the business. The organization needed to be renovated in several ways—but it wasn’t going to be easy. 
 In 2008 I was working about eighty hours a week doing my two full-time jobs (overseeing our investments and overseeing the company), and in my opinion not doing well enough at either. I felt that I, and the company more broadly, were slipping from being pervasively excellent. From the get-go I had toggled acceptably between investment management and business management. But now that we were a bigger company, the business management side was demanding much more time than I had to give it. I conducted a time-and-motion study of all of my investment and management responsibilities; it showed it would take me about 165 hours a week to achieve the level of excellence that I would be satisfied with in overseeing both our investments and management. That was obviously impossible. Since I wanted to delegate as much as possible, I asked whether the things I was doing could be done excellently by others, and if so, who those others were. Everyone agreed that most of those areas couldn’t adequately be delegated. I clearly hadn’t done a good enough job of finding and training others to whom I could delegate my responsibilities. 
 To me, the greatest success you can have as the person in charge is to orchestrate others to do things well without you. A step below that is doing things well yourself, and worst of all is doing things poorly yourself. As I reflected on my position, I could see that despite all of my and Bridgewater’s amazing achievements, I had not achieved this highest level of success. In fact, I was still struggling to achieve the second-highest level (doing things well myself), even though Bridgewater was extremely successful. 
 At the time, there were 738 people working at Bridgewater, with fourteen department heads. I oversaw the department heads, along with a Management Committee I’d created because I knew I couldn’t trust myself to know what was best without others probing me. I had structured the reporting lines so that I both reported to the Management Committee and held its members accountable for their oversight of the company. I wanted them to also own the responsibility of producing pervasive excellence and I wanted to be at their service in helping them achieve it. 
 In May 2008, I wrote an email to the five members of the Management Committee, copying the company, telling them that “I am escalating to let you know that I have reached my limits and that the quality of my work, and my work-life balance, are both suffering unacceptably.” 
 THE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC CRISIS OF 2008 
 Recognizing that I was stretched wouldn’t by itself be enough to slow the flow of things coming at me, especially in the investment area at what proved to be a time of historic turbulence. 
 Because too often I had been painfully surprised by different types of events that hadn’t happened to me before but happened in other times or other places—like the currency devaluation of 1971, or the debt crisis in the early 1980s—I’d developed our economic and market principles to be timeless and universal. In other words, I knew that we needed to understand all important economic and market movements, not just those that happened to me, and to make sure the principles we were using to position ourselves would have worked in all past times and all other countries. 
 As a result, back in the early 2000s, we had included a “depression gauge” in our systems that specified the actions we should take if a certain configuration of events began to play out in a way indicating a heightened risk of a debt crisis and depression. In 2007, this gauge indicated that a bubble of debt was nearing its bursting point because the costs of debt service were outpacing projected cash flows. Because interest rates were so close to 0 percent, I knew that central banks could not ease monetary policy enough to reverse the downturn the way they had in prior recessions. This was the exact configuration that had led to past depressions. 
 My mind and gut flashed back to my 1979–82 experience. I was now both thirty years more knowledgeable and a whole lot less confident. While the dynamic in the economy seemed clear to me, I was much less sure I was right. I remembered how clearly it had seemed to me that the debt bust I’d been expecting in 1982 would sink the economy—and how painfully wrong I had turned out to be. 
 That experience also drove me to learn a lot more about debt crises and their effects on the markets, and I researched and traded through a number of them, including the Latin American debt crisis in the 1980s, the Japanese debt crisis of the 1990s, the blowup of Long-Term Capital Management in 1998, the bursting of the dot-com bubble in 2000, and the fallout from the attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon in 2001. With the help of my teammates at Bridgewater, I took history books and old newspapers and went day by day through the Great Depression and the Weimar Republic, comparing what happened then with what was happening in the present. The exercise only confirmed my worst fears: It seemed inevitable to me that large numbers of individuals, companies, and banks were about to have serious debt problems and that the Federal Reserve couldn’t lower interest rates to cushion the blow, as was the case in 1930–32. 
 My fear of being wrong pushed me to seek out other smart folks to poke holes in my view. I also wanted to walk key policymakers through my thinking, both to stress-test it and to make them aware of the situation as I saw it, so I went to Washington to speak with people in both the U.S. Treasury and the White House. Though they were polite, what I was presenting seemed too far-fetched to them, especially when by all outward indications the economy seemed to be booming. Most of them didn’t go very deep into our reasoning or calculations before they dismissed them, with one exception: Ramsen Betfarhad, Vice President Dick Cheney’s deputy assistant of domestic policy. He worked through all our numbers and was concerned by them. 
 Because everything we saw lined up and we couldn’t find anyone who could refute our views, we prepared our clients’ portfolios by balancing our positions in a way that there would be considerable upside and limited downside in the portfolios if we were right and putting in a backup plan in case we were wrong. Though we thought we were well prepared, we were as worried about being right as we were about being wrong. The prospect of the world economy going over a waterfall was scary to all of us because of what it might mean to those who weren’t protected. 
 As in 1982, when conditions deteriorated and circumstances increasingly transpired as we’d predicted, policymakers began to pay more attention to us. Betfarhad had me come to the White House to meet with him. Tim Geithner, president of the New York Fed, asked to see me as well. I brought Bob, Greg, and a young analyst named Bob Elliott to a lunch meeting with Geithner. We walked him through the numbers and he literally turned white. When he asked me where we’d gotten them from, I told him they were publicly available. We’d just put them together and looked at them in a different way. 
 Two days after our meeting with Geithner, Bear Stearns collapsed. That didn’t trigger much worry for most people or for the markets, though it was a sign of what was to come. It wasn’t until six months later in September, when Lehman Brothers collapsed, that everyone else connected the dots. At that point the dominoes fell fast, and though they couldn’t contain all the damage, policymakers, most importantly Fed chairman Ben Bernanke, reacted brilliantly to create “a beautiful deleveraging” (i.e., a way of lowering debt burdens while keeping economic growth positive and inflation low). 8 
 To make this long story short, we navigated this period well for our clients, anticipating market moves and avoiding losses. Our flagship fund made over 14 percent in 2008, a year when many other investors recorded losses of more than 30 percent. We would have done even better had we not feared being wrong, which led us to balance our bets instead of arrogantly and foolishly putting more chips at stake. But I had no regrets because I had learned that it wasn’t smart to bet that way. While in this case we would have made more money if we were less balanced, we certainly wouldn’t have survived and succeeded long enough to be in such a position if we’d approached our investments in that way. 
 The 2008 debt crisis was another one of those like the one in 1982, which were both like many more before them and many more that will come. I enjoyed reflecting back on my painful mistakes and the value of the principles they gave me. When the next big one comes along in twenty-five years or so, or who knows when, it will probably come as a surprise and cause a lot of pain unless those principles are properly encoded in algorithms put into our computers. 
 HELPING POLICYMAKERS 
 Our economic and market principles were very different from most others, which accounted for our different results. I will explain these differences in Economic and Investment Principles and won’t digress into them now. 
 As former Fed chairman Alan Greenspan put it, “The models failed at a time when we needed them most . . . JP Morgan had the American economy accelerating three days before [the Lehman Brothers’ collapse]—their model failed. The Fed model failed. The IMF model failed . . . So that left me asking myself: What happened?” Bill Dudley, president of the New York Fed, homed in on the problem when he said, “I think there’s a fundamental problem in terms of how macroeconomists look at the economic outlook, growth, and inflation . . . If you look at the big macro models, they don’t have a financial sector typically in them. They don’t admit the possibility that the financial sector could essentially melt down, and therefore the monetary policy impulse could be completely impaired. So I think the lesson of the crisis is to do a lot more work to make sure that the finance people are talking to the macroeconomist people and building models that are more robust.” He was right. We “finance people” see the world very differently from the way economists do. As a result of our success, policymakers reached out to us more, which led me to have a lot more contact with senior economic policymakers in the U.S. and around the world. Out of respect for the privacy of our conversations, I won’t say much about them except to note that they became much more open to our nontraditional ways of looking at economies and markets, and more skeptical about traditional economic thinking, which had failed to either signal or avert the crisis. 
 Most of our exchanges were one-sided; I generally answered their questions and didn’t ask any that would put them in the awkward position of having to avoid answering for fear of compromising confidential information. I met with these leaders without making judgments and without regard for their particular ideologies. I approached them like a doctor, just wanting to make the most beneficial impact. 
 They wanted my help because my global macroeconomic perspective as an investor was very different from theirs as policymakers. We were both products of our environments. Investors think independently, anticipate things that haven’t happened yet, and put real money at stake with their bets. Policymakers come from environments that nurture consensus, not dissent, that train them to react to things that have already occurred, and that prepare them for negotiations, not placing bets. Because they don’t benefit from the constant feedback about the quality of their decisions that investors get, it’s not clear who the good and bad decision makers among them are. They also have to be politicians. Even the most clear-sighted and capable policymakers must constantly divert their attention from the immediate problems they are dealing with to fight the objections of other policymakers, and the political systems they must navigate are often dysfunctional. 
 While the economic machine is more powerful than any political system in the long run (ineffective politicians will be replaced and incapable political systems will change), the interaction between the two is what drives economic cycles in the here and now—and it’s often not pretty to watch. 
 MAKING GREAT RETURNS 
 Our returns in 2010 were the best ever—nearly 45 and 28 percent in our two Pure Alpha funds and close to 18 percent in All Weather—almost exclusively because the systems we had programmed to take in information and process it were doing it superbly. These systems worked far better than we could with just our brains. Without them, we would have had to manage money the old and painful way: by trying to weigh in our heads all the markets and all the influences on them and then bring them together into a portfolio of bets. We would have had to hire and supervise a bunch of different investment managers, and because we couldn’t have blind faith in them, we’d have had to understand how each one made their decisions, which would mean watching what they were doing and why so we could know what to expect from them, while dealing with all their different personality issues. Why would I want to do that? It seemed to me that that way of investing or managing an organization was obsolete, like reading a map instead of following a GPS. Of course, building our system was hard work—it had taken us over thirty years to do it. 
 Having too much money to manage can hurt performance, since the costs of getting in and out of positions can be high because being too big can push the markets. Making over 40 percent in 2010 had put us in the position of having to return a lot of money to clients who actually wanted to give us more to manage. We were always careful to stay safely short of being too big, lest we kill the goose that lays the golden eggs. 
 Our clients didn’t want their money back—they wanted us to grow it. So we were presented with the puzzle of how to maximize our capacity without hurting our performance. We hadn’t looked at that before, because we’d never had that much money. We quickly discovered that if we just tweaked what we did and created a new fund that managed money the same way as Pure Alpha but invested it solely in the most liquid markets, our expected returns would be the same and the expected risk (i.e., volatility) only slightly higher. 
 We programmed this new approach into our computers, back-tested it to see how it worked in all countries and time frames, and explained it to our clients in detail so they could thoroughly understand the logic behind it. As much as I love and have benefited from artificial intelligence, I believe that only people can discover such things and then program computers to do them. That’s why I believe that the right people, working with each other and with computers, are the key to success. 
 Toward the end of the year, we opened “Pure Alpha Major Markets” and clients invested $15 billion in it. Since then its returns have been as expected—that is, about the same as Pure Alpha’s (actually better, but only slightly). Our clients were delighted. In fact, this new option was so popular that by 2011 we had to close it to new investment too. 
 GOING FROM BELOW THE RADAR TO ABOVE IT 
 Success is a double-edged sword—as I learned after we anticipated the financial crisis and Bridgewater and I began to receive unwanted public attention. Our unusual performance, our unusual way of looking at economics and markets, and our unusual culture made us a continuing subject of interest. I wanted to stay under the radar so I avoided interacting with the press. That didn’t stop the press from writing about me and Bridgewater, which they typically did in a sensationalistic way—either painting me as a superhero investor who walked on water or as a leader of a cult, and sometimes both. 
 Getting a lot of attention for being successful is a bad position to be in. Australians call it the “tall poppy syndrome,” because the tallest poppies in a field are the ones most likely to have their heads whacked off. I didn’t like the attention and I especially didn’t like the mischaracterizations of Bridgewater as a cult, because I felt it was hurting our ability to recruit great people. At the same time, I realized that because we didn’t let the media see how we truly operated inside Bridgewater, those sensational portrayals were unavoidable. 
 So I decided in late 2010 to make public my Principles —which explained exactly what we were doing and why. I put it on our website so it could be read freely and understood by people outside the company. 
 Doing that was a hard decision, but it turned out to be a great one. Most people got it and many beyond Bridgewater benefited from reading them. More than three million people have downloaded Principles ; some even had it translated into their own languages at their own expense. I’ve received a large number of thank-you notes from people who said that reading Principles had changed their lives. 
 PREPARING BRIDGEWATER TO SUCCEED WITHOUT ME 
 Since I was a kid, I’ve learned by doing. I’d just dive in after things I wanted and try to survive long enough to learn from my mistakes and improve. If I changed fast enough to become sustainable at whatever I was doing, then I would build on that to flourish. I’ve always had great faith in my ability to figure things out, and over time my need to figure things out made me better at doing so. As a result, I tended to hire people who were the same way—who would dive right into challenges, figure out what to do about them, and then do it. I figured that if they had great character, common sense, and creativity, and were driven to achieve our shared mission, they would discover what it took to be successful if I gave them the freedom to figure out how to make the right decisions. I knew that micromanaging and handcuffing them wouldn’t work because neither of us would like it. If I was the one telling them what to do, I wouldn’t be getting any leverage from them. Besides, I didn’t want to work with people who needed that. 
 But starting in the 1990s, I began to recognize the emotional barriers most people had to looking at their problems and weaknesses forthrightly. Rather than embracing ambiguous situations and difficult challenges, they tended to get uncomfortable when facing them. It is the rare bird who has the right mix of common sense, creativity, and character to shape change. Almost everyone needs help before they can get there. So I wrote down my principles and the logic behind them and shared them, hoping they could be used by those who thought they were good and debated openly by those who didn’t. I figured that over time we would all get in sync about how particular situations should be handled. 
 But while almost all of us quickly agreed on the principles intellectually, many still struggled to convert what they had agreed to intellectually into effective action. This was because their habits and emotional barriers remained stronger than their reasoning. The training and the virtual-reality tapes helped a lot, but they still weren’t enough. 
 No matter how much effort we put into screening new hires and training them to work in our idea meritocracy, it was inevitable that many of them would fall short. My approach was to hire, train, test, and then fire or promote quickly, so that we could rapidly identify the excellent hires and get rid of the ordinary ones, repeating the process again and again until the percentage of those who were truly great was high enough to meet our needs. 
 But for this to work, we needed people with high standards who wouldn’t hesitate to eliminate people who couldn’t cut it. Many new employees (and some older ones) still were reluctant to probe hard at what people were like, which made things worse. It’s tough to be tough on people. 
 Of course, most of the people who come to Bridgewater are adventurous types; they know what they’re getting into. They understand that the chances their job will not work out are higher than normal, but they embrace the risk because the upside of succeeding is huge relative to the downside of having it not work out. In the worst case they learn a lot about themselves, have an interesting experience, and leave for other jobs; in the best case, they become a part of an exceptional team achieving exceptional things. 
 New hires typically go through an acclimation period of about eighteen to twenty-four months before becoming comfortable with the truthfulness and transparency that is such an essential part of the Bridgewater culture—especially accepting one’s mistakes and figuring out how to deal with them. But some people never adapt to it. I’ve been told that joining Bridgewater is a bit like joining an intellectual Navy SEALs; others describe it as going to a school of self-discovery run by someone like the Dalai Lama. The people who thrive say that while the period of adjustment is difficult, it is also joyous because of the excellence they achieve and the extraordinary relationships they make. And the ones who can’t or won’t adapt must be cut; this is essential to keeping Bridgewater excellent. 
 For a long time, I had been the one responsible for establishing the culture and upholding its high standards. But in 2010, I was sixty years old and had been running Bridgewater for thirty-five years. Though I expected to be good for another ten years or so, I was ready to put my energy into other things. While I always wanted to be deep into the markets, I wanted to spend more time with my family and friends, to help policymakers, and to pursue a few growing passions (like ocean exploration and philanthropy) as well as whatever else interested me. My plan was to step out as CEO while helping my replacements as a mentor, remain in my investment role, and take the time I gained from no longer managing the company to suck the marrow out of life while I still could. 
 As with all organizations, whether Bridgewater would succeed would come down to the people and the culture. People who run companies are faced with important choices every day. How they make those choices determines the character of the company, the quality of its relationships, and the outcomes it produces. When the buck stopped with me, I was responsible for most of the important decisions. Now those decisions would be in the hands of others. While they would have a well-established culture and agreed-upon principles that had worked for decades, the proof would be in the pudding.
