
19

c01.indd 19

1/13/09 9:52:06 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

is that forex is open 24 hours a day (except weekends), as the market
travels seamlessly around the globe with the changing time zones.
Other notable distinguishing features include the fact that there are
only a handful of tradable currencies to worry about, as opposed
to countless stocks and options, as well as the fact that forex offers
extremely high leverage levels (currently up to 400:1).
The key speculative players in the foreign exchange market
include the major commercial and investment banks, as well as the
larger hedge funds. The lowest rung on the totem pole of influential
participants consists of individual retail traders. Although there may
be a great deal of enthusiasm in this group, individual traders are
generally unable to move the forex markets in any appreciable way.
The primary drivers of foreign exchange price movement include
key fundamental factors like interest rates, GDP, employment, and
inflation, which all help affect the basic economic supply and demand
situation for each currency. Besides the fundamentals, technical factors can also contribute significantly to exchange rate movement.
Finally, the rest of the chapters in this book were introduced. In
its entirety, this book serves as an essential guide to foreign exchange
trading, as the title suggests. But nothing could ever take the place of
hands-on, practical experience. Forex traders are fortunate to have
their pick of free demo practice accounts provided by forex brokers. These accounts generally differ from real accounts only by the
kind of money traded (play money versus real money). Therefore, it
is incumbent upon the serious student of forex to practice diligently
with these demo accounts, as no better method exists of gaining
invaluable experience and self-directed education at no cost.

20

c01.indd 20

1/13/09 9:52:06 AM

CHAPTER 2

Basic Foreign
Exchange Trading
Mechanics
After reading this chapter, you will be
able to:
●

Appreciate the unique structure of currency pairs.

●

Place foreign exchange trades using any type of trade
order.

●

Understand the mechanics behind stop losses and profit
limits.

●

Recognize how lot size, leverage, and margin can affect
your trading.

●

Identify the potential transaction costs involved in forex
trading, including spreads and interest.

21

c02.indd 21

1/13/09 9:56:15 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

A natomy of a Currency Pair
The foreign exchange market is traded in a very unique way when
compared with other major financial markets like stocks or futures.
Unlike these more traditional markets, foreign exchange trading is
accomplished using the relative value of the underlying instrument,
rather than the absolute value.
More specifically, currencies are traded in pairs. When forex
traders talk about trading the U.S. dollar, for example, they are really
talking about trading the U.S. dollar’s relative value against another
currency. This other currency could be the euro, the British pound,
the Japanese yen, or even the Thai baht, among many others. The
first currency in a currency pair is called the “base” currency, while
the second currency is called the “quote” (or “counter”) currency.
It cannot be emphasized enough how important it is to keep in
mind that there are two integral, opposing components of a traded
currency pair, instead of the single component prevalent in trading stocks or futures. When forex traders initiate market positions,
it is imperative that they take into consideration the relative value
of both currencies. This means that a trader should not just consider
whether a currency will go up or down in value. Rather, the trader
must always take into account whether the currency’s value will go
up or down in comparison with another currency.
For example, one of the most commonly traded currency pairs
is the USD/JPY, which can be described in longhand as the U.S.
dollar against the Japanese yen. If traders maintain the view that
the value of the U.S. dollar will rise in relation to the Japanese yen,
they will buy the USD/JPY pair. Conversely, if they think that the

22

c02.indd 22

1/13/09 9:56:15 AM

Anatomy of a Currency Pair

U.S. dollar will fall in relation to the Japanese yen, they will sell the
USD/JPY pair.
Logically, by the same token, if traders believe that the yen will
rise in relation to the dollar, they will sell USD/JPY. And if they
think the yen will fall against the dollar, they will buy USD/JPY. At
first this may appear confusing. But if one considers currency pairs
as a coupling of polar opposites, it becomes a lot easier to grasp with
some time and experience.
As a point of reference, the top tier of currency pairs are the four
“majors,” which consist of the most traded, and therefore most liquid,
U.S. dollar-based pairs. These are EUR/USD (euro against U.S. dollar),
USD/JPY (U.S. dollar against Japanese yen), GBP/USD (British pound
against U.S. dollar), and USD/CHF (U.S. dollar against Swiss franc).
Then, there are the “semi-major” pairs, which also contain the
U.S. dollar but are not traded as actively as the majors. These include
USD/CAD (U.S. dollar against Canadian dollar) and AUD/USD
(Australian dollar against U.S. dollar).
After these, there are the many significant “crosses” which, by
definition, do not contain the U.S. dollar. Crosses include EUR/
GBP (euro against British pound), AUD/NZD (Australian dollar
against New Zealand dollar), CAD/JPY (Canadian dollar against
Japanese yen), GBP/CHF (British pound against Swiss franc), and
EUR/JPY (euro against Japanese yen), among others.
And finally, the exotics, which are thinly traded on the global
forex market compared to the more popular majors and crosses,
round out the currency pair list. These pairs include such currencies
as the Hungarian forint (HUF), the Malaysian ringgit (MYR), and
the South African rand (ZAR), among numerous others.

23

c02.indd 23

1/13/09 9:56:16 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

G oing Long and Selling Short
The fact that currencies are traded in pairs differentiates the foreign
exchange market from other financial markets in important ways,
one of which is the concept of long and short.
In trading equities, for example, a “long” entry is simply the
process of buying shares in a specific security in the hope that it will
go up in value. Conversely, a “short” entry is to sell shares before
actually owning them. This is with the understanding that the shares
must be bought back or “covered” at a later date, hopefully for a
profit if the stock goes down. Consequently, if traders believe that
a stock will go up, they will enter the trade “long.” If, on the other
hand, they think it will go down in price, they will sell “short.”
The foreign exchange market, in contrast, treats long and
short in a significantly different manner. To be long EUR/USD, for
example, is to simultaneously buy euro and sell dollar. To be short
EUR/USD, on the other hand, is to simultaneously sell euro and
buy dollar. So whether one is long or short any given currency pair,
one is always long one of the currencies in the pair, and short the
other.
This concept may seem foreign to traders used to dealing with
stocks and/or futures, but it essentially means that no matter what
position a trader takes in the currency markets, that trader is always
both bullish (financially optimistic) on one currency while simultaneously bearish (financially pessimistic) on another.
Now that the structure of currency pairs has been established,
the all-important topics of order type and trade placement can be
discussed.

24

c02.indd 24

1/13/09 9:56:16 AM

Going Long and Selling Short

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT

Robert R. Prechter Jr.
Robert R. Prechter Jr., CMT, famed publisher of The Elliott Wave
Theorist since 1979, is founder/president of Elliott Wave International (elliottwave.com) and executive director of the Socionomics
Institute. Legendary for his market timing and trading acumen utilizing Elliott Wave principles, Prechter has won numerous major accolades from the media and financial community over an illustrious,
decades-long career. He has authored many books, several of which
were instrumental in bringing Ralph Nelson Elliott’s groundbreaking
Elliott Wave Principle into the forefront of financial market analysis.
Prechter states:
“Currencies help us understand a fundamental aspect
of markets. They make clear that all markets are simply
ratios.”
“Stock indexes are expressions of share values in
terms of some currency. For example, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average is the ratio of an average of 30 Dow
stocks relative to dollars. But one could just as well
express the ratio as its inverse, showing the value of
a dollar in terms of 30 Dow stocks. Then, instead of
watching the Dow go up and down, investors would
be watching the dollar go up and down in terms of a certain group of 30 stocks. They would be talking about how
their dollars are doing instead of how their stocks are
doing.”
“Many people have difficulty understanding the simple fact that markets are ratios. Thankfully, currency
markets illustrate the matter clearly. A U.S. investor can
observe the dollar going up and down by watching the
dollar/euro ratio. A European can watch the euro go up

25

c02.indd 25

1/13/09 9:56:16 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT (CONTINUED)
and down by watching the euro/dollar ratio. Each of these
two investors—if he hasn’t thought about the matter—
might have a different psychological orientation to his
local expression of the ratio. But that doesn’t change the
fact—obvious in this instance—that both investors are
looking at exactly the same information. ‘Up’ and ‘down’
have no real referent.”
“Most stock investors are married to the idea that up
is good and down is bad. There is some basis for truth
in this feeling, because a downtrend in the stock market indicates a trend toward more negative social mood,
which in turn has negative results in social action. But in
terms of investment success, the direction is irrelevant,
and feelings of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ only get in the way of
successful decision-making.”
“A currency investor has an advantage over a stock
investor, because he should be far less married to
feelings of whether a certain direction for a ratio is
‘good’ or ‘bad.’ In the currency trader’s world, there is no
qualitative difference between the numerator and the
denominator. On one side of the ratio is one currency,
and on the other side is another. There is not even properly an ‘up’ or a ‘down’ direction. Every move is both
directions, depending on how you express the ratio.
The point is that a currency investor should be able to
approach his craft with less psychological baggage than
a stock investor carries and therefore with more objectivity and a better chance of success. This difference makes
it easier for a currency analyst to see that his job is not to
‘hope’ or ‘fear’ but just to get the trends right. If all investors could learn that lesson, they would be better off.”

26

c02.indd 26

1/13/09 9:56:16 AM

E n t r y o r d e r s — Wa i t i n g u n t i l t h e P r i c e I s R i g h t

M arket Orders — On the Spot
Depending on the specific strategy or type of trading preferred,
foreign exchange traders often rely heavily upon market orders. A
market order simply means that a trader wishes to enter a currency
position at the present moment, whether it is an order to buy (long)
or sell (short) a specific currency pair.
The main functionality that differentiates this type of order from
others is the fact that a market order is executed at the current market price, as opposed to a future price level.
Market orders are primarily used by traders who are physically
at their trading stations watching the market, waiting for either a
specific technical chart setup or a fundamental news announcement.
Once one of these trading opportunities presents itself, the trader is
then able to establish a virtually instant market position through the
use of a well-placed market order.

E ntry Orders — Waiting until the Price Is Right
In contrast to the immediate nature of market orders, entry orders are
pending positions whose purpose is to trigger when a certain price
level is reached. These types of orders can be set to execute well ahead
of time, and will only be executed if the specified price is reached.
There are two primary types of entry orders—stop entries and
limit entries. In the retail foreign exchange market, the functional
discrepancy between these two entry order types is largely semantic,
and many brokers simply blur the differences by calling them both
limit orders. But for those forex brokers that keep the delineation

27

c02.indd 27

1/13/09 9:56:17 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

intact, traders simply need to learn and remember the definitions,
which are as follows:
Buy stop—an entry order to buy at a price above the current price.
Buy limit—an entry order to buy at a price below the current price.
Sell stop—an entry order to sell at a price below the current price.
Sell limit—an entry order to sell at a price above the current price.
Unlike market orders, entry orders are primarily used by traders
who are unable or unwilling to be watching real-time prices and
waiting for trade opportunities at their trading stations. With entry
orders, complete orders can be entered ahead of time that encompass the full trading lifecycle, including both the trade entry as well
as the stop loss and profit target exits. These trade exits will be discussed in more detail in the next section.
Entry orders may also be used as a tool for enforcing order entry
discipline. Traders placing market orders at the current price are
often prone to entering orders “on the fly,” as a result of counterproductive emotions like greed and fear. In contrast, the mechanism
of entry orders encourages traders to enter trades only if their specific, predetermined price level and entry rules are met. Discipline
is a tremendously vital factor in successful trading that will be discussed further in Chapter 6.

S topping Losses with Stop Losses and
Trailing Stops
Whereas market orders and entry orders are trade entries, stop losses,
trailing stops, and profit limits (described in the next section) are

28

c02.indd 28

1/13/09 9:56:17 AM

S t o p p i n g L o s s e s w i t h S t o p L o s s e s a n d Tr a i l i n g S t o p s

trade exits. While many beginning traders concentrate almost exclusively on entries, most intermediate and advanced traders eventually come to realize that exits are at least as important, and some say
even more important, than getting the entries right.
In this section, only the basic mechanics of stop losses and trailing stops will be touched upon. Later, in Chapter 6, in a section that
covers risk management, the full meaning and nuances of using stop
losses will be discussed.
Stop losses are exactly what they appear to be. They actually “stop losses.” A stop loss is a form of pending order that can
be attached to any open order or position, whether that trade was
originally a market order or an entry order.
A stop loss closes an open trade when that trade reaches a predetermined level of loss. It is the price point at which a trader no
longer wishes to be involved in the trade because of the desire to
limit losses to a manageable level.
When using technical analysis (which will be discussed in great
detail in Chapter 3), a trader will employ a stop loss to get out of a
losing trade once that trade no longer makes sense from a technical
price perspective.
For example, if a currency pair’s price breaks out above a critical resistance line, and a technical trader then buys the pair in hopes
of profiting on a continued price climb, a sensible location for a
technical stop loss would be right below the line from where price
broke out. This is because if price subsequently retreats back below
the line, it is no longer considered a valid breakout trade and the
trade no longer makes sense. Stop losses are an incredibly useful tool
for predetermining trade risk and limiting catastrophic trading losses.

29

c02.indd 29

1/13/09 9:56:17 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

The close cousin to the simple stop loss is the trailing stop
loss. Whereas a stop loss is, by definition, a static order to close a
trade at a predetermined loss level, a trailing stop loss is a dynamic
order to close a trade at progressively better prices. The primary
purpose of a trailing stop loss order is to limit losses while automatically locking in gains. A trailing stop loss accomplishes this by systematically moving the stop loss as the price moves in favor of the
position.
For example, a trader buys the EUR/USD pair. The trader then
wishes not only to limit losses if price goes against this long position, but also to lock-in gains if price favors the position. To accomplish this, the trader would set-up a trailing stop loss. If the stop-loss
is set to trail the market price by 20 pips (the concept of pips will
be described shortly), it will actually follow the price dynamically by
an increment of 20 pips as the market moves, but only if the market
moves in a favorable direction.
The key concept to remember is that the trailing stop will only
move one way—in favor of the trader’s position. If price moves
against the trader’s position, the trailing stop will not move. And if
price moves against the trader’s position by more than the predetermined trailing stop increment, the trade will automatically be closed
by the trailing stop. If this occurs after a long price run in favor of
the trader’s position, substantial profits will have been gained while
having dynamically limited losses from the outset.
Trailing stop losses are often key components of professional risk
management strategies, and can be used to great advantage by the
typical foreign exchange trader.

30

c02.indd 30

1/13/09 9:56:17 AM

Exit with Caution

P rofit Limits — When You ’re in the Money
Another important type of exit order is the profit limit. Profit limits
can be considered the direct opposite of stop losses. The purpose of
a profit limit order is to close an open trade automatically at a predetermined, profitable price level so that the trader may realize those
profits into the trading account.
A profit limit order is set up much like a trader would set up a
stop loss order, only in the opposite direction.
Profit limits are set primarily with the intention of realizing and
securing profits before price reverses and erases those profits. When
foreign exchange traders set entry orders, they will often also set
both stop losses and profit limits so that there is a contingency for
any direction price may take within a given trade.

E xit with Caution
The last type of trade exit to be discussed here is the manual exit,
or manual close. This consists of simply closing an open trade at the
current market price, much like a trader would open a trade at
the current market price with a market order.
Relying on manual exits instead of preset exits can be a dangerous practice for beginners. Much like traders who over rely on market orders may be prone to opening positions haphazardly because
of emotions like greed or fear, traders using manual exits may fall
into the same type of trap.
Mental stops—which means a trader has an “intention” to manually close out a losing trade at some point of financial pain, but

31

c02.indd 31

1/13/09 9:56:19 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

does not actually set the stop loss—fall into the category of manual
exits. For obvious reasons, mental stops can potentially be dangerous,
especially if the trader does not actually have the necessary discipline
to close the losing trade and avoid a catastrophic loss.
On the profit end of the spectrum, manual exits can also be
potentially disadvantageous. If a strict profit limit that conforms to
a properly planned risk:reward ratio is not set (risk:reward is discussed further in Chapter 6, which covers risk management), traders
are often tempted prematurely to close winning positions manually.
In other words, with manual exits, fearful beginners will often close
their trades too early and with too small a profit to become consistently successful traders.

T rade Size — Lots and Lots of Lots
Whether entering or exiting a currency trade, how much of a given
currency is actually being bought or sold? The answer lies in the lot.
The closest equivalent to a lot in the financial markets is the contract, which is standard futures trading terminology. Lots, much like
the role of contracts in the futures markets, are the standardized units
of trade that are bought and sold in the foreign exchange market.
There are several types of lots available to trade that are classified
according to size. Standard, mini, and micro (or super-mini) are generally the main terms used by retail forex brokers and traders to describe
the different tradable lot sizes. A standard lot is sized at 100,000 currency
units, while a mini lot is 10,000 units, and a micro lot is 1,000 units.
These lot sizes are defined in generic unit terms because the specific currency represented by the units depends on which currency

32

c02.indd 32

1/13/09 9:56:19 AM

Leveraging Margin and Leverage

pair is traded. For example, if a standard lot of EUR/USD is traded, it
would be 100,000 euros. In contrast, if it was a standard lot of AUD/
JPY, the lot size would be 100,000 Australian dollars.
It is vitally important that a trader chooses a lot size that is
appropriate to that trader’s account size and risk tolerance. The lot
size chosen by the trader affects virtually all other aspects of trading.
This includes the margin required to enter and keep open a given
trade; the monetary value per pip movement in price; the amount
paid in spread costs; and the amount of interest paid or received. All
of these topics will be described next within this chapter.

L everaging Margin and Leverage
The concepts of margin and leverage are extremely important.
Margin is the actual amount of trading equity in a trader’s account
that is available to use for controlling currency positions. Leverage is
the multiplier by which a trader can magnify the financial controlling power of margin.
Because of the high leverage common in foreign exchange trading, a trader is able to trade a large lot amount like $100,000 with
only a small fraction of this amount in trading account margin.
Common leverage ratios currently offered by foreign exchange
brokers range from 50:1 on the low side all the way up to 400:1 on
the high side. The sheer magnitude of this level of leverage, even
on the low side, far eclipses the amount of leverage available in other
financial trading markets.
In practical terms, what this means to the foreign exchange
trader is that a standard lot of $100,000, for example, can be
