ate a solid return on its assets and on shareholders’ equity? This is the true
litmus test of whether a firm has built an economic moat around itself.

2. If the firm has solid returns on capital and consistent profitability, assess
the sources of the firm’s profits. Why is the company able to keep com-
petitors at bay? What keeps competitors from stealing its profits?

3. Estimate how long a firm will be able to hold off competitors, which is the
company’s competitive advantage period. Some firms can fend off competi-
tors for just a few years, and some firms may be able to do it for decades.

4. Analyze the industry's competitive structure. How do firms in this indus-
try compete with one another? Is it an attractive industry with many
profitable firms or a hypercompetitive one in which participants struggle
just to stay afloat?

Analyzing economic moats is complicated because there are a nearly infi-
nite number of solutions to the problem of consistently making a buck when
your competition wants to take it away, but the process is interesting for pre-

cisely the same reason,

Evaluating Profitability
The first thing we need to do is look for hard evidence that a firm has an eco-
nomic moat by examining its financial results. (Figuring out whether a com-
pany might have a moat in the future is much tougher, but we'll give it a shot
at the end of this chapter.)

What we're looking for are firms that can earn profits in excess of their
cost of capital—com panies that can generate substantial cash relative to the

amount of investments they make. One easy way to do this is by using the


EVALUATING PROFITABILITY

metrics in the following questions. Although none of these measures are per-
fect by themselves—they’re really a series of shortcuts—they generally do a
good job of identifying which firms have economic moats and which ones
don’t when they're used together. If you're confused by the financial measures
in this section, don’t worry: I’ll discuss them in detail in the next few chapters.

Does the Firm Generate Free Cash Flow? If So, How Much?

First, look at free cash flow—which is simply cash flow from operations
minus capital expenditures. (We'll go over free cash flow more in Chapter 5.
For now, just go to a firm’s statement of cash flows, which you can find in its
quarterly and annual financial filings, look for the line item labeled “cash flow
from operations,” and subtract the line labeled “capital expenditures.”) Firms
that generate free cash flow essentially have money left over after reinvesting
whatever they need to keep their businesses humming along, In a sense, free
cash flow is money that could be extracted from the firm every year without
damaging the core business.

Next, divide free cash flow by sales (or revenues), which tells you what pro-
portion of each dollar in revenue the firm is able to conyert into excess profits.
Ifa firm's free cash flow as a percentage of sales is around 5 percent or better,
you've found a cash machine—as of mid-2003, only one-half of the S&P 500
pass this test. Strong free cash flow is an excellent sign that a firm has an eco-

nomic moat.

What Are the Firm's Net Margins?

Just as free cash flow measures excess profitability from one perspective, net
margins look at profitability from another angle. Net margin is simply net
income as a percentage of sales, and it tells you how much profit the firm
generates per dollar of sales. (You can find sales and net income on a firm’s
income statement, which should also be in each of its regular financial fil-
ings.) In general, firms that can post net margins above 15 percent are doing

something right.

What Are Returns on Equity?

Return on equity (ROE) is net income as a percentage of shareholders’ equity,
and it measures profits per dollar of the capital shareholders have invested in
a company. Although ROE does have some flaws—which we discuss in

23


24

ECONOMIC MOATS

Chapter 6—it still works well as one tool for assessing overall profitability. As
arule of thumb, firms that are able to consistently post ROEs above 15 per-
cent are generating solid returns on shareholders’ money, which means
they're likely to have economic moats. We'll go over ROE in more detail in
Chapter 6.

What Are Returns on Assets?

Return on assets (ROA) is net income as a percentage of a firm's assets, and it
measures how efficient a firm is at translating its assets into profits. Use 6 per-
cent to 7 percent as a rough benchmark—if a firm is able to consistently post
ROAs above these rates, it may have some competitive advantage over its peers.

When you're looking at all four of these metrics, look at more than just one
year. A firm that has consistently cranked out solid ROEs, good free cash flow,
and decent margins over a number of years is much more likely to truly have
an economic moat than a firm with more erratic results. Consistency is impor-
tant when evaluating companies, because it’s the ability to keep competitors at
bay for an extended period of time—not just for a year or two—that really
makes a firm valuable. Five years is the absolute minimum time period for
evaluation, and I'd strongly encourage you to go back 10 years if you can.

In addition, these benchmarks are rules of thumb, not hard-and-fast cut-
offs. Comparing firms with industry averages is always a good idea, as is ex-
amining the trend in profitability metrics—are they getting higher or lower?

There’s also a more sophisticated way of measuring a firm’s profitability
that involves calculating return on invested capital (ROIC), estimating a
weighted average cost of capital (WACC), and then looking at the difference
between the two. We'll talk more in Chapter 6, but don’t worry ifit seems too
complicated for you. Using a combination of free cash flow, ROE, ROA, and

net margins will steer you in the right direction.

Building an Economic Moat

Next, we need to determine why a firm has done such a great job of holding
on to its profits and keeping the competition at arm’s length. Although being
in an attractive industry can certainly help, the strategy pursued at the com-
pany level is even more important. The mere fact that there are excellent

companies in fundamentally unattractive industries (e.g., Southwest Airlines)


BUILDING AN ECONOMIC MOAT

tells us intuitively that this must be the case. Academic research suggests that
a firm’s strategy is roughly twice as important as a firm’s industry when it’s
trying to build an economic moat."

When you're examining the sources of a firm’s economic moat, the key
thing is to never stop asking, “Why?” Why aren't competitors stealing the firm’s
customers? Why can't a competitor charge a lower price fora similar product or
service? Why do customers accept annual price increases?

When possible, look at the situation from the customer's perspective.
What value does the product or service bring to the customer? How does it
help them run their own business better? Why do they use one firm’s product
or service instead of a competitor’s? If you can answer these questions, odds
are good that you'll have found the source of the company’s economic moat.

In general, there are five ways that an individual firm can build sustain-
able competitive advantage:

1. Creating real product differentiation through superior technology or
features

2. Creating perceived product differentiation through a trusted brand or
reputation

3. Driving costs down and offering a similar product or service at a lower
price

4. Locking in customers by creating high switching costs

5. Locking out competitors by creating high barriers to entry or high barriers

to success

Real Product Differentiation

This is certainly the most obvious type of economic moat—after all, wouldn't
customers always pay more for a better product or service? Unfortunately,
simply having better technology or more features is usually not a sustainable
strategy because there are always competitors hoping to build a better mouse-
trap. And because having the best product or service usually means charging

a premium price, firms pursuing this strategy often limit the size of their

"Anita McGahan and Michael E. Porter, “How Much Does Industry Matter, Really?” Strategic
Management Journal, 18, p. 15 (1997).

25


26

ECONOMIC MOATS

potential market. Many customers will be satisfied with a slightly inferior
product at a significantly lower price.

More important, it’s just plain difficult to constantly stay one step ahead
of competitors by adding features or improving a product, which is why few
firms are able to use this strategy to create long-term excess profits. This is
especially the case in many parts of the technology sector and in the con-
sumer electronics industry—today’s vendor of the latest and greatest server,
storage system, or DVD player is likely not going to be tomorrow’s leading
player. Finally, constant innovation generally sucks up a large amount of cap-
ital in the form of research and development expenses, which can make a
product-differentiation strategy very expensive.

Data-storage manufacturer EMC is a good example. In the mid-1990s,
the firm had leapfrogged IBM in this fast-growing area of the technology sec-
tor and was winning new customers because its products had features that
IBM’s lacked. For several years, EMC raked in enormous profits by charging
customers substantially higher prices than the competition for its technolog-
ically superior products. (In fact, EMC’s prices were so high that customers
nicknamed the firm “excess margin corporation.”)

However, IBM and other competitors didn’t give up. Eventually, IBM
rolled out products that came pretty close to matching EMC’s, and IBM
priced them much lower in an effort to win customers back. As a result,
IBM began regaining market share, and EMC’s business suffered.

The lesson here is that although firms can occasionally generate enor-
mous excess profits—and enormous stock returns—by staying one step
ahead of the technological curve, these profits are usually short-lived. Unless
you are familiar enough with the inner workings of an industry to know
when a firm’s products are being supplanted by better ones, be wary of firms

that rely solely on innovation to sustain their competitive advantage.

Perceived Product Differentiation

Very often, however, a firm with consistently better products or services cre-
ates a brand for itself, and a strong brand can constitute a very wide eco-
nomic moat. The wonderful thing about a brand is that as long as customers
perceive your product or service as better than everyone else’s, it makes rela-

tively little difference whether it actually is different.


BUILDING AN ECONOMIC MOAT

Tiffany is a fabulous example of the power of a brand to create excess eco-
nomic returns. The simple fact that a piece of jewelry is packaged inside the
famous little blue box allows Tiffany to charge a significant premium for its
products. This example is fascinating because jewelry has so many objective
standards—karats of gold, clarity of diamonds—that measure the quality of
an individual piece. The fact that consumers will pay more for a virtually
identical diamond ring from Tiffany than from a local jeweler is what defines
a truly valuable brand: It increases a consumer's willingness to pay.

Thinking about brands and reputations in this way—whether consumers
ofa product or service are truly willing to pay more to buy the good from one
firm instead of another—helps separate more valuable brands from less valu-
able ones. What matters is not the existence of the brand, but rather how the
brand is used to create excess profits. In fact, brands aren't useful at all in
some industries.

Think about companies such as Sony or Ford, both of which have well-
known brands. But both firms have struggled to generate solid returns on
capital over the past few years because they sell goods that are simply not very
amenable to brand-driven price differentiation. Consumers are unlikely to
pay much more for a Sony stereo relative to a product from Panasonic with
similar features, and they're also unlikely to pay more for a Ford truck just be-
cause it has the Ford nameplate.

On the flip side, Abercrombie & Fitch has managed to convince legions
of teenagers to pay $25 for a T-shirt just because it has “Abercrombie” on the
front. How long this brand will remain strong is tough to predict, but
there's no question that it’s enabled Abercrombie to charge more for its
products over the past several years. In fact, the durability of a brand is a
critical component of any brand-based economic moat. Some brands—
for example, Coke or Disney—last for generations, but some are much
more fleeting.

When you're evaluating whether a strong brand really does create an eco-
nomic moat, it’s not enough to look at whether consumers trust the product
or have an emotional connection to the brand. The brand has to justify the
cost of creating it by actually making money for the firm, and sustaining a
powerful brand usually requires a lot of expensive advertising. Therefore, un-

less the brand actually increases consumers’ willingness to pay and those

27


28

ECONOMIC MOATS

looser wallets translate into consistently positive returns on capital, the brand

may not be worth as much as youd thought.

Driving Costs Down

Offering a similar product or service at a lower cost can be an extremely pow-
erful source of competitive advantage. It costs Southwest 25 percent less to fly
one passenger one mile than the leanest of the major airlines, and it’s that ad-
vantage that propelled the firm from a Texas upstart to a big-league player in
25 years. Low costs have fattened Dell’s profit margins to such an extent that
the firm has been able to expand its share of the PC market from around 6
percent in 1997 to more than 15 percent by year-end 2002—a big move in just
six years.

Airlines and PCs are known as commodity industries, in which products are
tough to differentiate. Low-cost strategies work especially well in these types
of markets, Even in noncommodity markets, lower costs can bring large ad-
vantages as long as the cost advantage is sustainable and not temporary.
However, it’s not enough to just look at a firm’s profit margins and say that
such-and-such firm has lower costs than its competitors—you need to iden-
tify the sources of those cost savings, which can come in a variety of flavors.

In general, firms can create cost advantages by either inventing a better
process or achieving a larger scale. Dell is the classic example of a firm with a
process-based advantage. Building PCs only after they're ordered allows the
firm to take advantage of the swift price erosion of PC components—parts
don’t sit in inventory losing value while the firm waits for orders to come in.
Over time, Dell has continued to squeeze costs from its supply chain to the
point where you could argue that Dell is no longer a technology firm, but
rather a manufacturing one.

Process advantages can also be subtler. In the asset-management industry,
you might think that Vanguard's size is what allows it to underprice its ser-
vices—but there are other firms of comparable size with much higher fees.
The key is that Vanguard is structured as a mutual organization that's collec-
tively owned by fundholders, rather than a profit-maximizing corporation
owned by shareholders. Because of this structure, Vanguard can plow back ex-
cess profits into cost-reducing activities, whereas traditionally structured asset

management firms will either distribute excess profits to their managers in


BUILDING AN ECONOMIC MOAT

the form of fat bonuses or allow the cash to pile up on the balance sheet. In
Vanguard's case, higher profits allow the firm to push costs down, which at-
tracts more assets, which generates more profits, and so forth. This relatively
unique structure means that it will likely be very difficult for any non-mutual
asset-management firm to ever match Vanguard’s low costs.

Scale advantages are often very difficult for competitors to match because
they tend to build on themselves: The largest firms continue to drive down
costs and prices, and smaller ones have an increasingly difficult time catching
up. The most basic form of a scale advantage comes from simply leveraging
fixed costs—in other words, spreading the cost of an asset such as a factory
across an ever-larger sales base. Intel, for example, produces far more micro-
processors in any given year than archrival AMD, which means its per-chip
production cost is a great deal lower than AMD's.

Fixed costs don’t have to be factories. For example, the trucks that make
up the distribution network of package-delivery service UPS represent an
enormous fixed cost that allows the firm to deliver to more locations at a
lower cost than almost any other competitor. Although replicating a delivery
network that serves only large metropolitan centers might not be too daunt-
inga task for a potential competitor, replicating a network that can deliver to
virtually any address in the United States would be another thing altogether.
Because it costs UPS very little extra money to put an additional couple of
packages on a truck that’s already serving a particular delivery route, its profit
on those extra couple of packages is high.

Locking In Customers
Customer lock-in, or creating high customer switching costs, is possibly the
subtlest type of competitive advantage. Uncovering it requires a deep under-
standing of a firm’s operations. Cost advantages, brands, and better products
are all relatively easy to spot from the outside, but knowing exactly what makes
it tough for a customer to switch from one firm to another can be difficult to
find out. However, it can also be very powerful, which is why firms with high
customer switching costs often have wide economic moats.

If you can make it difficult—in terms of either money or time—for a
customer to switch to a competing product, you can charge your customers

more and make more money—simple in theory, but difficult in practice.

29


30

ECONOMIC MOATS

Remember, a switching cost does not have to be monetary—in fact, it
rarely is. Much more frequently, what deters customers from dropping a
product or service in favor of a competing product or service is time. Often,
learning how to use a product or service can require a significant investment
of time, which means the benefits of a competing product have to be very
large to induce a switch. A consumer might switch brands of tomato sauce
because one tastes just a little better than the other, but a word-processing
program would have to carry huge advantages over an incumbent program to
induce a consumer to throw away the accumulated knowledge and spend
time learning the new program.

Medical device firms such as Stryker and Zimmer are perfect examples of
how firms can create high switching costs that help ensure customer reten-
tion. Both of these firms manufacture artificial joints such as hips and knees,
and surgeons have to be trained on how to implant their products—a Stryker
hip is different enough from a Zimmer hip that a surgeon can’t just choose
one or the other based on which is on sale that week. This training process is
time-consuming for surgeons, which means surgeons tend to develop prefer-
ences for a particular company’s products and stick with them. Therefore,
Stryker, Zimmer, and their competitors tend to have relatively stable shares of
the joint-replacement market—a firm would have to introduce a measurably
better product to induce surgeons to incur the retraining costs needed to use
the new product.

When you're looking for evidence of high customer switching costs, these

questions sho uld help:

> Does the firm’s product require a significant amount of client training? If
so, customers will be reluctant to switch and incur lost productivity dur-
ing the training period.

> Is the firm’s product or service tightly integrated into customers’ busi-
nesses? Firms don’t change vendors of mission-critical products often be-
cause the costs of a botched switch may far outweigh the benefits of using
the new product or service.

> Is the firm’s product or service an industry standard? Customers may feel
pressure from their own clients—or their peers—to continue using a

well-known and well-respected product or service.


BUILDING AN ECONOMIC MOAT

> Is the benefit to be gained from switching small relative to the cost of
switching? Bank customers, for example, often endure slightly higher fees
because the lower fees they might get from moving to a competing bank
are of less value than the potential hassle of moving their account.

> Does the firm tend to sign long-term contracts with clients? This is often

a sign that the client does not want to frequently switch vendors.

Locking Out Competitors

Locking out competitors is the fifth strategy that firms can use to generate
lasting competitive advantages. If done well, this can result in years of strong
profits. If done too well, it can invite the scrutiny of the federal government
on antitrust grounds—as Microsoft (and other firms) have discovered.

The most obvious way to lock out competitors is to acquire some kind
of regulatory exclusivity, as many casinos do from state governments. Li-
censes and such are powerful deterrents to competitors—but because gov-
ernments make the rules, they can also change them without warning. U.S.
state governments have been known to raise the tax rates on the casinos they
license after the casino facilities are in place and generating profits. Although
the casinos were still protected from competitors, state governments were
able to tax away a larger portion of their excess profits than the casinos ini-
tially expected.

Patents fall into the regulatory category as well because a patent holder is
legally protected from direct competition for a set period of time. And as
large pharmaceutical companies have demonstrated, patents can lead to years
of extremely high profit margins. But although patents may deter competi-
tion, they tend to attract litigation, which can severely hamper the patent-
holder’s ability to earn excess returns.
