
235

236 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
When anger makes it impossible to think clearly, your best bet is to call it a
day, close out your positions, and go somewhere far from your trading
screen. Leave your phone at home if you’re using your broker’s mobile apps,
too! Take a long walk and wait for your anger to subside. Otherwise, your
rage will interfere with your plans and your profitability. The only way to
psych out the market is to be just as mechanical and unemotional as the
blips that cross your screen.

Anxiety
Anxiety is the anticipation of things going wrong, and it often includes
a physical response: perspiration, clenched jaws, tense muscles, heart
palpitations, and so on. Anxious people worry, agonize, overanalyze, and
generally stress out. And then they avoid whatever it is that makes them
upset. That means that a trader may not make an obvious trade but instead
hesitate and miss a market move. He may hold on to a losing position too
long because he’s worried about the effect that selling it will have on his
portfolio. He becomes too nervous to trade according to his plan, and his
performance suffers.
One way to combat anxiety is through automated trading and limit orders. If
your limits are set when you place the trade, then your anxiety can’t override
your plan.

Boredom
An ugly truth about day trading is that it can be really dull. In an eight-hour
trading session, you may spend seven and a half hours waiting for the right
opening. A flurry of trades, and it’s all over. To keep yourself entertained, you
may start making bad trades, spending too much time in chat rooms, or letting your mind wander away from the task at hand. None of those things is
conducive to profitable trading.
One way to reduce the temptations brought on by boredom is to block access to
social media on your trading computer. Several companies make software that
will keep you from using Facebook, Pinterest, or Addicting Games when you
should be trading! A few to consider are Anti-Social (www.anti-social.cc)
and Cold Turkey (www.getcoldturkey.com). Keep in mind that they may slow
down your system — and that your phone may need a social-media blocker, too.

Depression
Depression is a severe downturn in your mood, especially one that causes
you to feel inadequate and lose interest in things you used to like. Although
everyone is susceptible to depression, the ups and downs of the market can
make traders particularly vulnerable. At best, depression can make it hard
for a trader to face a day with the market. At worst, it can lead to alcoholism,
alienation, and even suicide.

Chapter 14: Stress Management in the Trading Day
If you think you may be depressed, check out the self-assessment at www.
mayoclinic.com/health/depression/MH00103_D. Or better yet, go to
your doctor. He or she will give you a better diagnosis than Dr. Internet.

Having an outlet
Successful day traders have a life outside the markets. They close out
their positions, shut off their monitors, and go do something else with the
rest of the day. The problem is that a market is always open somewhere.
Undisciplined traders work overnight and after hours through electronic
communications networks and sometimes move the action to exchanges in
other parts of the world. Think about Steve Perkins, losing millions of dollars
in the middle of the night! Without something to mark a beginning and an
end to your trading day, and without other things happening in your life, the
market can consume you in an unhealthy way.
So as you plan your life as a day trader, think about what else you’re going to
do with your days. Exercise, meditation, socializing, and having outside interests are keys to maintaining balance and staying focused on the market when
you have to be. The following sections go into more detail.

Exercise
Exercise keeps your body in fighting shape so that you can stand up to
market stress and react to trends when you need to. Many times when you’re
trading, you have huge rushes of adrenaline that you can’t do much about.
You have to stay in front of your screen until the trade is over, no matter how
much you want to run away screaming. But after the trading day, you can hit
the track or pool or treadmill and burn off some of that adrenaline. Figuring
out a regular exercise routine can pay off for your trading.
If you aren’t an exerciser now, call your local YMCA. It has introductory programs that can teach you how to use the equipment and help you design a
workout that suits your current fitness levels and goals.

Meditation
When you’re trading, you may get upset and start thinking about everything
else that has ever gone wrong in your life, instead of staying focused on the
task at hand. Even after you close out your positions and shut down your
monitors, your day’s trading may keep playing itself out over and over in
your head, making it impossible for you to relax. Neither of these scenarios is
good for you — or your trading.
Trading requires mental discipline. Good traders can keep their minds clear
of everything but their trading system, at least when the markets are at their

237

238 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
hairiest. One way to develop that discipline is to take up meditation. Yeah,
it may seem goofy, being a big tough trader type doing something woo-woo
like meditation, but if you have trouble keeping your focus, you really may
want to give it a try. There are an almost infinite number of meditation styles,
many of which are associated with different religious traditions, so you
can surely find something that works. Research compiled by the Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine at the National Institutes of Health
(http://nccam.nih.gov/health/meditation/overview.htm) shows
that many people report mental-health benefits from meditation.
Check out the instructions for the Buddhist mindfulness meditation practice
at www.shambhala.org/meditationinstruction.html as a way to get
started.

Friends and family
Day trading is a lonely activity. You work by yourself all day. It’s just you,
your room, and your screen. This job is really isolating. If you don’t get other
human contact, you run the risk of personalizing the market in order not to
feel so lonely. That’s bad, because the market isn’t a person; it’s an agglomeration of all the financial activity taking place, and it has no interest in you
whatsoever.
No matter what you do in life, you want to have the support of the people you
know and love. And you need to make time for them, too. Start and end your
trading day at regular times and be sure to make plans to see people who
are important to you. Going to your kid’s ball game, having dinner with your
spouse, and seeing your friends for a few beers on a regular basis can go a long
way to keeping your life in balance — and that will keep your trading in balance.
If you like pets, consider getting one to keep you company during the day.
There’s nothing like a dog that needs a walk to force you to close shop for the
night.

Hobbies and other interests
A lot of people get into day trading because they have long had a fascination
with the market. Trading goes from being a hobby to being a living. In many
ways, that’s perfect. Going to work is so much easier when you have a job
that you love.
But if the market is your only interest, then you’re going to be too susceptible
to its gyrations, and you’re going to have trouble sticking to your trading
discipline. Plus, whatever upsets you during the trading day is more likely to
carry over. So find a new hobby if you don’t have one. Maybe it’s a TV show,
a sport, or knitting, but whatever it is, you need to have something going on
outside of your trading.
Trading is just one part of your life.

Chapter 14: Stress Management in the Trading Day

Setting up support systems
Exercise and friends and family and hobbies and the like are all well and
good, but they don’t directly address the mindset of trading. Fortunately, a
veritable industry supports traders, and you can tap in to it easily. Many day
traders find that reading books, hiring a coach, or finding other day traders
helps them get through the day.

Books
A library full of books has been written on the psychology of trading itself. In
addition, many traders rely on other self-help and history books for inspiration
and ideas. (I think every trader I’ve ever known owns a copy of Sun Tzu’s
The Art of War, which is about military strategies and tactics. They find that this
book helps them prepare their minds to face the market — or at least gives them
something interesting to talk about.) I list several books in the appendix that
may help you organize your mind and keep your enthusiasm for the market.

Counseling and coaching
Because handling big losses — and big gains —takes a lot of mental toughness, many traders find professional support. They use counselors, psychologists, or life coaches to help them deal with the challenges of the market and
understand their reactions to it. You can ask other traders or your doctor
for a referral, or check the online directory at Psychology Today’s website,
www.psychologytoday.com, or the International Coach Federation, www.
coachfederation.org. When interviewing coaches or counselors, ask
whether they have experience with traders or others who work in finance.
Many day-trading training and brokerage firms also offer coaching services
that specialize in helping people learn and follow day-trading strategies.
Some day traders find these people to be invaluable, whereas others find
they are just glorified salespeople.

Finding other traders
To offset the loneliness of trading alone, many day traders choose to join
organizations where they will meet other traders. These may be formal or
informal groups (I list a few in the appendix) where traders can socialize,
learn new things, or just commiserate.
Many day traders also get together through Internet message boards and
chat rooms. I discuss this option in more detail later in this chapter and list
a few in the appendix. These groups are less formal, more anonymous, and
sometimes as destructive as supportive.
Most day traders lose money and give up their first year. You may find
that spending too much time with other traders is more depressing than
supportive.

239

240 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Watching your walk-away money
A lot of traders have a secret that lets them get through the worst of the markets.
It’s something called walk-away money, although traders sometimes use more
colorful language to describe it. Walk-away money is just what its name implies:
enough money to let the trader walk away from trading and do something else.
And just exactly how much walk-away money does a trader need? Well, the
exact amount varies from person to person, but having enough money to pay
three months’ worth of expenses on hand and in cash is a good place to start.
If you know that you can pay the mortgage and buy the groceries even if you
don’t make money trading today, you’re better able to avoid desperate trading. You won’t have to be greedy, and you won’t have to live in fear.
The more money in your walk-away fund, the better. Then you have more
time to investigate alternative careers should day trading prove not to be
your thing, and you can relax more when you face the market every day.
Most day traders quit after a year or so. There’s nothing wrong with deciding
to move on and try something else. If you have some money saved, then you’re
in a better position to control when you stop trading and what you do next.
If all your trading capital is gone, you may be tempted to tap your walk-away
fund to stay in the game. Don’t. That’s the exactly the time that you should use
your walk-away money to walk away, if only for a short time to clear your
head, rethink your strategies, and build up some new trading capital.
Otherwise, your trading losses may become financial ruin.

Managing Stress with Your Trading Plan
You may have noticed that trading plans pop up several times in this book.
That’s because they are so important to maintaining the discipline that leads
to trading success. You have to know what you’re doing and how to recognize
entry and exit points and then go and do it.
In this section, I cover how you can use a trading plan to manage stress and
give you a few tips for sticking to your trading plan even as the markets
sometimes move against you.

Avoiding problems following your plan
A good, tested trading plan sets out market patterns that work often enough that
you can make good trading profits. But some people have trouble following their
plan, and that leads to stressful mistakes. Following are some common problems
and advice on how you can avoid — or overcome — them.

Chapter 14: Stress Management in the Trading Day
Prevent choking!
In sports lingo, an athlete who chokes starts playing so carefully that he or
she looks like a beginner. Choking is often caused by overthinking — by being
so afraid of failure that the mind slows down and breaks the play down step
by step. Watching a contender break down in a championship game isn’t
pretty. The fans want to see a good match.
Anyone in a high-performance situation can choke. When a trader chokes, he
seems to be following the plan, but it’s no longer automatic. Trading becomes
so slow and deliberative that obvious trades get missed.
The more you trust your plan, the less likely you are to choke. Has it been
tested? Are there parts that you can automate? Chapter 16 has some ideas on
how to measure a trading plan’s performance before you start to trade with
the plan.

Reduce panic
Panic occurs when you just stop thinking. Your most basic survival
instincts take over, even when they are totally uncalled for. You’re losing
money? You start to trade more and more, off-plan, in a desperate gamble
to win it back. You’re making money? You close out all your trades right
now so that you can’t possibly lose, even if your plan tells you to hold your
positions. When you panic, you can’t think straight, and you can’t follow
your plan.
When your positions are down and you seem to be losing money, you really
should be buying and sticking it out so that you can make money later. The
problem is that your panicked instincts are telling you to do the opposite.
Following through on your plan rather than knuckling under to your instincts
is tough to do and requires a lot of discipline. With experience, traders learn
to avoid panic.
You’re probably going to have more than a few losing trades when you get
started. In your trading diary (see Chapter 16), keep notes about how losing
money makes you feel. Can you handle it emotionally? If losing upsets you too
much, you may not be cut out for day trading. You can’t trade with a clear
head if you’re bogged down with negative thoughts.

Nurture your confidence, not your ego
Day trading requires a lot of confidence because you are going to lose money
and you are going to get beaten up some days. Not only do you have to
remain confident in the face of adversity, but you also have to be careful that
you do not cross from confidence into an inflated ego. The more your trading
success and failure become part of your personal identity, the more trouble
you’re going to have.

241

242 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
What’s the difference between confidence and ego? A confident person would
say, “I’m smart enough to figure out what the market is telling me”; an egotistical
person, “I’m smarter than the market.” The difference is crucial to your success.

Revising and troubleshooting
your trading plan
Strong discipline is key to success in trading, but only if you’re disciplined
in following the right system. If your trading method is flawed, sticking to it
is going to hurt you. If something isn’t working, don’t get mad at the system;
take some responsibility and make some changes.
How do you figure out whether your trading system is right and what
changes to make? Go through your trading diary (see Chapter 16 for how to
set one up) and ask yourself some questions:
✓ Why did you choose this system? What is the market telling you about
it? Is it telling you that the system works if you follow it, or is it telling
you that something is wrong with the underlying assumptions?
		What works for someone else may not work for you. There’s no flaw in
admitting that you made a mistake and that you need to make a change.
✓ Were your mistakes because you followed the plan or because you
didn’t?
✓ What part of the system is causing the trouble? Are you having trouble
identifying entry points or exit points? Or are you stuck when the time
comes to enter the trade, causing you to miss a point? Or do the trades
your system identifies never seem to work out? When you know where
the problem is, you can change it.
✓ Can you improve your trade efficiency? Is there a way to reduce the
number of mistakes? Would automating some or all of your trading help?
One way to get your confidence back while still staying in the market is to
trade in very small amounts so that your profits and losses don’t really matter.
Trade 100 shares, not 1,000 shares. You give up the upside for a time, but you
can also get out of the cycle of greed and fear that has destroyed many a
trader.

Chapter 15

Taxes for Traders
In This Chapter
▶ Understanding the rules for different trading products
▶ Hiring a savvy tax adviser
▶ Figuring incoming income and outgoing expenses
▶ Divulging tax secrets for IRS-qualified traders only
▶ Reporting to the IRS and paying estimated taxes
▶ Paying into retirement accounts

T

hink day trade returns come without a catch? Think again, because the
IRS has plenty of ways to catch you come April 15. Day trading involves
strategies that generate both high returns and high tax liabilities, which can
eat away at your total return if you’re not careful. Not all your expenses are
deductible, and although you may think that you’re day trading, the IRS may
have a different definition of your activities.
Taxes themselves aren’t necessarily bad, because citizens have to pay for
things like roads and schools and national defense somehow. But taxes can
be devastating to your personal finances if you haven’t planned for them.
You need to consider the tax implications of your trading strategy right
from the start and keep careful records so that you’re ready.
Tax issues for day traders are complex and change frequently. And because
the federal government is broke, as are most of the states, don’t expect the tax
rules to get easier. Check the most recent federal regulations at www.irs.gov
and work with an accountant or tax expert who has experience in these
matters. This chapter is just a guide. I’m a reasonably social gal and all, but
I’m not going on an audit with you.

244 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Getting the Lay of the Land: What You
Need to Know Based on What You Trade
The Internal Revenue code is complex, with specific rules for specific types
of transactions. You can easily get tripped up, and a tax trip-up can be costly.
Here I give an overview of different types of day-trading assets and some of
the tax implications associated with them.

Commodities and futures
Of the many reasons that day traders work with commodity and futures contacts, one is that the taxes are easy to handle. Under Section 1256 of the IRS
code, certain types of contracts — for example, regulated futures contracts,
foreign currency contracts, and non-equity options (on debt, commodities,
currencies, and stock market indexes) that are marked-to-market in trading —
are handled under the 60/40 rule. This rule stipulates that 60 percent of your
total capital gain or loss will be treated as a long-term capital gain or loss, and
the other 40 percent of your gain or loss will be treated as a short-term gain
or loss. How long you held the position doesn’t matter. Why is this rule so
nice? Because the long-term capital gains rate is less than the short-term rate,
and you as a day trader can take advantage of it, even though, by definition,
day traders don’t hold positions over the long haul.

Currency trading
If you trade currencies, the tax laws that apply to you can be confusing, and
they have gray areas. How taxes apply to you can be impacted by the following:
✓ Whether you’re an individual or a business: Small individual currency
transactions are usually considered to be like-kind exchanges; for
example, if you go on vacation to Mexico, exchange your dollars to pesos
when the dollar is strong, and then change whatever remains back at
the border a week later when the dollar is a bit weaker, you’ll have made
a profit. However, this transaction is not a reportable one, because, in
essence, you exchanged two identical items: money for money.
		A business, however, can accrue taxable gains and losses due to changes
in exchange rates. If a company makes goods in the United States and
sells them through its Mexican subsidiary, for example, the amount
of profit or loss that the subsidiary has depends on the exchange rate

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
between the dollar and the peso, and that determines the amount of
tax that the company pays. In this case, identical objects aren’t being
exchanged. (The IRS has plenty of rules on how businesses should
handle foreign exchange under Section 988 of the tax code.)
✓ Whether you’re trading actual currency or futures and options on
currencies: Futures and options on currencies are taxed under Section
1256 using the handy 60/40 rule described in the preceding section. But
you’re trading in the spot market. You aren’t trading currency contracts;
you’re trading actual currency. What do you do about profits and losses
you may accrue?
		The IRS isn’t keen on your claiming a tax-free like-kind exchange if your
goal is to make a living trading currencies. But you aren’t running a business with overseas operations, are you? Unfortunately, there are no clear
guidelines here, so you probably want to work with an accountant. The
general thought is that you can report your currency trading through
Section 988 or Section 1256. Under Section 988, your trading gains and
losses are considered short-term capital gains in your trading business.
This arrangement saves you money if you lost money trading but costs
you if you made money. Under Section 1256, your spot trading is handled
as futures contracts, and you pay short-term capital gains taxes on 40
percent of your profits and long-term capital gains taxes on the remaining 60 percent of your profit. This saves you money in the years you
made money.
		The key? Be consistent. You can’t file under Section 988 when you lose
money and under Section 1256 in years you make money. That game
makes the IRS very unhappy, and you don’t want to have the tax guys
unhappy with you.
Although you should consider this entire chapter as a guideline and not professional tax advice, this warning holds particularly true for the information
on currencies. At the time I am writing this, both the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission and the Internal Revenue Service are taking a close look
at the forex market to clarify the regulations, so the information may be very
different when you do your taxes.
