
government had just ended graduate school military deferments. Since I was unhappy at Columbia
and combat in Vietnam didn't appeal to me, I joined a U.S. Marine Corps reserve unit that was
recruiting officers.
You have to be somewhat crazy to be in the Marines; it is a very unusual organization. They push
you to the edge and then rebuild you in their own mold. However, I have developed a great respect
for that bureaucracy, because throughout the Marine Corps history, they've been consistent in their
training procedure. As a second lieutenant you have forty-six lives under your control, so you must
be well skilled. They put you under a lot of pressure. If you couldn't cut the mustard, you didn't get
the bars. We had an attrition rate that I believe approached 50 percent.
I was the only reservist in Officers Candidate School in Quantico at that time. There were 199
regulars who went to Vietnam, but I came home; that was the deal I made when I was recruited. I
was also the only Jewish person there, and they weren't too favorably disposed toward Jews. One
time, the platoon sergeant drew the Star of David on my forehead with a magic marker. I wanted to
knock the crap out of him, but I figured he didn't really know the historic significance of what it
meant. I knew he was just trying to find any kind of pressure point that would make me break. The
hardest thing I had to do was scrub the magic marker off my forehead. That's a bitch [he laughs].
Anyway, I persevered and made it through successfully. I consider that a really fine achievement.
The feeling improves as time passes, and you forget the real pain of the experience.
The rigorous Marine training gave me the confidence to believe that I could perform at levels
beyond my previous expectations. Just as Amherst had strengthened my mind, the Marines
strengthened my body. The two experiences convinced me that I could do almost anything if I
worked hard enough and provided the groundwork for my successful trading. That's not to say it
worked right away, because it didn't.
After getting out of the Marines, I returned to Columbia and held some boring part-time jobs while
I completed my M.B.A. My first full-time job was as a securities analyst at Kuhn Loeb. I
specialized in the health and retail field, and I stayed there for two years. I found that, on Wall
Street, the best way to receive a pay increase was to change jobs. The company you work for never
wants to pay you as much as a company trying to recruit you.
I left for XYZ in 1972.1 want to leave out the firm's name and other particulars for reasons that will
soon become obvious. This proved to be one of the most difficult periods in my life and career.
XYZ had thirty analysts, divided into three subgroups often. Because the research director didn't
want to work, he had one of the senior analysts of each group review the work of the analysts. The
policy was that our research reports would be circulated and critiqued by the other analysts within
the subgroups prior to being sent out.
I had written a bearish report on hospital management stocks, saying that the industry would
eventually go to a utility rate of return. As part of the normal routine, the draft was circulated
among the other analysts, one of whom got drunk one night on a flight home from California and
told a client about my report. He even sent him a copy of the report in progress. What right did he
have to send out my work? The stocks began plummeting prior to the report's release, because the
client started spreading rumors that a negative report was about to be issued.
It was a bitter experience. I had to testify for six hours before the New York Stock Exchange. My
company's counsel told me, "We will represent you, but should our interests diverge at any point,
we will inform you."
At the time, did you know what had happened?
No, I didn't, but I assumed that everything would be all right if I told the truth, which I did. I was
totally exonerated; the exchange realized I had been set up. The drug analyst eventually confessed
because an exchange official found out what happened by piecing it all together. It was a rotten,
bitter experience for me, and I was very sour. I shut the door of my office and stopped working. I
lost the spark, the drive, the desire to succeed.
What were you doing at that time?
I was still doing reports, but I didn't have my heart in it. Besides that whole negative experience, it
was early 1973, and I felt the market was topping out. I had become very interested in technical
analysis. At the time, the advance/decline line had formed a major top many months earlier. I felt
126

that the market and the stocks I was covering were going to go down. Still, people wanted to know
how many widgets a company was selling and at what price. I lost the spirit to write bullish reports,
because if stock prices are going down, who cares how many widgets are being sold. I was
covering growth stocks, which in those days sold at forty or fifty times earnings. It was all so
ridiculous!
Were you discouraged from writing bearish reports? Also, what ever happened to the bearish
report that was leaked?
Nobody wrote bearish reports on Wall Street at that time. I was allowed to complete the bearish
report on the hospital management industry, but I don't believe they ever intended to publish it. Of
course, after it was leaked, they were forced to rush it to the printer to save their scalps.
What eventually happened?
I lost my job in the bear market and was out of work for four months. That was a very interesting
period, because I believe you learn the most through adversity. I had about $20,000, which in those
days was a lot of money, and I was going to trade. I found a real lunatic who had developed
computer programs for trading commodities. At the time, he had to rent time on a monster machine
to run programs that today you could do on any PC. He was using different moving averages, that
sort of thing. I put some of my money in with him, and I lost most of it—along with my dreams of
glory.
Having dissipated my capital, I decided I had to go back to work. I was in for a shock. Although I
had been totally honest and forthright, I was tainted. "Oh, aren't you the guy who wrote that
report?" It didn't matter that I had been totally ethical and exonerated. People don't want to get
involved with any controversy, even if it wasn't of your own making.
A friend of mine helped me get a job at Edwards & Hanly, which, although it was a retail-oriented
firm, had a group of analysts who became real stars. It was there that I met Bob Zoellner, the
managing partner of the firm. He was a great, great trader. He almost single-handedly kept the firm
afloat in 1974 by shorting stocks and making money in the firm's capital account, while they were
losing money on the operating side. He started his own hedge fund in 1976 and went on to become
an extraordinary success.
I always had a good nose as a securities analyst, and it has stood me in good stead. When I noticed
that the head of research, who never went out to lunch, began going out to lunch regularly, I started
interviewing for another job. So, when the firm went bankrupt in fall 1975, I had another job lined
up at Loeb Rhoades.
In 1976,1 met my wife-to-be and she had a profound effect on me. She made me realize that my
life was not a dress rehearsal; it was the real thing and I had been screwing it up. Although I had
steadily earned good salaries, I was still almost broke because I consistently lost money in the
market.
We got married in March 1978. By that time, I was working at E. F. Hutton. Being married made
going on business trips harder and harder. When you are twenty-five, seeing friends from college in
different cities around the country is very exciting, but when you get in your thirties, it gets real
stale. My wife literally had to push me out the door when I had to go on these trips.
I resented what I called the "tap dances," which made you feel like a piece of meat. You meet with
portfolio managers to give them your views on the stocks you follow, so that they will give
commission business to your firm. On a typical trip, you might have five appointments in Houston,
fly to San Antonio for dinner, and then fly to Dallas later that night to be ready for breakfast the
next morning. I got sick of it.
I wanted to have a family, but I felt that I wasn't able to handle it financially. I had resisted getting
married because I was afraid of being tapped out. But, at that point, I wondered whether it had been
a self-fulfilling prophecy. People seem to know how to handle failure because they can produce it
themselves. It almost becomes a negative cause and effect cycle, whereby they produce it, they
know how to handle it, and they wallow in it.
By mid-1978,1 had been a security analyst for eight years and it had become intolerable. I knew I
had to do something different. I always knew I wanted to work for myself, have no clients, and
answer to no one. That, to me, was the ultimate goal. I had been brooding for years, "Why wasn't I
127

doing well when I was groomed to be successful?" I decided it was now time to be successful.
When a brokerage firm wants to hire you, they'll give you anything. Once you are there, they are
far less responsive. So, when I was being romanced by Hutton, I asked for a quote machine in my
office. I was the only securities analyst that had a quote machine. During my last year at Hutton, I
started closing the door to my office so that I could watch the market. I talked to my friend Bob
Zoellner several times a day, and he taught me how to analyze market action. For example, when
the market gets good news and goes down, it means the market is very weak; when it gets bad news
and goes up, it means the market is healthy.
During that year, I started taking trial subscriptions to a lot of different newsletters. I consider
myself a synthesizer; I didn't necessarily create a new methodology, but I took a number of
different methodologies and molded them into my own approach.
I found a guy, Terry Laundry, who lived in Nantucket and had an unorthodox approach called the
Magic Т Forecast. He was an МГГ engineering graduate with a math background, and that
appealed to me. His basic theory was that the market spent the same amount of time going up as
going down. Only the amplitude was different.
In my experience, markets come down a lot quicker than they go up. Doesn't that contradict
the theory?
The market movement before it goes down may be a distributive process. I call them M-tops. The
point you use to measure the time element is not the price high, but an oscillator high, which
precedes the price high. That, in fact, is a major cornerstone of his work. The theory had different
properties that I learned, and it has been extremely helpful to me.
For the record, what is the name of Laundry's book?
There is no book. He just extolled his theory through his various newsletters. He also had some
pamphlets. Actually, it was kind of funny. After I mentioned him in a Barren's article, he got a lot
of inquiries for his pamphlets. He is a little eccentric. His response was, "I don't have any copies
available." He should have printed them and made some money.
I developed and synthesized a number of indicators that I used to determine when the market was at
a lower-risk entry point. I focused on determining mathematicalprobabilities. Although
occasionally there are situations where the market goes three standard deviations instead of two,
based on the likelihood that 98 percent of the moves will stop at two standard deviations, I'll take
that bet any day of the week. And, if I am wrong, I am going to use risk control and stop myself out
X dollars away. That is the most critical element.
Anyway, I subscribed to all these letters, developed a methodology, and traded like crazy. By mid1979,1 hadrun $5,000 up to $140,000 in just two years.
When did you turn from a loser to a winner?
When I was able to separate my ego needs from making money. When I was able to accept being
wrong. Before, admitting I was wrong was more upsetting than losing the money. I used to try to
will things to happen. I figured it out, therefore it can't be wrong. When I became a winner, I said,
"I figured it out, but if I'm wrong, I'm getting the hell out, because I want to save my money and go
on to the next trade." By living the philosophy that my winners are always in front of me, it is not
so painful to take a loss. If I make a mistake, so what!
Did you make a complete transition from fundamental to technical analysis?
Absolutely. I always laugh at people who say, "I've never met a rich technician." I love that! It is
such an arrogant, nonsensical response. I used fundamentals for nine years and got rich as a
technician.
But you were still doing fundamental analysis as an analyst?
Yes, to earn a salary. But my wife said to me, "Go out on your own. You're thirty-four and you've
always wanted to work for yourself. The worst that can happen is that you '11 go back to doing
what you were doing before."
I always pictured myself as being brave, courageous, and strong, but when it came time to take the
chance, I was scared out of my mind. I had $140,000, of which about $30,000 was tied up in tax
deals and $92,500 was used to pay for a seat on the American Stock Exchange. That left me with
128

about $20,000 when I went on the floor as a market maker. I borrowed $50,000 from my in-laws,
which gave me $70,000 of working capital.
I started off losing in my first two days in the business. I got involved in Mesa Petroleum options
because Zoellner, whom I profoundly respected, thought they were significantly undervalued. I
called him the second day from the floor, "Are you sure you are right?" I must have had a grand
total of ten options. I was down $1,800 and dying. I was petrified because, in my mind, I was down
almost 10 percent, since I didn't consider my in-laws' money part of my own working capital. The
third day, Mesa options started going up and I never looked back.
After the first four months, I was ahead by $100,000. The next year I earned $600,000. After
1981,1 never earned less than seven figures. I remember talking to a good friend of mine in 1979
and saying, "I don't think anybody can make $40,000 a month trading options." Now I can do that
in a day without a problem.
You were doing very well on the floor. Why did you leave?
It was very slow during lunchtime in those years. I used to go to an upstairs office to eat my lunch.
While I was at my desk eating a sandwich, I would do my charts and look for different ideas. I
came to realize that I could see much more sitting at the desk, looking at a machine, than being at a
post, trading an option. On the floor, the specialists chose the symbols they wanted to keep on the
quote machines, because they paid the rent on them. So you always had to run around to find what
you wanted to see. I felt much more comfortable upstairs.
About a year and a half later, after I started earning a lot of money, the floor wasn't big enough.
There was a much bigger arena to play in. Another reason for my move was the fact that, in 1981, a
change in the tax laws made it more lucrative to trade futures than stocks and options.
In my futures trading, I didn't try to make two one year, four the next, eight the next, etc. I didn't
earn significantly more in my futures trading in 1987 than I did in 1982, because I used my profits
to invest in real estate and other things to enhance the quality of my life.
I was broke in the 1970s, and I never wanted to be broke again. My philosophy was that if you
make money every month, nothing bad is going to happen to you. So, you won't be the richest
person. You'll never be the richest person anyway. What difference does it make? I'm proud of my
futures trading, because I took $40,000 and ran it up to about $20 million with never more than a 3
percent drawdown.
Did you continue trading stocks during this period?
Yes, but with a different mentality. I traded stocks from a little longer time horizon. I don't feel the
same pressure when I own 100,000 shares of stock as when I own 100 S&Ps.
Will you trade stocks as readily from the short side as the long side?
No, I find it harder to trade stocks from the short side.
Because of the uptick rule?
No, it is just easier to short the S&P, because you get so much more bang for the buck. Also, I hate
the specialist system; they are always trying to con you to death. I'll give you my view on
specialists: Never in my life have I met a less talented group of people who make a
disproportionately large amount of money relative to their skills. Having the specialist book is the
most extraordinary advantage one could ever ask for. In normal markets, the specialists can always
define their risk. If they have a bid for 20,000 down \ they can buy the stock, knowing they can
always get out'/«lower. So, they are protected. I always tell my friends to have their daughters
marry the son of a specialist.
I can't stand most established institutions. I have a me-against-them mentality, which I believe
helps me be a better, more aggressive trader. It helps as long as I maintain an intellectual bias in my
work and discipline in money management.
What was your experience during the week of the October 19 stock crash?
I came in long. I have thought about it, and I would do the same thing again. Why? Because on
October 16, the market fell 108 points, which, at the time, was the biggest one-day point decline in
the history of the stock exchange. It looked climactic to me, and I thought that was a buying
opportunity. The only problem was that it was a Friday. Usually a down Friday is followed by a
129

down Monday.
I don't think Monday would have been nearly as bad as it was, if Treasury Secretary James Baker
had not started verbally bludgeoning the Germans about interest rates over the weekend. He was so
belligerent. Once I heard Baker, I knew I was dead.
So, you knew that you were in trouble over the weekend?
Yes. Also, Marty Zweig, who is a friend of mine, was on "Wall Street Week" on Friday evening,
talking about a possible depression. I called Marty the next day, and he said he thought there was
another 500 points risk in the market. Of course, he didn't know it was going to happen in one day.
What made him so bearish at the time?
I think his monetary indicators were terribly negative. Remember, the bonds were sinking rapidly at
the time.
What happened that Monday? When did you get out?
The high in the S&P on Monday was 269.1 liquidated my long position at 267'/2.1 was real proud
of that because it is very hard to pull the trigger on a loser. I just dumped everything. I think I was
long 40 contracts coming into that day, and I lost $315,000.
One of the most suicidal tilings you can do in trading is to keep adding to a losing position. Had I
done that, I could have lost $5 million that day. It was painful, and I was bleeding, but I honored
my risk points and bit the bullet.
That's another example where my Marine training came into play. They teach you never to freeze
when you are under attack. One of the tactics in the Marine Corps officer's manual is either go
forward or backward. Don't just sit there if you are getting the hell beat out of you. Even retreating
is offensive, because you are still doing something. It is the same thing in the market. The most
important thing is to keep enough powder to make your comeback. I did real well after October 19.
In fact, 1987 was my most profitable year.
You liquidated your long position very well on October 19. Did you think about actually
going short?
I thought about it, but I said to myself, "Now is not the time to worry about making money; it is the
time to worry about keeping what you have made." Whenever there is a really rough period, I try to
play defense, defense, defense. I believe in protecting what you have.
The day of the crash, 1 got out of most of my positions and protected my family. Then at 1:30
P.M., with the Dow down 275 points, I went to my safe deposit box and took my gold out. Half an
hour later, I went to another bank and started writing checks to get my cash out. I started buying
Treasury bills and preparing for the worst. I had never seen anything like what was going on.
You were seriously worried about the banks going under?
Why not? The stories I heard, subsequently, from people on the operations side of the business
would have stopped the hearts of the public if they had known what was going on. The banks
weren't meeting any of the calls at the brokerage firms. On Tuesday morning, we were within hours
of the whole thing totally collapsing. So my caution was well advised.
I think my fear of a depression is related to my father graduating college in 1929. If you talk to
people who got out of college at that time, it is as though a ten-year period is missing from their
lives. There was just nothing substantial going on in this country. That always stuck with me,
because I feared it so much. I think that is one of the reasons why I don't try to increase my
earnings geometrically. On the day of the crash, when I looked at my son in his crib, I thought, I
don't want him ever to ask me, "Dad, why didn't you do everything you could have done?"
When did you start trading again?
Wednesday of that week. It was funny because I started out trading only one or two S&P contracts
at a time. The S&P was trading in full point increments [equivalent to $500 per contract, compared
to $25 for a minimum tick], and I didn't know how to handicap what was going on. From past
experiences, I knew we were in some sort of opportunity period, but they were rewriting the rale
book. My attitude is: Never risk your family's security. I didn't need to make any more money at
that point. On Wednesday, the market got up to an area where I thought it should be shorted. I
130

ended Wednesday short twelve S&P contracts, which for me was a miniscule position.
That night, Bob Prechter [editor of the Elliott Wave Theorist, a widely followed advisory letter] put
out a negative hotline message. The next morning, the market was under tremendous pressure,
partially because of that recommendation, but mainly because one of the biggest fund managers in
the country was trying to liquidate a monster long position. It has been stated that he lost $800
million during that period.
I called the S&P pit just before the opening that morning, and my clerk said, "Decembers are
offered at 230, offered at 220, offered at 210, trading at 200 even." I yelled, "Cover!" I made a
quarter of a million dollars on twelve contracts! It was one of the most memorable trades of my
life.
What are your thoughts about program trading? [See Appendix 1 for definition.]
I hate it. There used to be a natural ebb and flow in the market, but program trading killed it. Those
firms doing program trading wield extraordinary power to move the market, and the locals have
simply become accomplices. I'm not just paranoid, because I've adjusted to it and been successful.
But I hate it.
Some people say that all this criticism of program trading is a bunch of nonsense.
Well, they are idiots.
No, some of them are very intelligent people.
No, they are idiots. I can prove to any one of them that they are idiots.
How do you prove it?
There is something I would like the regulators to investigate. The market closes near the high or
low of the day much more frequently than it used to. During the last two years, the market has
closed within 2 percent of the high or low of the day about 20 percent of the time. Mathematically,
that type of distribution is impossible by chance.
You talk about program trading as if it is immoral. What is unethical about trading stocks
against futures?
Because the program traders also have the other side of the equation to do. You have the so-called
Chinese wall in investment banking, where they don't want the arbitrageurs and investment bankers
on the same floor for fear they might talk to each other. Well, I would like the SEC to explain to me
how they can allow agency program traders sitting alongside principal traders for the firm's own
account.
Your example introduces an element of frontrunning, which obscures the basic question.
What I am trying to get at is: What is immoral about buying stock and selling futures (or the
reverse trade) because prices in the two markets are out of line?
Because I've seen situations in which a firm has information about a debt/equity swap a day ahead
of time. For example, when the state of New Jersey sold $2 billion worth of stock and moved it into
the bonds, this firm knew about it the day before. Since they knew they were going to be selling $2
billion worth of stock the next day, from 4:00 to 4:15, they sold thousands of futures contracts to
set up the trade. That stinks.
The example you just gave is (a) a case of trading on inside information, (b) frontrunning,
and (c) an outright trade. It is not a program trade. Let me give you an example. Let's say a
trading firm has a computer program that signals when stocks are overpriced or underpriced relative to futures, and they are not doing any customer business—
Let me give you an example first. If these brokerage firms need an 80-cent discount to take off a
customer program, they will take off their own position at a 50-cent discount. They have the edge
and can ran in front of their clients because their transaction costs are lower—they're not paying
commissions to themselves.
I keep trying to separate these things out. Let's take an example where there is no
frontrunning or customer business—just somebody trading their own money, trying to take
out an arbitrage profit. If that is their methodology, why is it any worse than your
131
