
8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 22

• 22 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

with great interest, just as soon as he could. Paying one’s debts was
already ingrained in him, and it is something he did all his life, no
matter how long it took.
When Livermore entered Boston at the ripe old age of 14, his
life was just beginning, but he would never forget the lessons he
had already learned in his youth. Now, however, he needed to
concentrate on his future. He confined his mother and father to a
compartment of his brain, then locked that compartment tight.
He could stand no distractions if he was to succeed. This ability to
park his emotions, to compartmentalize, came naturally to him.
He could function no matter what the condition of his emotional
life. He fought all his life to keep his business and personal lives
completely separate. And he almost succeeded.
At 14, he was blond, blue-eyed, slender and intelligent, with a
quick flashing smile of perfect white teeth. His confidence was
rock solid.
He slipped off the wagon in Boston and stood outside the Paine
Webber offices for a moment, taking them in, before entering. He
watched as the customers came and went. The stock tickers
clicked and spit endless white trails of paper tape. The board boys
moved up and down the room-length green chalkboard, like
dancers on the stage. They posted stock prices as fast as the stock
caller, often a customer sitting in the gallery watching the tape,
could yell the current quotes at them.
The customers sat in chairs against the walls, frantically watching the chalkboard, occasionally rising to go to their brokers as
though they were placing bets in a horse room. Livermore inhaled
all the action: the clicking of the tickers, the clatter of chalk on the
boards, and people talking loudly, excitedly. All the movement and
action thrilled him. His fingers tentatively touched the glass globe
of the stock ticker; it was both warm and cool to his hand. It was
like a crystal ball, except if you could read its fortune you would

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 23

THE BACK STORY

• 23 •

be as rich as Croesus, the richest man in the world. He watched.
People were getting rich every second based on what that impersonal tape said. He did not think about losing.
The office smelled good to him, heady, with its aroma of wood,
chalk, paper and ink, of human excitement and energy, coffee
brewing, and food being eaten at desks. He liked the juice—the
excitement—from the second he walked into the Boston office of
Paine Webber.
He was already a long way from the farm.
He was wearing a suit that was slightly too big for him. His
mother had bought it large so he could grow into it. He found the
manager, took a deep breath, and tapped him on the shoulder. The
manager was a man in his late 40s. He looked at Livermore and
saw a farm lad, a country bumpkin.
“Whadda you want, kid?” he asked, looking him over.
“A job.”
“You any good with numbers?”
“Yes.”
“See them kids up on the walkway postin’ the numbers?”
“Yes.”
“Well, we’re short one chalkboard boy. A no-show.” He studied Livermore. “You a no-show kinda kid? You gonna let me
down?”
“No sir. I’ll show.”
“Alright.” He smiled. “I’ll give ya a shot, kid. I started that way
myself, a chalkboard boy.”
“Yes sir,” Livermore answered.
“And look at me now, 25 years later, I’m the boss around here.
Don’t you ever forget that this is America, kid, where anybody can
do anything they set their mind to. Now, I can’t stand here blabberin’ with you all day. I gotta make some money. You want the
job?”

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 24

• 24 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“Yes sir.”
“Alright. Take off your big brother’s jacket, kid, and get up
there on the walkway.”
“I don’t have a big brother.”
“I don’t care whether you do or you don’t. I was only ribbin’
you, kid, ’cause your jacket’s so big. Get up there now. Ain’t you
ever been ribbed?”
The manager watched as young Livermore shed his coat and
climbed the ladder to the walkway. He was immediately handed a
piece of chalk by one of the other boys.
“Here, kid, take this.” The boy also handed him an alpaca
office-coat.
“Kid? You call me a kid? You’re only a kid yourself.” Livermore
said.
“Not up here on this walkway, I ain’t no kid. I been doing this
for four years.” He smiled.
“Hey kid,” the manager yelled at Livermore.
“Yes?” Livermore answered, fearful that he had already changed
his mind about the job.
“You never asked me about the pay.”
“What’s the pay?” Livermore answered.
“Six bucks a week,” the manager replied. “And kid, don’t do
that again—always negotiate. Don’t just take what the guy offers
you. I mighta went to seven bucks. I mean, I gave you a clue. I told
you I was short a boy. You gotta take it when you can in this world.
Negotiate.”
“Yes sir.”
The manager winked at him and went back to work.
Livermore had been in Boston for less than an hour. He had
gotten a job and a free lesson in negotiating, and he had already
decided to buy himself a suit that fit. He did not like being insulted
about the way he dressed.

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 25

THE BACK STORY

• 25 •

Livermore found himself a room with board near the Paine
Webber offices. He was up at the crack of dawn every day and was
always the first one to the offices, often waiting for the manager to
arrive with the office key. He loved everything about his job.
Being a chalkboard boy was like going to stock market college. He
was privy to everything in the office. In the beginning it was all
Greek to him, but every day something new was revealed, and he
knew that if he could someday break the code and develop a system of trading, he would be rich.
Young Livermore had access to everything: talk from the brokers, from customers with tips, and from customers who played
the tout sheet tacked to the bulletin board every morning. Creative theories on trading were explained to him in the dull times,
on his breaks, and at lunch. The office was consumed with one
thing, making money from the actions of the stock market. Everyone there was a player. Livermore and the other kids were an
important part of it. They were moving up and down the walkway,
posting the actual trades on the chalkboard.
The action on the board would become one of the keys to his
later success. He quickly learned that it was never what the brokers, or the customers, or the newspapers said—the only thing that
was important was what the tape said. He also observed that the
tape’s pronouncements very rarely matched what the brokers or
the customers had predicted. The tape had a life of its own, and its
was the most important life. Its verdict was final.
He loved the actual physical job of writing the quotes on the
chalkboard because he had a photographic memory when it came
to numbers. His memory for numbers was perfect—the yelling of
the quotes from the ticker could not come quick enough for Livermore. He never fell behind in posting the quotes, no matter
how fast they came. They racked up in his brain like stacked cordwood.

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 26

• 26 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Eventually, he started to see repeating patterns come alive in
the numbers. At night, alone in his room, he would write out the
numbers for several issues from memory. He started keeping
a numerical diary, and certain recurring numerical patterns
emerged. He noticed that the numbers moved in consistent waves,
often in smooth repeating trends. When the price of a stock
started to go upward, or downward, it usually remained in that
trend until some pressure caused it to reverse. The clues to this
action were often in the numerical patterns.
“Stocks act in line with the laws of physics,” he thought. “A
body in motion tends to stay in motion, until a force or obstacle
stops or changes that motion.” He kept logs tracking the stocks for
longer periods, and then he had another revelation: There were
patterns within the patterns, and even larger patterns emerged.
He kept the diary in secret and discussed his observations with
no one. He was secretive by nature. He had ultimate confidence
in his mathematical ability, even at the age of 14. Besides, he was
too busy posting the numbers and watching the action of the
market on the chalkboard to engage in idle chatter during business hours.
Because he was working the chalkboard—listening for the
shouted quotes, erasing prices, writing in new numbers hundreds
of times a day, thousands of times a week—he learned to be interested only in the change in price, not the reason for the change. He
had no time to waste trying to rationalize the action of the stock.
There could be a million reasons why the price had changed.
These reasons would be revealed later, after the fact. But by the
time these reasons were understood, the change would already be
a historical event, and it would be too late to make any money.
His notebook was neat, well-written, and precisely accurate. At
15, he began to look for repeating patterns, searching for a system,

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 27

THE BACK STORY

• 27 •

trying to identify natural mathematical laws that were operating
within the market.
He had also observed that the majority of the people in the office
lost money. These people seemed to be acting randomly. They had
no plan, no consistent, reasoned approach to the market. They
were just gambling, just like at the track, just playing hunches. One
day they would play the favorites, the next day the long shots or the
jockeys; or they would buy a tout sheet and play the recommendations of the tipster—random-action stock picking.
These were heady days for Livermore. He was loving every
minute of his life in the markets. And he was getting paid for it!
After six months of doing his job every day, eventually making a
series of paper bets in his notebook and keeping track of them, he
was still missing a crucial part of the equation, and he knew it. He
had yet to buy his first stock. He knew that unless he actually purchased a stock, he could never know how he would handle himself.
Like a gambler who has never made a wager, it was only talk and
speculation until he slapped his money down. When a trader made a
bet everything changed, and he knew it. Then and only then did the
trader enter the heated jungle of emotions. He knew that he would
always have his intellect under control, and it was a strong one. What
he did not know was whether he could control his emotions.
He had watched the customers at the Paine Webber office, and
he knew it would be his emotions that would make or break
him—particularly greed and fear, the two devil-emotions of the
market. You either controlled them or they controlled you.
The time had come for Livermore to buy a stock, but he had
very little money. Where could he buy a stock cheaply?
Livermore would later marry and have two sons, Jesse Jr. and
Paul. He recounted to them, on many occasions, where he found
cheap stocks: the bucket shops.

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 28

• 28 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Nov. 6, 1928—In a darkened hospital room at the edge of
Hell’s Kitchen on the West Side of Manhattan, the king of
easy money lay dying. Through the shadows that drifted slowly
across his mind he could hear a weary voice repeating the same
question again and again. “Who did it, Mr. Rothstein?” the
voice asked in a disinterested, mechanical way. “Who shot
you?” But Rothstein would not tell. His only response was to
slowly turn his face to the wall and whisper: “If I live, I’ll tend
to it.” Then he closed his eyes and faded away.”
—William Klingaman,
1929:The Year of the Great Crash
Arnold Rothstein, known in underworld circles as “the Brain,”
was a genius with money. He started out as a gambler, but after a
fantastic string of successes, he became an underworld king and
lived like it. He was accused of many crimes, among them fixing
the 1919 “Black Sox” World Series. His fortune was vast. His
financial tentacles reached into every vein of American vice.
Among Rothstein’s many holdings were most of the bucket
shops in the major cities of the United States. A bucket shop
looked like a broker’s office. It had a gallery for the customers, a
chalkboard to record the stock quotes, and an active stock ticker
spewing out the daily trades on an almost instantaneous basis. But
it was more like a horse-betting parlor than a true broker’s office.
At a bucket shop, traders could play the market on 10 percent margin. In other words, traders needed to have only 10 percent of the
price of the stock they wanted to buy. The rules were simple: Put
up 10 percent and make a bet by buying a stock. A ticket with the
buy number would immediately be printed and given to the purchaser. This ticket would indicate the time, the price paid for the
stock purchased, and the number of shares purchased. The purchaser would watch the quotes, and as soon as the stock lost 10

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 29

THE BACK STORY

• 29 •

percent of its value, the shop moved in and quickly swept away
the money. Conversely, if the stock price went up and the trader
won, the trader went up to a clerk who marked the ticket stub
with the price of the last trade on the stock ticker. Then the trader
went to the cage window to collect the money. It was a sucker’s
play—the house won 95 percent of the time.
Most important for the functioning of the bucket shop, the
money spent to buy the stock was never sent to the floor of the
exchange. It was simply booked by the bucket shop; the bucket shop
would hold the bet, like a bookie. Bucket-shop action was quick
and fierce. Traders could buy as few as five shares or as many as the
house could cover—thousands of dollars worth.
Because Livermore had no capital, no stake, it was inevitable
that he would enter the bucket shops, a world controlled by the
crime bosses. It was only a matter of when and how.
In 1892, when Livermore was 15 years old, his friend Billy,
another board-crew kid, approached him. “Jesse, you got any
money?”
“I’m eating my lunch.’
“Never mind your lunch. You got any money?”
“Why?”
“I got a tip on Steel. I need somebody to go in with me.”
“How you gonna play it, Billy?” Livermore asked.
“Bucket shop. I’ll run over and make the play during lunch.”
“How much you need?”
“I need five bucks. I wanna buy five shares of U.S. Steel. It’s selling at ten dollars.”
“Just a minute.” Livermore reached into his pocket and pulled
out his notepad.
“What’s with the notepad?” Billy asked.
“I’m reading my horoscope for today,” Livermore answered. He
checked the history of the trading figures on U.S. Steel in his

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 30

• 30 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

notepad. The numbers were moving in the same pattern as they
usually moved before the stock went up. He was satisfied they had
a good chance. “Okay.”
He handed his friend the money. Two days later he smiled as he
pocketed his winnings—a pure profit of more than $3. Livermore
was in the game. He was finally a player.
Livermore started to visit the bucket shops on his own, always
checking his notepad for the exact price quotes of the stocks he
followed, looking for patterns. He had developed a system and he
stuck to it. He played both sides of the market, going long if his
numbers told him to do so, or jumping on the short side if his
numbers pointed to the downside. It made no difference to him.
Soon he was making more money at the shops than he was at his
job. So he quit and played the market in the Boston bucket shops
full time. Before he was 16, he had well over $1,000 in cash. He
went home for a visit. His mother was ecstatic to have her son
home; his father just shook his head in wonderment. How could a
boy of 16 legally lay his hands on over $1,000 in cash?
Livermore gave half his winnings to his parents, paying back his
mother. He returned to Boston with a line of over $750 and continued with what would be his life’s work. He worked alone, never
telling anyone what he was doing, never taking on a partner, never
borrowing money. He moved from bucket shop to bucket shop so
as not to draw attention to himself. This lone-wolf strategy served
him well, and it fit his personality. He would act this way all his
life—buying alone and in secret, selling alone and in secret, telling
no one. His true thrill came from being right—using his brain to
win, not his brawn, not his connections, not his powers of persuasion—just using pure brain power to figure out what few men
could figure out: how to make money in the stock market. The
thrill came from the winning, not the money, though the money
was nice. The money always came if his judgment was right.

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 31

THE BACK STORY

• 31 •

It was at this young age that Livermore earned the nickname
“Boy Plunger,” based on his youthful looks and large bucket-shop
bets.
Just as a gambler who was a consistent winner would be barred
from a casino, Livermore was finally barred from the bucket shops
of Boston after his winnings had piled up. All the bucket-shop
proprietors knew who the Boy Plunger was and what he looked
like. He tried changing his name and wearing disguises, but they
quickly saw through the deception. He tried a new strategy: losing
at first and then making a big move at the end of his play. This
worked only for a brief time, always ending in being told to get
out and take his business elsewhere.
Livermore was killing the bucket shops. At first they had
thought he was just a kid, what could he know? But soon the
bucket-shop managers found out exactly how much he did know,
right in their cash-boxes. The supreme boss in most cases was
Arnold Rothstein, and he kept a close eye on his businesses. The
managers had their own skins to look out for. Livermore, now
banned from the bucket shops in Boston, took his theories, his system, and his stock-buying principles to the great city of New York
in hopes of playing the bucket shops there. Unfortunately for Livermore, the New York Stock Exchange and the police had successfully shut down all the New York bucket shops. So Livermore
would have to find new hunting grounds.
He figured that the same principles, the same system, would
work in the major brokerage houses. He was sure his theories
would hold up.
He was wrong.
He arrived in Manhattan with $2,500. His Boston bucket-shop
stake had, at times, been over $10,000, but he had suffered a few
reversals before leaving Boston for New York. These reversals
bothered Livermore, so he analyzed what had happened. He never

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 32

• 32 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

blamed the market. It was illogical to get angry at an inanimate
object, like a gambler getting mad at a deck of cards. He always
wanted to learn from his mistakes and thereby profit from those mistakes. There was no arguing with the tape. The tape was always
right; it was the players who were wrong. He reviewed his bad
trades, and the conclusions became clear to him.
His first conclusion was that he won when all the factors were
in his favor, when he was patient and waited for all the ducks to
line up in a row. That led him to his second conclusion, that no
one could or should trade the market all the time. There were
times when a trader should be out of the market, in cash, waiting.
Years later, his friend Bernard Baruch would reaffirm this early
conclusion. Baruch would occasionally say, “J.L., I think it’s time
to go grouse shooting.” Baruch would then sell out all his positions and go to the famed Hobcaw Barony, his 17,000-acre plantation in South Carolina. Its sandy beaches and salt marshes once
offered the finest duck hunting in the United States—and no telephone.
Livermore, 20 years old, was in New York with some cash in his
pocket, but without access to a bucket shop. So he entered the
game on the Big Board, the New York Stock Exchange. He settled
on working out of the offices of E. F. Hutton. The people at Hutton liked him, and his winning bucket-shop reputation preceded
him. On respectable Wall Street, his nickname was transformed
from “Boy Plunger” to “Boy Trader.” With so small a stake, he
could hardly expect to be a plunger among the big players.
At first he did well and ran up some good commissions for the
brokers, but he eventually went broke. It took six months of hard
work for him to bust out. Ultimately, he actually wound up on the
wrong side of the ledger. He owed the broker money.
Disgusted with himself, he went to see E. F. Hutton one
evening after the market closed.

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 33

THE BACK STORY

• 33 •

“I need a loan, Ed,” he said.
“How much?” Hutton asked.
“A thousand dollars.”
“I’ll just give you a credit in your account for a thousand.”
“No, I want a loan.”
“Why?”
“I can’t beat Wall Street right now. I’m going back to the bucket
shops. I need a stake, then I’ll be back.”
“I don’t get it,” Hutton said. “You can beat the bucket shops,
but you can’t beat Wall Street. How’s that?”
“First off, when I buy or sell a stock in a bucket shop, I do it off
the tape. When I do it with your firm, it’s ancient history by the
time my order hits the floor. If I buy it at, say, 105, and the order
gets filled at 107 or 108, I’ve lost the comfort margin and most of
my play. In the bucket shop, if I buy it off the tape, I immediately
get the 105. The same is true when I want to sell short, especially
on an active stock where the trading is heavy. In the bucket shop,
I put my sell order in at, say, 110, and it gets filled at 110, but here
it might get filled at 108. So I’m getting it from both sides.”
“But we give you better margins than the bucket shops,” Hutton said.
“And that Ed, is what really killed me. See, with the extra margin from you I could stay with a stock—not like the bucket shop,
where a ten percent move wiped me out. See, the point is that I
wanted the stock to, let’s say, go up, and it goes down. Holding on
to it longer is bad for a trader like me, because I was betting it
would go up. I can afford to lose the ten percent but I can’t afford
twenty-five percent on margin. I have to make too much back to
get my money back.”
“So, all you could ever lose in the bucket shops was the ten percent because they would sell you out?”
“Yes, and it turns out that was a blessing. All I ever want to lose
