
would have been faced with at least three years of unprofitable and difficult trading,
particularly when the currency pair was hitting record highs in late 2003 into early
2004. This area would have certainly attracted many traders looking to pick a top or
to fade the trend. Despite a dip in late 2004 the AUD/USD has remained strong going
into 2005, which would have made it very difficult for medium-term range players to
trade.

Figure 8.2 AUD/USD Multiple Time Frame Hourly Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
Instead, the more effective trading strategy is to actually take a position in the
direction of the trend. In the AUD/USD example, this would have involved looking
for opportunities to buy on dips. Figure 8.2 is an hourly chart with Fibonacci
retracements drawn from the February 2004 all-time high and the low of June 17,
2004. Rather than looking for opportunities to sell, we use the 76 percent Fibonacci
retracement level as key support zones to go long the Australian dollar. The
horizontal line in Figure 8.2 represents the Fibonacci retracement level. What we did
therefore was use the daily charts to get a gauge of the overall trend and then used the
hourly charts to pinpoint entry levels.
Let's take a look at another example, this one of the British pound. Figure 8.3 is
the daily chart of the GBP/USD for January 2002 to May 2005. Like traders of the
Australian dollar, traders trying to pick tops in the GBP/USD would have also faced
at least three years of difficult trading, particularly when the GBP/USD was making
10-year highs in January 2004. This level would have certainly attracted many
skeptics looking to pick tops. To the frustration of those who did, the GBP/USD
rallied up to 10 percent beyond its 10-year highs post January, which means that
those top picket would have incurred significant losses.

77

Figure 8.3 GBP/USD Multiple Time Frame Daily Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)

Figure 8.4 GBP/USD Multiple Time Frame Hourly Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
Taking a look al the hourly chart for the GBP/USD, we want to look for
opportunities to buy on dips rather than sell on rallies. Figure 8.4 shows two
Fibonacci retracement levels drawn from the September 2004 and December 2004
bull wave. Those levels held pretty well on retracements between four-tenths and
78

four-fourteenths while the 23.6 percent Fibonacci level offered an opportunity for
breakout trading rather than a significant resistance level. In that particular scenario,
keeping in mind the bigger picture would have shielded traders from trying to engage
in reversal plays at those levels.
Multiple time frame analysis can also be employed on a shorter-term basis. Let
us take a look at an example using CHF/JPY. First we start with our hourly chart of
CHF/JPY, which is shown in Figure 8.5. Using Fibonacci retracements, we see on
our hourly charts that prices have failed at the 38.2 percent retracement of the
December 30, 2004, to February 9, 2005, bear wave numerous timers. This indicates
that the pair is contained within a weeklong downtrend below those levels. Therefore,
we want to use our 15-minute charts to look for entry levels to participate in the overall downtrend. However, in order to increase the success of this trade, we want to
make sure that CHF/JPY is also in a downtrend on a daily basis.

Figure 8.5 CHF/JPY Multiple Time Frame Hourly Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
Taking a look at Figure 8.6, we see that CHF/JPY is indeed trading below the
200-day simple moving average with the 20-day SMA crossing below the 100-day
SMA. This confirms the bearish momentum in the currency pair. So as a day trader,
we move on to the 15-minute chart to pinpoint entry levels. Figure 8.7 is the 15minute chart; the horizontal line is the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement of the
earlier downtrend. We see that CHF/JPY broke above the horizontal line on May 11,
2005; however, rather than buying into a potential breakout trade, the bearish big
picture reflected on the hourly and daily charts suggests a contrarian trade at this
point. In fact, there were two instances shown in Figure 8.7 where the currency pair
broke above the Fibonacci level only to then trade significantly lower. Disciplined
day traders would use those opportunities to fade the breakout.
79

Figure 8.6 CHF/JPY Multiple Time Frame Daily Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)

Figure 8.7 CHF/JPY Multiple Time Frame 15-Minute Chart
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
The importance of multiple time frame analysis cannot be overestimated.
Thinking about the big picture first will keep traders out of numerous dangerous
trades. The majority of new traders in the market are range traders for the simple fact
that buying at the low and selling at the high is an easy concept to grasp. Of course,
80

this strategy does work, but traders also need to be mindful of the trading
environment that they are participating in. Looking back to Chapter 7, traders should
try to range trade only when the conditions for a range-bound market are met. The
most important condition (but certainly not the only one) is to look for ADX to be
less than 25 and ideally trending downward.
FADING THE DOUBLE ZEROS
One of the most widely overlooked yet lucrative areas of trading is market
structure. Developing a keen understanding of micro structure and dynamics allows
traders to gain an unbelievable advantage and is probably one of the most reliable
tactic for profiting from intraday fluctuations. Developing a feel for and
understanding of market dynamics is key to profitably taking advantage of short-term
fluctuations. In foreign exchange trading this is especially critical as the primary
influence of intraday price action is order flow. Given the fact that most individual
traders are not privy to sell-side bank order flow, day traders looking to profit from
short-term fluctuations need to learn how to identify and anticipate price zones where
large order flows should be triggered. This technique is very efficient for intraday
traders as it allows them to get on the same side as the market maker.
When trading intraday, it is impossible to look for bounces off of every support
or resistance level and expect to be profitable. The key to successful intraday trading
requires that we be more selective and enter only at those levels where a reaction is
more likely. Trading off psychologically important levels such as the double zeros or
round numbers is one good way of identifying such opportunities. Double zeros
represent numbers where the last two digits are zeros—for example, 107.00 in the
USD/JPY or 1.2800 in the EUR/USD. After noticing how many times a currency pair
would bounce off of double zero support or resistance levels intraday despite the
underlying trend, we have noticed that the bounces are usually much bigger and more
relevant than rallies off other areas. This type of reaction is perfect for intraday FX
traders as it gives them the opportunity to make 50 pips while risking only 15 to 20
pips.
Implementing this methodology is not difficult, but it does require individual
traders to develop a solid feel for dealing room and market participant psychology.
The idea behind why this methodology works is simple. Large banks with access to
conditional order flow have a very distinct advantage over other market participants.
The banks' order books give them direct insight into potential reactions at different
price levels. Dealers will often use this strategic information themselves to put on
short-term positions for their own accounts.
Market participants as a whole tend to put conditional orders near or around the
same levels. While stop-loss orders are usually placed just beyond the round
numbers, traders will cluster their lake-profit orders at the round number. The reason
why this occurs is because traders are humans and humans tend to think in round
numbers. As a result, take-profit orders have a very high tendency of being placed at
the double zero level. Since the FX market is a nonstop continuous market, speculators also use stop and limit orders much more frequently than in other markets. Large
banks with access to conditional order flow, like stops and limits, actively seek to
exploit these clustering of positions to basically gun stops. The strategy of fading the
81

double zeros attempts to put traders on the same side as market makers and basically
positions traders for a quick contra-trend move at the double zero level.
This trade is most profitable when there are other technical indicators that
confirm the significance or the double zero level.

Strategy Rules
Long
1. First, locate a currency pair that is trading well below its intraday 20-period
simple moving average on a 10- or 15-minute chart.
2. Next, enter a long position several pips below the figure (no more than 10).
3. Place an initial protective stop no more than 20 pips below the entry price.
4. When the position is profitable by double the amount that you risked, close
half of the position and move your stop on the remaining portion of the trade to
breakeven. Trail your stop as the price moves in your favor.
Short
1. First, locate a currency pair that is trading well above its intraday 20-period
simple moving average on a 10- or 15-minute chart.
2. Next, short the currency pair several pips above the figure (no more than 10).
3. Place an initial protective stop no more than 20 pips above the entry price.
4. When the position is profitable by double the amount that you risked, close
half of the position and move your stop on the remaining portion of the trade to
breakeven. Trail your stop as the price moves in your favor.

Market Conditions
This strategy works best when the move happens without any major economic
number as a catalyst in other words, in quieter market conditions. It is used most
successfully for pairs with tighter trading ranges, crosses, and commodity currencies.
This strategy does work for the majors but under quieter market conditions since the
stops are relatively tight.

Further Optimization
The psychologically important round number levels have even greater significance if they coincide with a key technical level. Therefore the strategy tends to
have an even higher probability of success when other important support or
resistance levels converge at the figure, such as moving averages, key Fibonacci
levels, and Bollinger bands, just to name a few.

Examples
So let us take a look at some of the examples of this strategy in action. The first
example that we will go over is Figure 8.8, a 15-minute chart of the EUR/USD.
According to the rules of the strategy, we see that the EUR/USD broke down and was
trading well below its 20-period moving average. Prices continued to trend lower,
moving toward 1.2800, which is our double zero number. In accordance with the
rules, we place an entry order a few pips below the breakeven number at 1.2795. Our
82

order is triggered and we put our stop 20 pips away at 1.2775. The currency pair hits
a low of 1.2786 before moving higher. We then sell half of the position when the
currency pair rallies by double the amount that we risked at 1.2835. The stop on the
remaining half of the position is then moved to breakeven at 1.2795. We proceed to
trail the stop. The trailing stop can be done using a variety of methods including a
monetary or percentage basis. We choose to trail the stop by a two-bar low for a
really short-term trade and end up getting out of the other half of the position at
1.2831. Therefore on this trade we earned 40 pips on the first position and 36 pips on
the second position.

Figure 8.8 EUR/USD Double Zeros Example
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
The next example is for USD/JPY. In Figure 8.9, we see that USD/JPY is
trading well below its 20-period moving average on a 15-minute chart and is headed
toward the 105 double zero level. This trade is particularly strong because the 105
level is very important in USD/JPY. Not only is it a psychologically important level,
but it also served as an important support and resistance level throughout 2004 and
into early 2005. The 105 level is also the 23.6 percent Fibonacci retracement of the
May 14, 2004, high and January 17, 2005, low. All of this provides a strong signal
that lots of speculators may have taken profit orders al that level and that a contratrend trade is very likely. As a result, we place our limit order a few pips below
105.00 at 104.95. The trade is triggered and we place our stop at 104.75. The
currency pair hits a low of 104.88 before moving higher. We then sell half of our
position when the currency pair rallies by double the amount that we risked at
105.35. The stop on the remaining half of the position is then moved to breakeven at
104.95. We proceed to trail the stop by a five-bar low to filler our noise on the
shorter time frame. We end up selling the other half of the position at 103.71. As a
result on this trade, we earned 40 pips on the first position and 76 pips on the second
83

position. The reason why this second trade was more profitable than the one in the
first example is because the double zero level was also a significant technical level.

Figure 8.9 USD/JPY Double Zeros Example
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)

Figure 8.10 USD/CAD Double Zeros Example
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
Making sure that the double zero level is a significant level is a key element of
filtering for good trades. The next example, shown in Figure 8.10, is USD/CAD on a
15-minute chart. The great thing about this trade is that it is a triple zero level rather
84

than just a double zero level. Triple zero levels hold even more significance than
double zero levels because of their less frequent occurrence. In Figure 8.10, we see
that USD/CAD is also trading well below its 20-period moving average and heading
toward 1.2000. We look to go long a few pips below the double zero level at 1.1995.
We place our stop 20 pips away at 1.1975. The currency pair hits a low of 1.1980
before moving higher. We then sell half of our position when the currency pair rallies
by double the amount that we risked at 1.2035. The stop on the remaining half of the
position is then moved to breakeven at 1.1995. We proceed to trail the stop once
again by the two-bar low and end up exiting the second half of the position at 1.2081.
As a result we earned 40 pips on the first position and 86 pips on the second position.
Once again, this trade worked particularly well because 1.2000 was a triple zero
level.
Although the examples covered in this chapter are all to the long side, the
strategy also works to the short side.
WAITING FOR THE REAL DEAL
The lark of volume data in the FX market has forced day traders to develop
different strategies that rely less on the level of demand and more on the micro
structure of the market. One of the most common characteristics that day traders try
to exploit is the market's 24-hour around-the-clock nature. Although the market is
open for trading throughout the course of the day, the extent of market activity during
each trading session can vary significantly.
Traditionally, trading tends to be the quietest during the Asian market hours, as
we indicated in Chapter 4. This means that currencies such as the EUR/USD and
GBP/USD tend to trade within a very tight range during these hours. According to
the Bank for International Settlements' Triennial Central Bank Survey of the FX
market published in September 2004, the United Kingdom is the most active trading
center, capturing 31 percent of total volume. Adding in Germany, France, and
Switzerland, European trading as a whole accounts for 42 percent of total FX trailing.
The United States, on the other hand, is second only to the Untied Kingdom for the
title of most active trading center, but that amounts to only approximately 19 percent
of total turnover. This makes the London open exceptionally important because it
gives the majority of traders in the market an opportunity to take advantage of events
or announcements that may have occurred during late U.S. trading or in the overnight
Asian session. This becomes even more critical on days when the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve meets to discuss and announce
monetary because the announcement occurs at 2:15 p.m. New York time, which is
past the London close.
The British pound trades most actively against the U.S. dollar during the
European and London trading hours. There is also active trading during the
U.S./European overlap, but besides those time frames, the pair tends to trade
relatively lightly because the majority of GBP/USD trading is done through U.K. and
European market makers. This provides a great opportunity for day traders to rapture
the initial directional intraday real move that generally occurs within the first few
hours of trading in the London session. This strategy exploits the common perception
that U.K. traders are notorious stop hunters. This means that the initial movement at
85

the London open may not always be the real one. Since U.K. and European dealers
are the primary market makers for the GBP/USD, they have tremendous insight into
the extent of actual supply and demand for the pair. The trading strategy of wailing
for the real deal first sets up when interbank dealing desks survey their books at the
onset of trading and use their client data to trigger close stops on both sides of the
markets to gain the pip differential. Once these stops are taken out and the books are
cleared, the real directional move in the GBP/USD will begin to occur, at which point
we look for the rules of this strategy to be met before entering into a long or short
position. This strategy works best following the U.S. open or after a major economic
release. With this strategy you are looking to wait for the noise in the markets to
settle down and to trade the real market price action afterward.

Strategy Rules
Long
1. Early European trading in GBP/USD begins around 1:00 a.m. New York time.
Look for the pair to make a new range low of at least 25 pips above the
opening price (the range is defined as the price action between the Frankfurt
and London power hour of 1 a.m. New York time to 2 am. New York time).
2. The pair then reverses and penetrate the high.
3. Place an entry order to buy 10 pips above the high of the range.
4. Place a protective stop no more than 20 pips away from your entry.
5. If the position moves higher by double the amount that you risked, cover half
and trail a stop on the remaining position.
Short
1. GBP/USD opens in Europe and trades more than 25 pips above the high of the
Frankfurt and London power hour.
2. The pair then reverses and penetrates the low.
3. Place an entry order to sell 10 pips below the low of the range.
4. Place a protective stop no more than 20 pips away from your entry.
5. If the position moves lower by double the amount that you risked, cover half
and trail a stop on the remaining position.

Examples
Let us go ahead and take a look at some examples of this strategy in action.
Figure 8.11 is a textbook example of the strategy of waiting for the real deal. We see
that the GBP/USD breaks upward on the London open, reaching a high of 1.8912
approximately two hours into trading. The currency pair then begins to trend lower
ahead of the U.S. market open and we position for the trade by putting an entry order
to short 10 pips below the Frankfurt open to the London open range of 1.8804 at
1.8794. Our stop is then placed 20 pips higher at 1.8814 while our take-profit order is
placed at 1.8754, which is double the amount risked. Once the take-profit order on
the first lot is fulfilled, we move the stop to breakeven at 1.8794 and trail the stop by
the two-bar high. The second lot eventually gets stopped out at 1.8740, and we end
up earning 40 pips on the first position and 54 pips on the second position.

86

Figure 8.11 GBP/USD May 2005 Real Deal Example
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)

Figure 8.12 GBP/USD April 2005 Real Deal Example
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
The next example is shown in Figure 8.12. In this example, we also see the
GBP/USD break upward on the London open, reaching a high of 1.8977 right at the
U.S. open. The currency pair then begins to trend lower during the early U.S. session,
breaking the Frankfurt open to the London open range low of 1.8851. Our entry point
is 10 pips below that level at 1.8811. Our short position is triggered, and we place our
87

stop 20 pips higher at 1.8861 and the first take-profit level at 1.8801, which is double
the amount risked. Once our limit order is triggered, we move the stop to breakeven
at 1.8841 and trail the stop by the two-bar high. The second lot gets stopped out at
1.8789, and we end up earning 40 pips on the first position and 52 pips on the second
position.

Figure 8.13 GBP/USD March 2005 Real Deal Example
(Source: eSignal. www.eSignal.com)
The third example is shown in Figure 8.13. In this example, we also see the
GBP/USD break upward on the London open, reaching a high of l.9023 right before
the U.S. FOMC meeting. The currency pair then breaks lower on the back of the
meeting, penetrating the Frankfurt open to the London open range low of 1.8953. Our
entry order is already placed 10 pips below that level at 1.8943. Our short position is
triggered and we place our stop 20 pips higher at l.8963 and the first take-profit level
at 1.8903, which is double the amount risked. Once our limit order is triggered, we
move the stop to breakeven at 1.8943 and trail the stop by the two-bar high. The
second lot gets stopped out at 1.8853, and we end up earning 10 pips on the first
position and 90 pips on the second position.
INSIDE DAY BREAKOUT PLAY
Throughout this book, volatility trading has been emphasized as one of the most
popular strategies employed by professional traders. There are many ways to
interpret changes in volatilities, but one of the simplest strategies is actually a visual
one and requires nothing more than a keen eye. Although this is a strategy that is
very popular in the world of professional trading, new traders are frequently amazed
by its ease, accuracy, and reliability. Breakout traders can identify inside days with
nothing more than a basic candlestick chart.
88

An inside day is defined as a day where the daily range has been contained
within the prior days trading range, or, in other words, the day's high and low do not
exceed the previous day's high and low. There need to be at least two inside days
before the volatility play can be implemented. The more inside days, the higher the
likelihood of an upside surge in
*************************************
PAGE 113
**************************************
Protect against false breakouts: If the stop and reverse order is triggered, place a
stop al least 10 pips below the low of the nearest inside day and protect any profits
larger than what you risked with a trailing stop.
Further Optimization
For further optimization, technical formations can be used in conjunction with
the visual identification to place a higher weight on a specific direction of the
breakout. For example, if the inside days are building and contracting toward the top
of a recent range such as a bullish ascending triangle formation, the breakout has a
higher likelihood of occurring to the upside. The opposite scenario is also true: if
inside days are building and contracting toward the bottom of a recent range and we
begin to see that a bearish descending triangle is in formation, the breakout has a
higher likelihood of occurring to the downside. Aside from triangles, other technical
factors that can he considered include significant support and resistance levels. For
example, if there are significant Fibonacci and moving average support zones resting
below the inside day levels, this indicates either a higher likelihood of an upside
breakout or at least a higher probability of a false breakout to the downside.
Examples
Let us take a look at a few examples. Figure 8.14 is a daily chart of the euro
against the British pound, or the EUR/GBP. The two inside days are identified on the
chart and it is clear visually that both of those days’ ranges, including the highs and
lows, are contained within the previous day's range. In accordance with our rules, we
place an order to go long 10 pips above the high of the previous inside day at 0.6634
and an order to sell 10 pips below the low of the previous inside day at 0.6579. Our
long order gets triggered two bars after the most recent inside day. We then proceed
to place a stop and reverse order 10 pips below the low of the most recent inside day
at 0.6579. So basically, we went long at 0.6634 with a stop at 0.6579, which means
that we are risking 45 pips. When prices reach our target level of double the amount
risked (90 pips) or 0.6724, we have two choices either close out the entire trade or
begin trailing the stop. More conservative traders should probably square positions at
this point, while more aggressive traders could look for more profit potential. We
choose to close out the trade for a 90-pip profit, but those who stayed in and
weathered a bit of volatility could have taken advantage of another 100 pips of profits
three weeks later.
