
8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 111

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 111 •

change precipitously in either direction. They gave plenty of signals, clues, if he could read them objectively.
He compared market directions to advancing opposed armies—
the bull army and the bear army. When the leading divisions of the
army, in this case the leading stocks, started to get beaten down
and turned around, that was the time to light the caution lamp.
When they started to roll over and retreat, that was the time to
change the strategy, and start trading in the opposite direction. He
believed that the market leaders of the 1916 bull market gave
strong, if subtle, clues.
The market was like a smooth card player. It did not tip its hand
for everyone to see. Livermore had to be aware, astute, alert, ready
to read the signs, because on an early call for a major market turn
in trend, he would be going against public opinion—public opinion that would still be seduced by the strong momentum of the
existing market. Livermore’s experience had taught him to stand
apart from the crowd at these major turning points in the market,
heading in the opposite direction. This had never bothered him,
because it was at these times that he made his greatest money.
He reverted to his time-tested technique of sending out probes,
buying small positions to see if he was correct in his assessment of
the market. Slowly he took positions in 12 stocks, including the
market leaders Steel, Baldwin, American Can, General Motors,
Chrysler, and Anaconda Copper. He sold short a total of 60,000
shares, which was a reasonably modest position for him by this
time. He waited, and the tape dropped about four points across the
board. He knew he was right, doubled his position to 120,000
shares, and waited.
It was at this time that a scandalous leak came out of Washington, claiming that President Woodrow Wilson had issued a peace
offering to Germany and the Allies to end the war. The market

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 112

• 112 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

tumbled on the good news, because peace in Europe would kill
the healthy wartime economy of supplying foreign nations. Livermore had a steadfast rule that if something serendipitous, an
unplanned windfall, should occur, he must capitalize on it and not
be greedy—accept his good fortune and close out his position.
Livermore also had 120,000 shares of stock to sell, which was a
hefty position to liquidate in the 1916 market.
The leak occurred on the morning of December 20, 1916. Livermore was back in Palm Beach; having recouped his fortune, he
could afford to vacation in his favorite spot again. He had wandered into the offices of Finlay, Barrel and Company. He had no
account with this broker. He was just watching the tape and reading the newspapers when he was shown a private telegram from
the home office of Finlay, Barrel.
“Look at this telegram, Mr. Livermore,” the office manager
said.
“Wilson to offer peace to warring parties, later today,” Livermore read out loud. The wire came from a Washington reporter
named W. W. Price, whom Livermore had heard about. “You
think this is on the level?” Livermore asked the clerk.
“I think so, yes sir,” the office manager said.
Livermore thanked the manager, went to one of his own Palm
Beach brokers, the E. F. Hutton office, and asked if they had heard
anything about the news of a peace offering from President Wilson. They said no. He called Ed Hutton in New York. Hutton said
he had not heard anything. Livermore watched the market weaken
in front of his eyes. He ordered lunch sent in and set to watching
the market.
A little after 1 P.M., E. F. Hutton’s telegraph department sent an
urgent flash telegram to all of the company’s officers. It said the
same thing as the wire that Livermore had already read in the Finlay, Barrel offices earlier that morning. Livermore checked the

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 113

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 113 •

major wire services, but there was no news about President Wilson offering a plan for peace to Germany.
But the rumor of peace in Europe had been born, and the market
started to sag as people started to unload before the news became
known to the public. Then it looked as if the rumor was going to
be confirmed, and the market really started to plummet—soon the
news of possible peace was on everyone’s lips. Bids were pulled, and
prices sank.
Bernard Baruch, a friend of Livermore’s, was heavily involved in
the action. He had been short, like Livermore, and he was pounding away on the short side, selling into any situation that still looked
good to him. But Livermore was looking to cover his short position
of 120,000 shares, and so at 2 P.M. he became a buyer of stock. He
had covered all his shorts by 3 P.M. and the close of business.
Baruch had made a substantial profit recently—over $3 million—with the bulk of it coming during this sudden sell-off following the rumors out of Washington.
A congressional committee was formed to investigate the leak.
Baruch admitted to the committee that he had used the leak to
trade war stocks, but maintained that he had made a profit of only
$465,000.
Livermore, on the other hand, explained to the committee that
he was often short the market and that he had established his
120,000-share position seven weeks before the Wilson peace proposal because he felt that the market had topped out.
He was subpoenaed on February 1. The next day the New York
Times quoted him. “How could I have known that far back that
President Wilson was going to make a peace offering to Germany
to end the war? I doubt if the president himself knew seven weeks
ago that he was going to offer a proposal of peace.”
As a result of this famous incident, the New York Stock
Exchange changed its rules and banned traders from acting on

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 114

• 114 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

news leaks, an idea which, though laudable, was completely unenforceable.
It was at this crucial juncture that something strange again happened to Livermore. He told both his sons the story, years later,
one night at dinner:
“I was seeing some friends off at Grand Central Station. I
walked with them to my private railway car, which I was loaning
to them, to take them down to Palm Beach. The porter walked
beside us pushing the trolley with their luggage. When we got to
the car, my friend reached over to pick up his wife’s jewelry case
from the trolley, and his hat fell off and rolled under the car. The
porter reached under the car to pick up the Stetson homburg from
the tracks, and he handed it to me to give to my friend. I looked
down at the upturned hat. In the hatband there were initials in
gold, ‘W.A.R.,’ for Warren Augustus Reed, my friend’s initials.
“Well, that was a message to me, boys, a sign, and I raced back
to the office and started selling in earnest. I already was short the
market, but now there was no question in my mind, war was coming to the United States.”
Four months later, on April 6, 1917, the United States joined
the Allies in the great European war. The people of the United
States had initially been against entering directly into a European
war, but they had agreed to supply the Allies with war goods and
armaments. However, after a series of incidents involving the German policy of unrestricted submarine warfare and the sinking of
U.S. ships, the United States finally entered the fray and declared
war on Germany.
Near that time in early 1917, Livermore made one of his proudest
walks down Wall Street. He departed from his new offices at 111
Broadway, stopped at each of his creditors, and wrote checks paying off all his bankruptcy debts in full.

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 115

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 115 •

“Let me add some interest to the amount I owe you,” Livermore offered, but each creditor refused. They simply accepted the
checks, smiled, shook his hand, and wished him luck for the
future. It was another act that added to his legend on Wall Street.
Livermore was 40 years of age. He decided to make a few
changes in his life. He established a $500,000 trust fund for himself, which would spin off an income of $30,000 a year. He would
never be poor again.
Livermore was also about to fall in love.
Flo Ziegfeld was a close friend of Livermore’s. Ziegfeld was the
creator of the Ziegfeld Follies, featuring beautiful women, beautiful
sets, and beautiful music. The legendary staging of scantily clad
women carrying exotic fans, parading around magnificent sets, up
and down elaborate staircases, was an extravagant spectacle. It was
the hottest show on Broadway.
One day Ziegfeld called Livermore. “J.L., I have someone you
just have to meet. A little brunette that lights up any room she’s in.
You need to meet her, J.L., she’ll light up your boring life. It must
get boring making all that money. You know, all work and . . .”
“Too much play makes a man poor.”
“We only pass through these earthly portals one time, J.L. We
are not here for a long time, so it should be a good time.”
“I’m not arguing, Flo.”
“Well, I’m having a little soiree at my apartment tonight. She’ll
be there. Will you, J.L.?”
“Yes, Flo, I’ll be there.”
That night, Livermore walked into Ziegfeld’s magnificent penthouse apartment in Manhattan and promptly fell in love with
Dorothy Wendt. She was small, a brunette, with the most gorgeous hazel-green eyes he had ever seen—they were piercing and
laughing at the same time. She sat with half a dozen people
around her, entertaining them all with her lively chatter. Ziegfeld

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 116

• 116 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

marched through the little crowd and introduced Livermore to
her.
Livermore was hooked. He went to all her shows, wined her
and dined her all over New York. They fell in love, the dashing
financier and the beguiling, beautiful showgirl, a storybook
romance.
Livermore had finally found someone whom he was desperate
to marry. But he remained married to Nettie, and now he had to
get a divorce. He thought that because he had given her a $1,000a-month stipend and bought her a house and a car, she would
accommodate him in his request for a divorce. He was wrong. The
divorce quickly became acrimonious. Livermore was in the chips
again, and Nettie knew it. She also knew he was in love with
another woman. She struck in the courts.
The one thing Livermore did not want to lose in the divorce
was his black Rolls-Royce, which he had kept for himself all these
years. But he had made the mistake of parking the car in her
garage, and she was not giving it up. “It’s mine” was her simple
explanation when he asked for it.
Livermore went to W. Travers Jerome, the famous former district
attorney for New York County. Jerome was a private investigator
who cut an impressive figure, solidly built, full of self-confidence,
and sporting a slick handlebar moustache. He was famous for his
well-chronicled prosecution of one of the most infamous murderers of the twentieth century—Harry K. Thaw—for the murder of
the famous New York architect Stanford White.
Thaw, heir to a vast Pittsburgh rail and coal fortune, shot White,
an architect and New York society darling, in the Roof Theater of
Madison Square Garden—a building White had designed—in
plain view of hundreds of people. Thaw’s wife, showgirl Evelyn

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 117

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 117 •

Nesbit, had told her husband that White, her former lover, had
once raped her.
The shooting occurred on the evening of June 25, 1906, during
the presentation of the musical Mamzelle Champagne. When the
cast started singing “I Could Love a Million Girls,” which Nesbit
described as a “putrid number,” Thaw rose and walked over to
White’s table. He took a pistol from his belt and fired three shots
into White’s head. He then held the smoking pistol in the air to
signal that he was done. He calmly walked back to his own table
and sat down. He was immediately arrested and disarmed by a fireman on duty in the Garden.
Lying dead, slumped on his table, head in a pool of blood, face
blackened by powder burns, shot into oblivion, was America’s
most famous architect.
The Thaw trial became the first “trial of the century” involving
the rich and decadent, with a courtroom drama that elicited wild,
frenzied press coverage. With its exposure of wealth and incredible
indulgence, topped off with intimate sexual details, this trial began
the practice of mass media coverage of celebrity indiscretions.
White’s “red velvet swing,” on which he liked to have women
wearing no undergarments sit and swing in front of him so he
could look underneath their dresses, was just one of the sexual
details exposed.
Nesbit told the court that White had often beaten her with a
whip and had originally met her in his apartment, where he
immediately drugged her with champagne and ravished her. She
admitted she had sat naked in White’s famous red velvet swing
while he pushed her so high that her toes touched a Japanese parasol attached to the ceiling. She never properly explained why she
returned to White, her former lover, so often after she had become
involved with Thaw.

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 118

• 118 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The trial also marked the beginning of great defenses by great
lawyers. Delphin Delmas, Thaw’s lawyer, offered the “Dementia
Americana” defense, which he defined as an affliction of the
American male whose wife’s purity has been violated.
There were two trials, and Thaw was eventually found innocent
by reason of insanity. Thaw spent the rest of his life in and out of
insane asylums.
Nesbit lived the rest of her life continually retelling the story of
that famous night. She died at the age of 82. Her last words:
“Stanny White was killed in 1906, but my fate was worse. I lived.”
Livermore visited Jerome, gave him a duplicate set of keys and his
power of attorney, and instructed him to go out to Long Island and
repossess the Rolls when Nettie was not around.
On September 7, 1917, Nettie Livermore had the famous
lawyer Jerome arrested in Oyster Bay, Long Island. The police
actually put Jerome in the lockup. His partner Isidore Kresel
quickly bailed him out on a $2,000 bond. Putting Jerome in jail
was a mistake. He was angry. He called Livermore, and they
decided to tail Nettie.
A few weeks later, on September 22, there was a circus atmosphere at the courthouse for the initial hearing on the case. Justice
of the Peace Allison Lowndes immediately began the proceedings.
“Is Mrs. Livermore in court with us?” she asked.
“I’m afraid Mrs. Livermore is ill, your honor,” her attorneys,
Frank Acer and Frank Davis, offered. “We would request an
adjournment to a later date.”
“Your honor, I beg to differ,” Jerome said, rising. “I know for a
fact that Mrs. Livermore was in New York last night and returned
to her home in Long Island at one o’clock this morning. There’s
nothing really wrong with her.”
“I want Mrs. Livermore here, and quick, or I’ll throw out this

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 119

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 119 •

case,” the judge said. This was reported in the New York Times the
next day.
Ten minutes later Nettie Livermore walked into court with an
entourage of her sister, her father, and two friends. The judge
asked how Jerome had obtained the car, and she was told that Travers had a key to the garage and to the car.
Mrs. Livermore took the stand next.
“What makes you think the car belongs to you, Mrs. Livermore?” the judge asked.
“Mr. Livermore told me when he bought it. He said, ‘Chick,
this car belongs to you.’ ”
“How long have you been married to Mr. Livermore?”
“Eighteen years, but we have been separated for a long time.”
“Have you paid for any of the upkeep of the car?” the judge
asked.
“No.”
“Is the bill of sale or the ownership in your name?”
“No.”
“Did you know that Mr. Jerome had the power of attorney from
your ex-husband to seize the car?”
“Yes.”
“Prior to your divorce, how much were you receiving as an
allowance for living?”
“A thousand dollars a week, Your Honor.”
“Mrs. Livermore, Officer Bowker says he values the car at
twenty-five thousand dollars. Are you aware of that, and do you
agree?”
“Yes, Your Honor.”
“But this bill of sale to Mr. Livermore says ten thousand dollars.
Are you aware of that also?”
“Yes, Your Honor.”
“It seems you’re aware of everything, Mrs. Livermore. I see no

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 120

• 120 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

merit in your case so I’m dismissing it.” The judge’s gavel fell and
the case was dismissed.
In an article in the New York Times on September 23, Jerome
said: “The officer must have described the wrong car. Perhaps the
twenty-five-thousand-dollar Rolls-Royce he had in mind is the
model they make out of solid gold. And I don’t think Mr. Livermore would ever say ‘Chick, this car belongs to you,’ not the Jesse
Livermore I know.” The press reporters loved Jerome and he loved
them, and they were already fascinated by the secretive Wall Street
legend, Livermore.
Things were going well for Livermore, and he showed his love for
Dorothy Wendt by purchasing a large emerald stone set in a platinum ring on September 24, 1917. The reported price of the ring
was $120,000. It was purchased in Palm Beach. This was to be the
beginning of a massive collection of jewelry he would buy
Dorothy over the years to come.
The next day, Livermore also purchased a very large speedboat,
which he called the “sub catcher.” The boat was based in Palm
Beach and Key West.
Livermore was also receiving wide acclaim. He was grouped
together with Bernard Baruch as one of the “new breed” of stock
market speculators. The New York Times ran an editorial on this
subject on May 13, 1917. The headline read: “Exit the Swashbuckling Trader of Wall Street: Present Day Speculator in Stocks Is
More of a Student and Economist Than the Sensational Manipulator of Other Years.”
They speculate in Wall Street these days in a way different
from the methods employed in the free and easy times of
John W. Gates, and his coterie of wealthy plungers. “Bet a

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 121

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 121 •

Million” Gates was a leader who had a blind following in the
stock market, convinced that he would make them all rich.
There is no leader anymore. James R. Keene was the last of
this class of great operators whose bull-like crushing tactics,
supported by much money, swung the market up or down.
No one could charge Bernard M. Baruch with making a
display of his stock market efforts. Before the congressional
committee which investigated the “leak” of last December,
Baruch referred to himself as an investor and speculator in the
same manner as any other man would have spoken of his grocery business. He informed the committee, with no more
enthusiasm than he might have shown in discussing the
weather, that he made $467,000 on the short side of stocks in
the month of December.
His reasons for selling stocks when he did, illustrated the
new epoch in speculation. He believed merely that prices
were too high. Study of the speculative situation persuaded
him that the market was about ready for a break.
Jesse Livermore is another operator whose work attracts
little attention while he is about it. In a way, Livermore is a
relic of the old days, without any of the trimmings. His business is his own affair, and he has never been known to make
efforts to influence the market by whispering into the ears of
his friends. He harkens back to the past only in the sizes of his
purchases and his short selling.
Livermore, the story goes, began selling stocks short last
November, a month before prices started to move off. Practically every other trader was buying enthusiastically while he
was selling short. He sensed the market tendency to head
lower and stood unmoved amid a shower of optimistic references. When the break finally came, he is said to have been
short of stocks between 50,000 and 60,000 shares, on which

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 122

• 122 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

a profit running into the hundreds of thousand dollars
accrued.
Baruch and Livermore stand forth as examples of bona fide
speculators of the largest caliber. The impression they made
on the market of last year however, was only a fraction of the
influence which came from a source which is difficult to
characterize either as speculative or investment.
A combination of the two might be ascribed to dealings in
the war market by the Du Pont group of gun-powdermaking-millionaires and W. C. Durant of the General
Motors Company. Possessed of great and steadily growing
incomes these men put their money to work to great advantage. “Buy and hold stocks for an extraordinary rise.”
About the middle of 1915 Wall Street heard that the Du
Ponts were putting much of their inflowing wealth into stock
of the Baldwin Locomotive Company, the General Motors
Company, and the other concerns whose shares, then relatively low, rose to unusual heights in the later frenzy of war
speculation. These rumors did not meet with denial, and
afterward came reports that great profits had been taken
around top levels. Baldwin rose from 26 that year to 154, and
General Motors advanced from 82 to 558, going in 1916 to
well above 700.
Durant, president of General Motors, has the reputation
among his friends of possessing imagination which could
make him a leading figure in speculation if he desired to be
one. But he has never appeared in the limelight of stock market affairs, although it is known that he has seen tremendous
profits accrue on stocks bought at low figures. He buys long
before the public sees the speculative merit of the stocks
involved. He is said to possess supreme confidence in his own
judgment; when he decides to accumulate stocks he buys

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 123

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 123 •

them and no changes in market conditions of a temporary
sort disturb him.
It is said Durant seldom sells what he buys because his
judgment tells him that they are good. This is investment
buying.
Livermore never commented on what other people said in the
newspaper if he could help it, no matter what the press published.
He stayed silent on this issue, too. Livermore the mystery man only
hopped up the press more.
For the rest of 1917, Livermore did well, except for a lone coffee
trade.
Livermore saw the prices of all commodities rising as the
United States crept closer and closer to what he believed was
inevitable—U.S. involvement in the war roaring in Europe. When
the United States finally joined the war, commodities rose 100 to
300 percent in price. The only commodity that did not rise was
