
Most investors think that charts are hocus-pocus. Only about 5 to 10 percent of investors
understand charts. Even a lot of professionals are totally ignorant about charts. Just as a doctor
would be foolish not to use X-rays and EKGs, investors would be foolish not to use charts. Charts
provide valuable information about what is going on that cannot be obtained easily any other way.
They allow you to follow a huge number of different stocks in an organized manner.
Earlier, you talked about using volume as a clue that the market averages were topping. Do
you also use volume as an indicator in trading individual stocks?
The volume in a stock is a measure of supply and demand. When a stock is beginning to move into
new high ground, volume should increase by at least 50 percent over the average daily volume in
recent months. High volume at a key point is an extraordinarily valuable tip-off that a stock is ready
to move.
Volume can also be used in a reverse manner. When prices enter a consolidation after an advance,
volume should dry up very substantially. In other words, there should be very little selling coming
into the market. During a consolidation, declining volume is generally constructive.
How do you handle a losing streak?
If you hit a losing streak, and it is not because what you are doing is wrong, that tells you the whole
market may be going bad. If you have five or six straight losses, you want to pull back to see if it is
time to start moving into cash.
The "M" in your CANSLIM formula emphasizes the importance of being out of the
market—at least on the long side—during major bear phases. Since most mutual funds, by
their very structure, remain heavily invested in stocks throughout both bull and bear
markets, does this imply that you believe mutual funds are a poor investment?
This is going to surprise you. I think mutual funds are an absolutely outstanding way to invest. I
believe that every person should own their own home, own real estate, and have an individual stock
account or own mutual funds. Those are the only ways you can make any substantial income above
your salary. Although I think mutual funds are an excellent investment, the problem is that most
people don't know how to handle them. The key to success in mutual funds is to sit and not to
think. When you buy a fund, you want to be in it for 15 years or more. That is how you will make
the really big money. But in order to do that, you need the courage to sit through three, four, or five
bear markets. The typical diversified growth stock fund will go up 75 to 100 percent in a bull
market, but it will decline by only 20 to 30 percent in a bear market.
So you treat a fund very differently from an individual stock account?
Very, very differently. With an individual stock, you absolutely have to have a stop-loss point,
because you never know how far down the stock is going. I remember selling a $100 stock one
time and it eventually went to $1.1 didn't have any idea it was going down that far, but what would
have happened if I had held on to it? One mistake like that and you can't come back.
In contrast, in a mutual fund, you should sit through the bear markets. Since most funds will be
diversified in 100 or more stocks across the American economy, when stocks recover after a bear
market, these funds will recover as well—they almost have to. Unfortunately, in a bear market,
most people get scared and decide to switch, ruining their long-term holding plan. Actually, when a
good, diversified growth fund is down sharply, you should buy more.
Would it be fair to say that the general public tends to treat funds like they should individual
stocks and stocks like they should funds? By that I mean, they tend to hold on to their losers
in individual stocks, but liquidate their mutual funds when they are down sharply.
Yes, that is exactly right. Because of the emotional element, most of what people do in the market
is wrong.
Along that line, what are the biggest mistakes investors generally make?
In my book I have a chapter on eighteen common mistakes.
The following list of common mistakes is excerpted from O'Neil's book How to Make Money in
Stocks, published by McGraw-Hill in 1988.
1.Most investors never get past the starting gate because they do not use good selection criteria.
113

They do not know what to look for to find a successful stock. Therefore, they buy fourth-rate
"nothing-to-write-home-about" stocks that are not acting particularly well in the marketplace and
are not real market leaders.
2.A good way to ensure miserable results is to buy on the way down in price; a declining stock
seems a real bargain because it's cheaper than it was a few months earlier. For example, an
acquaintance of mine bought International Harvester at $19 in March 1981 because it was down in
price sharply and seemed a great bargain. This was his first investment, and he made the classic
tyro's mistake. He bought a stock near its low for the year. As it turned out, the company was in
serious trouble and was headed, at the time, for possible bankruptcy.
3.An even worse habit is to average down in your buying, rather than up. If you buy a stock at $40
and then buy more at $30 and average out your cost at $35, you are following up your losers and
mistakes by putting good money after bad. This amateur strategy can produce serious losses and
weigh you down with a few big losers.
4.The public loves to buy cheap stocks selling at low prices per share. They incorrectly feel it's
wiser to buy more shares of stock in round lots of 100 or 1,000 shares, and this makes them feel
better, perhaps more important. You would be better off buying 30 or 50 shares of higher-priced,
sounder com panies. You must think in terms of the number of dollars you are investing, not the
number of shares you can buy. Buy the best merchandise available, not the poorest. The appeal of a
$2, $5, or $10 stock seems irresistible. But most stocks selling for $10 or lower are there because
the companies have either been inferior in the past or have had something wrong with them recently. Stocks are like anything else. You can't buy the best quality at the cheapest price!
It usually costs more in commissions and markups to buy low-priced stocks, and your risk is
greater, since cheap stocks can drop 15 to 20 percent faster than most higher-priced stocks.
Professionals and institutions will not normally buy the $5 and $10 stocks, so you have a much
poorer grade following and support for these low-quality securities. As discussed earlier, institutional sponsorship is one of the ingredients needed to help propel a stock higher in price.
5.First-time speculators want to make a killing in the market. They want too much, too fast, without
doing the necessary study and preparation or acquiring the essential methods and skills. They are
looking for an easy way to make a quick buck without spending any time or effort really learning
what they are doing.
6.Mainstream America delights in buying on tips, rumors, stories, and advisory service
recommendations. In other words, they are willing to risk their hard-earned money on what
someone else says, rather than on knowing for sure what they are doing themselves. Most rumors
are false, and even if a tip is correct, the stock ironically will, in many cases, go down in price.
7.Investors buy second-rate stocks because of dividends or low price/earnings ratios. Dividends are
not as important as earnings per share; in fact, the more a company pays in dividends, the weaker
the company may be because it may have to pay high interest rates to replenish internally needed
funds that were paid out in the form of dividends. An investor can lose the amount of a dividend in
one or two days' fluctuation in the price of the stock. A low P/E, of course, is probably low because
the company's past record is inferior.
8.People buy company names they are familiar with, names they know. Just because you used to
work for General Motors doesn't make General Motors necessarily a good stock to buy. Many of
the best investments will be names you won't know very well but could and should know if you
would do a little studying and research.
9.Most investors are not able to find good information and advice. Many, if they had sound advice,
would not recognize or follow it. The average friend, stockbroker, or advisory service could be a
source of losing advice. It is always the exceedingly small minority of your friends, brokers, or
advisory services that are successful enough in the market themselves that merit your consideration.
Outstanding stockbrokers or advisory services are no more frequent than are outstanding doctors,
lawyers, or baseball players. Only one out of nine baseball players that sign professional contracts
ever make it to the big leagues. And, of course, the majority of ballplayers that graduate from
college are not even good enough to sign a professional contract,
10.
Over 98 percent of the masses are afraid to buy a stock that is beginning to go into new high
ground, pricewise. It just seems too high to them. Personal feelings and opinions are far less
114

accurate than markets.
11.The majority of unskilled investors stubbornly hold onto their losses when the losses are small
and reasonable. They could get out cheaply, but being emotionally involved and human, they keep
waiting and hoping until their loss gets much bigger and costs them dearly.
12. In a similar vein, investors cash in small, easy-to-take profits and hold their losers. This tactic is
exactly the opposite of correct investment procedure. Investors will sell a stock with a profit before
they will sell one with a loss.
13.Individual investors worry too much about taxes and commissions. Your key objective should
be to first make a net profit. Excessive worrying about taxes usually leads to unsound investments
in the hope of achieving a tax shelter. At other times in the past, investors lost a good profit by
holding on too long, trying to get a long-term capital gain. Some investors, even erroneously,
convince themselves they can't sell because of taxes—strong ego, weak judgment.
Commission costs of buying or selling stocks, especially through a discount broker, are a relatively
minor factor, compared to more important aspects such as making the right decisions in the first
place and taking action when needed. One of the great advantages of owning stock over real estate
is the substantially lower commission and instant marketability and liquidity. This enables you to
protect yourself quickly at a low cost or to take advantage of highly profitable new trends as they
continually evolve.
14.The multitude speculates in options too much because they think it is a way to get rich quick.
When they buy options, they incorrectly concentrate entirely in shorter-term, lower-priced options
that involve greater volatility and risk rather than in longer-term options. The limited time period
works against short-term option holders. Many options speculators also write what are referred to
as "naked options," which are nothing but taking a great risk for a potentially small reward and,
therefore, a relatively unsound investment procedure.
15.Novice investors like to put price limits on their buy-and-sell orders. They rarely place market
orders. This procedure is poor because the investor is quibbling for eighths and quarters of a point,
rather than emphasizing the more important and larger overall movement. Limit orders eventually
result in your completely missing the market and not getting out of stocks that should be sold to
avoid substantial losses.
16.Some investors have trouble making decisions to buy or sell. In other words, they vacillate and
can't make up their minds. They are unsure because they really don't know what they are doing.
They do not have a plan, a set of principles, or rules to guide them and, therefore, are uncertain of
what they should be doing.
17.Most investors cannot look at stocks objectively. They are always hoping and having favorites,
and they rely on their hopes and personal opinions rather than paying attention to the opinion of the
marketplace, which is more frequently right.
18.Investors are usually influenced by things that are not really crucial, such as stock splits,
increased dividends, news announcements, and brokerage firm or advisory recommendations.
As someone who has spent a lifetime researching stocks and the American economy, do you
have any opinions about the quality of research provided by Wall Street firms?
An article in Financial World found that top-rated analysts generally un-derperformed the S&P
average. One major problem is that 80 percent of brokerage firm research is written on the wrong
companies. Each industry analyst has to turn out his or her quota of reports, even though only a few
industry groups are leaders in each cycle. There is insufficient screening to determine which reports
should actually be written. Another major problem with Wall Street research is that it seldom
provides sell recommendations.
I would assume, given the consistency of your success as a stock investor for over twenty-five
years, that you don't think very much of the random walk theory.
The stock market is neither efficient nor random. It is not efficient because there are too many
poorly conceived opinions; it is not random because strong investor emotions can create trends.
In the most general sense, trading success requires three basic components: an effective trade
selection process, risk control, and discipline to adhere to the first two items. William O'Neil
provides a perfect illustration of the successful trader. He has devised a specific strategy for
115

selecting stocks (CANSLIM), he has a rigorous risk control rale, and he has the discipline not to
deviate from his selection and risk control strategies. In addition to the specific stock selection
methodology detailed in this chapter, traders and investors should find the advice regarding
common mistakes, listed near the end of the interview, particularly useful.

116

David Ryan-Stock Investment as a Treasure Hunt
David Ryan does not believe in buying low-priced stocks. But that was not always the case. He
remembers flipping through the Wall Street Journal when he was thirteen years old and finding a
$1 stock. He ran with the paper in hand to his father and asked, "If I go up to my room and get a
dollar, can I buy this stock?" His father told him that it didn't quite work that way. "You have to do
some research about a company before you invest in the stock," he explained.
A few days later, leafing through the Wall Street Journal again, Ryan found an article on Ward
Foods, which made Bit-O-Honey and Chunky candy bars. It seemed like a perfect investment,
since he ate a lot of candy. His father set up an account for him, and he bought ten shares of the
stock. He recalls getting all his friends to buy the candy bars so the company would make more
money and his stock would go up. That was the official start of Ryan's career as a stock investor.
Ryan's interest in the stock market increased as he grew older. By the time he was sixteen years
old, he was subscribing to a weekly chart service and attending investment seminars by William
O'Neil and other market analysts. In college, he read every book on the stock market he could find.
William O'Neil was Ryan's idol. After graduating college in 1982, he decided to try to get a job at
O'Neil's company. He told the receptionist of his interest in O'Neil's work and his willingness to
accept any job, no matter how menial, just to get his foot in the door. He was even willing to work
for free. Ryan was hired, and within four years, his investment success led to his appointment as the
youngest vice-president of the company, with responsibilities as a portfolio manager and as
O'Neil's direct assistant in stock selection for institutional clients.
Ryan achieved a degree of fame in his own regard when he won the 1985 stock division of the U.S.
Investing Championship, a contest ran by former Stanford University Professor Norm Zadeh. His
return that year was a phenomenal 161 percent. As if to demonstrate that his performance was no
one-year fluke, Ryan reentered the contest in 1986, virtually duplicating his previous year's
performance with a 160 percent return second-place finish. In 1987, he won the contest once again
with another triple-digit return year. For the three years as a whole, his compounded return was a
remarkable 1,379 percent.
Although most of the traders I interviewed have a love for trading, none have the unbridled
enthusiasm demonstrated by Ryan. To Ryan, the whole process of stock selection is like a terrific
game—a treasure hunt as he describes it—and he still can't believe he is getting paid to do it.
The offices of the traders I interviewed ranged from the unadorned to the elaborate, but Ryan
clearly had the low end of the spectrum staked out. Instead of an office, plain or otherwise, I was
surprised to find Ryan's workplace to be a cubicle within a noisy, floor-sized room. Ryan didn't
seem to care about the lack of amenities. I suspect that as long as he was supplied with his charts
and computer runs, he would probably be content to work in a hall closet.
Did your original job at William O'Neil & Co. involve any market analysis?
No, but once I was in, I just started studying and studying.
On your own time, I take it
Yes. I would take stuff home every night and on weekends.
What kind of things were you studying?
I would go over our charts. I studied the company's past recommendations. I studied historical
models of great winning stocks to ingrain in my mind what a stock looked like before it made a
major move. I tried to get to the point where I was looking at the exact same things O'Neil did. He
was my role model.
Were you trading at this time?
Yes, I opened a $20,000 account shortly after I started working for the company [1982].
How did you do?
Initially, I ran the account up to about $52,000 by June 1983. Then I gave it all back, including
some of my starting capital. By mid-1984, my account was down to $16,000.
Do you know what you did wrong?
Yes. I sat down and studied every mistake that I had made from June 1983 through the middle of
117

1984. Probably my biggest mistake was that even though we were in a moderate bear market—the
Dow came down from 1,296 to 1,078—I continued to play as aggressively as I had during the bull
market from August 1982 through June 1983.1 also made the mistake of buying stocks that were
overextended. By that I mean I was buying stocks that had already moved 15 to 20 percent above
their price bases. You should only buy stocks that are within a few percent of their base; otherwise,
the risk is too great.
I turned it around by learning from all the mistakes that I had made. In late 1984,1 sold a piece of
real estate I owned and put all the money in a stock account.
Were you confident, despite your poor performance during mid-1983 to mid-1984, because
you felt that you had figured out what you were doing wrong?
Yes, because I had studied very hard and was determined to be disciplined, I thought I was going to
do very well. So in 19851 entered the U.S. Investing Championship. I won the stock division that
year with a 161 percent return, I reentered the contest in subsequent years and substantially
exceeded 100 percent returns in 1986 and 1987 as well. I was doing the exact same thing over and
over again. I was buying stocks when they had all the characteristics I liked.
How are you doing this year [May 1988]?
So far this year, I am down. We are in a different type of market: Stocks aren't moving as quickly
as they have in the last three years. I am playing with a much smaller amount this year, because I
think the potential for making a lot of money is much more limited.
You mentioned earlier that for a while you read virtually every book on the markets you
could find. What reading list would you give to someone starting out who is serious about
becoming a successful stock trader?
Essential reading on top of the list is O'Neil's book, How to Make Money in Stocks (McGraw-Hill,
New York, NY 1988). Another book that is must reading is How I Made Two Million Dollars in the
Stock Market by Nicholas Darvas (Lyle Stuart, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, 1986). A lot of people laugh at
that title, but it is fun reading and you learn a ton. Another book I would recommend is
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator by Edwin Lefevre [reputedly about Jesse Livermore].
Livermore himself wrote a very good thin volume, How to Trade in Stocks (Institute for Economic
& Financial Research, Albuquerque, NM, 1986).
Any others?
A good one on what to look for in individual stocks is Super Performance Stocks by Richard Love
(Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1977). The book has a great study on some of the greatest
winners of all time. Another good one on picking stocks is Profile of a Growth Stock by Kermit
Zieg and Susannah H. Zieg (Investor's Intelligence, Larchmont, NY, 1972). I would also
recommend Marty Zweig's book, Winning on Wall Street (Warner Books, Inc., New York, NY,
1986) and Stan Weinstein's Secrets for Profiting in Bull and Bear Markets (Dow, Jones-Irwin, New
York, NY, 1988), which has some good sections on short selling. Finally, on Elliott Wave analysis,
which I think has some validity, there is Elliott Wave Principle by Frost and Prechter (New Classic
Library, Inc., Gainesville, GA, 1978) and a book called Super Timing by an English fellow named
Beckman (Milestone Publishers, London).
All those books are good, but you learn the most from the market itself. Every time I buy a stock, I
write down the reasons why I bought it [he pulls out a binder containing annotated charts]. Doing
this helps cement in my mind the characteristics of a winning stock. Maybe even more important, it
helps me learn from my mistakes.
What kind of things did you learn by keeping your trader's diary?
Not buying overextended stocks, using О'Neil's criteria for stock selection, and being as disciplined
as possible. The more disciplined you can get, the better you are going to do in the market. The
more you listen to tips and rumors, the more money you're likely to lose.
Has keeping this diary been an important part of your success?
Absolutely.
Can you describe your procedure for selecting stocks?
118

I start out by going through the stock charts and writing down the stocks with strong technical
action. In other words, I write down all the stocks
I want to take a closer look at.
Your company follows 7,000 stocks; you can't possibly look at 7,000 charts on a regular basis.
I don't look through 7,000, but in a week I probably go through about 4,000 charts. So, I see a
majority of the data base. Keep in mind there are probably about 1,500 to 2,000 stocks that trade
under $ 10, and I don't like to look at those anyway.
Is that a good rule: Avoid stocks under $10?
Yes, because they are usually down there for a reason.
Doesn't that knock out a lot of the OTC stocks?
Yes, a lot of the smaller OTC stocks.
But aren't those sometimes the best buys—the stocks that no one is paying any attention to?
Sometimes. But many of those stocks stay down there for years and years. I would rather wait until
they prove themselves by moving up to the $15 to $20 range.
After you have reviewed the charts and written down the stocks that interest you, what do
you look at next to screen your selection?
I look at the five-year earnings growth record and the last two quarters of earnings relative to the
previous year's levels. The quarterly comparisons show you if there is any deceleration in the
earnings growth rate. For example, a 30 percent growth rate over the last five years may look very
impressive, but if in the last two quarters earnings were only up 10 percent and 15 percent, it warns
you that the strong growth period may be over. Of course, those two factors—the five-year
earnings growth record and the earnings during the past two quarters—are combined in our
earnings per share (EPS) rank. [See the O'Neil chapter for a detailed explanation of the EPS.]
What are you looking for in an EPS figure?
As high as possible—at least above 80, and preferably above 90. Actually, a lot of stocks I buy
have an EPS rank of 99.
In my experience, markets usually anticipate. One thing that surprises me about the EPS is
that I would think that the price of the stock would run up well before the earnings growth
starts to be extremely positive.
That is what a lot of people think. They say, "It's too late to buy the stock; the earnings are already
on the table." However, in analyzing hundreds of the biggest winners, we found that, in many
cases, the earnings had been on the table for a while.
What would cause a stock to just sit despite very good earnings?
The broad stock market may be weak and holding back the stock, but once the weight of the market
comes off, these stocks just go right through the roof.
How about if the stock market is OK? What would keep the stock from taking off in that type
of situation?
Perceptions—people might not believe that the earnings are going to continue as strongly as they
had in the past.
What else are you using besides the EPS and the earnings breakdown to screen your stock
selections?
The relative strength is very important. [The relative strength ranks a stock's price change relative
to all other stocks surveyed. See the O'Neil chapter for a detailed definition.]
What are you looking for in relative strength?
At least above 80, and preferably above 90.
Intuitively, I would almost think that—
"It has already gone too far. It can't get any stronger."
Well, not necessarily that it can't get any stronger, but it seems to me that, by definition,
119
