
Sears Holdings Example: Intraday Ascending Triangle
All price patterns are applicable on all timeframes, as Figure 5.10 reveals, as it shows the 30-minute
intraday chart of Sears Holdings (SHLD). Patterns even form and complete their targets on
timeframes as low as the 1-minute chart!

FIGURE 5.10 Intraday Ascending Triangle Example in Sears Holdings—April 2010

The price of SHLD was in a sharp impulse move up from the $106.00 level on April 21 to peak and
form a line of horizontal resistance at $125.00 from April 23 to May 1. Traders and investors formed
a horizontal resistance line at the $125.00-per-share level, as they deemed this level to be
“expensive” to buy shares at that price. However, the level deemed cheap, or the lower support zone,
began on April 23 with a series of higher lows that formed a clean rising trendline as drawn.
By May 1, it became clear that price was most likely forming a consolidation pattern that took the
form of an ascending triangle. However, just as soon as you realized that price was contained within
a consolidation pattern with a median or fair value price at the $122.00 level, sellers took price
lower, breaking under not just the lower rising trendline, but the prior swing low of $121.00 per
share from April 30, triggering an official price pattern short-sale entry trade.
I used this example to underscore the point that if you were 100 percent convinced that price had to
rise and had bought shares long while the triangle formed, either because the prior trend was up or
because you felt that all ascending triangles broke to the upside, you would be trapped in a sharp selloff that began with a morning gap and immediate sell-off that took price from $122.00 to $118.00
right off the market open. If you regarded this pattern as neutral, you would have avoided this painful
loss and would be in the right mindset to put on a short-sale trade, if you so desired, to play a range
breakout trade.
In this case, the entry was as soon as you could get short once price cleanly broke under the rising
trendline, which occurred at the $122.00 level. Your most realistic entry came at the $118.00 level,
which placed a stop likely within the triangle at the $122.00-per-share level or above the upper
resistance line at $125.00. To project your price target, you would measure the height of the triangle,
$125.00 minus $116.00 gives us $9.00, and then subtract this value from the price breakout zone at
the $121.00-per-share level. Subtracting $9.00 from $121.00 gives us a lower price projection target
of $112.00. In the event that you entered short at $118.00, that left you with a price target distance of

$6.00 with a stop-loss at $122.00, which was $4.00 away. That's not at all an ideal reward-to-risk
ratio, being $6.00 to $4.00, or one and a half to one.
This also underscores the point that it is best to enter into a triangle breakout as soon as possible,
and you could have done so right off the open as price began to trade under $120.00. Shorting exactly
at $120.00 would have given you a superior reward-to-risk ratio of $9.00 to $2.00, or four and a half
to one. Every penny matters when you are taking a trade, and the longer you wait for confirmation as
the price moves toward the target and away from the stop-loss, your reward-to-risk ratio deteriorates.
Sears Holdings hit its price target of $112.00 per share officially on May 6, 2010, two days after
the breakout trade triggered. Price actually fell further after this chart ends. Remember, with price
patterns, generally your stop is at a fixed location and your target is also at a fixed location. The
closer you enter to where you would locate a stop makes a big difference in your reward-to-risk ratio.
We will discuss these details when we discuss Edge and Probability in Chapter 8.

USING PRICE PATTERNS IN THE REAL WORLD

Price patterns are important to traders, but they are by no means perfect. If you expect all patterns you
see on a chart to work perfectly according to textbook standards, you will soon be disappointed.
However, when you tie price patterns to underlying principles of price behavior, understand that
patterns offer a brief window of a possible pathway forward to a target in price, and that the edge
from patterns comes from the low risk/higher reward relationship contained in the inherent stop and
target placement, you will likely find that trading specific price patterns can be a rewarding practice.
As is the purpose of this book, all concepts are enhanced through confluence, rather than in
isolation. Look for as many convergences in principles and price levels as possible before putting on
a trade. In so doing, you will pass on the sub-par patterns that develop and trade only those that align
with other price principles or concepts you have learned in your experience. Envision patterns as a
brief window into the supply/demand relationship that exists among traders of all styles and
experience levels, similar to the way a candle reveals insights into the current supply/demand
relationship between buyers and sellers and what that might indicate for the future.
Keep in mind that some of the best trades come from what we call busted patterns, or patterns that
grab the attention of a large majority of traders, and then fail, taking the massive stop-losses of those
who have entered which creates a predictable equal but opposite reaction than is expected. Positive
feedback loops often develop unexpectedly when a popular price pattern fails as traders are trapped.
For now, study these patterns along with additional patterns you have learned in the trading
literature, but never take a pattern at face value or believe with 100 percent certainty that the pattern
will resolve exactly as the textbooks say it will. We trade in the real world, not the theoretical, and
we need to adjust our expectations accordingly and be nimble without being biased to a single
position.
We have briefly touched on how Fibonacci retracements can enhance a bull flag trade, but
Fibonacci retracement grids go far beyond that application. Our next chapter explains how to draw
and apply Fibonacci retracements within the context of trending environments to locate hidden
support or resistance confluence levels in price.

CHAPTER 6
Fibonacci Tools
So far, we have discussed price principles, price patterns, and basic candlestick charting as a means
to discover higher probability trade setups. Now we move into our first advanced price charting
method, known as Fibonacci Analysis. Traders use basic Fibonacci retracements to find support or
resistance in a trending market, and these key prices can help uncover hidden points of potential
support or resistance levels not seen using basic charting methods. Most software programs or
charting web sites make Fibonacci tools available to traders, and thus increased the popularity of
using even simple Fibonacci techniques.
In this chapter, we will discuss how to use Fibonacci retracements to find key support or resistance
levels that may form alignment with other price levels, how to uncover hidden confluences of
Fibonacci retracement levels, and how even simple Fibonacci tools can help confirm other methods
of identifying price support or resistance, which leads to enhanced trade entry and exit.

WHAT IS FIBONACCI IN TRADING?
Traders in 2010 still use insights from a number series described by Leonardo Fibonacci of Pisa, an
Italian mathematician from the thirteenth century as described in his book Liber Abaci (which
translates as “The Book of the Abacus”). Most modern mathematics students know the Fibonacci
sequence as the classic 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, and so on, where the next number
in the sequence is the result of adding the prior two numbers together. For example, 5 plus 8 equals
13, and 8 plus 13 equals 21. The Fibonacci sequence initially explained growth and decay sequences
in nature, such as the growth in generations beginning with a single pair of rabbits, and has now been
expanded to include larger growth and decay cycles of much larger structures, including financial
markets.
The numbers themselves are not as important to modern traders, who are more concerned with the
specific ratio between the numbers that develops the idea behind the Fibonacci charting strategies
used today. Dividing one number by the immediate larger number in the sequence results in the ratio
0.618, such as the number 55 divided by 89 equals 0.618, which forms a stable relationship when
dividing any number by one Fibonacci number higher. With the exception of the beginning numbers in
the sequence (5 divided by 8 is 0.625, any number in the infinite sequence above 34 results in the
0.618 relationship). The 0.618 number becomes important when using the Fibonacci retracement tool
common on most software programs.
Dividing a given number by the next smaller number in the sequence results in the ratio 1.618, as in
the example 89 divided by 55 equals 1.618, or 55 divided by 34 equals 1.618. This relationship and
ratio holds true no matter which number in the sequence is divided by a lower number. As such, the
ratio of one number to the next Fibonacci number is 1.618 times itself, or stated differently, to identify
the next larger number in the series, one then multiplies a current number by 1.618, as in the example

89 times 1.618 equals 144. The ratio 1.618 has importance for traders looking to use Fibonacci price
projection or extension tools on their charting software to uncover potential range expansion price
targets.
The application to modern traders has less to do with the actual Fibonacci numbers than the 0.618
and 1.618 relationships themselves. As explained by Charles Kirkpatrick and Julie Dahlquist in
Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians (2007), the .618 and
1.618 ratio between numbers holds true regardless of the departure point as long as the two numbers
sum to the third number in an infinite sequence. Kirkpatrick and Dahlquist begin their example with
the random whole numbers 14 and 285 as a departure point instead of the 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 numbers that
begin the official Fibonacci sequence. Over a period of 7 to 8 iterations of adding the original two
numbers, the ratio converges to the same 0.618 relationship between a given number and the next
larger digit, and the 1.618 ratio of a given number and the next smaller digit in the sequence.
Try it for yourself with any two random starting digits, such as in the example 25 and 50. 25 + 50 =
75; 75 + 50 = 125; 125 + 75 = 200; 200 + 125 = 325; 325 + 200 = 525; 525 + 325 = 850; 850 + 525
= 1,375 to infinity. The sequential number 850 divided by 1,375 equals 0.618, and the sequential
number 850 divided by the higher sequential number 1,375 equals 1.618. The application to the
markets and beyond therefore comes from the mathematical ratio itself and not from the starting
numbers.
Now that we have a basic understanding of the 0.618 and 1.618 ratio numbers which are important
not only to mathematicians, let us now move into the realm of describing how modern traders use
these ratios to create Fibonacci tools to uncover potential turning points in the market.

FIBONACCI RETRACEMENTS
While many traders are familiar with Fibonacci tools, others have never heard of the concept as it
relates to technical analysis or charting. The simplest way to apply the 0.618 ratio is in the common
Fibonacci retracement tool on most charting software programs. Recall that in an upward trend move,
price forms higher highs and higher lows, or stated differently, price forms upward impulses and
downward retracements. Traders anticipate where these retracement swings to the downside will
stop and then price will resume rising in its established uptrend. Some of the easiest trades come from
buying pullbacks in an uptrend to a key support level, such as a short-term moving average, rising
trendline, or prior price support levels.
Another trading tool is the simple Fibonacci retracement tool, which is designed to find the end of a
downward retracement into support so that traders may buy shares as price begins to rise upward
from a potential support level. Traders use the 0.618 ratio and derivations of this ratio such as the
popular 0.382 ratio to find potential turning points in a market. Traders use percentages such as the
61.8 percent retracement level and the 38.2 percent retracement level. The 38.2 percent level derives
from the remainder or what is left over after measuring 61.8 percent of a move. In terms of ratios,
think of the 0.382 as being left-over after finding the 0.618 segment, or specifically 1 minus 0.618
equals 0.382. This is why you see the 38.2 percent retracement on standard Fibonacci retracement
tools. While not officially a Fibonacci ratio, almost all traders pay attention to the 50 percent
retracement level in addition to the 61.8 and 38.2 percent levels, which is why most default
retracement tools show three lines in the chart. Thus, the 61.8 percent, 38.2 percent, and the 50
percent retracement lines are what you can expect to see most frequently when doing any type of

Fibonacci retracement analysis on the price chart.

Drawing Fibonacci Retracement Grids
Most software programs incorporate Fibonacci tools into their basic or free set of indicators, such as
the charting web sites StockCharts.com and FreeStockCharts.com. The following describes the
purpose and rules for drawing a classic Fibonacci retracement grid on a chart to reveal potential
support levels in an established uptrend.
The purpose for drawing a Fibonacci Retracement Grid is to find potential support or turning points
that will end a downward retracement swing in an established uptrend. The trader looks to buy shares
if price forms a reversal candle at a major Fibonacci retracement level, or if a Fibonacci Level forms
a price confluence with a moving average, trendline, or other form of support.
The following steps represent the sequence to draw a Fibonacci Retracement Grid:
1. Establish that price is in a confirmed uptrend
2. Observe a recent price swing high and note that price is retracing down from a recent
swing high in price
3. Use the Fibonacci Retracement tool to start the grid by clicking on the most recent swing
low in price and dragging the grid to the most recent swing high in price
4. Observe the 38.2, 50.0, and 61.8 percent retracement levels the software labels on the
price chart for potential downside targets and areas to identify potential price confluences
with other methods, with the purpose being to buy when price has retraced into support and
may be resuming the established uptrend
For finding overhead resistance levels in a downtrend, repeat the procedure above but start the
Fibonacci grid at the most recent swing high in price in an established downtrend and end the grid at
the most recent new swing low in price to uncover the 38.2, 50.0, and 61.8 percent overhead
resistance levels. Look to sell short when price retraces into one of these overhead resistance levels,
particularly if the level forms a confluence with a moving average or trendline along with a reversal
candle.

Examples of Identifying Price Support
The following examples of Fibonacci retracement grids designed to identify price support will be
helpful in understanding this concept. Keep in mind that the technique will be opposite for finding
overhead resistance levels to short-sell in a downtrend. Let us start with a pure Fibonacci example
using a theoretical uptrend beginning at $1.00 and moving to $100.00 (an extreme example), and we
want to know the potential retracement levels of the prior swing from $50.00 to $100.00. Figure 6.1
shows the established uptrend and the recent retracement to a lower support level, where a Fibonacci
Retracement grid can be helpful.
FIGURE 6.1 A Pure Price Example of a Fibonacci Retracement Grid

In Figure 6.1, we first observe an uptrend as evidenced by higher price highs and higher price lows.
The most recent swing took price from a swing low of $50.00 to the most recent swing high of
$100.00 per share. The most recent swing was a $50.00 move to the upside, and we want to know
where potential levels of support might be, and so we use the Fibonacci retracement tool.
Starting with the most recent $50.00 swing low, we begin our grid and then end the grid with the
most recent swing high at $100.00. The software then draws the 38.2, 50.0, and 61.8 percent
retracement levels. Some software programs might draw the grid starting with the high and ending
with the low, so be sure to consult the user manual of the charting software program you use. The goal
is to have the 38.2 percent retracement in an uptrend be near the recent high in an uptrend to find
support, and for the 38.2 percent retracement to be near the recent low in a downtrend to find
resistance.
The 50.0 percent retracement is the easiest to understand, as this is the halfway point of the prior
swing. In a strong uptrend, price can retrace up to 50 percent of the prior swing to be considered
healthy. However, any price retracement greater than 50 percent of the prior move could signal a
deeper than normal retracement is underway, and that the next level to expect support is at the 61.8
percent level.
If price retraces greater than 61.8 percent of the prior move, then many traders would be
comfortable stopping out in anticipation that price was forming a reversal swing to the downside
instead of a standard retracement to test lower support levels. As such, many traders regard the 61.8
percent level as a very important level to watch as a boundary line to determine the potential for a

reversal to form instead of a retracement.
In this example, the price swing is $50.00. Half of this value is $25.00, and when either subtracted
from the $100.00 high or added to the $50.00 swing low, the result is $75.00 per share, which is
conveniently labeled on the chart. In this example, the $75.00 level also forms a confluence with the
most recent prior swing high, meaning that we have a confluence of support from the 50 percent
retracement grid and a prior swing high. If price retraces to this level and a reversal candle or a
positive momentum divergence forms at the $75.00 confluence support level, we would be interested
in buying the market to anticipate a resumption of the uptrend, leaving us to profit from any move to
the upside from an expected support level.
Other than the 50 percent halfway retracement level, we then turn to the two Fibonacci Levels as
drawn by the retracement grid, starting with the 38.2 percent line which appears at $80.90 in this
example. It is possible that price will continue retracing downward and find support at this higher
retracement level, and we might want to buy the market if we start to see signs of a reversal forming
at the $81.00 level in the form of positive divergences or reversal candles. We would also look for
any rising trendlines or short-term moving averages such as the 20-period simple or exponential
moving average to align at the $81.00 level. If so, we would consider buying the market at the 38.2
percent Fibonacci retracement price of $80.90.
The final well-known Fibonacci-based retracement zone comes in at the 61.8 percent retracement
level. The 61.8 percent level reflects the 0.618 ratio of the recent $50.00 swing to the upside, such
that $50.00 (the distance of the prior swing) times 0.618 (the Golden Ratio) equals $30.90. Taking the
swing high at $100.00 and subtracting $30.90 gives us the 61.8 percent retracement at $69.10. As a
cross-check, adding this same value to the $50.00 swing low gives us the $80.90 price, which is the
same as the 38.2 percent retracement level.
After observing price as being in an established uptrend and finding the price retracing downward
from the key swing high of $100.00, we use our Fibonacci retracement tool to find the $80.90,
$75.00, and $69.10 price levels to be potential support zones. Should other non-related methods, such
as moving averages, trendlines, or prior price support levels align with one or more of these levels,
then we could expect increased odds of a potential turn in price back to the upside, giving us a
potential trade setup.
While specific trade execution tactics will be discussed in Chapter 8, we would confirm a trade
entry if we observed a reversal candle such as a bullish hammer, bullish engulfing, or doji candle at
the expected support level. In addition, if we observed a positive momentum divergence either on the
same timeframe or on a lower timeframe, odds would be increased for profitable trade setup. No
method alone can guarantee success, but finding confluences across multiple non-correlated methods
increases the odds of a successful trade outcome and helps with the accuracy edge in our strategies.

UTX Daily Example
I n Figure 6.2, we see a real example of a Fibonacci retracement grid and the outcome of a deep
retracement of a prior swing to new highs in United Technologies (UTX) in mid-2007.
FIGURE 6.2 Daily Chart of a Fibonacci Retracement Grid in United Technologies during mid-2007

Although not specifically showing it, United Technologies was in an uptrend since the 2003 lows
and had recently formed a key swing high just shy of $78.00 per share. In July, price began a
downswing to test lower levels, and nimble traders drew the following Fibonacci Retracement grid
to find potential support levels to watch for a potential entry. Initially, price found support in early
August at the 38.2 percent level at $72.41, but after a week of trading higher, price then suddenly fell
to the deeper potential support level of the 61.8 percent retracement at $69.06. Traders often place
stop-losses under the 61.8 percent level of a retracement, and the United Technologies chart in Figure
6.2 is a good example of how this can be a helpful tactic for those who were bullish on United
Technologies.
The candle on August 16, 2007 took price sharply lower in a sudden gap lower as price fell
throughout the intraday trading session. However, by the close of the day, buyers found that the 61.8
percent retracement level contained the low of the trading day, and also the retracement lower as a
bullish hammer candle formed at the close of the session. Traders associate bullish hammer candles,
with the long lower shadow reflecting price rejection of lower prices, with price reversals. True to
its bullish signal, the hammer candle preceded the next upswing in price as buyers took price back
above the 38.2 percent retracement level and later to new highs above $78.00 in a resumption of the
uptrend, though this chart does not show the new highs which formed a final swing high of $82.50 on
October 2, 2007, a few weeks after the end of this chart.
