
CHAPTER

5
Fundamental
Analysis
Analyzing Exchange Rates Based
on Fundamental Factors
Fundamental analysis deals with the external factors that move currencies.
These factors might be quantifiable, like those that fall under the umbrella of
economics or finance. There are also numerous qualitative factors, such as
investor sentiment, political developments, and crises of various kinds. As I
explained in Chapter 3, all of these factors can influence exchange rates, and
determining just how this takes place is the job of the fundamental analyst.
At the heart of fundamental analysis is the notion of equilibrium. At any
given time, a currency pair should trade at a particular rate that balances
trade and investment flows. Of course, fluctuations in market risk appetite
and unexpected developments may imply a rate that is well above or below
what financial-economic conditions justify. If you accept the efficient market
hypothesis in its weak form—the idea that all public information has already
been priced into the exchange rate—then this isn’t a major concern.
Fundamental analysis is ultimately more art than science. As you’ll see from
the pages that follow, competing narratives abound in the forex markets, and
this makes fundamental analysis difficult even in the most stable market
conditions. Still, those that are able to read the tea leaves correctly (and are
able to develop good forecasts) will find fundamental analysis of exchange
rates to be a rewarding pursuit.

96

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Interest Rate Analysis
There are two overarching forces which describe how changes in central
bank interest rates impact exchange rates: interest rate parity and the carry
trade. Emerging (growth) currencies tend to trade in direct proportion to
relative interest rate levels since higher rates attract speculative investors.
Recall that investors in the carry trade seek to profit from positive interest
rate differentials; hence, the higher the interest rate, the more attractive the
corresponding currency. Currencies backed by stable (slow growth)
economies generally fluctuate against one another so as to preserve interest
rate parity, especially over the long term.
In other words, interest rate adjustments lead to inverse changes in the
exchange rates between major currencies. For example, a hike in the US
federal funds rate should cause the US dollar to fall against the British
pound, unless the Bank of England takes similar action. Recall from Figure
3-5 in Chapter 3 that, from 2004 to the present, changes in the US/UK
interest rate differential presaged corresponding changes in the GBP/USD
rate. In order for interest rate parity to be maintained, a decline in US interest
rates (relative to UK rates) should spur risk-averse investors away from the
pound and toward the US dollar. The same logic can be applied to the Swiss
franc, Japanese yen, euro, and Canadian dollar.
This relationship is not set in stone. The actual impact will depend on
investor sentiment and the prevailing market narrative. When risk appetite is
extremely high, for example, investors might treat major currencies like
emerging currencies. In the early 2000s, when the carry trade came into
vogue, the US dollar rose rapidly against the yen in conjunction with a series
of federal rate hikes. Similarly, when the Federal Reserve Bank, or
commonly, the Fed, began cutting rates in 2007, investors moved to unwind
their carry trade positions and the US dollar plunged against the yen. As a
result, the USD/JPY underwent a massive correction (Figure 5-1) and interest
rate parity was restored.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 5-1. USD/JPY response to changing interest rate differential

One way to conceptualize this is that, due to high appetite for risk, spot
market traders were willing to violate covered interest rate parity in order to
secure immediate short-term profits. When risk appetite tanked (in the lead
up to the 2008 credit crisis) and the US/Japan interest rate differential
simultaneously narrowed, the short-term benefit of holding the US dollar
against the Japanese yen was eliminated. Another way to understand this is
that the spot market (which was betting on the dollar) fell out of equilibrium
with the forward market (which implied a weaker dollar, in accordance with
covered interest rate parity) and was only restored when speculators in the
spot market retreated.
You can see from Figure 5-1 that both the long-term uptrend (from 2004 to
2007) in the USD/JPY and the long-term downtrend that followed (from
2007 to present) were preceded by changes in the interest rate differential.
(To be fair, the downtrend was much due to the inception of the global
financial crisis, and falling US interest rates were probably more of an effect
than a cause. I will explore this idea later in greater detail.) A fundamental
analyst, then, might have seen an opportunity to buy the USD/JPY in 2005
and a basis for selling in 2007.
In fact, the carry trade has become one of the most reliable trades in forex.
When investors buy a high-yielding currency against a low-yielding one,

97

98

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
they can capture an interest rate spread. Their expectation is that the
underlying exchange rate will remain stable so that adverse changes don’t
erode interest earnings. When market risk appetite is strong, a flood of
speculative capital into carry trade strategies actually forces the underlying
exchange rate to rise, and profits from currency appreciation become an
added bonus for those seeking low-risk interest. When the tide turns,
however, the whipsaw of money flowing out of carry trades can be just as
ferocious. This is typically triggered by a change in risk appetite rather than a
change in interest rate differentials.
Emerging market currencies represent the primary targets for carry traders
since their corresponding short-term interest rates are perennially high. Their
industrialized counterparts, on the flipside, are known for low rates and are
better utilized on the short end of the carry trade as funding currencies. Of
course, emerging market currencies are also plagued by higher volatility,
monetary instability, lower liquidity, and logistical issues related to trading
them. The benchmark interest rates of Angola and Kenya, for example, are
perennially among the highest in the world, but, for many reasons, their
currencies are not well suited for carry trading, let alone normal currency
speculation.
Before we get ahead of ourselves, consider that there are in fact many
different interest rates, depending on which entity is performing the
calculation. For example, most central banks control a base interest rate that
they determine outright or merely target (as in the case of the Federal
Reserve Bank). The Fed has its federal funds rate and discount rate. The
European Central Bank has its refinancing rate. The Bank of England uses a
repo rate while the Bank of Japan prefers an overnight call rate. While the
nuts and bolts of each country’s rate mechanism are slightly different, the
objective is always the same: to achieve economic stability. For example,
when an economy is expanding too quickly and price inflation picks up, the
central bank will raise its benchmark interest rate in order to make saving
more attractive than borrowing and spending. During a recession, the central
bank will lower interest rates in order to make saving unattractive (at the
expense of immediate consumption) and borrowing inexpensive.
The central bank base rate is the rate at which banks lend to each other using
deposits held with the central bank. It is typically the lowest rate throughout
the entire financial system. Moreover, it is typically utilized in exchange rate
models because it is the easiest to compare across different countries and
over time. (See Figure 5-2.)

Forex for Beginners

Figure 5-2. Central bank base interest rates for selected economies, change over time

As one moves down the pyramid of size and liquidity, from large bank to
small business to consumer, interest rates can be expected to rise
incrementally in order to compensate for the perception of greater credit risk.
You can also utilize London Interbank Offer Rates (LIBOR) rates, which are
used for interbank loans and are determined by market forces. Comparing
sovereign bond yields—like the US 10-year Treasury Bond Rate versus the
UK 10-year Guilt Rate—is yet another option, though these rates reflect
differences in government creditworthiness as much as differences in price
inflation and economic growth and are hence less applicable.
Except in rare circumstances (such as during crises), interest rate adjustments
are carried out by central banks only at regularly scheduled meetings. At the
conclusion of these meetings, all changes in monetary policy (including rate
changes) are announced to the public through written press releases and/or
via live press conferences. Fundamental analysts pay especially close
attention to these meetings, which are the focus of tremendous short-term
speculation in the credit and forex markets. (Technical analysts are also
keenly aware of the meetings’ significance and may avoid all trading during
the volatile periods immediately before and after the announcement.) Most
central banks will also release the minutes from their meetings, detailing
what took place, how board members (also known as governors) voted on
proposed changes in monetary policy, and so forth.

99

100

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
Central banks usually telegraph their intentions in advance to avoid shocking
the markets. Press releases may thus contain insight into the near-future
direction of monetary policy and are the subject of intense analytical
scrutiny. In fact, every investment bank employs a research team whose sole
responsibility is to develop interest rate forecasts, which are then channeled
into bets in the credit markets. As a result, interest rate futures prices can be
used as a basis for assessing the “probability” of interest rate hikes and are an
important tool for fundamental analysts. (In fact, research has shown that
futures markets slightly underestimate changes in the federal funds rate, but
they are nonetheless the best insights into where investors believe rates are
headed.)1
Per Figure 5-3, the Fed is not expected to raise the federal funds rate from the
current level of 0.0%–0.25% at its upcoming December meeting. The
markets wavered slightly from this assumption in July, but have since settled
on a 0.0% probability.

Figure 5-3. Implied probability of federal funds rate change at December 2011 meeting
(Source: The Cleveland Fed)

As for how central bank interest rate adjustments impact the forex markets in
real-time, that depends on investors’ expectations and specific market
conditions. If the actual change is consistent with analysts’ forecasts, relevant
1 Ed Nosal, “How Well Does the Federal Funds Futures Rate Predict the Future Federal

Funds Rate?” Economic Commentary, October 2001, http://199.169.201.130/research
/commentary/2001/1001.pdf.

Forex for Beginners
exchange rates probably won’t jump by much. If the rate change fails to
accord with expectations or comes as a complete surprise, you would expect
instant 50–100 PIP moves across the board.
Furthermore, in an atmosphere that is considered hospitable to the carry
trade, a rate hike will make the corresponding currency more attractive to
speculators and should cause immediate or near-term appreciation. The
opposite should be true for an interest rate cut. When risk appetite is weak,
rate changes will be ignored by markets or result in inverse changes to the
respective currency in line with purchasing power parity. Of course, there are
exceptions to this rule. When the European Central Bank announced a
surprise cut in its benchmark rate in November 2011, investors responded by
selling the euro. That’s not because the euro suddenly became a more
attractive funding currency for the carry trade, but because the cut triggered
concerns that the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis had become more serious.

Figure 5-4. Spot market reaction to November 2011 surprise European Central Bank rate cut

101

102

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Inflation Analysis
From the standpoint of fundamental analysis, the importance of inflation is
twofold: it directly erodes the value of currency and is one of the primary
drivers of monetary policy.
Remember from Chapter 3 that purchasing power parity is one of the central
tenets of exchange rate theory. And for good reason! Inflation makes
currency less valuable in both absolute and relative terms. As a medium of
exchange and store of value, a currency is only useful/valuable insofar as it
can be used to purchase goods and services, both now and in the future. If
prices are rising by 5% per year, then one unit of currency will necessarily be
worth 5% less one year from now!
Given that currencies are valued in terms of one another, inflation rates are
mainly applicable to the forex markets on a comparative basis. (For instance,
consider the possibility that inflation rates were synchronized at 5%
throughout the entire world. In that case, the relative value of their currencies
would not change, even though domestic consumers would suffer a 5%
decline in domestic purchasing power.) This is one of the main reasons for
the steady appreciation of the Japanese yen against the US dollar over the last
several decades, which has taken place despite a handful of contradicting
factors. Likewise, several emerging market currencies have stagnated
because of inflation, their strong economies notwithstanding. As I explained,
that’s because inflation has the same effect as currency depreciation. If
macroeconomic fundamentals justify a 10% appreciation in the Brazilian
real, but the Brazilian rate of inflation exceeds 10%, then the real should
remain roughly in place in order for economic equilibrium to be maintained.
While purchasing power parity is a reasonable guide for making multi-year
exchange rate forecasts, its explanatory power is fairly limited over the short
term, where the sway of inflation is mainly psychological. As long as the
inflation rate remains at an acceptable level (which varies from 0%–10%,
depending on the country and the strength of its economy), it tends to elicit
little response from consumers and investors. That’s because moderate
inflation has been shown to be crucial to proper economic function. If
inflation were too low (or even negative), it would offset the balance between
saving and investing, induce consumers to hoard cash, and interfere with the
ability of central banks to conduct monetary policy, among other things. On
the other hand, high inflation can quickly spiral into hyperinflation, causing
economic disruption, loss of savings, and even social unrest. None of the

Forex for Beginners
major currencies has experienced hyperinflation in the modern era of forex.
Similarly, more than two decades have passed since a bout of hyperinflation
has plagued any of the top-tier emerging currencies. While some paranoid
gold bugs would certainly disagree, hyperinflation is not a likely possibility
in any of the currencies that are discussed in this book.
At the same time, inflation is problematic for investors because it eats into
investment returns. When inflation ticks up without a corresponding change
in interest rates, the real interest rate (also known as the inflation-adjusted
interest rate) is said to decline. Likewise, a 10% return on an equity
investment is not so attractive if the rate of inflation is also hovering
around 10%.
Emerging market investors are especially sensitive to sudden upticks in
inflation. That’s because currency appreciation has historically accounted for
more than half of the returns earned by investors in emerging markets.2
When inflation ticks up rapidly, emerging market investors will respond by
shifting money back into industrialized economies until the responsible
central bank takes steps toward monetary and price stability. By way of
example, consider the case of the Brazilian real, whose speedy recovery in
the wake of the financial crisis slowed to a halt in 2010, due in part to fears
of rising inflation. The Brazilian real resumed its ascent in 2010, when the
Bank of Brazil finally raised its benchmark Selic rate. This appreciation took
place in spite of capital controls that were imposed by the central bank to
deter speculators. (Note Figure 5-5.)
Of course, the principal application of inflation to the currency markets
involves its role as a guide for monetary policy decisions. Most central banks
have an overarching mandate to control inflation. The Federal Reserve Bank
has slightly more latitude as it is charged both with maximizing employment
and maintaining price stability. When inflation rises, central banks respond
by tightening monetary policy in the form of interest rate hikes and other
adjustments. (At the very least, they will acknowledge inflation in their press
releases and offer some indication as to whether it is viewed as a problem.)
This should cause prices to stabilize and economic growth to cool. When
inflation begins to fall, the central bank will respond by taking necessary
action, like cutting rates. Indicators of inflation thus receive tremendous
3 Steve Johnson, “Push to Tap into EM Currency Returns,” Financial Times, February

27, 2011, www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/1170ed2e-4112-11e0-bf62-00144feabdc0.html#axzz1
tlpZ6PJ8.

103

104

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis
attention from the financial markets as they tend to presage changes in
interest rates.

Figure 5-5. Impact of rising inflation and falling real interest rates on the Brazilian real

This relationship does break down from time to time. In the wake of the
financial crisis, emerging market currencies had fallen to multi-year lows.
Emerging market central banks were happy about this development because
lower exchange rates made their exports relatively cheaper. The downside of
this currency depreciation was import inflation. If the price of oil is $90 per
barrel, for example, South Africa will pay 720 rand per barrel at an exchange
rate of 8 USD/ZAR, but 810 if the Rand depreciates to 9 USD/ZAR. There
will also be a trickle-down impact across the entire economy.
As inflation picked up, then, emerging market central banks pondered raising
interest rates. They feared, however, that rate hikes would invite speculative
capital inflows from risk-driven investors eager to shake off the pall of the
credit crisis. The resulting currency appreciation would affect exports and
endanger their fragile economic recoveries. Sure enough, falling real interest
rates caused emerging market currencies to stagnate in early 2010. Inflation
rose further as emerging market central banks played monetary chicken with
one another, opting to raise reserve requirement ratios rather than adjust
interest rates. The Bank of Brazil finally broke down and hiked its

Forex for Beginners
benchmark Selic rate in late 2010, and other central banks followed suit in
2011. Their currencies resumed their appreciation shortly thereafter.
There are a handful of ways in which inflation is measured. Most
governments have a branch that computes economic statistics. (In the United
States, this task is delegated to the Departments of Labor and Commerce.)
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) is perhaps the most comprehensive
measure of inflation in an economy. Composed of a basket of tens of
thousands of goods and services, it is designed to mimic the spending
patterns of a broad spectrum of consumers. Of course, some items/sectors are
weighted more heavily than others, such that a rise in the price of car tires
will probably impact overall CPI less than a rise in home prices. CPI data is
released once a month and is reported on both an overall basis and regional
bases. It is often modified to exclude certain items, such as food and energy,
which are considered too volatile. The end product is known as core inflation
and represents one of the most important guides of monetary policy.
(Conspiracy theorists will assert that this exclusion is intended to understate
inflation, but to be fair, it also corrects for sudden declines in food and
energy prices, as can be seen in Figure 5-6 below.)
There are a handful of secondary inflation indicators, such as the GDP
deflator and the producer price index (PPI). The former is computed by the
US Department of Commerce and is used as a basis for converting nominal
GDP into real GDP. The latter measures inflation as experienced by
manufacturers. As is evident from Figure 5-6, producer price indexes are
closely connected with exchange rate fluctuations, since most manufactured
goods are assembled with overseas components. Secondary inflation indexes
include the Commodity Research Board (CRB) Futures Index, which consists
of prices for 21 commodities, as well as the Employment Cost Index and
Import Price Index (IPI). (In fact, the Federal Reserve Bank’s statistical
database contains more than 1,000 different measurements of inflation,
segmented by economic sector, geographic region, end user, and so on.)
Most indexes are seasonally adjusted, annualized, and converted into
percentage form for ease of comparison.

105

106

Chapter 5 | Fundamental Analysis

Figure 5-6. Various indicators of US inflation from 2001 to the present

Some analysts pay close attention to the Housing Price Index (HPI) under the
belief that home prices play a critical role in guiding monetary policy. While
the Fed certainly pays lip service to asset prices (including housing prices),
however, it has insisted that these are outside of its mandate. In the past, the
Fed has only been influenced by asset bubbles insofar as they threaten to
affect the economy as a whole and price levels, broadly.
Component indicators are monitored because they inform predictions for
future inflation. As this book goes to press, the federal funds rate stands at
0%, and history suggests that the Fed won’t hike rates until core inflation
rises. In this case, rising inflation will probably be preceded by an increase in
producer prices and/or a recovery in housing prices.
Some economists—Milton Friedman, notably—have argued that price
inflation is a function of growth in the money supply. The theory goes that, if
new money enters circulation, the value of existing currency declines. When
the Fed increased the money supply in 2009 as part of its quantitative easing
program, for example, critics argued that it would trigger hyperinflation and
lead to a crash in the US dollar. Chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank Ben
Bernanke steadfastly responded that if and when inflation creeps upward, the
Fed would simply withdraw the newly printed money from circulation. (Thus
far, Bernanke’s position has been upheld.)3 In fact, it has always been the
