
800 share size position allows you to execute this trade, assuming you will not allow a single position
to be larger than one-third of your account (33.3 percent). Multiply 800 shares that you plan to
purchase by the current price per share at $30.00 to arrive at $24,000.00. The dollar amount of
$24,000.00, which is 24 percent of your account is within your allowable 33 percent threshold, so
you certainly can take this trade. Notice how the closer stop resulted in a larger position size in terms
of both the number of shares you purchased and the dollar amount of the position, which is of course a
different strategy than the prior fixed-share size or fixed-dollar amount strategies.
Let's look at this example one more time and assume that you determine that the stop-loss should
only be $1.00 beneath your entry price at $30.00, resulting in a very low-risk position. How many
shares can you purchase where a $1.00 move against your position results in a $2,000.00 equity
account loss? That's right—2,000 shares. Now, we determine if a 2,000 share size position meets our
rule that no trade can occupy larger than 33 percent of our account. We multiply 2,000 shares by the
purchase price of $30.00 per share to arrive at $60,000.00 for the position, which is almost double
our allowable dollar amount for this position. Unfortunately, we would have to reject this trade setup
and move to a more appropriate opportunity, either with a lower-priced stock or one with a larger
dollar-value-per-share risk. As you might guess, this model is not appropriate for conservative
traders who wish to place their stops extremely close to their entry price.
This model tends to be more effective in terms of using the charts to determine logical places to
locate stop-losses as opposed to exiting when price has moved a fixed dollar amount against you,
which may actually be just above a key support point in the market at which the price finds support,
turns higher, and rallies up to your target. If you chose to locate your stop based on the chart, you
would have held on to this trade and achieved profit, as opposed to using a strategy with fixed dollar
stop-loss prices that focuses more on your account value than the logic of the charts in terms of
placing stops.
The advantage of the strategy allows for appropriate position sizing based on the unique risk in the
trade setup you are about to take, but the disadvantage comes in the reality that you must reject certain
trades that do not meet your dollar-per-position threshold. Unfortunately, the trades that you reject
will most frequently be those with very tight stops, and if you decide to use a very large stop-loss,
you may result in a position size that requires you to buy 100 shares or fewer, which would most often
not make expected profit from the position worth the time in the trade.
Traders refer to this strategy as the R-Value position-sizing strategy (a term coined by Dr. Tharp),
because you can then quantify each trade by its value at risk, which will always be 2 percent of your
account, or whatever value you chose, be it 1 percent, 3 percent, or greater. Over a series of 10
trades, if you used the same tactic on each setup, all trades will thus risk 2 percent of your account.
Van Tharp suggests labeling your risk by the letter R and then quantifying your profit in terms of R. If
you risked 2 percent on a given position and then profited 10 percent on the trade, your 10 percent
gain was five times larger than your 2 percent risk, and thus you have a winning trade with an RMultiple of five.
In doing this, you can assess the long-term edge or expectancy of your trading performance in terms
of profit multiples of risk or R-Multiples. You can also quantify your risk in fixed dollar terms
instead of fixed percentage terms if you decide to adopt a fixed dollar amount stop-loss strategy. If
you are interested in learning more about this type of position-sizing method, study Van Tharp's
section on position sizing in his Trade Your Way to Financial Freedom.

THREE POPULAR POSITION-SIZING METHODS
Fixed-Share Size
Traders purchase the same number of shares or contracts in every position depending on the size of the account. For
example, a trader might buy one futures contract or trade 1,000 shares for every $50,000.00 in the account. As the account
grows, so does the position size. Fixed-size strategies work best for day traders who trade the same stock, ETF, or contract
exclusively.

Fixed-Dollar Size
Also called Fixed-Unit Size, this strategy allocates the same fixed amount of capital—a unit—for every trade. A trader
might allocate $30,000.00 for every position regardless of the price of the stock, ETF, or futures contract. This is best for
swing traders who want to hold numerous open positions and diversify risk across multiple opportunities over time, while
keeping positions equal in dollar terms.

Percent Risked
Traders determine their share size as a function of the risk in the position as determined by the distance from the trade
entry to the stop-loss price. A trader allocates a different number of shares and dollar amount for each position depending
on the fixed percentage, usually 1 percent to 4 percent, in relation to the overall affect on the entire portfolio. This strategy
is appropriate for swing and day traders alike, but unfortunately causes them to reject good opportunities, usually the ones
with tighter stops which result in a very large position size that is too large for a given account. While day traders may be
able to allocate 50 percent or even 100 percent of the account for an individual trade, swing traders cannot.

Depending on your experience, risk-tolerance, and timeframe, certain strategies are more
appropriate than others. Any strategy is better than randomly or emotionally sizing your position,
which effectively is no position-sizing strategy at all. Professional traders often remark that long-term
success in the market is a factor of the edge in your strategy and position-sizing tactic you use
consistently, which is a balance of taking on too much risk or not enough in each position.

TRADE EXECUTION TACTICS
So far, we've discussed edge and how that applies to your trading. However, to maximize your edge
in trading, or to have any chance of making money at all, you must put your analysis into action in the
most efficient way possible, and that's where trade execution tactics come into the picture. You put
your advantage, or edge, into action through recognizing opportunities, and then execute a position to
participate in the expected price move and then exit the market either at your expected target or at
your predetermined stop-loss price. Trade execution tactics help you maximize your entry into a
position, and exit from an open position as efficiently as possible, while minimizing slippage and
unforced errors as much as possible.
While specific patterns such as bull flags or head and shoulders offer specific places to enter a
position, other setups do not. It's up to you to determine the price you enter, price you locate your
stop, and price at which you exit your position either with a loss or a gain. In addition to answering
the question of where to execute, you need to answer the question how to execute. This section will
cut through the confusion and address the importance of trade execution tactics.

Common Types of Orders
The two most common order types you will use as a discretionary trader include market orders and

limit orders. No matter what online trading platform you use to execute your trades, you can send your
order to buy or sell shares as a market order or a limit order, usually with the click of a button. At the
time of entry, you also should place a stop-loss order which will predetermine your risk in a position
if the market does not behave the way you expect.
Stop-losses prevent normal, small losses from becoming abnormal, very large losses. Too many
large losses not only erode your edge over time, but they can destroy a positive expectancy that you
work so hard to achieve. To enter and exit trades, you will need to use the most appropriate type of
order for the specific situation and volatility environment of the market at the time of your trade
opportunity.

Market Orders
A market order sends your order immediately to the electronic routing network to have your order
filled as soon as possible, and as close as possible to the last price quoted. With a market order, your
order is often filled within seconds of you clicking the buy or sell button from your platform. The
benefit lies from the speed of execution, however this speed usually comes with an associated cost.
The price you pay in achieving a fast execution result in a higher rate of slippage, which adds up over
time. Market orders are filled at the best available price when the exchange receives the order, and if
the market is illiquid or moving very quickly in a range expansion breakout intraday, you may find that
your fill is at a much higher price than you expected.
For example, let's assume you want to enter a breakout trade from a particular stock that broke
above resistance at $50.10 per share. You enter your number of shares and click on the market order
option to send your order to the market as it begins to break above $50.10. Immediately, your system
notifies you that your order has been filled for $50.20 per share. You check your screen to see that the
price now trades at $50.18. While the price traded at $50.10 when you sent your order, you were
actually filled 10 cents higher, which represents 10 cents per share of slippage. Remember the factors
that affect slippage: they include the number of shares you are executing, the volatility of the market,
the liquidity of the stock, and the time of day you are executing your trade. If you execute your trade
with a market order to buy 5,000 shares of a low-priced stock in the first five minutes of the day in a
stock that trades 100,000 shares per day, you can expect much larger slippage than if you entered a
market order during the third hour of the trading day to buy 500 shares of a higher priced stock that
trades 10,000,000 shares per day. Keep these factors in mind when you develop your trading plan.
Slippage is the hidden cost of executing trades, and the more you can minimize its effects, the better
you will be at the end of the year.
You may be thinking that market orders are the worst type of orders to use. While market orders do
have their drawbacks, they do have significant benefits that you miss if you abandon these types of
orders completely. Though you can expect to pay in terms of slippage to buy a stock intraday in a
volatile range-breakout, you do get your trade filled if you execute into a rapidly rising market. If you
are playing for a range breakout target of $1.00 or more intraday, a slippage cost of 5 cents is a
negligible part of the total expected move. Because the market is moving so quickly toward the
breakout target, you want to participate in this move, and if you attempt to minimize your slippage as
much as possible, you will find you have missed the trade entirely. Thus, in order to save 5 cents of
slippage on the trade, you let 95 cents pass you by; instead of losing money, you lost opportunity.
Sometimes the hidden costs of trading, such as watching an opportunity pass you by, can be worse
than the losing trades that actually cost money. While slippage certainly is bad, saving a few pennies

per share is not worth missing entire price moves that you saw develop.

Limit Orders
In contrast to market orders, limit orders allow you to specify a price at which you are willing to be
filled but no higher (or lower if you are short-selling). Traders use limit orders to minimize slippage
as much as possible, and once some traders begin using limit orders, they never use a market order
again.
To execute a trade with a limit order, type in the price of the stock at which you wish to be filled
and then send the order through your broker. The electronic exchange will fill your order as soon as
possible at a price that is equal to or better than your limit price. You may wait seconds or even
minutes for your order to be filled, and if the market is moving rapidly in a volatile environment, you
may not be filled at all. In such cases, you can decide to cancel your open order and then resend a
new order at a higher limit price in the hopes that it will be filled. Traders can repeat this process
until they receive a confirmation that their order has been filled at the price they specified for entry.
Sometimes this is at a price far beyond the initial order to enter, especially in the case of a range
breakout.
Swing traders who study daily and weekly charts benefit from limit orders because they can
perform their analysis overnight and then specify a price at which they wish to execute a trade. This is
especially helpful if they have a full-time job or otherwise cannot monitor each price tick intraday. If
the market trades to that price during the day, their order will be filled and they will be in a position
that may last weeks or months depending on their time horizon. Day traders also benefit from limit
orders because they can control the price of execution to minimize slippage as much as possible.
While it may seem that limit orders are superior to market orders, keep in mind the factors that
affect slippage affect the ability for your order to be filled. Let us revisit our earlier example of a
price breaking intraday above a known resistance level at $50.10 per share. Our first trader entered a
market order and was filled immediately at $50.20. Our second trader did not want to pay more than
$50.15 to enter the position, so he executed a position with a limit order to buy 1,000 shares at
$50.15 or better. After a few minutes go by, he notices that not only has he not received notification of
a trade fill, but the stock is now trading above $50.20 and rallying sharply to the upside as he
expected. Within moments, the stock is now trading at $50.30. Immediately, he rushes to cancel his
first order and place another limit order to buy 1,000 shares at $50.30 or better. However, he finds
the same outcome, with no notification of a fill and the stock rallying even higher to trade above
$50.40.
The trader is left now with two options: either pay the price and execute the same position with a
market order as the stock rallies higher to the target of $51.00 per share intraday, or stand aside and
miss this opportunity completely because the stock has now broken higher halfway to the target, and
the reward-to-risk relationship severely deteriorated. Defeated, our trader decides to pass and watch
the stock rally to $51.00 without him. In his attempt to save $50.00 to $100.00 of slippage (5 or 10
cents), he left up to $900.00 on the table in a missed opportunity. While losses show up in our trading
accounts where we can see them clearly, missed opportunities like this do not.
Thus, all things being equal, traders do well to use limit orders to execute the majority of their
trades with the exception of trading range breakout impulse moves to play breakout trading strategies.
A trader should minimize slippage costs as much as possible, but not to the extent that clear

opportunities for profit are missed because of an overzealousness to reduce slippage. Decide in
advance and clarify in your trading plan the circumstances and specific trade setups where you will
use limit orders or market orders for entry, and be sure to understand the tradeoffs of the decision.

Stop-Loss Orders
While no trader enjoys taking a stop-loss, stops are necessary to protect capital and exit positions
where the edge in a trade has deteriorated. Not only do stops preserve capital, but they allow you to
preserve your expectancy in terms of your accuracy and monetary edge. If you let too many losing
positions grow from small losses into large losses, you deteriorate your monetary edge in your
expectancy calculation by increasing the size of your average losing trade.
You cannot let your emotions or psychological need to be right overrule the necessity to exit a trade
that has fallen to trade at the stop-loss price you set when you entered the position. Exiting a position
at a predetermined stop-loss price frees up your capital to be able to execute a new position with a
more favorable opportunity in the near future.
You also must minimize slippage as much as possible when exiting a position with a loss. The same
discussion applies for minimizing slippage with trade exits as it does with trade entries: market
orders allow you to exit a position immediately though at a cost of higher slippage, while a limit
order allows you to fix your price of execution but at the potential of the order not filling.
If you are a purely discretionary trader, the emotions you feel when exiting a losing position are
different from those you feel either when entering a fresh new position or exiting a position with a
win. Depending on your personality, you will either feel the need to widen your stop-loss price in
order to give your position more room to breathe, and perhaps recover to a win, or will you will feel
the need to exit your position as soon as possible, perhaps even before the market touches the price of
your stop-loss order. Both scenarios have their advantages and disadvantages.
In general, if you give a trade a wider stop, it will have the potential to trade lower and then
recover back to the profitable side, resulting in a win. However, if you tend to exit trades before the
price reaches your predetermined stop, you may find that you exit positions early that fall pennies
lower and then reverse back to the profit zone without you in the position. In such cases, your
decision to end the trade early resulted in a loss, decreasing your accuracy rate, but had you obeyed
your predetermined stop and not exited early, you would have experienced a winning trade.
The opposite is also true. If you find yourself unwilling to take losses appropriately and thus widen
your stop-loss as the price approaches it, you will find that you will more frequently suffer larger
losing trades than had you exited when the market touched your predetermined stop-loss price. How
you solve this dilemma depends on your individual personality, strategy, and experience as a trader.
However you decide to take a stop, it is preferable to place your stops as market orders instead of
limit orders with few exceptions. You should place stops just beyond confluence support or
resistance prices where price touching your stop would result in a clearly failed trade and shift in the
expected supply/demand relationship.
Let us assume that you are buying shares because you observe price to be in a rising uptrend and the
most recent swing retraced back to the rising 20-day moving average, which happened to form a
confluence with the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement that you drew from the recent swing higher.
You bought because price formed a hammer candle in a sudden bounce higher from the 20-period
average. In this example, you would want to place the stop a safe distance under the rising 20 period

average, and perhaps even under the 50 percent Fibonacci retracement.
In the event that price broke under the rising 20-period moving average and then lower through the
50 percent Fibonacci retracement, then you would assume that price was forming a reversal swing
lower instead of forming a retracement swing that would support off the 20 average and continue on
to make a new swing high. You will allow the price to trade slightly under the 20-period average
without exiting your trade, but you determine that if sellers push price under the 50 percent Fibonacci
line, or especially under the 61.8 percent line, then the probabilities of a successful trade have greatly
diminished. In this way, you place stops based on what you expect price to do, or not do, in terms of
price principles, patterns, and setups.
In terms of executing your stop-losses, you would prefer market orders in most cases because if you
just entered a losing trade, there is a good chance other traders have entered the same position you did
and have located stop-loss orders near the same price levels you have. As a result, a positive
feedback loop can develop when the market moves to hit this pocket of stop-loss orders. If you used a
limit order to minimize your slippage, you might not get filled if price moves sharply against you, and
might be forced to send two or three orders to exit your position, which would result in a worse
situation than had you used a market order initially to exit. Instead of a trader missing a breakout
opportunity by not getting filled due to using limit orders, you would be losing actual money
continuously by not getting filled.
This is especially true if you are expecting price to remain within the confines of a trading range,
and then the price unexpectedly breaks down through the trading range in a range expansion move at
the same time you just entered a long position to play an expected bounce. You want to exit your
position as soon as possible, accepting your slippage, and not accepting further larger losses in the
event that price continues its breakout to the downside. Remember, the beginning of most breakout
moves occurs when one side of the market is trapped and forced to cover their positions, which is
combined with the other side entering new positions in expectation of a breakout to continue. You do
not want to be caught in such an environment and unable to get filled on a stop-loss order.

Degrees of Risk
Deciding where to enter a trade will be determined by your experience, personality, and goals as a
trader. Some traders are inherently risk-averse while others are inherently risk seeking. You will find
that risk-seeking traders often exhibit risk-seeking behaviors in other facets of their lives, just as riskaverse traders will exhibit risk-averse behaviors in their lives. Trading ultimately is a private
performance art that requires the balancing of many factors, with execution tactics being one of many
variables to balance.
While most trading books or courses tell you to enter here and exit there, traders will be unable to
execute those strategies over time if the strategies do not align with their personalities or experience
levels. A trader with a conservative risk tolerance will be unable long term to execute aggressivestyle trading strategies consistently, just as an aggressive trader will be unable to execute defensive,
risk-averse trading strategies. The mismatch between trader personality and strategy results in
frustration and unnecessary losses, and may be the reason for an early end to an otherwise promising
trading career.
