IP'

TECHNICAL

ANALYSIS
FOR T H E

TRADING PRDFESSIDNAL
Strategies and Techniques for Today's
Turbulent Global Financial Markets
SECOND EDITION

CONSTANCE M. BROWN, CMT
Mc
Graw
Hill
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid IWexico City
Milan New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto

The McGrawHill Companies
Copyright © 2012 by Constance M. Brown. All rights reserved. Printed in the United
States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of
1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or
by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
123456789

10 DOC/DOC 1 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

ISBN 978-0-07-175914-4
MHID 0-07-175914-X

CONTENTS

e-ISBN 978-0-07-175915-1
e-MHID 0-07-175915-8
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard
to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that neither the author
nor the publisher is engaged in rendering legal, accounting, securities trading, or other
professional services. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
of a competent professional person should be sought.
-From a Declaration of Principles Jointly Adopted by a Committee of the
American Bar Association and a Committee of Publistiers and Associations

Art credits of permissions info or referral to a credits section at the back of the book.
Library of Congress Cataloging-ln-Publicatlon Data
Brown, Constance M.
Technical analysis for the trading professional: strategies and techniques for today's
turbulent global financial markets / by Constance Brown. — 2nd ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 13: 978-0-07-175914-4 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-07-175914-X (alk. paper)
1. Speculation. 2. Investment analysis. 3. Stocks-Charts, diagrams, etc. I. Title.
HG6041.B74 2012
332.64'5"dc23

Part

I

Foreword v i i
Acknowledgments x i i
Disclaimer xiv

1 DISPELLING SOME COMMON
BELIEFS ABOUT INDICATORS

Chapter | 1

Oscillators Do Not Travel between
0 and 100 3
Oscillators, contrary to popular belief, can be used
to define market trend. A discussion focusing on RSI
and Stochastics reveals how specific indicator ranges
can confirm larger trends and identify an upcoming
trend reversal.

2011041019

McGraw-Hill books are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and
sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative,
please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.

Chapter [ 2

Dominant Trading Cycles Are Not Time
Symmetrical

27

Rhythmical fluctuations can be more than just
a fixed interval. Explore how three great North
American analysts, Benner (1875), Dewey (1930s),
and Cann used cycle analysis to examine the trends
and risks in their time and ours presently.

This book is printed on acid-free paper.

Chapter j 3

Choosing and Adjusting Period Setup
for Oscillators

59

The correct method for determining the time period
for an oscillator is discussed. Recommendations are
given as to when to change initial oscillator setups

• Mi •

iv •

Contents

and the methods for making these adjustments. This
chapter also reveals how institutional traders can
benefit from inexperienced technical traders.

Chapter | 4

Chapter | 7

79

Chapter [ 8

Contents

• v

169

Price Objectives Derived from Posihve and
Negahve Reversals in the RSI

Signals from Moving Averages Are
107

Price Projechons by Reverse-Engineering
Indicators

The concept of reverse-engineering an indicator to
forecast price objectives is discussed using Microsoft's
Excel software. This chapter includes a detailed, stepby-step picture illustration of how to export data from
Omega Research's TradeStation to Microsoft's Excel
software for advanced custom analysis.

Dominant Trend Lines Are Not Always
from Extreme Price Highs or Lows

Trend lines of greatest significance may not originate
from major price highs and lows. Visual exercises
help demonstrate geometric proportions that extend
beyond traditional charting techniques. Learn how
gaps and strong bars define the angles to create
channel lines. The market timing of high-risk trend
changes can also be identified by projecting trend
lines forward from specific chart signals.

Chapter j 5

185

RSI can be used to calculate price objectives from
specific indicator patterns called Positive and Negative
Reversals. Signal probability and price objectives can
be dramatically improved by measuring the amplitude
of the oscillator. The price projection method and
filtering technique are fully explained and illustrated.

Frequendy Absent in Real-Time
Charts

Time-sequenced charts show that trading signals
from moving averages and indicators that incorporate
averages may not be present in real-time market
analysis. Knowing how these indicators change their
screen positions when the current bar is displaced
with new data will allow traders to adjust to real-time
conditions and miss fewer signals.

Part I 2

Chapter | 9

Gann Analysis: Calculating Price and
Time Objectives

211

A detailed introduction to W.D. Gann's use of price,
time, and diagonal analysis to determine market
movement. You will be introduced to the laws of
vibration and natural laws, and harmonic ratios.
Examine a 700-year history of the Wheat market.
Explore the use of a Gann Wheel, and the critical geometric relationships between a Gann square, Gann Fan,
and Square of Nine Gann price projection. Included are
the formulas to create your own Gann Wheel.

CALCULATING MARKET PRICE
OBJECTIVES

Chapter 6

Chapter | 10

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave
Principle

Adjusting Tradihonal Fibonacci Projechons
for Higher Probability Targets

247

A market move that requires several days to develop is
used to walk readers through a real-time, stepby-step progression to show how to apply the Elliott
Wave Principle. As the market unfolds through a
time-sequenced event, all the rules, guidelines, and
patterns are discussed to show how they are used to
predict future market action.

13 5

Weaknesses exist in the industry's standard use of
Fibonacci relationships. The industry in general
determines 0.382, 0.500, and 0.618 retracement levels
from distinct price highs and lows and also projects
618, equality, and 1.618 market swings from the
same pivot levels. This chapter reveals methods for
more accurate price projection to accommodate the
normal expansion and contraction cycles present in
all markets. In addition, it demonstrates why price
spikes or key reversals should not be used to determine
Fibonacci retracement targets.

The prior chapters are also applied to clarify how the
different techniques are combined. Wave counts in
hindsight versus developing wave scenarios unfolding
in real-time to predict future market movement
require different skills. The differences are discussed,
and common misunderstandings in the industry are
identified.

vi •

Contents

The chapter concludes with an in-depth look at an
analytic method used to develop long-horizon wave
interpretations for the S 6 P 500.

Part 1 3

NEW METHODS FOR IMPROVING
INDICATOR TIMING AND FILTERING

FOREWORD

PREMATURE SIGNALS
Chapter | 11 V o l a h l i t y Bands o n Oscillators

357

A volatility band formula is discussed that has
a different character from Bollinger Bands. The
chapter also discusses the importance of establishing
independent variables for upper and lower bands
because markets do not decline in the same manner as
they advance.

Chapter

12

T h e Composite Index

431

Appendix A

403

W r i t t e n by a b r i l l i a n t trader for only those seasoned traders w h o are
w i l l i n g to work at their analysis o f the markets i n a disciplined way,
this book contains the most advanced methodology I've ever seen!
C o n n i e Brown's credentials come i n the f o r m o f nine years o n

force to reckon w i t h i n the financial markets. A t the same t i m e , she
publishes a daily b u l l e t i n o n the D o w , the S&P, and Bonds. T h i s
is faxed to some o f the world's most sophisticated, large traders.
Her predictions as to price objectives and trend o f the market are
unequaled anywhere i n the industry.
T h e r e are 14 separate chapters i n this book, each a separate subject. Six of these subjects have been written o n before, and these
chapters serve as improvements o n o l d indicators. T h e r e are, also,
15 major breakthroughs i n technical analysis! Seven o f these breakthroughs are new—never-before-revealed material! Eight more dissect, change, and improve o l d concepts.
I n her discussion o f Stochastics and o f RSI as oscillators, she
introduces the concept that oscillators do n o t necessarily f l u c t u -

429

435

Appendix B

the front line as a research analyst and f u n d trader. She is herself a
disciplined professional, w h o has grown to the p o i n t where she is a

369

The Composite Index is fully disclosed and discussed
in numerous global charts such as China's Shanghai
Composite, American Corporate Debt BBS Bond
Funds, and the USDCHF Forex market. The
oscillator was developed to warn traders when RSI
is failing to detect trend reversals.

Chapter | 13 T h e Principles of D e p t h Perspective A p p l i e d
to T w o - D i m e n s i o n a l C h a r h n g

This chapter discusses the strengths and weaknesses
of common indicators in order to isolate desired
characteristics for developing a custom formula.
Personal biases contribute to the effectiveness of an
indicator's signal. Depth perception is discussed to
clarify how we evaluate charts graphically in a twodimensional environment. Depth perception needs to
be understood as it will affect our judgment of chart
signals and will dictate how indicators should be plotted
to accommodate personal strengths and weaknesses.

Credits

437

Appendix C
Index

ate between 0 and 100 and that all signals do not fall w i t h i n the
traditional default overbought and oversold bands. T h e oscillator
may actually travel w i t h i n a larger or a narrower range that can
be pinpointed w i t h precision. To correct what the writer perceives

439

. vii .

viji •

Foreword

Foreword • ix

the music, they cannot perceive the beauty of the composition

ing band may travel up and down within the range, and that it may

people are "wave-deaf"; just as a tone-deaf person cannot hear

missed. She also introduces the concept that this effective signal-

begins. Understanding their frustration, Connie agrees that some

range to help identify signals that might otherwise have been

because the wave count appears to change when a larger cycle

of an upper resistance band and a lower support band within this

industry. For some, the Elliott wave is frustrating i n the extreme

as a flaw in commercial software packages, she suggests the use

expand or contract. She suggests that the trader should adjust this
effective signaling range to compensate for the idiosyncrasies of
strongly trending bull and bear markets, and even suggests some
better parameters! This alone would change the way we look at
oscillators—and, consequently, our entry timing.

because they are caught up in counting the beats and analyzing
the notations. She stresses that it is necessary to understand the
structure, but more important to keep a sense of proportionality
to the analysis.
Then she teaches the three simple rules that form the basis of

ponent of a hypothesis I've long espoused: Stochastics can prove

duces the Composite Index she created to accompany RSI.

lators, Fibonacci ratios, and Gann into her analysis. She is a pro-

and filtering indicators with variants of different lengths. She intro-

real-time "to the T," showing as she goes how she integrates oscil-

generation indicators created by applying oscillators on oscillators,

explanation of flats and zigzags, and analyzes a number of charts

to discuss the application of moving averages over oscillators, third-

Elliott wave analysis, takes the reader through an "easy to take"

But this inventive young trader does not stop there. She goes on

In a theme she returns to frequently, she kids the "Stochas-

Elliott wave—and help clarify an indistinct wave count!

swing objectives, Connie's projections are plotted from numerous

passionate case for keeping a flexible state of mind.

retracement. In her discussion of the use of multiple Fibonacci

data to construct responsive, customized indicators. She makes a

order to properly calculate the correct price objective of the affected

of attention to procedures for determining and inputting the proper

and that the trader has to remove the differential of the gap in

but does it anyway. She remedies this deficit by giving a great deal

She rightly points out that markets may gap past a price objective

clue as to why, and the educated but lazy trader who knows better

chapter on Fibonacci measurement truly upgrades this old friend.

default values in software and tries to use them to trade without a

Connie also discusses Fibonacci methodology in depth. The

tics Default Club"—both the uneducated public that accepts the

by the reader. The explanation of the Fibonacci price projection

naturally turns to the Elliott wave, her starting point i n the

and internal Fibonacci guidance is to be especially appreciated

Approaching the subject of market price objectives, this writer

This chapter has been badly needed. The discussion on spikes

the use of charts with differing time cycles to perfect cycle timing.

I was particularly impressed with the discussion and the upgrades.

of a weighted factor to them, versus Fibonacci cycles. She explains

support and resistance levels, which are useful in and of themselves.

and decay," which leads to asymmetrical cycles, and the application

pivot levels. She has found that these levels tend to cluster into tight

To the subject of cycles, Connie introduces the concept of "growth

X • Foreword

method—and specifically the use of multiple Fibonacci swing projections—is worth the price of the whole book!

Foreword • xi

In doing this, she correctly arrives at the conclusion that
Fibonacci and Gann took two routes to arrive at much the same

with even greater respect.

required to work outside the mindset established by the puzzle. So,

or price between the different methods she uses should be treated

from the page. To come up with the correct answer, the reader is

the same indicator should be respected, confluence in areas of time

to connect the squares with four lines, without removing the pencil

areas of confluence in time or price within different charts with

writer challenges us to solve a puzzle, the Nine Squares. The task is

place. This has led her to another valuable concept: that, just as

Before tackling the subject of trend lines as price predictors, the

be done—in the next book, of course!

the intersection of trend lines as a timing tool—a subject that

money in the markets. Connie, I challenge you to prove to us it can

ignoring spikes or using intermediate highs or lows. She discusses

a non-Mensa trader such as myself to actually use Gann to make

in the market, she prefers less conventional approaches, such as

she is holding back on some of the specific information needed for

she believes spikes at tops and bottoms are caused by aberrations

can be used to locate dates of changes in trend and price objectives,

lines must be established from absolute highs and lows. Because

However, while she explains how Gann's time and price wheels

too, the writer asks us to suspend our preconceptions that trend

has needed clarification for years! Then, she demonstrates a very

—George C. Lane

unconventional use of trend lines to "reverse-engineer" a triangle
that can be bisected into two right triangles by a line extended into
the future that will point to a final bottom. She goes on to introduce an entirely new approach to trend lines—the intersection of
trend lines from divergent highs on an oscillator with the long-term
trend line. The results are astounding! This is "eyeball training"
from which a good chartist can profit!
The Nine Squares connected by four unconventional trend lines
in the formation of a pyramid is an excellent lead-in to the subject of Gann. Because his methods seemed enigmatic, it has been
suggested that Gann used astrology to arrive at his predictions,
and his work has been obscured by the veil of occultism. Connie
has correctly perceived that this is not the case and has done an
exceptional job of returning his use of an astronomical clock, the
third oldest calculator known to humankind, from the occult to the
realm of science and simple mathematics!

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Acknowledgments

• xii!

divergence signal that developed between two peaks of eight years
apart is problematic.
Learn to use every method as a weighting factor. This method
versus another will either compliment, contradict, or add confusion. A l l are valid as the latter means stay out of a market when
all the evidence is unclear. That is a valid opinion as well. But we

isolation are outdated.

There has been so much personal growth since this book was first

our market opinions now. The times of looking at one market in

this project to revise Technical Analysis for the Trading Professional.

have to use multiple time horizons and global markets to develop

I would like to thank Morgan Ertel of McGraw-Hill who initiated

markets. But the key thing for all of us students of markets to keep

involved in producing a book takes as long as it does to write it.

one needs skills to read charts from all financial and agricultural

critical step as well. Most people do not realize the design and work

South African Rand and the other in U.S. Dollars? Today every-

text that flows easily to read. The layout and clarity of graphics is a

diverge will you understand the reason is because one is based in

words from someone who is not a wordsmith and mold them into

stock traders need only study stocks. But when two Gold stocks

mation on to you. Books need a very skilled team to take the raw

Readers need skills in all the financial markets. Some believe

written it was a wonderful opportunity for me to pass this new infor-

ing. By doing well today we earn the right to participate tomorrow.

him continued success.

presented itself to you. Take it. Run with it. Answer it. Assume noth-

list of major contributing authors who feel similarly. We all wish

become aware of a question that the opportunity has just politely

advisor and expert contact in the book publishing worid. He has a

to find the opportunities and risks. Always recognize when you

I have eight books from various publishers. He remains my primary

goal is to stay ahead of the ebbing tide of market changes in order

ent publishing firms, I would stay loyal to him. It is the only reason

methods to resolve the cash flow puzzles that lie in our path. Our

made this book possible in 1998. As his career moved h i m to differ-

in mind as the goal is not the mastery of our tools, but to use our

A special mention must be given to Stephen Isaacs who first

chairs.

G M T (Ghartered Market Technician) designation. The experience

changes are endlessly challenging and keep us on the edge of our

paring for the final exam of the Market Technician's Association

I guess that explains why few in our industry ever retire. The world

I would like to take a moment to encourage the readers pre-

contact them.

that will build an opinion on the future move of a market. A

the Gredits at the back of this book for a detailed list and ways to

historians when the focus needs to be on searching for evidence

who made the illustrations in this book possible. Please refer to

have addressed in this second edition. Young analysts tend to be

There are several market software vendors and chart services

of grading these exams shows a few common misunderstandings I

* xii •

DISCLAIMER

PART

1

It should not be assumed that the methods, techniques, or indicators presented i n this book w i l l be profitable or that they w i l l not
result i n losses. Past results are not necessarily indicative o f future
results. Examples i n this book are for educational purposes only.
T h i s is not a solicitation o f any order to buy or sell.
T h e N F A requires us to state that:

"Hypothetical or simulated performance results have certain inherent limitations. Unlike an actual performance record, simulated
results do not represent actual trading. Also, since the trades have
not actually been executed, the results may have under- or over-

DISPELLING
SOME COMMON
BELIEFS A B O U T
INDICATORS

compensated for the impact, i f any, of certain market factors, such
as lack of liquidity. Simulated trading programs in general are also
subject to the fact that they are designed with the benefit of hindsight. No representation is being made that any account will or is
likely to achieve profits or losses similar to those shown."

• xiv •

chapter

1

O S C I L L A T O R S DO NOT
TRAVEL BETWEEN
0 AND 100

A I h y does it appear that conventional technical indicators
V V are failing us as we approach the twenty-first century?
What has changed?" Thirteen years ago this was an opening which
did not know the volatility changes that would be ahead. However,
this method of describing oscillator movement to determine trend
and entry/exits in volatile conditions has stood up to the test of
time. I believe strongly that a method you favor should be able
to handle market changes; therefore, the original text requires no
revision. The only suggestion I would offer is to stop reading occasionally and study how a 14-period Relative Strength Index (RSI)
has moved in your own charts. Take any time horizon or market.
Study global indexes. Gold, O i l , Bonds, and Forex trend or trendless markets, as the method described here will stand up to the
challenge. The ranges defined in this chapter remain valid and
of value. However, the astute analyst and trader will know there
• 3 •

4 • D I S P E L L I N G SOME COMMON B E L I E F S ABOUT INDICATORS

Oscillators Do Not Travel between 0 and 100

• 5

in w i t h instantaneous execution.
