
If a rule's expected return is equal to zero or less, then a back test
should generate profits that are reasonably close to zero.
The back-tested performance was not reasonably close to zero; in
fact, it was significantly above zero.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, the contention that the rule's expected
return is equal to zero or less is likely to be false.

171

Statistical Analysis

How unlikely or rare must the positive performance be to reject the
notion that the rule is devoid of predictive power? There is no hard and
fast rule. By convention most scientists would not be willing to reject a
hypothesis so unless the observed performance has a 0.05 probability or
less of occurrence under the assumption the null is true. This value is
called the statistical significance of the observation.
The discussion so far pertains to the case where only one rule is back
tested. In practice, however, TA rule research is typically not restricted to
testing a single rule. Economical computing power, versatile back-testing
software, and plentiful historical data make it easy, almost inviting, to test
many rules with the aim if selecting the one with the best performance.
This practice is known as data mining.
Although data mining is an effective research method, testing many
rules increases the chance of a lucky performance. Therefore, the threshold of performance needed to reject the null hypothesis must be set
higher, perhaps much higher. This higher threshold compensates for the
greater likelihood of stumbling upon a useless rule that got lucky in a
back test. This topic, the data mining bias, is discussed in Chapter 6.
Figure 4.4 compares two probability density functions. The top one
would be appropriate for evaluating the significance for a single rule back
test. The lower density curve would be appropriate for evaluating the sig-

Appropriate Distribution
for Single-Rule Test

Probability
Density

Observed Performance
Looks Significant

o
Appropriate Distribution for Best of 1000 Rules
Observed Performance
Does Not Look
Significant

Probability
Density

o
Back-Tested Rate of Return

FIGURE 4.4 Great performance in a single rule back test is only mediocre when
1,000 rules are tested.

172 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

nificance of the best-performing rule out of 1,000 back-tested rules. This
density curve takes into account the increased likelihood of luck that results from data mining. Notice that if this best rule's observed performance were to be evaluated with the density curve appropriate for a
single rule, it would appear significant because the performance is far out
in the right tail of the distribution. However, when the best rule's performance is evaluated with the appropriate probability density function it
does not appear statistically significant. That is to say, the rule's rather
high performance would not warrant the conclusion that it has predictive
power or an expected return that is greater than zero.

THE NEED FOR RIGOROUS sml'ISTICAL ANALYSIS
The tools and methods of a discipline limit what it can discover. Improvements in them pave the way to greater knowledge. Astronomy took a great
leap forward with the invention of the telescope. Though crude by today's
standards, the earliest instruments had 10 times the resolving power of the
unaided eye. Technical analysis has a similar opportunity, but it must replace informal data analysis with rigorous statistical methods.
Informal data analysis is simply not up to the task of extracting valid
knowledge from financial markets. The data blossoms with illusory patterns whereas valid patterns are veiled by noise and complexity. Rigorous
statistical analysis is far better suited to this difficult task.
Statistical analysis is a set of well-defined procedures for the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data. This chapter and the next two
will introduce the way statistical tools and reasoning can be used to identify TA rules that work. This overview is necessarily condensed, and in
many instances I have sacrificed mathematical rigor for the sake of clarity.
However, these departures do not dilute the essential message: If TA is to
deliver on its claims, it must be grounded in a scientific approach that
uses formal statistical analysis.

AN EXAMPLE OF SAMPLING AND
STATISTICAL INFERENCE
Statistical reasoning is abstract and often runs against the grain of common sense. This is good and bad. Logic that runs counter to informal inference is good because it can help us where ordinary thinking lets us
down. However, this is exactly what makes it difficult to understand. So
we should start with a concrete example.

Statistical Analysis

.73

The central concept of statistical inference is extrapolating from samples. A sample of observations is studied, a pattern is discerned, and this
pattern is expected to hold for (extrapolated to) cases outside the observed sample. For example, a rule observed to be profitable in a sample
of history is projected to be profitable in the future.
Let's begin to think about the concept in the context of a problem that
has nothing to do with technical analysis. It comes from an excellent
book: Statistics, A New Approach by Wallis and Roberts. 9 The problem
concerns a box filled with a mixture of white and grey beads. The total
number of beads and the numbers of grey and white beads are unknown.
The task is to determine the fraction of beads that are grey in the entire
box. For purposes of brevity, this value will be designated as F-G (fraction-grey in box).
To make this situation similar to statistical problems faced in the real
world, there is a wrinkle. We are not allowed to view the entire contents
of the box at one time, thus preventing a direct observation of F-G. This
constraint makes the problem realistic because, in actual problems, observing all the items of interest, such as all beads in the box, is either impossible or impractical. In fact, it is this constraint that creates the need
for statistical inference.
Although we are not allowed to examine the box's contents in its entirety, we are permitted to take samples of 20 beads at a time from the box
and observe them. So our strategy for acquiring knowledge about F-G will
be to observe the fraction of grey beads in a multitude of samples. In this
example 50 samples will be taken. The lowercase f-g stands for the fraction of grey beads in a sample.
A sample is obtained as follows: The bottom of the box contains a
sliding panel with 20 small depressions, sized so that a single bead is captured in each depression. The panel can be slid out of the box by pushing
it with a similar panel that takes its place. This keeps the remaining
beads from dropping out of the bottom. Consequently, each time the
panel is removed, we obtain a sample of 20 beads and have the opportunity to observe the fraction grey (f-g) in that sample. This is illustrated in
Figure 4.5.
After the fraction of grey beads (f-g) in a given sample has been determined, the sample beads are placed back into the box and it is given a
thorough shaking before taking another sample of 20. This gives each
bead an equal chance of winding up in the next sample of 20. In the parlance of statistics, we are making sure that each sample is random. The
entire process of taking a sample, noting the value f-g, putting the sample
back in the box, and shaking the box is repeated 50 times. At the end of
the whole procedure we end up with 50 different values for f-g, one value
for each sample examined.

174 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

What Fraction
Are
Gray?
F-G

FIGURE 4.5

Sliding Panel

Determining f-g for each sample.

By placing each sample back in the box before taking another sample, we are maintaining a stable concentration for the fraction of grey
beads in the box. That is to say, the value for F-G is kept constant over
the course of the 50 samplings. Problems in which the statistical characteristics remain stable over time are said to be stationary. If the beads
were not replaced after each sample the value F-G would change over the
course of the 50 samplings, as groups of beads were permanently removed from the box. A problem in which the statistical characteristics
change over time is said to be nonstationary. Financial markets may indeed be nonstationary, but for pedagogical purposes, the box-of-beads
problem is designed to be stationary.
It is important to keep in mind the distinction between F-G and f-g.
F-G refers to the fraction of grey beads in the entire box. In the language
of statistics, all the observations in which we are interested are called a
population. In this example, the term population refers to the color of all
the beads in the box. The term sample refers to a subset of the population. Thus, F-G refers to the population while f-g refers to the sample.
Our assigned task is to gain as much knowledge as possible about the
value of F-G by observing the value f-g over 50 separate samples.
It is also important to keep clear the distinction between two numbers: the number of observations comprising a sample-in this case 20
beads-and the number of samples taken-in this case 50.

PROBABILI1Y EXPERIMENTS AND RANDOM VARIABLES
Probability is the mathematics of chance. LO A probability experiment is
an observation on or a manipulation of our environment that has an uncertain outcomeY This would include actions such as noting the pre-

Statistical Analysis

175

cise time of arrival after a long trip, observing the number of inches of
snow that falls in a storm or the face of a coin that appears after the
tossing of a coin.
The quantity or quality observed in a probability experiment is called
a random variable such as the face of a coin after a flip, the number of
inches of snow that fell, or a value that summarizes a sample of observations (e.g., a sample average). This quantity or quality is said to be random
because it is affected by chance. Whereas, an individual observation of a
random variable is unpredictable, by definition, a large number of observations made on a random variable may have highly predictable features.
For example, on a given coin toss, it is impossible to predict head or tails.
However, given one thousand tosses, that the number of heads will lie
within a specified range of 500 is highly predictable.
Depending on how it is defined, a random variable assumes at least
two different values, though it can assume more-perhaps even an infinite
number. The random variable in a coin toss, the face visible after the toss,
can assume two possible values (heads or tails). The random variable, defined as the temperature at noon taken at the base of the Statue of Liberty,
can assume a very large number of values, with the number limited only
by the precision of the thermometer.

Sampling: The Most Important
Probability Experiment
The most important probability experiment in statistical analysis is sampling. It involves the extraction of a subset of observations from a population. Here the random variable at issue is called a sample statistic. It is any
computable characteristic of the sample. The value f-g is an example of a
sample statistic.
Sampling can be done in a number of different ways, but it is crucial
that the observations that are selected for the sample be chosen in a random manner and that they be selected independently of each other. This
means that all observations that could possibly end up in the sample have
an equal chance of doing so. Because no particular observation has a better chance of appearing in the sample than any other, the observations
that wind up in the sample do so by chance. Samples must be constructed
in this manner because the principles of probability, upon which statistical reasoning rests, assume that the observations that wind up in the sample got there randomly.
Consider the test of a new medicine on a sample of volunteers. The
sample must be constructed so that anyone who might eventually take the
medicine has an equal chance of being selected for the test group. If the
subjects in the experiment are not selected this way, the results of the test

176 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

will not lead to a sound conclusion. A medical experiment that selects test
subjects who are expected to respond favorably to the medication will
produce a biased conclusions. In other words, the estimates of the medication's efficacy in the general population will be too optimistic.
Imagine taking a single bead at random from the box with your eyes
closed and then observing its color. This is a sampling experiment with a
sample size of one. The bead's color, grey or white, is the random variable.
Now imagine randomly selecting 20 beads from the box. Here the sample
size is 20 and the fraction grey in that sample (f-g) is a sample statistic that
is also a random variable.
As discussed earlier, we will call this random variable f-g. It is a random variable because its value is affected by chance. It can assume 21 different values {O, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, ... , 1.01. Now let's get back to the goal:
increasing our knowledge about the value of F-G.
The Knowledge Gleaned from One Sample

Suppose the first sanlple contains 13 grey beads out of 20. The value of the
sample statistic f-g is 0.65 (13/20). What does this tell us about F-G? With
only this information, some might be tempted to conclude that we have
solved the problem, and that 0.65 is the fraction grey for the entire box
(i.e., F-G = 0.65). This view tacitly and naively assumes that a single sample can provide perfect knowledge. At the opposite extreme are those
who just as wrongly conclude that the sample is too small to supply any
information.
Both conclusions are wrong. First, there is no basis for thinking that
we could acquire perfect knowledge from one sample. Though it is possible that a single sample of 20 beads might be a perfect replica of the
entire contents of the box, it is not likely. For example, if the true value
of F-G were 0.568, a 20-bead sample could never produce such a value.
An f-g value of 0.55 (11 grey of 20) is as close as one could get. Ten grey
beads in the sample would give an f-g of 0.50, 11 would give 0.55, and 12
would give 0.60.
Those who assert that nothing has been learned are also mistaken.
On the basis of this sample alone, two possibilities can be eliminated.
We can reject with absolute certainty that F-G = 1.0 (i.e., all beads grey)
because there were 7 white beads in the sample. With equal certainty,
we can reject the proposition that F-G is 0, because there were 13 grey
beads in the sample.
However, more precise estimates of F-G on the basis of the single observed value of f-g are subject to uncertainty. Even if we were to take numerous samples and have numerous values of f-g, the value of F-G would
remain uncertain. This is because a sanlple is, by definition, a partial rep-

Statistical Analysis

177

resentation of the full contents of the box. Only by observing every bead
in the population could all uncertainty about F-G be eliminated. And this
is prohibited.
However, with what has been learned from the single sample, some
intelligent guesses can be made that go beyond the certain knowledge that
F-G is neither 0 nor 1.0. For example, although a claim that F-G is as low
as 0.10 cannot be conclusively ruled out; no one would take it seriously.
The observed f-g value of 0.65 obtained from the first sample is too far
above 0.10 for it to be a credible estimate of F-G. If F-G really were as low
0.10, the probability of getting a sample with an f-g of 0.65 would seem unlikely just based on common sense. We could apply the same kind of logic
to dispense with a claim that F-G = 0.95. An f-g reading of 0.65 would seem
too low if the entire box were composed of 95 percent grey beads. The
bottom line: It is fair to say that a single sample does provide some knowledge about F-G.
What Can Be Learned from 50 Samples?

Greater knowledge about F-G can be obtained by analyzing more samples.
Assume another 49 samples are taken and the value f-g for each sample is
measured. The first thing we would notice is that f-g varies in an unpredictable fashion from sample to sample. This particular form of random
behavior is one of the most important phenomena in all of statistics. It is
called sampling variability or sampling variation.
Sampling variation is important because it is responsible for the uncertainty in statistical conclusions. Greater sampling variability translates
to greater uncertainty. The greater the fluctuations in f-g from one sanlple
to the next, the greater will be the uncertainty about the value of F-G.
. Regrettably, this important phenomenon, sampling variability, is unfamiliar to many people who analyze data. This is understandable because
real world problems do not offer the luxury of looking at more than one
independent sample. The box-of-beads provides this opportunity.
As will be seen, by conducting 50 sampling experiments, the random
variation in f-g becomes obvious. This is quite different from the situation
faced by rule researchers. They typically have a single historical sample of
the market, and if all that data is used to test a rule, only one observed
value of the performance statistic is obtained. This provides no opportunity to see how the rule's performance would vary if it were tested in numerous independent samples. The bottom line is this: Sampling variation
is an important fact that may not be obvious to data analysts unfan1iliar
with statistical analysis. This is a huge blind spot!
Sampling variation can be seen in a table of the 50 f-g values. See
Table 4.1.

178 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
TABLE 4.1

Fraction of Grey Beads in 50 Different Samples

Sample
Number

fog

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

0.65
0.60
0.45
0.60
0.45
0.45
0.55
0.40
0.55
0.40
0.55
0.50
0.35
0.40
0.65
0.65
0.60

Sample
Number
18
19
20
21

22
23
24
25
26

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

f·g
0.60
0.40
0.60
0.45
0.55
0.45
0.50
0.70
0.55
0.60
0.70
0.50
0.70
0.50
0.90
0.40
0.75

Sample
Number

fog

35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

0.60
0.55
0.50
0.50
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.45
0.55
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.65
0.50
0.50
0.65

Not surprisingly, the value of f-g, a random variable, fluctuates from
sample to sample. This is an example of chance in operation. However,
f-g's value is not entirely determined by chance. Its value is also
strongly influenced by the value of F-G, the proportion of grey beads in
the entire box.
Thus, it can be said that each observed value of f-g is the result of two
influences; the underlying phenomenon, F-G, and randomness caused by
sampling. F-G acts like a center of gravity, always keeping f-g within a certain range. In some samples, randomness nudged the value f-g above F-G.
In other samples, randomness nudged f-g below F-G. From sample to sample the value of f-g oscillates randomly around this center of gravity. This
is sampling variability.
Another important aspect of this situation is that the number of observations impacts our level of uncertainty about the value of F-G. The
greater the number of observations comprising the sample, the more precisely the value f-g will reflect the value F-G. Suppose that, instead of taking a 20-bead sample, we took a 200-bead sample. The random variation in
f-g around F-G would be smaller. In fact, it would be about one third of
what it is for a 20-bead sample. This is a very important point: the larger
the sample size, the smaller the impact of randomness. Two hundred
beads dampen the ability of any single bead to push f-g away from F-G. In

Statistical Analysis

179

a one-bead sample, the single selected bead will produce an f-g of either 0
or 1.0. In a two-bead sample, f-g can be 0, 0.50 or 1.0. In a three-bead sample, f-g can be 0, 0.33, 0.66, or 1.0. Thus, the larger the sample size, the
smaller will be the magnitude of random variation in f-g. Large samples
give F-G, the truth that we wish to know, the ability to reveal itself. This is
an effect of the Law of Large Numbers: Large samples reduce the role of
chance. In other words, it can be stated that the larger the size of a sample, the more tightly the values of f-g will cluster about the value F-G. This
is one of the most important principles in statistics.
We have learned an important concept of statistics that can be
stated as follows: even though the value of F-G does not change over
the course of the 50 sampling experiments, the value f-g can vary considerably from sample to sample. The phenomenon is called sampling
variability. It is present whenever a random sample of observations is
used to form a conclusion about a larger universe (i.e., population).
Sampling variability is the source of the uncertainty that is addressed
by statistical inference. 12
Frequency Distribution of the Sample Statistic f-g
In the box-of-beads experiment, the random variable f-g can assume
21 possible values ranging from zero, when there are no grey beads in
a sample, to 1.0, when the sample is composed entirely of grey beads.
The 50 observed values off-g are shown in Table 4.1. A casual examination shows that some values of f-g occurred with greater frequency than
others. Values in the range of 0.40 to 0.65 occurred quite often, whereas
values less than 0.40 and greater than 0.65 almost never occurred. In
the 50 samples taken, f-g assumed the value 0.50 nine times, 0.55 eight
times, and 0.60 ten times. ote that the value 0.65, which characterized
the first sample, appeared only five times. Therefore, that value was
not among the most common values, but it was not particularly unusual
either.
A plot called a frequency distribution or frequency histogranl communicates this information more forcefully than words or a table. It displays
how frequently each of f-g's possible values occurred over the 50 sampling
experiments. The term distribution is apt, because it depicts how a set of
observations on a random variable are distributed or sprinkled across the
variable's range of possible values.
Arrayed along the horizontal axis of the frequency distribution is a sequence of intervals, or bins, one for each possible value of f-g. The height
of the vertical bar over each interval represents the number of times that a
specific value of f-g occurred. Figure 4.6 shows the frequency distribution
of the 50 f-g values.

180 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
