
BETTER CHANNEL BREAKOUTS
Over time, investors discovered that the simple 4WR could be enhanced. A
big change was to make it not always in the market; the system could be
sometimes in the market, but there would be times that it would not be in
the market. In other words, the 4WR was always in the market. You were
either long or short all the time. So the first enhancement was to create a
system similar to the 4WR but was not always long or short. It could instead
be long, short, or flat.
The second enhancement was to change the length of the channels. It
turns out that longer channels can work much better for timing entries.

36

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

In the late 1980s I started using what I called the 40/20. When there
was a break of the 40-day high or low, we entered long and short positions.
The 40/20 was the same system as the 4WR, except that the time was twice
as long. You could say that entries were made using an eight-week rule.
However, the exits were on a break of the 20-day high or low depending on
whether you were long or short. This meant, for example, that you would
enter long when the market made a new 40-day high and you would exit
that trade when it made a new 20-day low. Note that you did not go short
when the market made a new 20-day low; you only exited your existing
long position. You would be flat the market if you got stopped out. This
is different from the classic channel breakout. With the classic channel
breakout, you are always in the market while the new method has you on
the sidelines.
This was a major breakthrough in channel trading. Often a market
would be in a nice strong rally and then quickly dip to the bottom and
get short on what was really just a retracement in a major bull market. The
rally on the British Pound chart (Figure 3.1) in September is an excellent
example. In hindsight, we wouldn’t want to get long on that break to new
highs. We would have preferred to stand aside. I’ll show you how to avoid
those dings later.
I used the 40/20 for many years. Studies and my own experience
showed it to be a nicely profitable system.
I later changed to a 55/20 after the release of the Turtle System to the
public. The Turtles were a group of traders trained by legendary traders
Richard Dennis and William Eckhardt. They were basically trend followers
and their core techniques were channel breakouts. They had settled on
55/20 parameters. The Turtles were some of the most profitable traders, so
I was intrigued to find out that they were users of channel breakouts. In
addition to using 55/20, they were also using the classic 4WR!
I love to learn, particularly from great traders. Dennis and Eckhardt
certainly fit that description, having made hundreds of millions of dollars
by the mid-1980s. It was amazing that they achieved that much success
using the old-fashioned 4WR.
But they had also found out that using a longer-term entry parameter
combined with a shorter-term exit parameter was an improvement over the
classic 4WR. They had also created other rules for trading but this was the
core upon which everything else was measured.
I had not checked which parameters were best so I tested whether
the 55-day parameter was better than my 40-day parameter. It was! Actually, just about everything between 50 to 60 days had about the same
results. So I enhanced my trading by switching to the parameters that
the Turtles were using. Basically, I was shifting from a two-month breakout to almost a three-month breakout. I was going to be trading less

Channel Breakouts

37

often but presumably entering only when there was a monster move in
place.
To repeat: Entries are made using 55 days but exits are made with
20 days. Let’s look at an example. Figure 3.2 is the same chart as shown in
Figure 3.1, but now I’ve added a 55-day channel. If the 20 and the 55 channel
high and/or low are the same, then you will only see one line. An example
of this is the month of July. The top channel for both the 20-day and 55-day
high are exactly the same so you only see one line. But note that there are
two lines below the prices. The higher line is the 20-day low line and the
bottom line is the 55.
Let’s follow the same process we did earlier but this time add in the
55-day parameter.
First, note that we do not get short in early April but wait until early
May. This shows a couple of things. First, 55-day breakouts will occur far
less often than 20-day breakouts. In this case, the market had to drop
for another month to create a strong enough bear market to trigger the
55-day low. Second, this actually hurt us in this trade because we sold at a
price lower than we would have using the 20-day low. On the other hand,
I actually don’t mind the lower price for the entry because it means that
I didn’t have my money tied up for about a month with a market going
nowhere. I don’t want to invest in things that are going sideways. It’s a
waste of time and attention.
We get short then in early May and get stopped out when the market moves above the 20-day high near the end of June for a loss of about
450 pips. Ugh. Now we are on the sidelines, not long. The market then
moves sideways and then breaks the 55-day high and gets us long in the
middle of July. That trade quickly fails and we are stopped out right at
the beginning of August for about a 650-pip loss. A few days later, we get
short when we break the 55-day low on August 8. The market then collapses and we show a profit until the sharp rally stops us out near the end
of September. We still make about a 750-pip profit. We get short again in
early October and would be showing a nice profit as the chart ends.
Note that this shift to 55 days eliminated the short position in early
June. We lost a little more on the losing trades than when we used the 4WR,
but we were able to eliminate one of the losing trades. We are probably a
little bit more profitable by adding in this new, longer entry channel. Over
the long run, we will be much more profitable.
A lot of people ask me what will happen if these two parameters
become very popular. Won’t that degrade the performance?
There is no question that a method can become too popular and the
performance begins to degrade. But this technique is robust. First, few
traders are looking at 55-day highs. Most traders are using short-term support and resistance to time their trades. They are looking at 10-day moving

38

FIGURE 3.2 British Pound with Channels Added

Channel Breakouts

39

averages and the most recent high or low. Few are looking back over the
last 55 days. Still, it is possible that the 55-day high or low could have
occurred in the last 10 days and that means that a lot of traders will be looking at that point to buy or sell, which will degrade performance slightly. I’m
always concerned about dealers and other short-term traders moving a
price to just above the 55-day high, triggering stops, and then having the
market collapse. The breakout will have occurred due to short-term price
manipulation rather that a significant change in the fundamentals. I’ll tell
you how we can counteract that next.
The 55/20 technique is so robust that you can use just about any parameter between 50 and 60. If you think that everyone is entering on 55-day
highs and lows then shift to 54 or 56. Heck, you can go all the way to 50- or
60-day highs or lows and it won’t make any difference. The basic technique
is catching some deep human action; shifting the parameters slightly won’t
change the performance.
In addition, 55/20 are not necessarily the optimal parameters for each
pair at all times. The best overall parameter is 55/20 because it works the
best for all pairs over the longest period of time.
I’ve found that the use of 20 days for the exit works well for most pairs
most of the time so I don’t fiddle with it. However, I have seen the optimal
length of the entry channel range from about 30 to about 70. I’ve seen the
optimal entry parameter change from year to year by half or double.
The problem with constantly changing the entry parameter is that you
will always be using the parameter that worked over the recent past, not
the parameter that will work in the near future. Sure, a parameter that
worked the best last month or year will likely be the parameter that will
work the best in the coming month or year. But I don’t like to fiddle with
the parameters because it makes the method less accountable and effectively turns the trading method into a discretionary method. I’ll talk more
about this concept in Chapter 9 on the psychology of trading. Chasing varying parameters is generally a waste of time. Finding a strong and robust set
of parameters that works is the key and I’ve presented those parameters.

THE PROS AND CONS OF
CHANNEL BREAKOUTS
The biggest argument in favor of channel breakouts is that they are extremely profitable. They are the core technique used by the most profitable
traders. That alone should be enough to convince you to use this technique.
I recognize that my job is to make money, not to be brilliant or creative
or even right. It’s to make money. So I want to use techniques that make
money and the channel breakout technique makes money.

40

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

One of the key advantages of channel breakouts is that you are guaranteed to catch the big moves in the pair. The big money is made on the big
moves so a huge advantage of channel breakouts is that they participate in
every big move. This advantage can’t be underestimated. It is this attribute
that drives great traders to use channel breakouts. You can’t make serious
money trading without making sure you are on board with the big moves.
Yes, the method can get chopped up with a sideways market but even
here the method works well. Having to make a new 55-day high or low cuts
down on the whipsaws. It usually takes a strong move in the market to
make a new 55-day high or low. That provides some protection against any
possible false breakout. But don’t fear, I will discuss the ways to protect
against serious losses using channel breakouts.
The main disadvantage with the channel breakout technique is that the
stop loss is a long way from the entry point. I haven’t talked about risk
management yet (see Chapter 7), but let me just say that the wider the
stop, the smaller your position will be if you have a position at all. In other
words, you can’t take a normal-size position because the risk is so high
due to the distance of the entry price to the exit channel. Getting stopped
out is a painful experience because of the distance between the entry and
exit channels. So what we need to do is to enhance the rules of channel
breakouts to improve performance and reduce risk.

THE BISHOP
My first enhancement is to use the Bishop to trigger liquidation signals.
Take a look at Figure 3.3. I have taken Figure 3.2 and added the average
directional index (ADX) indicator at the bottom. As you can see, the Bishop
gave us two good signals. I’ve put the cursor on the first signal to make it
easy to see.
Note that we exit right near the low of the major move down and move
to the sidelines just before the rally that caused the standard rules for channel breakouts to be stopped out. The standard rules state that we exit only
when we hit the 20-day high. Adding the Bishop actually allows us to exit,
in this case, near the bottom of the major move down and before the significant rally in September. This timely exit adds about 1,000 pips to our
profits for the year.
Remember that the Bishop is showing that the trend has ended. It triggers a buy signal in this case just a couple of days before the actual low in
the move. This is a huge enhancement to the profits for the year.
The next signal is not as good. Figure 3.4 shows the next Bishop exit
signal near the end of the chart. We have exited smartly, but we would have

41

FIGURE 3.3 British Pound with ADX Added

42

FIGURE 3.4 British Pound with Bishop Signal

Channel Breakouts

43

been slightly better off if we had stayed in the trade. Not bad but not good
either.
In any case, the net result of adding the Bishop exit signal is a major
improvement to profitability for the year. I think this is a good example
because it has one big winner and one small loser, which is typical of the
Bishop. It will make some amazing calls that add to our bottom line but
then will have a signal that hurts us slightly. The net result is still a big
winner.

ADX FILTER
My next enhancement to the basic channel breakout is to add the ADX
filter that I introduced in the previous chapter. Let’s take a new look at the
GBP/USD chart in Figure 3.5. This figure shows the ADX across the bottom
of the chart. It turns out that every one of the trading signals occurred while
the ADX was rising. As a result, the ADX filter never eliminated any trades.
In Figure 3.6, the chart has been moved to the right so that you can see
the more recent price action. I’ve put the cursor on December 4 where the
market breaks down. Also note the breakdown just at the end of December.
The ADX was declining in both cases so we would not have taken either
of these trades. As the chart shows, there was no real follow-through on
either of these trades. The ADX filter saved us from the sharp rally to the
20-day high where we would have been stopped out for a loss of over 800
pips. The ADX filter helped us dodge a bullet.
The ADX filter would have gotten us out of the trade at the end of
December as well. This would have saved us a little money because we
would have stopped ourselves out due to a new technique I’m going to
show you next. But I still wouldn’t have minded not entering that trade
anyway. The market moved sharply higher and I would have been suffering mightily for a couple of weeks until the market finally broke down in
the middle of January. I would have preferred not to enter this trade and
instead get in a little lower in the middle of January.
Using an ADX filter means that we will be trading slightly less often
because, by definition, some of the trades will be not entered because at
least some of the time the ADX will be moving lower. Our profits, however,
are greatly enhanced because we will usually eliminate taking on some losing trades. Rarely will we be eliminating a profitable trade. It’s no big deal
if we eliminate a winning trade because we will get in at a slightly lower
price. Remember, if the market breaks through the 55-day high/low and
the ADX is declining, we will look to get in on the next breakout, which
only requires one countertrend move. For example, we break to a new

44

FIGURE 3.5 British Pound with ADX Filter

45

FIGURE 3.6 ADX Indicator Is Declining as Market Breaks Down

46

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

55-day high but the ADX is declining. We don’t take the trade. But the market follows through and moves higher. I just need one day with a lower
close to set up a new potential 55-day-high buy signal. We never want to
put ourselves in a position where we don’t catch the big move just because
the ADX is moving lower. Any follow-through after a missed 55-day entry
signal will likely lead the ADX to move higher so any subsequent buy signals will be triggered. We might have missed the first few days of the move
but we won’t miss the big part of the move.

THE PRINCIPLE OF
INSTANT GRATIFICATION
I believe that one of the key underlying principles of profitable trading is
the principle of instant gratification. This means that we should show a
profit from the very beginning of the trade. Think back to your most profitable trades. Weren’t they profitable from the very beginning of the trade
or just after that? I think that my losing trades were nearly always losers
from the first day on, too. Basically, you can almost predict whether or not
a trade will be profitable by the price action of the first couple of days.
We must always find ways to make sure that we are profitable from the
beginning of the trade.
This principle is one of the reasons that I prefer to be a buyer on
strength and seller on weakness. This sharply increases the chances that
my trade will be profitable from the start.
The flip side of this principle is that I don’t like to hold positions that
are losing money. I want to get out before they become bigger losers. I
don’t want to wait around to see if they turn into winners. I want to get out
right away.

REJECTION RULE
This leads me to the next enhancement to the classic channel breakout
method: the rejection rule. This rule is designed to ensure that we are in
sync with the principle of instant gratification.
Markets break out of support and resistance all the time. Sometimes
the market will follow through and we will have a winning trade. Other
times the market will fail and fall back below the breakout level. The
question is whether the breakout was a false breakout or a premature
breakout. A false breakout is a breakout that simply fails and never shows
any follow-through. A premature breakout is a breakout that initially fails

Channel Breakouts

47

but eventually succeeds. The bulls needed to build more power before
they could overwhelm the bears. Breakouts cannot be predicted but we
want to protect ourselves against any sort of breakout that has no followthrough.
I call this rule the rejection rule because markets will reject a price if
the price is too high or low for current conditions. The price may break
out above a 55-day high but then move back to below the breakout level.
In this case, the market has rejected the new high. The bears are able to
quickly mount a counterattack and reject the breakout. The bulls do not
have enough strength to keep the market above the breakout level.
Take a look at Figure 3.7, which focuses on just one short period of the
previous figures. An arrow indicates the breakout that we want to view.
The first part of the rejection rule is the five-day condition. I want to
see that the 55-day high has been flat or declining for at least five days
prior to the breakout (use the opposite for breakdowns). The five-day condition ensures that we don’t apply the rejection rule to markets that are
running strongly up or down. We only want to use the rejection rule when
the market is roughly sideways. We want to find all the reasons in the world
to hang onto a position when the market is running. We want to look for
reasons to bail out if the market is going sideways. So we only apply the
rejection rule when the five-day condition is in place.
Figure 3.7 shows that the five-day condition is in place. The 55-day
channel has been flat for over five days when the breakout comes on July
15 (see arrow). The rejection rule is now in place.
The rejection rule is simple: If a five-day condition is in place, liquidate
a 55-day buy signal if the price of the market closes below the initial breakout level on the day of the breakout or the next day. In other words, the
price must close above the breakout level for the first two days of the trade
or you will exit on the close. If you can’t exit on the close for whatever
reason—for example, if you have a job that doesn’t allow you to watch the
markets during the day—then exit as soon as possible.
Let’s take another look at Figure 3.7. The market has broken above the
55-day high on the day highlighted with the arrow. In this case, the market opened below the 55-day high but broke through during the day. First,
we want to check to see if the market closes above the breakout level of the
55-day high on this first day. In this case, the market closes above the
55-day high so there is no rejection. However, the price closes below
the breakout level on the second day of the trade so we exit the trade
immediately.

r We are still looking at the original 55-day breakout level that caused
us to initiate the trade, not the new 55-day high created by the
breakout day.

48

FIGURE 3.7 British Pound with Rejection Rule Highlighted (Arrow)

Channel Breakouts

49

r Our loss in this trade is miniscule. We entered at a level just above
2.0000 and exited just slightly below that level. The loss is so small that
it is hardly worth considering.
r But note that we would have been stopped out at about 1.9650 for a loss
of about 350 pips if we were not using the rejection rule. The rejection
rule saved us a lot of money, which is what it is designed to do.
This trade aligns with the principle of instant gratification. The trade
failed right away. It made a profit for one day but it sold off a lot from
the high of the day of the breakout. It only made money for one day, then
failed. I have found throughout the years that it is better to eliminate trades
that fail quickly rather than hope that they will eventually come back into
profit.
The rejection rule significantly improves the profitability of the classic
channel breakout method because it eliminates a lot of trades that would
otherwise be stopped out at the 20-day low for a much larger loss. My experience is that roughly half of the normal stop-outs are eliminated by the
use of the rejection rule. This is a significant enhancement over the classic
channel breakout.
I’ll talk about risk management in Chapter 7, but let me just point out
that the risk per contract is greatly reduced by the rejection rule. Now, the
risk on a trade will rarely be the 20-day low. Instead, it will be a risk that
is unknown but likely close to the entry price. Note that it was only a few
pips away from the entry price in the example in this chapter. The risk will
usually be greater than our example, which is a common example.
Think for a minute. You might normally allocate a certain amount of
risk to each trade. Let’s say you want to risk $1,000 on each trade. Let’s
further say that it will be a $1,000 loss if the 20-day low is hit. The rejection
rule will kick in before the 20-day low in most cases. That is the result of
the principle of instant gratification. Let’s assume that you lose $200 every
time you get stopped out on the rejection rule rather than the $1,000 that
you lose if you hit the 20-day low. This means that you can either cut your
risk by 80 percent or increase your profit fivefold. (Remember that this is
just an estimate.) This is a dramatic change to the risks and rewards that
come from the channel breakout method. Let’s explore this further.
Let’s assume that you want to cut risk by 80 percent. You will have
a higher number of losing positions compared with the classic channel
breakout. The rejection rule creates a stop that is close to the entry position. The closer a stop is to the current market, the more often it will be
hit. It is not often that you will hit a stop that is the 20-day low. So you
should expect to get stopped out fairly frequently. However, the average
size of your losing trades will shrink dramatically. In our example, we will
be stopped out more often but our stop will limit our loss to only one-fifth
