
94

The Intelligent Investor

switching their low-interest holdings into very-high-coupon issues
on an even-money basis.
In our view the special advantages enjoyed by owners of savings bonds now will more than compensate for their lower current
return as compared with other direct government obligations.
2. other united states bonds. A profusion of these issues exists,
covering a wide variety of coupon rates and maturity dates. All of
them are completely safe with respect to payment of interest and
principal. They are subject to Federal income taxes but free from
state income tax. In late 1971 the long-term issues—over ten years—
showed an average yield of 6.09%, intermediate issues (three to five
years) returned 6.35%, and short issues returned 6.03%.
In 1970 it was possible to buy a number of old issues at large discounts. Some of these are accepted at par in settlement of estate
taxes. Example: The U.S. Treasury 31⁄2s due 1990 are in this category;
they sold at 60 in 1970, but closed 1970 above 77.
It is interesting to note also that in many cases the indirect obligations of the U.S. government yield appreciably more than its
direct obligations of the same maturity. As we write, an offering
appears of 7.05% of “Certificates Fully Guaranteed by the Secretary
of Transportation of the Department of Transportation of the
United States.” The yield was fully 1% more than that on direct
obligations of the U.S., maturing the same year (1986). The certificates were actually issued in the name of the Trustees of the Penn
Central Transportation Co., but they were sold on the basis of a
statement by the U.S. Attorney General that the guarantee “brings
into being a general obligation of the United States, backed by its
full faith and credit.” Quite a number of indirect obligations of this
sort have been assumed by the U.S. government in the past, and all
of them have been scrupulously honored.
The reader may wonder why all this hocus-pocus, involving an
apparently “personal guarantee” by our Secretary of Transportation, and a higher cost to the taxpayer in the end. The chief reason
for the indirection has been the debt limit imposed on government borrowing by the Congress. Apparently guarantees by the
government are not regarded as debts—a semantic windfall for
shrewder investors. Perhaps the chief impact of this situation has
been the creation of tax-free Housing Authority bonds, enjoying

General Portfolio Policy

95

the equivalent of a U.S. guarantee, and virtually the only taxexempt issues that are equivalent to government bonds. Another
type of government-backed issues is the recently created New
Community Debentures, offered to yield 7.60% in September 1971.
3. state and municipal bonds. These enjoy exemption from
Federal income tax. They are also ordinarily free of income tax in
the state of issue but not elsewhere. They are either direct obligations of a state or subdivision, or “revenue bonds” dependent for
interest payments on receipts from a toll road, bridge, building
lease, etc. Not all tax-free bonds are strongly enough protected to
justify their purchase by a defensive investor. He may be guided in
his selection by the rating given to each issue by Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s. One of three highest ratings by both services—Aaa
(AAA), Aa (AA), or A—should constitute a sufficient indication of
adequate safety. The yield on these bonds will vary both with the
quality and the maturity, with the shorter maturities giving the
lower return. In late 1971 the issues represented in Standard &
Poor’s municipal bond index averaged AA in quality rating, 20
years in maturity, and 5.78% in yield. A typical offering of
Vineland, N.J., bonds, rated AA for A and gave a yield of only 3%
on the one-year maturity, rising to 5.8% to the 1995 and 1996 maturities.1
4. corporation bonds. These bonds are subject to both Federal
and state tax. In early 1972 those of highest quality yielded 7.19%
for a 25-year maturity, as reflected in the published yield of
Moody’s Aaa corporate bond index. The so-called lower-mediumgrade issues—rated Baa—returned 8.23% for long maturities. In
each class shorter-term issues would yield somewhat less than
longer-term obligations.
Comment. The above summaries indicate that the average
investor has several choices among high-grade bonds. Those in
high income-tax brackets can undoubtedly obtain a better net yield
from good tax-free issues than from taxable ones. For others the
early 1972 range of taxable yield would seem to be from 5.00% on
U.S. savings bonds, with their special options, to about 71⁄2% on
high-grade corporate issues.

96

The Intelligent Investor

Higher-Yielding Bond Investments
By sacrificing quality an investor can obtain a higher income
return from his bonds. Long experience has demonstrated that the
ordinary investor is wiser to keep away from such high-yield
bonds. While, taken as a whole, they may work out somewhat better in terms of overall return than the first-quality issues, they
expose the owner to too many individual risks of untoward developments, ranging from disquieting price declines to actual default.
(It is true that bargain opportunities occur fairly often in lowergrade bonds, but these require special study and skill to exploit
successfully.)*
Perhaps we should add here that the limits imposed by Congress on direct bond issues of the United States have produced at
least two sorts of “bargain opportunities” for investors in the purchase of government-backed obligations. One is provided by the
tax-exempt “New Housing” issues, and the other by the recently
created (taxable) “New Community debentures.” An offering of
New Housing issues in July 1971 yielded as high as 5.8%, free from
both Federal and state taxes, while an issue of (taxable) New Community debentures sold in September 1971 yielded 7.60%. Both
obligations have the “full faith and credit” of the United States
government behind them and hence are safe without question.
And—on a net basis—they yield considerably more than ordinary
United States bonds.†

* Graham’s objection to high-yield bonds is mitigated today by the widespread availability of mutual funds that spread the risk and do the research
of owning “junk bonds.” See the commentary on Chapter 6 for more detail.
† The “New Housing” bonds and “New Community debentures” are no
more. New Housing Authority bonds were backed by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and were exempt from income
tax, but they have not been issued since 1974. New Community debentures,
also backed by HUD, were authorized by a Federal law passed in 1968.
About $350 million of these debentures were issued through 1975, but the
program was terminated in 1983.

General Portfolio Policy

97

Savings Deposits in Lieu of Bonds
An investor may now obtain as high an interest rate from a
savings deposit in a commercial or savings bank (or from a bank
certificate of deposit) as he can from a first-grade bond of short
maturity. The interest rate on bank savings accounts may be lowered in the future, but under present conditions they are a suitable
substitute for short-term bond investment by the individual.
Convertible Issues
These are discussed in Chapter 16. The price variability of bonds
in general is treated in Chapter 8, The Investor and Market Fluctuations.
Call Provisions
In previous editions we had a fairly long discussion of this
aspect of bond financing, because it involved a serious but little
noticed injustice to the investor. In the typical case bonds were
callable fairly soon after issuance, and at modest premiums—say
5%—above the issue price. This meant that during a period of wide
fluctuations in the underlying interest rates the investor had to
bear the full brunt of unfavorable changes and was deprived of all
but a meager participation in favorable ones.
Example: Our standard example has been the issue of American
Gas & Electric 100-year 5% debentures, sold to the public at 101 in
1928. Four years later, under near-panic conditions, the price of
these good bonds fell to 621⁄2, yielding 8%. By 1946, in a great reversal, bonds of this type could be sold to yield only 3%, and the 5%
issue should have been quoted at close to 160. But at that point the
company took advantage of the call provision and redeemed the
issue at a mere 106.
The call feature in these bond contracts was a thinly disguised
instance of “heads I win, tails you lose.” At long last, the bondbuying institutions refused to accept this unfair arrangement; in
recent years most long-term high-coupon issues have been protected against redemption for ten years or more after issuance. This
still limits their possible price rise, but not inequitably.

98

The Intelligent Investor

In practical terms, we advise the investor in long-term issues to
sacrifice a small amount of yield to obtain the assurance of noncallability—say for 20 or 25 years. Similarly, there is an advantage
in buying a low-coupon bond* at a discount rather than a highcoupon bond selling at about par and callable in a few years. For
the discount—e.g., of a 31⁄2% bond at 631⁄2%, yielding 7.85%—carries
full protection against adverse call action.

Straight—i.e., Nonconvertible—Preferred Stocks
Certain general observations should be made here on the subject
of preferred stocks. Really good preferred stocks can and do exist,
but they are good in spite of their investment form, which is an
inherently bad one. The typical preferred shareholder is dependent
for his safety on the ability and desire of the company to pay dividends on its common stock. Once the common dividends are omitted, or even in danger, his own position becomes precarious, for
the directors are under no obligation to continue paying him unless
they also pay on the common. On the other hand, the typical preferred stock carries no share in the company’s profits beyond the
fixed dividend rate. Thus the preferred holder lacks both the legal
claim of the bondholder (or creditor) and the profit possibilities of
a common shareholder (or partner).
These weaknesses in the legal position of preferred stocks tend
to come to the fore recurrently in periods of depression. Only a
small percentage of all preferred issues are so strongly entrenched
as to maintain an unquestioned investment status through all vicissitudes. Experience teaches that the time to buy preferred stocks is
when their price is unduly depressed by temporary adversity. (At
such times they may be well suited to the aggressive investor but
too unconventional for the defensive investor.)
In other words, they should be bought on a bargain basis or not
at all. We shall refer later to convertible and similarly privileged
issues, which carry some special possibilities of profits. These are
not ordinarily selected for a conservative portfolio.
Another peculiarity in the general position of preferred stocks

* A bond’s “coupon” is its interest rate; a “low-coupon” bond pays a rate of
interest income below the market average.

General Portfolio Policy

99

deserves mention. They have a much better tax status for corporation buyers than for individual investors. Corporations pay income
tax on only 15% of the income they receive in dividends, but on the
full amount of their ordinary interest income. Since the 1972 corporate rate is 48%, this means that $100 received as preferred-stock
dividends is taxed only $7.20, whereas $100 received as bond interest is taxed $48. On the other hand, individual investors pay
exactly the same tax on preferred-stock investments as on bond
interest, except for a recent minor exemption. Thus, in strict logic,
all investment-grade preferred stocks should be bought by corporations, just as all tax-exempt bonds should be bought by investors
who pay income tax.*

Security Forms
The bond form and the preferred-stock form, as hitherto discussed, are well-understood and relatively simple matters. A bondholder is entitled to receive fixed interest and payment of principal
on a definite date. The owner of a preferred stock is entitled to a
fixed dividend, and no more, which must be paid before any common dividend. His principal value does not come due on any specified date. (The dividend may be cumulative or noncumulative. He
may or may not have a vote.)
The above describes the standard provisions and, no doubt, the
majority of bond and preferred issues, but there are innumerable
departures from these forms. The best-known types are convertible
and similar issues, and income bonds. In the latter type, interest
does not have to be paid unless it is earned by the company.
(Unpaid interest may accumulate as a charge against future earnings, but the period is often limited to three years.)
Income bonds should be used by corporations much more

* While Graham’s logic remains valid, the numbers have changed. Corporations can currently deduct 70% of the income they receive from dividends,
and the standard corporate tax rate is 35%. Thus, a corporation would pay
roughly $24.50 in tax on $100 in dividends from preferred stock versus
$35 in tax on $100 in interest income. Individuals pay the same rate of
income tax on dividend income that they do on interest income, so preferred
stock offers them no tax advantage.

100

The Intelligent Investor

extensively than they are. Their avoidance apparently arises from a
mere accident of economic history—namely, that they were first
employed in quantity in connection with railroad reorganizations,
and hence they have been associated from the start with financial
weakness and poor investment status. But the form itself has several practical advantages, especially in comparison with and in
substitution for the numerous (convertible) preferred-stock issues
of recent years. Chief of these is the deductibility of the interest
paid from the company’s taxable income, which in effect cuts the
cost of that form of capital in half. From the investor’s standpoint it
is probably best for him in most cases that he should have (1) an
unconditional right to receive interest payments when they are
earned by the company, and (2) a right to other forms of protection
than bankruptcy proceedings if interest is not earned and paid. The
terms of income bonds can be tailored to the advantage of both
the borrower and the lender in the manner best suited to both.
(Conversion privileges can, of course, be included.) The acceptance
by everybody of the inherently weak preferred-stock form and
the rejection of the stronger income-bond form is a fascinating
illustration of the way in which traditional institutions and habits
often tend to persist on Wall Street despite new conditions calling
for a fresh point of view. With every new wave of optimism or
pessimism, we are ready to abandon history and time-tested principles, but we cling tenaciously and unquestioningly to our prejudices.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 4

When you leave it to chance, then all of a sudden you don’t
have any more luck.
—Basketball coach Pat Riley

How aggressive should your portfolio be?
That, says Graham, depends less on what kinds of investments you
own than on what kind of investor you are. There are two ways to be
an intelligent investor:
•
•

by continually researching, selecting, and monitoring a dynamic
mix of stocks, bonds, or mutual funds;
or by creating a permanent portfolio that runs on autopilot and
requires no further effort (but generates very little excitement).

Graham calls the first approach “active” or “enterprising”; it takes
lots of time and loads of energy. The “passive” or “defensive” strategy
takes little time or effort but requires an almost ascetic detachment
from the alluring hullabaloo of the market. As the investment thinker
Charles Ellis has explained, the enterprising approach is physically
and intellectually taxing, while the defensive approach is emotionally
demanding.1
If you have time to spare, are highly competitive, think like a sports
fan, and relish a complicated intellectual challenge, then the active

1

For more about the distinction between physically and intellectually difficult
investing on the one hand, and emotionally difficult investing on the other,
see Chapter 8 and also Charles D. Ellis, “Three Ways to Succeed as an
Investor,” in Charles D. Ellis and James R. Vertin, eds., The Investor’s Anthology (John Wiley & Sons, 1997), p. 72.
101

102

Commentary on Chapter 4

approach is up your alley. If you always feel rushed, crave simplicity,
and don’t relish thinking about money, then the passive approach is for
you. (Some people will feel most comfortable combining both methods—creating a portfolio that is mainly active and partly passive, or
vice versa.)
Both approaches are equally intelligent, and you can be successful
with either—but only if you know yourself well enough to pick the right
one, stick with it over the course of your investing lifetime, and keep
your costs and emotions under control. Graham’s distinction between
active and passive investors is another of his reminders that financial
risk lies not only where most of us look for it—in the economy or in our
investments—but also within ourselves.
CA N YO U B E B R AV E , O R W I L L YO U CAV E ?
How, then, should a defensive investor get started? The first and most
basic decision is how much to put in stocks and how much to put in
bonds and cash. (Note that Graham deliberately places this discussion after his chapter on inflation, forearming you with the knowledge
that inflation is one of your worst enemies.)
The most striking thing about Graham’s discussion of how to allocate your assets between stocks and bonds is that he never mentions
the word “age.” That sets his advice firmly against the winds of conventional wisdom—which holds that how much investing risk you ought
to take depends mainly on how old you are.2 A traditional rule of thumb
was to subtract your age from 100 and invest that percentage of your
assets in stocks, with the rest in bonds or cash. (A 28-year-old would
put 72% of her money in stocks; an 81-year-old would put only 19%
there.) Like everything else, these assumptions got overheated in the
late 1990s. By 1999, a popular book argued that if you were younger
than 30 you should put 95% of your money in stocks—even if you had
only a “moderate” tolerance for risk! 3

2

A recent Google search for the phrase “age and asset allocation” turned
up more than 30,000 online references.
3
James K. Glassman and Kevin A. Hassett, Dow 36,000: The New Strategy
for Profiting from the Coming Rise in the Stock Market (Times Business,
1999), p. 250.

Commentary on Chapter 4

103

Unless you’ve allowed the proponents of this advice to subtract
100 from your IQ, you should be able to tell that something is wrong
here. Why should your age determine how much risk you can take?
An 89-year-old with $3 million, an ample pension, and a gaggle of
grandchildren would be foolish to move most of her money into bonds.
She already has plenty of income, and her grandchildren (who will
eventually inherit her stocks) have decades of investing ahead of
them. On the other hand, a 25-year-old who is saving for his wedding
and a house down payment would be out of his mind to put all his
money in stocks. If the stock market takes an Acapulco high dive, he
will have no bond income to cover his downside—or his backside.
What’s more, no matter how young you are, you might suddenly
need to yank your money out of stocks not 40 years from now, but 40
minutes from now. Without a whiff of warning, you could lose your job,
get divorced, become disabled, or suffer who knows what other kind
of surprise. The unexpected can strike anyone, at any age. Everyone
must keep some assets in the riskless haven of cash.
Finally, many people stop investing precisely because the stock
market goes down. Psychologists have shown that most of us do a
very poor job of predicting today how we will feel about an emotionally
charged event in the future.4 When stocks are going up 15% or 20%
a year, as they did in the 1980s and 1990s, it’s easy to imagine that
you and your stocks are married for life. But when you watch every
dollar you invested getting bashed down to a dime, it’s hard to resist
bailing out into the “safety” of bonds and cash. Instead of buying and
holding their stocks, many people end up buying high, selling low, and
holding nothing but their own head in their hands. Because so few
investors have the guts to cling to stocks in a falling market, Graham
insists that everyone should keep a minimum of 25% in bonds. That
cushion, he argues, will give you the courage to keep the rest of your
money in stocks even when stocks stink.
To get a better feel for how much risk you can take, think about the
fundamental circumstances of your life, when they will kick in, when
they might change, and how they are likely to affect your need for cash:

4

For a fascinating essay on this psychological phenomenon, see Daniel
Gilbert and Timothy Wilson’s “Miswanting,” at www.wjh.harvard.edu/~dtg/
Gilbert_&_Wilson(Miswanting).pdf.

104

•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Commentary on Chapter 4

Are you single or married? What does your spouse or partner do
for a living?
Do you or will you have children? When will the tuition bills hit
home?
Will you inherit money, or will you end up financially responsible
for aging, ailing parents?
What factors might hurt your career? (If you work for a bank or a
homebuilder, a jump in interest rates could put you out of a job. If
you work for a chemical manufacturer, soaring oil prices could be
bad news.)
If you are self-employed, how long do businesses similar to yours
tend to survive?
Do you need your investments to supplement your cash income?
(In general, bonds will; stocks won’t.)
Given your salary and your spending needs, how much money
can you afford to lose on your investments?

If, after considering these factors, you feel you can take the higher
risks inherent in greater ownership of stocks, you belong around
Graham’s minimum of 25% in bonds or cash. If not, then steer mostly
clear of stocks, edging toward Graham’s maximum of 75% in bonds
or cash. (To find out whether you can go up to 100%, see the
sidebar on p. 105.)
Once you set these target percentages, change them only as your
life circumstances change. Do not buy more stocks because the stock
market has gone up; do not sell them because it has gone down. The
very heart of Graham’s approach is to replace guesswork with discipline. Fortunately, through your 401(k), it’s easy to put your portfolio
on permanent autopilot. Let’s say you are comfortable with a fairly high
level of risk—say, 70% of your assets in stocks and 30% in bonds. If
the stock market rises 25% (but bonds stay steady), you will now have
just under 75% in stocks and only 25% in bonds.5 Visit your 401(k)’s
website (or call its toll-free number) and sell enough of your stock
funds to “rebalance” back to your 70–30 target. The key is to rebalance on a predictable, patient schedule—not so often that you will
