The Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company is a goad example of a strong and steady consumer
goods company that has built up a wide economic moat over many years. Its Juicy
Fruit and Spearmint brands have been around since the early 1890s, and it’s been the
world’s leading gum maker for most of the past century. It has a nearly 60 percent
share of the U.S. gum market, more than twice as much as second-place Cadbury
Schweppes. Its products are sold in 140 countries, making it number one in world
gum market share as well. This dominance has helped Wrigley to become very prof-
itable, with net margins around 15 percent and retums on equity consistently in the
25 percent to 30 percent range.

Wrigley has traditionally been a very conservative company, but it has also done a
goad jab of innovating to stay ahead of the competition. When Bill Wrigley Jr. took
over the company in 1999, increased competition from breath mints such as Altoids
had threatened Wrigley’s market dominance and caused its growth to slow. The
youthful CEO stepped up the pace of innovation in response to these threats, and
Wrigley has come out with a plethora of new products focused on breath freshening,
including Orbit gum and Eclipse Flash Strips. Sales grew at a strong double-digit rate
in 2001 and 2002, and the company is lacking more energized than it has been

in years.

Big, Powerful Brands
Consumer product companies often invest a great deal of time and money
in building up strong relationships with end users in the form of brands.
Brands were born in the late nineteenth century when these consumer
goods firms sought to provide consumers with assurance of consistent qual-
ity—so youd know what you were getting for your money. Since then,
brands have evolved into a host of meanings, including expressions of aspi-
ration and affirmation of self-image. By imbuing a product with a meaning
that extends beyond functionality, companies create a higher level of per-
ceived value.

For instance, for years, Heinz Ketchup built up a reputation for top
quality—the thickest, richest ketchup that premier food establishments


312

CONSUMER GOODS

preferred. By the time Hunt’s Ketchup finally matched the Heinz product
with comparable thickness, it was too late. Hunt's didn’t gain much share,
and Heinz continued to command a premium price over its competition.
Not all brands are created equal, however. Simply putting a trade-
marked name or logo on the product does not turn it into a brand that can
command higher prices or greater share. The most powerful brands have
nurtured a connection with consumers that can last for years, creating a sig-

nificant challenge to new entrants, but this takes time, money, and market-

ing savvy.

Distribution Channels and Relationships

The networks that manufacturers use to get their products on to shelves in the
stores can be another competitive advantage that is very difficult for competi-
tors to replicate. For instance, beverage manufacturers rely on their wholesalers
and bottlers, each of whom retains exclusive control over a certain geographic
area, to cultivate close relationships with retail customers.

Large beverage firms can leverage extensive distribution networks that span
the map. On the other hand, a small company often finds it prohibitively ex-
pensive to build a network from scratch and must rely on creating an alliance
with a large firm to distribute its products, usually by demonstrating how its
products can fill a niche in the bigger firm's product portfolio. For example,
7Up did not have its own bottler network that provided full coverage of the en-
tire United States and had agreed that some of PepsiCo’s bottlers would dis-
tribute 7Up products. This approach, however, leaves the smaller firm at the
mercy of the large one. Once PepsiCo formulated its own lemon-lime soft
drink to compete with 7Up, PepsiCo applied pressure to make its bottlers drop
7Up and distribute Sierra Mist instead.

Exclusivity is another aspect of the distribution system that can enhance
a company’s economic moat. For instance, 60 percent of Anheuser-Busch’s
distributors sell only Anheuser-Busch products. This arrangement leads to
wholesalers with focus and incentive to sell harder. In contrast, the vast ma-
jority of Coors and Miller distributors are not exclusive and, thus, sell a vari-
ety of competitive brands. This means that a Miller wholesaler who tries to

sell Miller products unsuccessfully can pull a competitive product out of his


HALLMARKS OF SUCCESS IN CONSUMER GOODS

portfolio to sell instead. In the end, Miller’s distribution system may not be as
dedicated to Miller products as Anheuser-Busch’s are to its products.

Hallmarks of Success in Consumer Goods
When you're checking out a potential investment in consumer goods, look

for several characteristics.

Market Share

Companies with brands that hold dominant market share are likely to stay in
that position because shifts in share tend to be fairly small from year to year.
Thus, whoever is number one right now is likely to remain in that position
over the next several years (barring any truly extraordinary events such as
product contamination). For example, Tide has been the market leader in
laundry detergent for about as long as anyone can remember. It’s not always
easy to find specific numbers on market share, but you'll sometimes see this
discussed in the company’s annual report. General business publications such
as Business Week and The Wall Street Journal can also be good sources of infor-
mation on market share data.

Free Cash Flow

In this mature sector, the name of the game is tons of free cash flow—cash
flow from operations minus capital expenditures. Unlike a young company
that must invest most of its cash flow back into its business to expand and
meet growing demand, many of these century-old consumer goods firms
are in the enviable position of raking in cash. Additionally, because many of
these firms enjoy wide economic moats, you can expect them to continue
earning returns on capital in excess of their cost of capital for some time
to come.

With so much cash remaining, these firms often dispense a portion of it to
shareholders in the form of dividends and share buybacks. Checking on just
how much of a firm’s free cash flow is transferred to shareholders can be a
good way to assess whether management really has the shareholder's interests
at heart. For example, Coca-Cola's track record suggests the firm doesn’t hoard

cash and prefers to return it to shareholders. Of the immense $3.5 billion in

313


314

CONSUMER GOODS

free cash flow generated in 2002, Coca-Cola paid out nearly $2 billion in div-
idends. You can look through the statement of cash flows to find out how
much a firm has paid out in dividends to shareholders.

Belief in Brand Building

The strength of management's belief in brand building provides the founda-
tion for the birth and cultivation of powerful brands. Firms that consistently
invest in their brands through advertising and other non-sales-oriented com-
munication will build up a brand’s perceived value. For instance, Anheuser-
Busch has consistently spent ad dollars to support its key brands in high
profile (and expensive) media events such as the Superbowl. This helped
lead to seven consecutive years of domestic market share gains between 1996
and 2002.

However, watch out for firms that cut corners by consistently putting
their brands on sale. Although this may initially lead to increased volume and
higher market share, it hurts profitability, and, in the end, constant discount-
ing erodes even the most premium of brands. If a company is falling into a
pattern of cutting its advertising spending every few quarters when sales
aren't going so well, the firm may be more concerned with meeting earnings
expectations for the next quarter than building a brand that will still be

strong 5 orlo years from now.

Innovation

Considering the degree to which consumer goods firms rely on a steady
stream of new products to stay competitive, a firm’s level of innovation is
critical. Keep an eye on which companies consistently introduce new prod-
ucts that are successful in the marketplace and which ones always seem
to come out first with a new product. Further, it’s important to distinguish
between whether a firm is simply introducing a new flavor of an existing
product, such as Keebler launching another version of Pecan Sandies cook-
ies, or if the company is rolling out a revolutionary product that didn’t
exist before but which meets some consumer demand, such as Procter &
Gamble’s Dryel home dry cleaning system or Listerine’s PocketPak breath-

freshening strips.


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

Companies often prefer the former type of new product because it’s less
risky and consumers are already familiar with the mother brand. However,
innovation by line extension raises a greater possibility that consumers will
substitute the new flavor for the flavor they usually buy, which reduces the
opportunity for a larger boost in incremental sales. Ata minimum, the prod-
uct must offer some sort of substantial advantage over existing substitutes. In
addition, the company must successfully educate consumers on the benefit of
this product and familiarize the potential audience with the new brand.
There are advantages to both approaches—neither one is wholly superior.
The best bet is a company that does a good job of launching a string of single
hits with line extensions and occasionally hitting a homerun with a revolu-

tionary new product.

Conclusion

Though this mature sector is unlikely to grow much faster than the general
economy, relatively static demand for food, beverage, household, and to-
bacco products can add up to fairly steady performance. Further, many of
these companies enjoy the benefits of wide economic moats—sustainable
competitive advantages that translate into pricing power and profitability.
Though companies in this sector may seem staid and boring, without the
thrills of more risky categories, we like the stability, relatively low risk, and,

importantly, generous free cash flows.

Investor's Checklist: Consumer Goods

> Find companies that enjoy the cost advantages of manufacturing on a
larger scale than most other competitors. One related issue is whether the
firm holds dominant market share in its categories.

> Look for the firms that consistently launch successful new products—all
the better if the firm is first to market with these innovations.

> Check to see if the company is supporting its brands with consistent ad-
vertising. If the firm constantly promotes its products with sale prices, it’s
depleting brand equity and just milking the brand for shorter-term gain.

> Examine how well the firm is handling operating costs. Occasional re-

structuring can help squeeze out efficiency gains and lower costs, but if

315


316. CONSUMER GOODS

the firm is regularly incurring restructuring costs and relying solely on
this cost-cutting tactic to boost its business, tread carefully.

> Because these mature firms generate so much free cash flow, it’s impor-
tant to make sure management is using it wisely. How much of the cash
is turned over to shareholders in the form of dividends or share repur-
chase agreements?

> Keep in mind that investors may bid up a consumer goods stock during
economic downturns, making the shares pricey relative to its fair value.
Look for buying opportunities when shares trade with a 20 percent to 30

percent margin of safety.


24

Industrial Materials

THE INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS sector includes a broad array of companies,
which make everything from the fragrances used in soap to bulldozers and
heat-seeking missiles. The general business model is simple: Industrial mate-
rials companies buy raw materials and facilities to produce the inputs and
machinery that other firms use to meet their customers’ expected demand for
goods. This is a classic Old Economy sector, because it consists of companies
that make tangible goods.

We divide industrial materials into two groups: (1) basic materials such as
commodity steel, aluminum, and chemicals and (2) value-added goods such
as electrical equipment, heavy machinery, and some specialty chemicals. The
primary difference is that commodity producers have little or no influence on
the price of the products they produce. Makers of value-added industrial ma-
terials, on the other hand, may be specialized enough or improve a customer's
business enough for the manufacturer to share part of that benefit in the

form of a premium price (the value added).

Nicolas Owens, Sanjay Ayer, Michael Hodel, and Brian Lund with Pat Dorsey.


318

INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

From an investor’s point of view, these companies are the classics. All the
traditional rules apply, and textbook indicators such as asset turnover and
debt ratios can reveal a great deal about the companies’ performance and fi-
nancial health. But, because most of these companies supply industry with in-
puts, they are closely tied to the economic cycle and most firms’ shares tend to
create little value for buy-and-hold investors between cycle peaks. To make
matters worse, many segments of the industrial economy—particularly com-
modity producers—face destructive long-term price deflation. Low-cost com-
petition and excess capacity can easily overwhelm any growth in demand,

which is often in the low single digits at best.

The Problem with Cyclicality

The general idea of the business cycle is that economic growth is followed by
an eventual slowdown or a recession, then a recovery, and then the cycle starts
anew. When the economy is firing on all cylinders, profits and competition
intensify, as does demand for economic inputs such as raw materials and
labor, which in turn become more expensive. In this environment, interest
rates often rise because capital is in demand. Increased operating expenses,
interest payments, and competition erode businesses’ margins and lead busi-
nesses to reduce capacity. As businesses cut costs by investing less and laying
off employees, inventories and prices decline. Once the excesses are worked
off, expansion can begin again.

Industrial materials producers often find themselves at the business end
of the economic cycle bullwhip, where a small motion at the other end can
cause great gyrations (see Figure 24.1). For example, when the economy is ex-
panding, International Paper (IP) can harvest wood and run its mills at full
capacity because demand for its lumber and bleach-board paper runs high.
When the companies that use IP’s products see consumer spending dry up,
however, orders plunge. Thus, IP’s sales magnify changes in GDP growth:
When GDP growth rises, IP’s revenue growth soars; when GDP growth con-
tracts, IP’s sales growth plummets.

Makers of big-ticket industrial items, such as Caterpillar, which manufac-
tures off-road trucks and earthmoving equipment, or Deere & Co., a maker of
agricultural equipment, can face another kind of cyclicality. These producers

operate in mature industries, where demand is driven largely by replacement of


THE PROBLEM WITH CYCLICALITY 319

Growth (%Change) @ US. Business Gross Domestic Product
International Paper Sales

‘40

30

‘20

1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2002

Figure 24.1 When the economy moves a little, cyclical firms such as International Paper move a great
deal. Source: Morningstar, Inc.

older products. In times of economic uncertainty, builders and farmers can ex-
ercise some discretion in the timing of purchases. If their own prospects are
uncertain, they can delay buying new equipment until better times.

Dealing with demand swings can be very difficult for industrial com-
panies. Most of them manufacture commodity products with little pricing
power, so profit margins tend to be very slim—around § percent on average.
Companies compensate by dedicating themselves to achieving high produc-
tion volumes, which often lead to high fixed costs for manufacturing facilities.
When demand is strong, they can make a solid profit because incremental pro-
duction beyond the breakeven point comes with a high margin (a concept
known as operating leverage). But when demand falls, fixed costs become a bur-
den that can threaten the very survival of a business. Only the most efficient
producer, with the lowest fixed cost base in relation to sales volume, can re-

main profitable through a downturn.


320

INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

Industrial materials companies also use product diversification to di-
minish the impact of cyclicality. Many, including Caterpillar and General
Electric (GE), have large financing subsidiaries that make loans to their cor-
porate customers as well as consumers. In many cases, these subsidiaries ac-
count for a large proportion of the corporation’s value. To temper their
overall cyclicality, companies can also diversify among products tied to
longer and shorter cycles within the economy. For example, to complement
its long-cycle businesses such as power generating equipment, GE has also
diversified into short-cycle businesses, such as the NBC television network.
General Electric also generates recurring revenue and profits from special-
ized servicing contracts for complex equipment that is already in use, such

as jet engines used by airlines.

Economic Moats in Basic Materials
Economic moats in the basic materials industries tend to be very few and far
between. The main reason is that many of these companies produce com-
modities; thus, they would create a sustainable competitive advantage only
by becoming the low-cost producer.

Some commodity-producing companies achieve the low-cost position by
increasing their size and attaining economies of scale. Consequently, their
production cost per unit is less than the competition’s. In the aluminum in-
dustry, Alcoa has this economic moat; in steel, it’s mini-mill producer Nucor.
In the low-cost position, a company can charge less than its competitors and
still remain profitable. Ideally, this should drive inefficient producers from the
market and strengthen the industry over the long term.

The reality is, however, much more complicated on several fronts. In
many industries, such as steel, domestic firms have come under increasing
pressure from foreign producers with much lower cost structures. Their cost
advantage usually comes from some combination of three sources: the sheer
benefit of geography, government subsidies and tariffs, or low labor costs.

After a long decline, culminating in the 1990s, America’s steel industry
experienced strong competition from foreign firms with much lower costs
that churned out more steel than demand warranted, thus driving U.S. steel
prices to bargain-basement levels. In recent years, more than 30 domestic

producers, with relatively costly labor contracts and crushing pension and


ECONOMIC MOATS IN INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

retirement obligations, could not operate profitably with steel prices at such
low levels and filed for bankruptcy protection. Though the specifics and in-
tensity of these problems vary from industry to industry, other commodity
industries are dealing with similar issues.

Although basic materials industries do have significant barriers to entry—
the cost of constructing a new steel, aluminum, or paper processing plant is
steep—stiff price competition makes for mediocre profits at best. As men-
tioned previously, basic materials producers are highly susceptible to perfor-
mance swings tied to the overall economic environment. The high cost of
equipment and low profit margins mean these industries typically have poor
returns on capital, so there’s little to attract investment capital and even less to

attract investors.

Economic Moats in Industrial Materials

A handful of industrial materials firms meet the definition of what Peter Lynch
called “great companies in lousy industries” and boast sustainable or growing
competitive advantages.’ Such advantages can counteract the problems identi-
fied in this chapter—cyclicality, fierce price competition, slim profit margins,
pernicious replacement cycles—because they provide companies with a more
stable customer base, more predictable sales and profits, and the ability to rein-
vest their capital more efficiently.

Some wide-moat companies in the industrial materials sector include
specialty chemical manufacturer 3M, mail meter maker Pitney Bowes, auto
parts supplier Gentex, defense contractor General Dynamics (GD), and
manufacturing powerhouse United Technologies Corp (UTX), which makes
everything from Otis elevators and Carrier air conditioners to jet engines and
the Black Hawk helicopter. Gentex and 3M have numerous patents that pro-
tect their markets from some competition. General Dynamics and UTX op-
erate in very concentrated industries, and their customers would have a
difficult time switching to another product even if there were more choices.
Pitney Bowes enjoys both types of advantages: patented technology and high

customer switching costs.

‘Peter Lynch with John Rothchild, Beating the Street (New York: Fireside, 1994).

321


322

INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

Technology and Competitive Advantage

Because industrial materials markets are mature, there’s often fierce competi-
tion on price and little room for top-line growth. Thus, the only way to im-
prove the bottom line and reward investors is to develop a differentiated
product or to find ways to spend less making the same product. By definition,
acommodity product cannot be differentiated, so for many industrial materi-
als producers, investments in efficiency are the only way they can improve the
bottom line. In the industrial materials sector, about as much technology
spending is devoted to improving manufacturing efficiency as it is to develop-
ing new products.

Investments in technology can lead to lower-cost production methods. In
the steel industry, for instance, the electric are furnace allows Nucor to recycle
scrap steel and produce finished steel products at a much lower cost than the
big integrated producers, such as U.S. Steel, whose operations rely on an
expensive, capital-intensive blast furnace to make steel. Nucor’s technology
provides the most important competitive advantage available in a mature com-
modity industry: the low-cost position. The proof is in the pudding: Between
1999 and 2001, Nucor’s average gross margin was nearly double that of U.S.
