
Rewards of Social Trading
Now that the risks are clear, let's look at the advantages of the social trading approach.

Higher Chances of Success
Not surprisingly, leaving the trading to those better qualified should produce better results than if you
did your own trading, at least until you become an expert trader yourself.
According to a report by the Aite Group, a Boston consulting firm that specializes in the financial
services industry, up to 50 percent of social traders are profitable in a given quarter versus only about
a third (at best) of do-it-yourself retail traders, according to data from the major retail forex brokers.7
EToro reports even better results, claiming that between 80 and 90 percent of all copied trades are
profitable, and that investors who copy are showing “significantly higher gains than manual (self)
traders.”8 As noted earlier, only about 20 percent to 30 percent of forex traders are profitable

according to broker reports gathered by the U.S. government.
While it's not so surprising that copying experts should produce better results for most people, early
results suggest that a decent picker of top traders could beat markets in general, regardless of whether
conditions are bullish or bearish. As shown in Figure 11.1, Currensee's Trade Leaders have been
doing just that.
As the social trading sites become more adept at making it easier to identify and track top
performers, this performance advantage is likely to grow, regardless of how many followers are
attracted. As noted in Chapter 1, the forex market dwarfs that of the major stock indexes, so it is very
hard for anyone except for a few central banks to generate enough volume to move markets for more
than a matter of days.

Time Saved
While it still takes skill to succeed with social trading, you save an enormous amount of time and
effort compared to the time and effort invested to become and remain a top trader.
Even if you do expect to become a star trader, you still need to consider whether your results are
likely to justify the extra time and effort invested.
We suspect that the advantages of better results and time saved will cause many to decide to study
forex with a goal of becoming adept selectors of trading talent rather than traders themselves. Just like
there are funds comprised of shares in other funds, and investors who focus on mutual funds and
exchange-traded funds (ETFs), there will be forex investors who prefer to build portfolios of traders
as part or all of their forex activities.

Better Way to Play the Lower Correlation with Other Markets
As we covered in Chapters 1 and 2, the very nature of currency trading allows traders and investors
to profit in down as well as up markets. There's always a trend to be played in some pair or time
frame, and the almost interchangeable nature of retail forex and commodity trading means that skilled
forex traders can as easily exploit developments via certain commodities, making it easier still to find
worthwhile opportunities when other retail markets are more challenging.
In other words, forex's low correlation to other markets means you're not forced into the same
crowded and often overpriced assets like investors in other markets are.
In good times, cash pours into the most popular risk assets, bidding them up so that they quickly
become expensive, and you risk paying too much and missing the gains. In bad times, the same thing
happens with the popular safe haven assets. It's every asset manager's dream to find an asset class that
can do well in any market conditions.
Given the nature and size of forex markets, skillful (yes, there's the catch) forex trading is a
uniquely effective solution for those seeking assets with little correlation to other markets. The
problem for most people, even otherwise sophisticated investors or fund managers, is that they aren't
skilled forex traders. Social trading provides the shortcut to the benefits of professional forex trading
without the requisite investment to build that skill.
With social trading, it's much easier for average traders to exploit that low correlation by
automatically mirroring the trading of those who do it best. Again, there's a skill to identifying these
experts, but that's still easier and less time-consuming than doing it all yourself. Study this book well

and you've got most of the background you need to pick the right experts to follow.
For a more complete discussion of how uncorrelated expert trader returns can be to other markets,
see Appendix G.

Transparency: You Know Your Experts' Track Records and Current
Performance
You have the records of the other experts against which to compare the results of your own. This is
critical, because even the most exclusive private account and hedge fund managers at some point go
cold. You need a way to monitor them. Social trading provides past and current performance
information that is at least as good as and usually better than traditional managed accounts, and come
with the added bonus of community for consultations about your chosen experts and their competitors.

The Growth of Social Trading
Given these advantages, the appeal of better returns for less effort at a reasonable (or no additional)
cost, and the added benefit of having an entire community to consult about how and whom to choose,
social trading has been growing dramatically since it began in late 2010. For example, as of the end
of 2011, Currensee reports the following for its Trade Leader program:9
There has been $6 billion trading volume since the program began, and a 50 percent increase
since April 14, 2011.
There is $12 million in assets under management since launch.
More than 400 individual investors are actively participating.
Average investor account size is over $25,000.
An average of 3,500 trades are executed daily.
Investors from more than 50 countries are using the service in English, Chinese, French, Italian,
and Spanish.
Nearly 50 percent of the growth in assets during the prior 60 days has come from investors
achieving success in the program and depositing additional capital.
As a purely social trading site, Currensee's growth figures are all attributable to the growth of
social trading.
EToro reports that now 50 percent of all trades in its network are copied trades, up from 0 percent
when the program began in late 2010.10 Because eToro offers both self-directed and social trading, its
figures suggest the potential future growth of copied trades versus traditional self-directed trades that
we could see throughout the retail forex industry.

How eToro and Currensee Compare
EToro allows you to try their social trading platform with demo accounts. Currensee accepts only
real money accounts. There is a reason for this difference.
EToro runs its own forex brokerage, which provides both a revenue stream independent of social
trading and a preexisting infrastructure for demo accounts. If you see social trading as a key part of
your forex activities, then strongly consider starting your social trading career with an eToro demo

account. The chance to social trade on a demo account alone is enough to justify opening a demo
account with eToro. Of course if your research shows other brokers to be more suitable, there's
nothing stopping you from having demo accounts at different brokers as well, but you'll be able to
practice social trading only on the eToro account.
Currensee, in contrast, is not a forex broker. As a pure social network and trading business,
Currensee depends on its broker referral and social trading service fees, which come only with real
accounts. Its lack of a social trading demo account is a distinct disadvantage for newer traders
because, as we noted earlier, although social trading is easier than doing it yourself, it still demands
skill, and demo accounts help build skill.
However, precisely because it's not a broker, Currensee allows you the flexibility to choose the
broker that best fits you and still engage in social trading. Once you're past the entry-level stage, that
flexibility becomes a huge advantage because different brokers do different things better, be it
uniquely valuable members-only content, better prices, a wider range of assets to trade, a particular
trading platform or language support, or something else. Also, eToro is available only to residents of
certain countries (see: www.etoro.com/trade/etoro-and-brokers.aspx for details), so depending on
where you live, Currensee may be your best social trading option because you're more likely to find a
broker registered where you're a resident.11
As noted earlier, Currensee invests much more in selecting its expert traders, so your chances of
picking a winner with less time and effort are better. While eToro claims between 50 and 100 fulltime professionals among its roughly 400 trade Gurus, Currensee's team of experts is intended to be a
small, elite all-star team, so any trader(s) you pick should be highly qualified.
Not surprisingly, these trader studs pump out some impressive documented returns compared to
other asset classes. See Figure 11.2, which compares their average cumulative monthly performance
versus some other popular asset classes over three- and six-month periods ending October 31, 2011.
FIGURE 11.2 Currensee.com versus Other Asset Classes
Note: TLIP stands for Trade Leaders Investment Program.

Admittedly this isn't a long time period, though it's an auspicious start. Not only has Currensee's
dream team beaten the other asset classes, but it has shown very low correlation to other markets.
That's another huge advantage, because it means you have a better chance of profiting regardless of
market conditions. This is such a big deal that I've dedicated all of Appendix G to explaining it.
So in sum, how do the two social trading leaders compare? If you're new to forex or have very

limited capital, and if you reside where eToro is available, it may well be a better one-stop solution.
It is a brokerage that's as equipped as any to deal with beginners, so you need only deal with it. While
other brokers like FXCM offer more extensive education for their members (via its superlative
content site, DailyFX.com), eToro has some potent advantages for those who are newer or have yet to
find themselves as traders, including:
Numerous features noted earlier to help reduce (though not eliminate) RAMM mistakes. Until
you're solid in these skills, this feature matters—a lot.
Ability to practice social trading via demo accounts—also very, very significant for less
experienced forex traders or investors.
A stronger emphasis on trader education. In particular, it claims to have the largest social
network, which may, in theory, make it easier to find more of the advice and mentoring a
beginner would need. Moreover, you have a chance to be in contact with those you follow.
Guru trader compensation more heavily tied to number of followers than is Currensee's trader
compensation. While that may not be the most precise alignment of compensation and
performance as measured by profits, it should better reward those Gurus who do more marketing
via mentoring. Currensee's traders operate more like traditional fund managers, and are generally
not available for consultation.
Much larger selection of traders to copy. Not only are there hundreds of certified Gurus, with 50
to 100 full-time professionals among them, but also you can choose to copy any one of the many
thousands in the social network. That could be a distinct advantage for those seeking an unusual
trader profile to copy. Yes, that could require a much greater time investment than if operating
with Currensee. However, eToro has extensive screening tools to speed that process of sifting
through thousands of potential experts to copy.
Much lower minimum deposit, only $100, versus about $3,000 for Currensee. Again, however,
I'd warn that $100 seems far too little to have a realistic chance of surviving any kind of
temporary setback, though it's certainly possible for those with good RAMM skills to begin with
less than $3,000. However, even $3,000 is dangerously small when dealing with any kind of
moderate to high leverage or high-risk trader who experiences significant drawdowns in the
normal course of business.
For those who are already successful traders and seek to build at least a part-time career in
trading, but lack the trading style or track record for Currensee's elite club, eToro is the place to
build a track record and reputation among the many successful part-time traders and full-time
professionals there.
If you've the skill, time, and energy to sort through the hundreds of Guru traders to find the top
performers for your particular trading style and risk preferences, you could build a portfolio of
star traders producing stellar results at a significant discount to what you'd pay with Currensee,
possibly with greater diversification due to the greater choice available. With eToro's screening
tools, that shouldn't be any harder than using stock-screening software to screen stocks.
In sum, eToro may be the better bet for traders with less capital, less RAMM skill, and/or those
who are willing to dedicate the time to exploit the educational benefits of the larger social network
and access to input from trade experts. It's also definitely the place for those seeking to build a
following of traders. While only registered Guru traders get paid for having active copiers, anyone
can be copied and build a following and reputation as a good trader. Also, eToro will offer a much

wider range, albeit less selective, group of traders to follow. So if Currensee doesn't have a trader
that fits your needs, eToro's wider selection might.
On the other hand, Currensee is likely to be a better choice for:
Those who can afford the higher minimum required investment (typically between $2,000 and
$4,000) or, better still, $20,000 or more to allow for diversifying into a number of traders.
Finding a top trader, or for building a portfolio of traders faster and with less effort, due to the
smaller size and more selective composition of its Trade Leader team. Heck, for somewhere
between $30,000 and $60,000 you can have a small diversified portfolio comprised of each
Trade Leader.
Flexibility of broker choices, an important point if you're particularly attached to a given broker
and want all your trading done through that account. As good as eToro may be, it can't be all
things to all people. That said, even if eToro allows social trading via other brokerage accounts,
the mere fact that Currensee is not a potentially competing broker may simplify its ability to
connect with additional brokers.
Those who already have enough RAMM skills so that the assistance eToro provides in this
critical area for beginners is not decisive. Currensee's selection process considers risk
management, that's built into its system, although some of the Trade Leaders still experience
significant drawdowns and volatility, so RAMM is more in your own hands.
Those with less time or interest in actively monitoring their trading experts or alternative experts,
given the higher bar set for its Trade Leaders and much more limited selection of them.
Those with less interest in using the site for trader education via exploiting a larger social
network or being able to contact those whom you follow. We suspect wealthier, busier private
investors, as well as institutional investors and money managers, will be more comfortable at
Currensee.

GREAT TOOL, BUT REQUIRES SKILL TO USE
For most aspiring traders, using proven traders should work better, at least until you're on their level.
The available data shown earlier suggests you have a much better chance of profiting, and with less
effort, too.
If optimal returns are your top priority, it's hard to argue against having at least some of your forexdedicated funds allocated to copying experts, even if you're an aspiring star trader yourself. If you're
not set on becoming a successful trader, then your time is probably better spent learning enough about
forex to evaluate market conditions and traders, focusing on becoming adept at choosing the best
traders, building a portfolio of them, and leaving the actual trading to them.
Yes, you'd probably be a better selector of talent if you're active in the social network, doing some
trading and constantly growing your own skills. However, as with everything else, there's a time (and
probably money) price to pay. It's your call if the price is worth it.
That said, even if you're totally sold on the efficiency of social trading, keep in mind that, as with
any other professional services business, while you needn't be a great practitioner to succeed, you do
need to be a good judge of the talent you hire. Also, as we noted earlier, you need to be competent at:
Knowing yourself and what styles and risks you can comfortably handle: That is, are you okay

with seeing your account fall dramatically if you're using a trader with a volatile high-risk
strategy?
Risk and money management: You need to thoroughly understand, given the leverage and risk
data provided for a given expert, how much you could lose at a given time, and you must be sure
to have enough cash on hand to survive that drawdown until the longer-term profitability
statistics kick in.
Assessing whether a trader's style fits current market conditions: Different traders succeed under
different circumstances, so you want to have some idea of why your chosen trader should
succeed in the future. Consulting your colleagues in the social network may help, and so would
diversifying your holdings among multiple traders.
In other words, with social trading, as with managed accounts or automated systems, while you
don't need to be a great trader yourself, you still need enough of the core four skills mentioned in
Chapter 2 to select which delegated or outsourced trading solution to follow, and how long to stay
with a given trader or system.
No matter how good the experts may be, you still have plenty of chances to screw up. So continue to
educate yourself so that you can better exploit social trading through better selection of the right
traders and solid RAMM practices.
In sum, social trading is a potentially extraordinary tool and shortcut, but still requires skill, or
trustworthy, competent advice, to use it properly. By all means consider it, but don't view it as a
substitute for building your own knowledge and skills, at least to the point where you can manage
your talent choices and RAMM.

An Auspicious Start
Given that social trading only began in late 2010, it has shown great promise for reasons mentioned
earlier. However, given that it is still so new, be aware that its track record is very limited.
When you start trading, strongly consider allocating at least a portion of your capital to following
one or more experts, compare your results to theirs over a period of months, and draw your own
conclusions.

Do Your Homework Before You Decide Which to Use
In addition to the obvious wisdom of not relying solely on my information, both sites are constantly
upgrading their services, so it's possible that each may offer new features or copy features from the
other over time. Given how useful social trading services could be, it could be well worth your while
trying both, and even continuing to use both, depending on your needs. Also, by the time you read this,
new players may have emerged that may also be worth a look.

Social Studies: Further Reading on Social Networks and Trading
Forex isn't the only market where you can tap experts via social trading. For more on social trading,
read the seminal work on the topic, TradeStream Your Way to Profits by Zack Miller (John Wiley &
Sons, 2010). For the latest in social trading across different markets, and other new ways to apply
technology to investing, see his superb website, www.tradestreaming.com.

Consider Market Conditions in Choosing Strategy and Risk Tolerance
Just as you'll find that your preferred trading or investing style works best in certain conditions, the
same holds true for anyone, or anything, to which you delegate your trading decisions, be it a
computerized or human trader. They will work better in some markets than in others. That's why we
strive to get a sense of the longer-term trend, the one that's four to five times longer than the time
frame in which you trade, and then make sure our chosen strategy, system, or trader is in harmony
with that trend. That's easier said than done, and why you'll seek out reliable sources of good
analysis to use for guidance.
How much risk you accept for a given trading strategy, be it manual, automated, or professionally
managed, depends on two factors.
1. Your own personal risk tolerance in general: That's a personal decision, no matter what the
time frame, be it five minutes or five years.
2. How well that chosen strategy fits the anticipated conditions: In other words, if the trend is
strong, you may accept more risk with strategies that work well with very clear trends. The
longer you hold positions, the more trustworthy the trends and indicators are and hence the more
important it is to move in harmony with them.
If you believe you're at the early or middle stages of a long-term bull market in risk assets, you
should be biased to more aggressively bullish strategies, whether you implement them manually, via
auto-trading systems, or via professional managers. If you believed the opposite, you'd be looking for
solutions that are likely to do best in bearish conditions.
For the sake of illustration, let's say your time horizon is very long term, say five to 10 years or
more.
How would you know if you're in a long-term bull or bear market? Study one or more of the risk
appetite barometers we introduced in Chapter 6; this is what they're for. For example, look at some
long-term charts of 10 years or more of some major market stock indexes like the S&P 500. (See
Figures 11.3 and 11.4.)
FIGURE 11.3 S&P 500 Monthly Chart, December 1999 to September 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

FIGURE 11.4 S&P 500, 1950 to November 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Some key points to note:
We have a bearish double top as discussed in Chapter 4 in the section on Western chart patterns.
A valid double top pattern needs to be preceded by a long uptrend.
Figure 11.4 of the S&P 500 dating back to 1950 shows that we do indeed have a prior uptrend
and also shows the 60-plus-year perspective to demonstrate how significant this double top is,
the first decade-long topping pattern since the 1970s.
In Figure 11.3 note the double top formed in 2000 and 2007 (A and B) with the lower high (C) in
May 2011 that confirmed the double top.
Additional confirmation of the longer-term bear market in risk assets that began in the summer of
2007 includes a close below the 200-month exponential moving average (EMA) as well as all
