
Figure 10.3 Comparing Two Coupons with Different Prices

c10.indd 211

11/2/07 12:45:58 PM

212

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 10.4 Lower Strike Calls Cost More Than Higher Strike Price Calls

only difference is that the coupon on the left allows you to buy the
pizza for $3 less than the one on the right.
I’m sure you would select the coupon on the left because it has
more intrinsic value, and the same thing occurs in the option markets. Traders see the value in paying less money for the same number
of shares just like you saw value in picking up the coupon on the
left, so as a result of this added value, traders will pay more money
for this added value through an auction market. Look once again at
the option chain and you will see that lower price strike prices on the
call options are always priced higher than the higher strike prices
(Figure 10.4).
By now, you are probably asking yourself why option traders
would choose one call over another. Just remember that this chapter
is just glancing over some basic option concepts, and to get into
the core of option trading, we will have to write another book because
there is that much information to cover. However, wait a few more
pages and we will give you an outline of some of our favorite option
strategies.
Time Is Money

In Figure 10.5 you will see that the January 2009 calls are more
expensive than the January 2008 calls seen in Figure 10.4. For example, the January 09 $85 calls are offered at $17.90, while the January
08 $85 calls are offered at $13.20. Why do the January 09 calls cost
$4.70 more? Well, that’s because the January 09 calls will expire a
year later, giving the options more time to grow and increase in
value. Since all of the other factors between these two options are the
same, option traders are only bidding up the value of the additional
time. However, why $4.70 more? One of the reasons has to do with
interest rates. Remember, you are controlling 100 shares of a $94

c10.indd 212

11/2/07 12:45:58 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

213

Figure 10.5 More Time Means More Premium

dollar stock for a fraction of the share price. So the cost to carry this
position is much less than if you were to buy the shares outright.
For example: Owning 100 shares of a $94 stock will cost you
$9,400 to carry this position for a year. Buying one call for $17.90 will
cost you $1,790 ($17.09 ⫻ 100 shares per option contract ⫽ $1,790),
which is a difference of $7,610. This money could be used to control
more shares in another stock or could go to work in another option
position. The point here is that there’s value in your being able to
control a stock such as IBM for a fraction of the cost. This, among
other variables, is why we see the difference in price from one option
month to the next.
If You Buy a Call, You Are Not Required to Buy the Stock

It’s important for you to understand that if you buy call options, you
don’t have to buy the stock or take delivery of the stock. You can buy
and sell options in the open market just like you would buy and sell
shares in the underlying stock. Even though owning the call allows you
to buy stock at a certain price, most traders never exercise this right.
According to the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE):
• Approximately 10 percent of options are exercised, which means the
buyers of these options decided to go ahead and take a stock
position by exercising their options (or using their coupon to
collect their pizza).
• Fifty to sixty percent of options positions are closed before expiration,
which is what we are referring to when we say you don’t have

c10.indd 213

11/2/07 12:45:59 PM

214

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

to buy the stock if you own calls. You can trade out of them
before they expire.
• The remaining (approximately 30 to 40 percent) are held to expiry.
This group includes those who are holding options that expire
worthless.
Exercise versus Assign

If you decide to use your “coupon,” you must call up your broker and
submit instructions to exercise your options. This is a simple process
whereby you make a call to the institution that holds your trading
account and tell the representative that you would like to use your
call option to purchase stock. Throwing one more pizza analogy, it’s
like your calling up the restaurant telling them that you would like
to have a pizza delivered and that you will be using your coupon.
Instead, you would say “I would like to exercise my IBM January 80
call.” Because the strike price is the price you pay if you exercise your
option, it is also referred to as the exercise price. So if you hear the
words strike price or exercise price they mean exactly the same thing.
Once you’ve submitted your exercise instructions, you will receive
100 shares of stock in your account three business days later. This
means that 100 shares of stock will be delivered for every call option
held in your account. When the stock is delivered, a buy transaction
will be entered, showing that you bought X number of shares at the
strike price. In other words, if you are exercising one January $80
call, you will see a debit of $8,000 in your account. This represents
1 contract times 100 shares times $80 (strike price), which equals
$8,000; at the same time, you will see 100 shares of IBM deposited to
your account.
Now that you know how the person who owns the call option gets
his shares of stock, you should know what happens to the person who
has sold the call option contract. Remember that the person who has
sold the option has the obligation to make the trade. In the case of
the call option, the seller, also known as the writer, is now obligated
to deliver the stock to your account. Once you have submitted your
exercise instructions to your broker, an assignment notice goes out
to the seller of the option. The short position holder or writer is said to
be assigned on the call. Just to repeat what has already been said, the
person who is long, or who owns the call, has a right to buy stock by
exercising the option. On the other side of that, the person who is

c10.indd 214

11/2/07 12:45:59 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

215

short the call has not rights but an obligation to deliver the shares to
the owner of the option contract.
Intrinsic Value Plus Time Value Equals Total Premium

We discussed earlier in our IBM example about the immediate benefit of the January $80 call when the stock was trading $94.22. If you
were to exercise this call, you would have been able to immediately
take a profit of $14.22. This profit is known as intrinsic value. Another
way to describe an option contract that carries intrinsic value is to
say that this option is in-the-money. In-the-money calls are options that
have strike prices below the price at which the stock is trading. In
Figure 10.6 you will see how the in-the-money options are listed on
our option chain.
If you look at any of the in-the-money options highlighted in
Figure 10.6, you will see that the ask price for each of these options are
greater than the intrinsic value of each option. The January $80 call
has intrinsic value of $14.22 yet is it offered at $17.30, the January $85
call has intrinsic value of $9.22 while offered at $13.22, and, finally, the
January $90 call being in-the-money by $4.22 is offered at $9.50. This
is because each option carries with it a time component. If today were
options expiration day, the time value in each option would be zero
and the options would be trading very close to intrinsic value. Because
there is time left until expiration day, the options in our option chain
will reflect this time value in the price of the option. If there is no
intrinsic value in the option and there is still time left before the
option expires, then the only value posted on the option screen will
be reflecting time value alone. Options that have no intrinsic value are
defined as being out-of-the-money. In Figure 10.7 you will see examples
of calls that are showing premiums which only reflect time value.

Figure 10.6 In-the-Money Calls

c10.indd 215

11/2/07 12:45:59 PM

216

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 10.7 Out-of-the-Money Options Include Only Time Value in the
Premium

Time Premium Decays over Time

It is extremely important to know that this time value will decay on
every option contract each and every day as we approach expiration
day. There are some people who refuse to use options because of the
fact that an option’s price deteriorates over time. If you are one of
those people, you are missing out on a very big piece of the equation.
Your car loses value over time, doesn’t it? The computer you use to
trade with loses value. The fruits and vegetables that you eat deteriorate over time, too, yet these things still add value to your everyday
life. Once you understand how to use options properly with regard to
time decay, you will then see a whole new world of opportunity open
up for you. So it really doesn’t make sense to say that it’s not worthwhile to invest in a decaying asset. You just have to make sure you are
careful when you use them.
One of the biggest mistakes people make when first trading
options is that they tend to buy the cheapest premiums on the board,
thinking these are the best value options. Well, if this is something
that you are considering, understand that these are the options that
have no intrinsic value and the price you pay for these options is pure
time value. Therefore, when you decide to buy such cheap options,
you should know that you can’t hold on to these for very long; otherwise, they will decay on you as quickly as a bunch of bananas sitting in
a fruit bowl. Put them to use or you will wind up throwing them in the
garbage. If you think about it, most assets that you buy depreciate over
time. If you have ever owned a business where you had to buy equipment to run that business, you know that you have to get a return on
that investment that is greater than the rate of depreciation. This is
the same for options.

c10.indd 216

11/2/07 12:46:00 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

217

Put Options
Now that we have covered some basic ideas of call options, we will
now be able to move on the other option contracts we call puts.
A put is a contract that gives the owner the right, but not an obligation, to sell a specified amount of stock at a set price (strike price)
within a specified time. The general public usually finds it more difficult to understand the ideas behind put options, but, fortunately
for you, most of the principles you’ve learned about the calls also
hold true for puts. Things like strike price, expiration dates, and
time decay are all the same, with one exception—puts work in the
opposite direction. Maybe this is why the public is challenged in this
area. They have to force themselves to think backwards. So in order
to make this easier, let just say that put contracts are the insurance
policies for the stock market.
Puts work very much like automobile insurance. With an auto
policy, you pay a premium to the insurance company to cover your
car for a fixed amount over a certain period of time. Most people
buy car insurance from one calendar year to the next, and what you
are doing is transferring risk from you to the insurance company.
If you are a safe driver and you don’t wreck your car, all you will
have lost is the premium you paid for the policy. However, if you do
wind up getting in an accident, your insurance company pays you an
amount equal to what the value of the policy is. So, in a sense, you
are a buyer of an automobile put, and the underlying asset that’s
covered is your car. Also, like an owner of a put you have to right to
collect on your policy should you have a need to. You don’t have an
obligation to call up the insurance company but I’m sure you will
anyway should you wreck your car. In the world of stock options you
can look at it this way; should you own stock, and then buy a put
on that stock, you are protected in the event you get into a “stock
wreck” as a result of “market crash” (yes, pun intended).
Here is an example: You own IBM at $94 and you decide to buy a
put with a strike price of $90; this guarantees that you will be able to
sell your stock at $90 for as long as your put is in force, even if IBM
goes to zero. If IBM goes to zero, you are still going to lose money,
but it is not going to be a catastrophic loss. You own IBM at $94 and
you will get to sell it at $90, therefore losing $4; plus, you will lose
what you paid for the option. Well, isn’t that just like automobile
insurance? You might be driving around in a nice Mercedes that cost

c10.indd 217

11/2/07 12:46:00 PM

218

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 10.8 Put Premium Increases with Strike Price

you $94,000 but your insurance policy might pay out only $90,000
for the car, and on top of that you have to include what you paid for
the insurance policy to begin with. Yes, you will have lost $4,000, but
at least it wasn’t a catastrophic loss. You can always buy more coverage next time so you don’t lose on any other wrecks you might get
into, but what would be the trade-off for a larger insurance policy?
Yes, you would have to pay a higher premium to the insurance company. The same thing applies to put options. If you owned IBM at
$94 per share and wanted to be guaranteed that you could sell those
shares for $100 per share, you could do that. You would just have to
pay a higher premium for the extra intrinsic value. The more coverage you want, the more money you have to lay out.
Take a look at Figure 10.8 and you will see the puts listed in the
option chain. The strike price represents the locked-in sale price for
the owner of the puts. See how the premium in the ask column goes
up as the strike prices go up.
The cost of a put, like the call, has basically two parts to the premium.
First is the intrinsic value, and second is the time value. The intrinsic
value is what you would make as a profit should you exercise your option
and collect on your policy. Anything left over from that is the time value,
which, as discussed before, decays over time. This is the part that we like
because, as you will see in the next chapter, this time premium actually
works in our favor in a time premium collection strategy. Knowing how
to buy an option is just one small piece of a much larger picture because
if you understand how insurance policies work, you will know that
the insurance companies make more money off of the policies they
issue than the policyholders do when collecting on their claims.
Obligations versus Rights for Puts

Selling puts places you in an obligation agreement that binds you
to buy stock whenever the put owner wants to sell to you. In other

c10.indd 218

11/2/07 12:46:00 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

219

words, you become the insurance company for the policyholder. This
is an important point because if the stock drops in price, you will still
have to buy the stock even if the stock goes to zero. Therefore, there
is risk to you, the put seller. On the other hand, should the stock go
up in price and not close below the strike price on expiration day,
you still get to keep the premium that you collected when you first
sold the put. We will be discussing some of the risks in selling options
in the next chapter, so stay tuned for that.
The Next Step

As we said earlier in this chapter, it’s going to take time for you to fully
understand the power of options and what they can do for you as a
trader. There is a glossary of terms that you will find at the back of this
book. Be sure to review these terms in order to become more familiar
with the ideas behind these fantastic tools. Once you have memorized
the definitions, it will be easier for you to pick up more educational
material that will help you fine-tune your trading skills. With a little
time and effort, your world will change as a result of your learning how
to trade the option markets.
We will continue our introduction to options in the next chapter,
where we start looking at how we can use them. Once we understand
the basic definitions and concepts, we can start exploring which strategies to apply. Will we become hedgers or speculators? Should we
collect premium or buy it? Do we use the coupon or the insurance?
The world of trading really starts to open up when you realize that
there is much more available to you than “ Buy low and sell high.”

c10.indd 219

11/2/07 12:46:01 PM

c10.indd 220

11/2/07 12:46:01 PM

11

C H A P T E R

Essential Options, Part 2
K N OWIN G YO U R STR ATEGIES

w

e have often said that learning option strategy is like learning
a language. If you have ever attempted to speak a foreign language,
you will know it starts off with one word at a time, a sentence at
a time, then eventually you will learn how to speak in paragraphs.
Before you know it, you will be able to have conversations with others
who speak the language. With the exception of a few gifted individuals who have a knack for learning languages, most people will be
able to become fluent in a few years, that is, of course, if the student
submerges himself in the culture in which the language is spoken.
Chapter 10 took you through some terms and concepts that will help
you get started in the language option traders use most. This chapter
will take you through some strategies that will help you maximize
your profits. As with other trading strategies, it is always important to
understand not only how the strategies work but also how to defend
yourself in the event the market moves against you and the strategies
do not work out as planned.
Before we get to the heart of our discussion regarding strategies,
we will need to cover a few more terms that will help you get a better understanding of this new language. You will often hear option
traders refer to option contracts as being in-the-money, at-the-money,
and/or out-of-the-money. These are terms that are used to describe an
option’s “moneyness.” An in-the-money option is one that has intrinsic value or, as discussed in Chapter 10, a call option is in-the-money
221

c11.indd 221

11/2/07 12:46:40 PM

222

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

when the option’s strike price is below the price of the underlying
security. Seasoned option traders will be able to quickly determine
whether an option is in, at, or out of the money but for the beginner
it will take some focus and practice before one is completely fluent.
Figure 11.1 will help keep things easy for you. Just remember that
an option will either have intrinsic value or not. So when expiration
day comes along the option will be worth the intrinsic value or it will
be worthless. Call options that have intrinsic value will be ones with
strike prices below the price of the underlying stock. Options that
have strike prices greater than or equal to the price of the underlying stock will have no intrinsic value attached. Below are some simple
formulas that will help you with these definitions. You can copy this
chart and put in a place near your computer so you can refer to it
when needed.
Intrinsic value is just one of the parts that influence the price you
might pay for an option. With intrinsic value options also carry with
them premium known as time value. In general, in-the-money options will
have a small time premium attach to them along with out-of-the money
options. At-the-money options have the greatest amount of time premium
associated with their strikes and over time, as you become more familiar
with how time value works, you will see how time value can work either
for or against you depending on what kind of option strategy you are
using. Knowing how to quickly calculate the time value of an option will
give you an advantage in being able to select the right option strategy for
your portfolio.
One of the most important things you should know about time
value is that time value decays from the premium of the option as you
get closer to the expiration day for that particular option contract.
If you are buying an option contract, whether it is a call or a put,

Figure 11.1 Call Options Intrinsic Value Chart

c11.indd 222

11/2/07 12:46:40 PM

Essential Options, Part 2

223

you need the stock to move in the direction that favors your option
position otherwise you will lose money if the stock sits in a sideways
trading range. One of the biggest mistakes novice option traders
make when trading options is they have a tendency to reach for the
cheapest options on the board thinking that these are the best valued options. In the world of options you should remember that you
get what you pay for. If you are thinking about buying cheap options,
then chances are you will wind up getting cheap performance. So if
you are buying the front-month options, that are out-of-the-money,
understand that the only thing left in the price of these options is
time value.
This is why the front-month options cost so much less than the
long-term options we call LEAPS. LEAPS is an acronym for long-term
equity anticipation security. With more time until expiration, LEAPS
have more life in them as compared to the front-month options. In
turn, this gives the owner of the LEAPS more time in the market,
which, in turn, gives them a greater chance to profit. The trade of
for this luxury of time is simple: The more time you want to play in
the market, the more premium you will have to pay. To help you with
this idea, just think of an insurance policy—the longer the term, the
higher the premium.

On Expiration Day, the Option Must Be Worth
at Least Intrinsic Value
Many people hear that all options expire worthless at expiration so
let’s put an end to this idea by saying this is definitely not true. It is
only the time value of and option that becomes worthless. If there
is any intrinsic value in the option it stays with that option.
For example, assume you own an option and today is expiration
day for that option. In your position you hold a call with a strike
price of $40 and the stock closes on expiration Friday at $45 per
share.
You own one $40 call which gives you the right to buy 100 shares
of the stock at $40 per share. If the stock closes that day at $45 per
share that option is worth at least $500 at the close of the market
on options expiration Friday. So the option is said to have $5 of
intrinsic value.
You can also refer to the pizza coupon in Chapter 10 and see
that if you had a pizza coupon that allowed you to buy a pizza for
