
square, the chance of success is actually 47.5 percent, but because the casino has the edge in terms of
the green squares. The house has the opposite side of the bet, which is a 52.5 percent chance of
achieving its goal of taking the player's money. Stated differently, the player wins only if the roulette
wheel ends in a red square (47.5 percent chance), but the house keeps the entire bet if the wheel ends
in a black square (47.5 percent chance, which is equal to the player) or a green square (5.0 percent
chance, which represents the casino's advantage or edge).
We can speak in terms of outcomes on the next spin of the wheel, which gives the player a 47.5
percent chance of success if the bet is on either a red or black outcome, and in terms of expectancy, or
edge over time. In other words, if the gambler bet red 100 times in a row in a single night, the
gambler would lose slightly more money than the gambler expects to keep. Why? The gambler does
not have the edge over the casino.
The pay-out from the casino on a correctly guessed color outcome is one to one, which means if you
bet $100.00 on red and the ball ends in a red numbered square, then the casino would pay you
$100.00. Each time you lose, you lose your initial bet of $100.00—it goes to the casino. If after 10
spins of the wheel, red came up five times and black came up five times, the player would have
gained $500.00 but also lost $500.00, right back at the start. That's no good!
Let us now assume that the player bets on red 100 times in a row and the outcomes were exactly in
line with the percentages from the odds and probabilities. Of the 100 times, 47 spins will come up
red (win) 47 spins will come up black (loss) and five times will come up green (loss). We'll let the
remaining spin be a loss. The gambler will have won 47 times, resulting in a gain of $4,700.00, but
lost 53 times, losing $5,300.00. The gambler would end the night down $600.00, or stated differently,
because the casino had the edge due to the two green squares, the casino would have profited $600.00
from the efforts of the gambler.
This is how you must approach edge in the market: you must have the edge or advantage in your
favor over time. You increase your edge by locating, entering, managing, and then exiting highprobability trading opportunities, while controlling your risk on each trade. This chapter will teach
you to assess the edge not just on individual trades, as the gambler did when betting on a single
outcome of red on the casino wheel (47.5 percent), but over time as you take many, many trades each
month, quarter, and year.
You are probably aware that trading on hot tips is not an effective long-term trading strategy. You
must be able to do the work yourself, find opportunities, assess the probabilities, determine if an edge
is present, and then execute the trade. Once in a trade, you must not let your emotions guide your
decision to exit early, either if the trade ticks slightly against you but not yet to your stop-loss price,
or ticks up to a profit but not yet to your expected target based on your analysis. Base your trading
decisions on the facts from the charts as you understand them at the time. Monitor open positions for
any unexpected developments that warrant an exit earlier than expected. Try to anticipate the
outcomes as much as possible in advance.
Let's now take a moment to understand what edge means in the context of short-term trading
strategies.

Are Markets Random or Predictable?
One of the most common questions you will be asked by the average person when you announce that
you are a trader is the classic question “Markets are totally random—how then do you make money?”

Do you know the answer to that question? Are markets totally random?
On one hand, the academic argument known as the Random Walk Theory states that markets are 100
percent random and that no individual or fund can consistently beat the market over time. In other
words, it is impossible to gain an edge over the market because it is impossible to assess the odds of
a purely random system. On the other hand, you have the argument that markets are totally predictable
from advanced methods of discerning the future, and that charts, fundamentals, or quantitative
strategies can indeed accurately predict the future, which allows those with the programs, tools, or
techniques to achieve superior returns year over year.
The truth of the matter rests somewhere in the middle of these conflicting points of view. Markets
do have repeating patterns and individuals or funds do consistently beat the market year over year, but
it's not because these individuals have special insights into the future moves in the market. On the
contrary, most successful short-term traders are masters of edge, probability, risk-management, and
emotion. They often admit that they are uncertain of the next move in the market, but they know how
they will be positioned if certain scenarios occur.
Think back to the roulette wheel example. While every single spin is totally random, the House has
the edge by the configuration of the colored squares on the board, namely the two green squares.
While an individual spin is random with fixed probabilities, the system and method of taking money
steadily from the gambler each night is not random. So it is in the market, and your goal is to assess
the probability and trade with the larger picture of edge as it plays out on the chart.
For example, if a trader sees a price break through a key overhead resistance level after a
consolidation period, that trader will buy shares as close to the breakout as possible and place a stoploss order just under the resistance area. The trader is not completely certain as to whether the price
will continue to rise in a range expansion breakout move as expected, but if price does continue to
rally, then by the time the trader exits the position after price forms a new trading range at a higher
level, the trader books a nice profit from the move. The trader appropriately managed the position
such that the profitable exit was many multiples larger than the initial stop-loss price in the event the
range breakout failed and price fell back under the overhead resistance level.
If we assume that the trader captured a $10.00 move but placed a stop-loss order $2.00 lower than
the entry, then the profit was five times the risk in the position. If the trader takes 10 similar setups
over the course of a year and half of these setups fail but half succeed, the trader would end the year
with a nice profit, despite the fact that half of the trades failed. The five trades that succeeded
generated a net $50.00 per share and then we would subtract the $10.00 per share from the five trades
that failed, costing $2.00 each, which leaves the annual profit at a $40.00-per-share net gain. At no
time was the trader certain that an individual trade would meet its upside target, or would stop with a
loss. Instead, the trader knew that over time, the edge would lead to profits over time, assuming there
was no deviation from the strategy.
This trader would still profit even if 70 percent of the trades taken that year failed with such a
superior edge. How is that possible? The three successful trades gave a profit of $30.00 per share,
but when we subtract the $14.00 from seven losing trades at $2.00 each, we arrive at a net profit for
the year of $16.00 per share. In essence, a breakout strategy trader can fail to predict the future seven
times out of 10, but still make money on the year.
This is the type of thinking you must adopt as a trader. Markets are neither totally random nor
absolutely predictable, but if you use strategies based on foundation price principles and carefully
assess your edge in each trade, then you have a much higher chance of success than if you do not.

Defining Edge
Most new traders focus on being right, or correctly forecasting the next swing in price and thus
dedicate all their efforts to achieving winning trades. It is normal to want to be right, and is frustrating
to analyze a particular trade setup and then lose money on a typical stop-loss order. It thus makes
sense that traders are drawn to strategies or stock market courses which promise accuracy rates
greater than 90 percent (some even promise zero losing trades).
If we think back to our analogy about the casino and the roulette wheel and our discussion on the
red and black squares, the casino has the edge 52.5 percent of the time, which means that 47.5 percent
of the time the casino will lose money to the gambler. However, the edge will play out not necessarily
on the next immediate spin of the wheel, but over the next 100, 1,000, and 10,000 spins of the wheel
where money will flow over time from the gambler to the casino. This is the way you should develop
your strategies and also cope with an individual losing trade.
When discussing the edge of a particular trade setup in the market, traders seek to maximize the two
main types of edge: accuracy and monetary.

Accuracy Edge
The accuracy edge refers to a greater than 50 percent chance of obtaining a winning outcome from a
trade setup. In addition to assessing the probabilities of a winning trade, the accuracy edge describes
the win rate or win percentage over a series of trades.

ACCURACY EDGE
Greater than 50 percent probability of obtaining a profitable outcome to a trade, which comes from time-tested price
principles, setups, or strategies.

Traders use the 50 percent threshold as a baseline to assess their win rate, because a 50 percent
accuracy rate indicates results that would be expected by picking entries and exits randomly. A win
rate less than 50 percent indicates a negative edge while a win rate above 50 percent represents a
positive edge. In the roulette wheel example, the House holds the accuracy edge over the gambler—
52.5 percent to 47.5 percent.
In assessing the probability of success of any given trade, a trader must study the price chart,
observe any key price in play, assess the volatility environment, measure the dominant trend,
determine whether a price pattern exists, and weigh the balance of power between buyers and sellers.
Through studying a particular price chart, traders assess the probability for the next likely swing in
price and determine whether or not the odds favor participating in the anticipated move.
While new traders want a very high win rate, they soon discover that accuracy in forecasting the
future price swings is not the only variable in trading success, nor is it even possible or necessary to
know with absolute certainty where the market is heading next.
In fact, many professional traders post win rates less than 50 percent, which means they lose money
on a larger number of trades than they win. How then can a trader make money with an accuracy rate
less than 50 percent? They understand the importance of edge over time and how the accuracy edge is
just one component in their trading plan.

Monetary Edge
Professionals often argue that the more important edge is the monetary edge, which refers specifically
to the reward-to-risk relationship in dollar or point terms of a setup. Because so many trading books
stress that traders should refuse to take a trade setup that has less than a three-to-one reward-to-risk
relationship, many traders demand a minimum of a three to one reward-to-risk relationship before
they will commit money to a trade setup, even if the setup has a high probability of success. Other
traders will not enter a position unless they can calculate a five-to-one reward-to-risk relationship
between the profit target and the stop-loss prices. In the roulette example, neither the House nor the
gambler claimed the monetary edge, as the risk was a fixed $1.00 to a potential reward of $1.00, or
one-to-one reward to risk relationship.
If a trader seeks to profit $5.00 for every $1.00 at risk each time he puts on a trade, then the trader
will make money over time due to the monetary edge as long as the accuracy rate remains above 20
percent. That means the trader can lose on eight trades and profit on two trades and still make money.
Of course, the trader would make more money with a higher win rate, but this extreme example
underscores the point. The eight trades that result in $1.00 stop-loss orders total a loss of $8.00, but
the two $5.00 winning trades combine for a profit of $10.00. When you subtract the loss of $8.00
from the gain of $10.00, you find that the trader profited $2.00 from the 10 trades—this is the trader's
mathematical advantage, or monetary edge, in trading performance.
Thus, traders calculate edge by combining the accuracy edge—their win rate—with the monetary
edge—the reward-to-risk relationship. As you develop your strategies, seek strategies that favorably
combine the accuracy and monetary edge into a duality of edge that tips the odds of success and profit
in your favor. Know the tradeoffs that exist in certain strategies in terms of accuracy and monetary
edge.

MONETARY EDGE
The reward-to-risk relationship in a trade; the profit target is larger than the risk in a trade as defined by a stop-loss price.

For example, most generic breakout trading strategies post lower win rates than other strategies, but
also have higher reward-to-risk relationships. Long-term trend-following strategies often have a
higher monetary edge at the expense of the accuracy edge, which is why new traders cannot endure the
numerous losses trend following strategies generate in search of the small handful of trades that
generate the majority of profits for a year.
Retracement trading strategies in the context of a dominant trend often have higher accuracy rates,
but the smaller targets degrade the monetary edge. In terms of testing out different strategies, you will
often find that there is an unfortunate tradeoff between the two types of edge, such that to obtain a
larger monetary edge (larger profit target relative to the stop-loss price), one often sacrifices a
proportion of the accuracy edge.
Sometimes higher accuracy strategies can be insidious to new traders because a string of small
winning trades can lure the trader into a sense of invincibility, greed, and overconfidence. After five
winning trades in a row, the trader will refuse to take a stop-loss price on the sixth trade, and that one
trade will grow into a very large losing trade that erases the profits obtained on the prior five trades
and more. Emotions override edge, and our emotions will always be part of discretionary trading
plans.
Many mean reversion strategies fall in this category. Look back to Chapter 3 on the Price

Alternation Principle, specifically when price remains within the boundaries of a horizontal
resistance line and lower support line. Traders who enjoy playing positions between this range, for
example, buying shares as price touches support and then selling those shares as price rises to touch
overhead resistance, continue to make money as long as the price remains within the boundaries of
this well-established range.
However, trading ranges cannot last forever, and when price breaks out of the trading range, a
trader can become trapped on the wrong side of a suddenly violent and unexpected range breakout
move. In this way, a trader obtains numerous small profits from small-target trades, but then loses
those profits and more from a single loss by refusing to take a stop-loss price when the market breaks
out of the trading range, or if price gaps strongly outside of the range unexpectedly. In that single
event, the trader may suffer a large loss on a single trade, where the loss is greater than the smaller
profits from the range-trading trades.

Beyond Accuracy and Monetary Edge
Before you put on a trade, quiz yourself on the specific edge in the trade. Do you know the expected
probability for the trade? Is your trade based on a foundation price principle such as trend continuity
(buying pullbacks to support in a rising uptrend), a momentum principle (buying after an impulse, or
shorting after a lengthy negative momentum divergence), or a price alternation principle (buying a
breakout up from a lengthy trading range)? How much confluence do you see in the trade? Do you
observe a price rally that is extended beyond the rising 20-period moving average into the upper
Bollinger Band that has formed a bearish engulfing candle as a negative momentum divergence
formed? These questions help you assess the probability of a successful outcome for the trade setup
you are about to take.
If you have determined that the odds favor a successful outcome for your trade, then your next goal
is to assess the reward-to-risk relationship. Let's take the prior example of the overextended price
swing into the upper Bollinger Band with a bearish engulfing candle on a negative momentum
divergence. Generally, traders enter as price breaks under the low of the bearish engulfing candle and
then place a stop above the candle high or the most recent swing high. From your entry, you assess
where your expected price target exists, which is perhaps the rising 20-period moving average. This
is a classic mean reversion trade to target a rising short-term average in the context of a prevailing
uptrend.
If your price target is at least two times larger than your stop-loss, then you have assessed a setup
that combines the accuracy (probability) and monetary (reward/risk) edge. You would want to take
the setup and not concern yourself with the outcome of this individual trade, particularly if you are
stopped out. Judge yourself by your ability to locate high-probability setups based on structure and
then adhere to your price target and stop-loss price. Do not micromanage the trade or let your
emotions affect your decision of the objective probabilities in the setup. If you only take discretionary
setups that combine the accuracy and monetary edge, you will greatly enhance your chance for success
as a developing trader.
Mark Douglas wrote about the importance of edge and probability in his classic text Trading in the
Zone. In discussing trade outcomes and edge, Douglas compared trade outcomes to purely random
events such as flipping a coin. If you bet money on a coin toss but the coin lands on tails when you bet
heads, you completely understand that the outcome was random and you do not get upset with

yourself. Contrast this with a trader who did his homework and just got stopped out of a trade. The
trader then becomes frustrated, upset, or depressed due to the loss, because the trader felt that the next
swing in the market could be perfectly predicted.
When the stop-loss execution indicates that the market was not predicted correctly, the trader feels
defeated and personally assaulted by the market. Psychologically wounded, the trader is either more
likely to skip the next high-probability, low-risk trade setup and thus miss opportunity, or engage in
revenge trading and jump into the next quasi-setup seen, which usually is a low-probability, high-risk
setup. Whatever psychological error the trader is prone to make, what fails is the understanding that
ability had nothing to do with the outcome of a single trade.
What began as a high-probability setup that resulted in a random loss devolves into a downward
spiral of revenge trading and missed opportunities. If you lose money on a well-researched highprobability, low-risk opportunity, view it as just a roll of the dice, flip of the coin, spin of the wheel,
or deal of the cards. Do not let the experience derail you from finding similar setups in the near future.
Trading is a game of probabilities, not certainties.
While you must assess the accuracy and monetary edge of each trade setup you take, you should also
assess your performance over time in terms of your larger accuracy and monetary edge. Specifically,
calculate your weekly or monthly win rate and large scale reward-to-risk ratio. This type of
discussion takes you into the world of expectancy, which further explains the importance of the
duality of edge in developing your trading strategy.

EDGING OUT YOUR EXPECTANCY
Simply stated, the expectancy formula combines your accuracy edge and monetary edge over time and
then calculates your expectancy per trade of your strategy or performance. The expectancy formula is
a formal representation of the importance of both your win rate and your reward-to-risk relationship.
In an ideal world, both factors would be as high as possible, but expectancy reminds us that the
interaction of these two components is more important than either in isolation.
To calculate your personal trading expectancy, you need to have a track record of at least 30 closed
positions, though more is preferred. Using Excel or any trading journal program, find your average
winning trade and then your average losing trade both in dollar terms. These figures should be readily
available from the distribution of trades. Then, calculate your percentage of winning and losing
trades. These are the four components you will need to assess your expectancy for your trading
performance.
First, multiply your average winning trade by your percentage of winning trades. Then, multiply
your average losing trade by your percentage of losing trades. Subtract the losing trades number from
your winning trades number to arrive at your expectancy per trade.

EXPECTANCY
To calculate the expectancy of your strategy, you must calculate your average winning trade, average losing trade, and
your win rate as a trader. With these variables, insert the information into the following formula:

For example, a retracement-style swing trader named Joe calculated that his average winning trade

was $500.00 and he had a win rate of 60 percent. He then found that his average losing trade was
$300.00 and of course he had a loss rate of 40 percent. He calculated that $500.00 times 0.60 was
$300.00 and that $300.00 times 0.40 was $120.00. He then subtracted $120.00 from $300.00 to
arrive at a final number of $180.00, which was his expectancy. Using these statistics, he can expect to
make $180.00 on every trade. That of course doesn't mean he makes exactly $180.00 per trade, but
that the components of accuracy and monetary edge combine to produce the $180.00 positive
expectancy figure per trade. Notice that Joe possesses a duality of accuracy and monetary edge, which
is the best situation.
Think of this example another way. Out of 10 trades, six of which were winners and four of which
were losers, Joe made $3,000.00 from his winning trades ($500.00 × 6) and lost a total of $1,200.00
($300.00 × 4) from his losing trades. If we subtract his losses of $1,200.00 from his profits of
$3,000.00, we arrive at $1,800.00. In this example, Joe took 10 trades, so if we divide $1,800.00 by
the number of trades he took, we arrive at his expectancy per trade of $180.00, as calculated above.
Expectancy literally tells you how much money you can expect to make on each of your trades, if
you continue to take similar setups and opportunities as you did with your prior trades. If a particular
trade deviates too far from your normal distribution, it will affect your expectancy calculation
accordingly.
Let's take a look at an expectancy calculation from breakout trader Jane, who only maintains a
monetary edge instead of an accuracy edge because she focuses specifically on breakout trading
strategies, where her winning trades are much larger than her losing trades, but as a trade-off, she has
a larger number of losing trades due to false breakouts.
Over the last month, Jane's average winning trade was $5,000.00, but she maintained a win rate of
only 30 percent. Her average losing trade was small, only $500.00, and her loss rate was high at 70
percent. Jane calculated her expectancy per trade as $1,150.00 through the following calculation:
