
Melinda Gates Foundation, already the largest charity in the world, in a historic marriage of two fortunes for
the betterment of the world.16 He was requiring that the money be spent as it was given, so that the
foundations could not perpetuate themselves. To cushion the shock of losing the money that would someday
have made their family foundation the largest in the world, Buffett divided the remaining shares, worth about
$6 billion, among his children’s individual foundations, each of which would receive shares worth $1 billion,
and the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, which would receive shares worth $3 billion. None of the
children had ever expected their personal foundations to reach such an enormous size, especially not while he
was alive. At the date of the gift, the shares handed over in the first year’s installment were worth $1.5 billion
to the Gates Foundation, $50 million to each of his children’s foundations, and $150 million to the Susan
Thompson Buffett Foundation. Depending on Berkshire’s stock price, those values could vary. As it turned
out, they would increase. They would increase a lot.17
The man who was, at the time, the second richest person on earth was giving away his money without leaving
a trace of himself behind. He had spent all his life rolling up the snowball as if it were an extension of
himself; yet he would establish no Warren Buffett Foundation, no Buffett hospital wing, no college or
university endowment or building with his name on it. To donate the money without naming something after
himself, without controlling personally how it would be spent—to put the money in the coffers of another
foundation that he had selected for its competence and efficiency, rather than creating a whole new empire
—upended every convention of giving. No major donor had ever done such a thing before. “It was a historic
moment in the field of philanthropy globally,” said Doug Bauer of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors. “It’s
set a bar, a touchstone, for others.”18
That Warren Buffett had done this was both surprising and predictable. An unconventional thinker and
problem-solver, he was making a gesture against philanthropic waste and grandiosity. The Gates Foundation
got its money, but had to spend each installment—and fast. The decision was unusual, highly personal, a form
of teaching by example, and—naturally—enormously attention-getting. Meanwhile, in another sense, this
was a classic Buffett no-lose deal. He had stunned the world by giving away almost all of his money by
earmarking it, yet got to keep most of it until he actually transferred the shares. Nonetheless, in one stroke he
had transformed a lifetime of grasping at money by committing to letting go—and had started to disburse it
by the billions. The boy who would not let his family touch the chifforobe where he kept his hoarded coins
had finally become a man who could entrust his tens of billions to someone else’s hands.
In the announcement speech, Buffett said, “Just over fifty years ago last month, I sat down with seven
people who gave me one hundred and five thousand dollars to manage in a little partnership. And those
people made the judgment that I could do a better job in amassing wealth for them than they could do
themselves.
“Fifty years after that, I sat down and thought about who could do a better job dispensing the wealth than
myself. It’s really quite logical. People don’t often have that second sit-down. They are always saying, Who
should handle my money? and they quite willingly turn their money over to people with a certain expertise.
But they don’t seem to think about doing that very often in the philanthropic world. They pick their old
business cronies or whomever to administer wealth after they’re gone, at a time when they won’t even be
able to observe what’s happening.
“So I got very lucky, because philanthropy is harder than business. You are tackling important problems
that people with intellect and money have tackled in the past and had a tough time solving. So the search
for talent in philanthropy should be even more important than the search for talent in investments, where
the game is not as tough.”
Buffett then spoke of the Ovarian Lottery. “I have been very lucky. I was born in the United States in 1930
and won the lottery the day I was born. I had terrific parents, a good education, and I was wired in a way
that paid off disproportionately in this particular society. If I had been born long ago or in some other
country, my particular wiring would not have paid off the way it has. But in a market system, where capitalallocation wiring is important, it pays off like no other place.

“All along, I’ve felt the money was just claim checks that should go back to society. I am not an enthusiast
for dynastic wealth, particularly when the alternative is six billion people who’ve got much poorer hands in
life than we have, getting a chance to benefit from the money. And my wife agreed with me.
“It was clear that Bill Gates had an outstanding mind with the right goals, focusing intensely with passion
and heart on improving the lot of mankind around the world without any regard to gender, religion, color,
or geography. He was just doing the most good for the most people. So when the time came to make a
decision on where the money would go, it was a simple decision.”
The Gates Foundation followed a basic creed that Buffett shared: “Guided by the belief that every life has
equal value,” it worked to “reduce inequities and improve lives around the world” in the areas of global
health and education. The Gateses saw themselves as “convenors,” who brought together the best minds as
advisers to work on permanent solutions to enormous problems.19
However much Buffett had changed and grown since Susie’s death, he was still very much the same in
certain ways. Allen Greenberg, who ran the Buffett Foundation, found out that the foundation he would be
running would be a $6 billion foundation, not the $45 billion foundation for which he had been preparing, not
from Buffett, but by proxy through Allen’s new boss and ex-wife, Susie Jr. Warren had been unable to bring
himself to confront Greenberg to tell him that all his plans and thinking about how to run the foundation in
the future must be downsized. Susie Jr. had to convince Allen that this was in no way a grade on his
performance. After his initial explosion over the fact that he hadn’t heard the news from the source, he
conceded that he would still be administering one of the world’s ten largest charitable coffers, and peace
ultimately reigned.
All involved had ample reason to behave well. Even though Buffett was giving away a vast sum, the money
would be paid out over some years. And the stock he had not yet earmarked as a gift was estimated as worth
more than $6 billion at the time. He still had plenty to give away.
The effects of Buffett’s announcement were immediate and sizable. Jackie Chan, the Hong Kong actor,
announced that he would give away half his wealth. Li Ka-shing, Asia’s richest man, pledged a third of his
$19 billion to his own charitable foundation. Carlos Slim, the Mexican communications monopolist, ridiculed
Buffett and Gates for their philanthropy but, some months later, did a turnabout and announced that he, too,
would begin giving money away. And the Gateses set up a new division within their foundation simply to
handle people who wanted to make donations to them—such as a seven-year-old girl who sent the Gates
Foundation her life savings of $35.
The newly enriched Gates Foundation was having a tectonic impact on the philanthropic world. Its “all-asset
approach,” which greatly resembled Buffett’s ideas about concentration—and, indeed, his investing style—
focused resources toward a short, carefully selected list of serious problems. That differed markedly from
many other major foundations and community funds, at which a headquarters staff of philanthropoids circled
around a series of supplicants, playing “eeny, meeny, miney, moe” as they doled out fragmentary sums. By
the end of 2006, certain organizations such as the Rockefeller Foundation had begun modifying their policies
to align them more closely with the Gates approach.20
Three thousand letters from needy people poured into Buffett’s office after the Gates announcement, with
more coming every day. They had no insurance and were overwhelmed by medical bills, or they had gotten
injured on the job and their homes were being repossessed. Their children had cataclysmic health problems
that required special care, which prevented them from making enough money to pay their mortgage. Or their
boyfriends had gotten them pregnant, cheated them out of money, tricked them into assuming the boyfriend’s
debt, and then run off without paying child support. They were the losers in the Ovarian Lottery. Warren
forwarded the letters to his sister Doris. Over the past ten years her Sunshine Lady Foundation, funded with
the proceeds from Howard Buffett’s trust, had helped thousands of victims of domestic violence, the severely
disadvantaged, and families in crisis. He enclosed $5 million with the letters to help fund Doris’s work.
She hired a group of women over age fifty to help sort out the letters where “bad luck rather than bad
choices” had played a part, and relatively small amounts of money could give someone a hand up. They often

gave advice to the gamblers and credit-card addicts and people who just didn’t want to work, but they never
bailed out people who had other ways to solve their problems. And Doris never paid for everything. “I don’t
want to be their mommy,” she said. She also made them write thank-you letters. Her type of philanthropy
taught gratitude and self-respect.21
Buffett kept handing out more of his billions. He was already giving $5 million a year to Ted Turner’s
Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), which he considered the most important of the U.S. organizations focused on
dealing with the world’s nuclear threat, and he was willing to give more. Former Senator Sam Nunn, who ran
NTI, had proposed a nuclear-fuel reserve to which countries could turn rather than developing their own
nuclear enrichment programs, thereby reducing the likelihood of nuclear proliferation. Buffett felt that this
idea had considerable merit, and he pledged $50 million as a matching gift if other funds could be raised. He
would make huge amounts of money available to any antinuclear causes that seemed to him able to come up
with realistic solutions to the problem.
Buffett also gave a donation to former President Jimmy Carter for the work of the Carter Center. After
leaving office an unpopular president, Carter had become an example of someone fallen to the ninety-eighth
floor who had looked forward, not back, rising to win the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in global health,
democracy, and human rights. “Would love to have you join us in Ghana on Feb. 6–8, 2007,” Carter wrote
him back warmly after the gift, “to see our guinea worm work.”22 Buffett considered Carter a friend, but
nobody—not Howie, not Big Susie, not even Bill Gates—could have gotten him on a plane to go see a guinea
worm.23
Thus, for a third time he avoided a trip to Africa. Some things did not change. But time moved on, and other
things did change.
Astrid was now Warren’s official companion at events outside Omaha. She remained virtually
unchanged—the same plainspoken, unpretentious person—but her world had expanded at stunning speed.
She now socialized routinely with Bill and Melinda Gates. In the fall of 2005, she and Warren had flown to
Tahiti to attend Bill Gates’s fiftieth-birthday party, which took place on Paul Allen’s sleek blue-and-white
Octopus, one of the world’s largest yachts. A billionaire’s little-boy fantasy that belonged to the world’s
sixth-richest man, the Octopus had a movie theater, a recording studio, two helicopters, a sixty-three-foot
tender, and a small submarine that could sleep eight people for two weeks on the ocean floor. She and
Warren stayed in Paul Allen’s mother’s stateroom, a large suite with a walk-in closet and a library in the
sitting room. “Oh, my God,” says Astrid, “it was unbelievable. I have never experienced and will probably
never experience a time like that again.”
“It beats home” was Warren’s reaction. He returned from the trip talking of the onboard bridge games.24
Two years after Susie’s death, on his seventy-sixth birthday, Warren married Astrid in an unfussy civil
ceremony at Susie Jr.’s house with no guests other than family. Astrid wore a simple turquoise blouse and
white pants, and Warren wore a business suit. Tears welled from her eyes as he placed a huge diamond
solitaire ring on her finger. Afterward, they went to the Bonefish Grill next to Borsheim’s for dinner. Then
they flew out to San Francisco for a wedding party and a traditional wedding cake at Sharon Osberg and
David Smith’s. The Gateses joined them for the celebration.
Warren Buffett, the not-simple man of simple tastes, now had the simple life of the man that he had always
believed himself to be. He had one wife, drove one car, occupied one house that hadn’t been redecorated in
years, ran one business, and spent more and more time with his family.25
***
Buffett always said that trees don’t grow to the sky. But new saplings form.

The question of who would succeed him had long vexed his shareholders.
He sometimes quipped that Berkshire could be run by someone working five hours a week, or by Charlie’s
bust of Ben Franklin, or by a cardboard cutout. He’d also joked about controlling it after his death: “Well, my
backup plan is that I’ve figured out how to manage the company by seance.” No one was fooled by his
banter. On other occasions he was just as likely to tell his listeners: “My psyche is all wrapped up in
Berkshire.” And those who worked for and invested in Berkshire were all wrapped up in Buffett. He was not
replaceable. And what would happen to all that capital? The question of either a dividend or a huge share
repurchase would arise instantly when he was gone. His successor would have to change some things—for
while parts of the Berkshire model should be preserved, other parts should not. The headquarters staff—
famously minuscule—would probably grow as outsourced functions were reclaimed. Meanwhile, the
presumption continued to be that all of the succession candidates already worked at Berkshire. But that
wasn’t necessarily true. In fact, the board would be obliged to consider outside candidates when the time
came.
Buffett once said that he would be happy if Berkshire was still serving his shareholders thirty years after his
death. That was his design. The elegant machine that he had created was built to last more than a generation
beyond him. Yet to maintain it would be a remarkable accomplishment; he was the soul of that machine, and
without him there would be a vacuum at the center, no matter what. For Buffett was the best there would
ever be at the thing that only he could do perfectly, which was to be himself.
No group of shareholders in history had ever missed their CEO as much as Berkshire’s shareholders would
miss Buffett when he was finally gone. None had ever thought of their CEO as a teacher and a friend the way
Buffett’s shareholders had thought of him. The man who had made billions had touched thousands of people
and had a relationship that felt personal to countless others whom he’d never even met or seen. But oddly
enough, no matter how many fan letters Buffett got or how many autographs he signed, he never fully
grasped how loved and admired he was. He got as excited about every letter and request for an autograph as
though it were the first.
***
In July 2007, the Dow hit a new high of 14,000. Then it began to fall. House prices had already peaked, the
way every great bubble peaks, partly because the Federal Reserve had finally started raising interest rates,
and house prices had been sliding for some time. Unable to refinance, homeowners were defaulting on their
mortgages at historically high rates.
The global margin call began in August. Over a period of eight months, the financial world imploded in a
credit crisis of historic proportions. Not since the Great Depression had such a severe credit seizure occurred.
Not since the Panic of 1907, when old J. P. Morgan himself had personally intervened to orchestrate a
solution to the panic, had such extraordinary informal intervention in financial markets taken place as would
occur in 2008.
The crisis progressed in fits and starts, with weeks and even months of apparent calm followed by
convulsions that left victims scattered like broken shells on a beach. As it turned out, derivatives had indeed
spread risk—banks reported tens of billions in losses; a hospital-management company in Australia lost a
quarter of its investment portfolio; eight Norwegian towns lost millions on supposedly safe mortgages
securities; estimates of total losses ranged from hundreds of billions to as high as $1 trillion from all sources
combined. Like Long-Term Capital, the underlying bets were all made in the wrong direction. They had
assumed a rational “efficient” market in which a decline in prices would be halted by cool-tempered,
calculating buyers.
“They said all these derivatives made the world safer and spread the risk out. But it didn’t spread the risk
in terms of how people reacted to a given stimulus. Now, you could argue that it might be way better to
have that credit with just five banks, who could all work, than to have it with thousands around the globe,

all of whom are going to rush out of it at the same time.”
The Federal Reserve cut interest rates once again, and worked with other central banks to activate other
emergency sources of financing,26 yet the credit crisis continued to spread.
The reluctance to lend began to show signs of contagion. The Dow fell seventeen percent, to 11,740, from its
October high. With each new announcement of a fire sale, bankruptcy, or collapse, the low rumbling panic
grew louder. More people tried to sell assets behind the scenes and found no buyers; more lenders began to
call in loans.
On Thursday, March 13, 2008, a run began, this time on Bear Stearns, the weakest of the investment banks,
as its lenders started refusing to roll over its loans. In a near re-creation of the Salomon crisis seventeen years
earlier, the following day, Friday, Bear nearly collapsed from lack of financing. But this time the Federal
Reserve took the unprecedented step of guaranteeing $30 billion of Bear Stearns debt—the first time the
Federal Reserve had ever bailed out an investment bank. Bear closed at $30 per share on Friday afternoon.
Buffett pondered the situation that evening. Long-Term Capital Management’s bailout had been a dress
rehearsal—on a much smaller scale—for this moment.
“The speed with which fear can spread—nobody has to have an account at Bear Stearns, nobody has to
lend them money. It’s a version of what I went through at Salomon, where you were just inches away all the
time from, in effect, an electronic run on the bank. Banks can’t stand runs. The Federal Reserve hasn’t
bailed out investment banks before, and that was what I was sort of pleading back there in 1991 with
Salomon. If Salomon went, who knows what kind of dominoes would set off. I don’t have good answers to
what the Fed should do. Some parts of the market are pretty close to paralyzed. They don’t want contagion
to spread to what they would regard as otherwise sound institutions; if Bear fails and two minutes later,
people worry that Lehman fails, and two minutes after that they worry that Merrill will fail, and it spreads
from there.”
The rational Buffett tried to unlock the puzzle embedded in the risky choices facing the Federal Reserve. It
had no really good options. Either it allowed a financial meltdown or it took actions that would promote
inflation by adding to downward pressure on the dollar. “It could all end on a dime if they flooded the
system with enough liquidity, but there are consequences to doing that. If dramatic enough, the
consequences would be the immediate expectation of huge inflation. A lot of things would happen that you
might not like. The economy is definitely tanking. It’s not my game, but if I had to bet one way or another
—everybody else says a recession will be short and shallow, but I would say long and deep.
“You absolutely never want to be in a position where tomorrow morning you have to depend on the
kindness of strangers in the financial world. I spent a lot of time thinking about that. I never want to have to
come up with a billion dollars tomorrow morning. Well, a billion I could. But any significant amount.
Because you just cannot be sure of anything. You have to think about things that have never happened
before. You always want to have plenty of money around.”
All weekend the regulators and bankers toiled, much as they had years earlier on Salomon. This time,
however, it was with the almost certain knowledge that the bank’s failure would have catastrophic
consequences to the global financial system. Whether Bear Stearns deserved its fate was not at issue. Just
before the Tokyo markets opened on Sunday, the Federal Reserve announced that it had orchestrated a sale
of Bear to investment bank JP Morgan Chase for a pittance. Buffett had been offered the deal, but thought it
contained too much open-ended risk.
The same day that the Bear bailout was announced, the Federal Reserve, attempting to calm panic and
prevent a run on Lehman Brothers, did indeed begin to flood the system with liquidity: It offered to let the
largest investment banks borrow up to $200 billion at its “discount window,” using mortgage-backed
securities as collateral. Use of the discount window, formerly a privilege restricted to commercial banks, had
never before been extended to investment banks, which are not subject to the reporting and capital
regulations that are a quid pro quo for such borrowing. The move didn’t calm the panic; then the government
made the offer open-ended. The government was going to accept bad loans as collateral; it began to take a

variety of once again unprecedented steps to try to unfreeze the mortgage markets and help struggling
lenders. Market pundits praised the Fed’s rescue of Bear and pump-priming of the investment banks as the
only way to prevent contagion, but argued whether these actions would hasten an economic recovery or only
prolong the pain and plant the seeds of the next bubble. And for seven months, while these financial disasters
were unfolding, the value of the dollar—which had been declining for some time—had continued to slide.
Meanwhile, oil prices spiked: By July 2008, spot oil traded at $144 per barrel.
***
“It’s a weird time. We’ve gone into a different world, and nobody knows what will happen to the world, but
Charlie and I looked at the downside, and nobody else did, very much.” Deleveraging could be a painful
process in which banks, hedge funds, financial-services companies, municipalities, the construction and travel
industries, consumers, and indeed the whole economy withdrew—fast and painfully or slow and
painfully—from the intoxicant of cheap debt. Asset returns could well stay subpar for a long time—what
Charlie Munger called a “4% return world.” Beware of scams and charlatans, said Munger; they might
proliferate because the easiest way to turn four percent into sixteen percent is thievery.
In the midst of all the chaos of the spring of 2008, there sat Buffett, whose thinking about value and risk had
not changed in the nearly sixty years of his career. There are always people who say that the rules have
changed. But it only looks that way, he said, if the time horizon is too short.
There was Buffett, stooping for cigar butts as if he were a child again. He took no joy from others’ pain, but
in the business of life, everyone chooses a side to play. Times like these brought out his sharpest skills, the
joy of doing what he loved most, true to himself. “We’re selling some credit default swaps [insurance
against firms going bankrupt] in situations where it is underpriced. I’m sitting here with my newest daily
paper that I read, the Bond Buyer, on my lap. Who the hell would have thought that I’d be reading the Bond
Buyer every day? The Bond Buyer costs $2,400 a year. I felt like asking for a daily subscription rate. We
get these bid lists on failed auctions of tax-exempt money-market funds and other auction rate bonds and
have been just picking them off. The same fund will trade at the same time on the same day from the same
dealer at interest rates of 5.4 percent and 8.2 percent. Which is crazy, they’re the exact same thing, and the
underlying loans are perfectly good. There is no reason why it should trade at 820, but we bid 820 and we
may get one, while concurrently someone else buys exactly the same issue at 540. If you’d told me ten weeks
ago I’d be doing this, I’d have said that’s about as likely as me becoming a male stripper. We’ve put $4
billion into this stuff. It’s the most dramatic thing I’ve seen in my life. If this is an efficient market,
dictionaries will have to redefine ‘efficient.’”
Who would think that tax-exempt money-market funds could become cigar butts?
“But the most immediate and doable opportunity is weird things in the credit market. And the biggest
opportunity is in mortgages. But I don’t understand them well enough, although I’m learning them so that I
can understand them. And if I think I’ve got enough margin of safety, I’ll do it.” But the average person
should not do it.
“No. Stocks are the things to own over time. Productivity will increase and stocks will increase with it.
There are only a few things you can do wrong. One is to buy or sell at the wrong time. Paying high fees is
the other way to get killed. The best way to avoid both of these is to buy a low-cost index fund, and buy it
over time. Be greedy when others are fearful, and fearful when others are greedy, but don’t think you can
outsmart the market.
“If a cross-section of American industry is going to do well over time, then why try to pick the little
beauties and think you can do better? Very few people should be active investors.”
If there is any lesson the life of Warren Buffett has shown, it is the truth of that.
