
 Placing support or resistance lines, although tricky, is actually quite simple once you get the hang of it. Please feel free to watch me every morning in our chatroom when I place my support and resistance levels. As I’ve mentioned, I share my platform live with our trading community. 

 Let’s review a trade that I took based on these lines. Please see Figures 7.24 to 7.26 below. CarMax (ticker: KMX), the United States' largest used-car retailer, on June 21, 2016 had extreme earnings and its stock gapped down over 3%. That was a perfect opportunity for retail traders like us to find a good trade plan. I quickly found the support or resistance area level on a daily chart and watched the price action around those levels. 

 Figure 7.24 - My Gappers watchlist on June 21, 2016 at 9:20 a.m. showing KMX may be a Stock in Play for that day. 

 Figure 7.25 - KMX support or resistance lines on a daily chart up to June 20, 2016. 

 After reviewing the daily charts up to June 20, 2016, I found four levels of $47.93, $48.42, $48.67, and $49.15. As you can see in Figure 7.25 above, all of these levels are extreme price levels for the previous days and, as I explained, I give more attention to wicks and extreme prices than I do to the open or close prices. 

 Now, let’s take a look at Figure 7.26, which is the next day intraday chart for June 21, 2016, and see how those levels appeared on the price action. I marked the areas that those levels acted as a support or resistance level. Do ensure that you give special attention to the volume of shares traded at or near those levels. Do you see that they are significantly higher near those levels? A high volume confirms that these levels are significant and day traders should pay attention to them. 

 Figure 7.26 - Example of a Support or Resistance Strategy on KMX on a 5-minute chart with my trades for that day. 

 When the market opened, I watched the stock and realized that the area of around $48.67 acted as a resistance level at the Open. Later, the stock sold off to $47.93 with high volume. I bought 1,000 shares at that support, with a stop loss below $47.93. If the price closed below that, I would be out with a loss. The price instead quickly bounced back, just like a diver hitting the bottom of the ocean. I sold 500 shares at $48.42 for a nice $500 profit. I sold the other 500 shares at the next resistance level of $48.67 for a nice $750 profit. I kept monitoring the price action and, later in the afternoon, when the price rejected the $49.15 level with high volume, I went short with a stop loss of a new high of the day or a close above $49.15. I covered half of my shares at the level of $48.67 and the other half at $48.42, both for another nice profit. 

 To summarize my trading strategy for support or resistance trading: 

 Each morning, after I make my watchlist for the day, I quickly look at the daily charts for that watchlist and find the areas of support or resistance. 
 I monitor the price action around those areas on a 5-minute chart. If an indecision candle forms around that area, that is the confirmation of that level and I enter the trade. I usually buy as close as possible to the support level to minimize my risk. Stop will be a break and a close of a 5-minute candlestick under the support level. 
 I will take profit near the next support or resistance level. 
 I keep the trade open until I hit my profit target or I reach a new support or resistance level. 
 I usually sell half-positions near the profit target or support or resistance level and move my stop up to my entry point for break-even. 
 If there are no next obvious support or resistance levels, I will consider closing my trade at or near half-dollar or round-dollar levels. 

 A similar approach will also work when you sell short a stock below a resistance level.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Strategy 8: Red-to-Green Trading 
 Red-to-Green is another easy to recognize trading strategy. As I mentioned in Chapter 5, one of the indicators I have on my chart is the previous day close level. The previous day close is a powerful level of support or resistance and traders should trade toward it when there is rising volume. 

 If the current price of a stock is higher than the previous day close (for Stocks in Play that gapped up), the market is moving from a Green day to a Red day (meaning that the percentage that the price has changed will now be negative, which will be shown as red in most of the Exchanges and platforms). This is a Green-to-Red move. 

 If the price is lower than the previous day close (for stocks that gapped down), the market is moving from a Red day to a Green day (meaning that the percentage that the price has changed will now be positive, which will be shown as green in most of the Exchanges and platforms). This is a Red-to-Green move. 

 The strategy is almost identical for both Red-to-Green and Green-to-Red except for the direction of the trade (short or long). So, for the sake of simplicity, I will use the term Red-to-Green Strategy for both directions, but depending on the trade, I may be referring to a Green-to-Red trade. 

 For example, take a look at Figure 7.27, the 5-minute chart for Mallinckrodt Public Limited Company (ticker: MNK), which was a Stock in Play on January 19, 2017. After a weak Open, the price held below VWAP. I went short, but there was no nearby support or resistance level except the previous day close at $46.52 (the dashed line on my chart). Therefore, I decided to go short from VWAP at around $47.80 for the profit target of the previous day close at $46.52, a nice $1.20 per share profit.  

 Figure 7.27 - Example of a short sell Red-to-Green Strategy on MNK. 

 For another example, let’s take a look at Figure 7.28, the 5-minute chart for Barracuda Networks, Inc. (ticker: CUDA) on January 10, 2017. The same price action can be seen at the Open. CUDA gapped up in the pre-market because of a good earnings report. At the Open, it was sold off heavily, perhaps because overnight shareholders and long-term investors started to sell their shares for a profit. The stock tested the VWAP for about twenty minutes and then sold off in a high volume toward the previous day close of $23.81. Its price bounced back later, during Mid-day, toward the VWAP, after it could not break the previous day close. Later, in the early afternoon, the price sold off again toward the previous day close for another Red-to-Green trade before it bounced back yet again. 

 In this example too, the previous day close level of $23.81 acted as a strong support level. In both morning and afternoon trading, a short sell opportunity was possible from VWAP at around $24.40 to $23.81. I did not take this trade as I was trading another stock around the same time that day. 

 Figure 7.28 - Example of a short Red-to-Green Strategy on CUDA. 

 To summarize my trading strategy for Red-to-Green trading: 

 When I make my watchlist for the day, I monitor the price action around the previous day close. 
 If a stock moves toward the previous day close with high volume, I consider going long with the profit target of the previous day close. 
 My stop loss is the nearest technical level. If I buy near VWAP, my stop loss will be the break of VWAP. If I buy near a moving average or an important support level, my stop loss will be the break of moving average or support level. 
 I usually sell all at the profit target. If the price moves in my favor, I bring my stop loss to the break-even and do not let the price turn against me. Red-to-Green moves should work immediately. 

 A similar approach will work equally as well when you short a stock for a Green-to-Red Strategy (see the MNK and CUDA examples in Figures 7.27 and 7.28 above).

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Strategy 9: Opening Range Breakouts 

 Another well-known trading strategy is the so-called Opening Range Breakout (ORB). This strategy signals an entry point, but does not determine the profit target. You should define the best profit target based on the other technical levels you learn from this book. Later on, you will notice that I list further possible profit targets. The ORB is an entry signal only, but remember, a full trading strategy must define the proper entry, exit and stop loss. 

 Right at the market Open (9:30 a.m. New York time), Stocks in Play usually experience violent price action that arises from heavy buy and sell orders that come into the market. This heavy trading in the first five minutes is the result of the profit or loss taking of the overnight position holders as well as new investors and traders. If a stock has gapped up, some overnight traders start selling their position for a profit. At the same time, some new investors might jump in to buy the stock before the price goes higher. If a stock gaps down, on the other hand, some investors might panic and dump their shares right at the Open before it drops any lower. On the other side, some institutions might think this drop could be a good buying opportunity and they will start buying large positions at a discounted price. 

 Therefore, there is a complicated mass psychology unfolding at the Open for the Stocks in Play. Wise traders sit on their hands and watch for the opening ranges to develop and allow the other traders to fight against each other until one side wins. 

 Typically, you want to give the opening range at least five minutes. This is called the 5-minute Opening Range Breakout (ORB). Some traders will wait even longer, such as for thirty minutes or even for one hour, to identify the balance of the power between the buyers and sellers. They then develop a trade plan in the direction of the 30-minute or 60-minute breakout. In the past, I only traded the trade at the 5-minute ORB, but recently I am more in favor of the 15-minute ORB or the 30-minute ORB. The longer the time frame, the less volatility you can expect compared to the 5-minute range. As with most setups, the ORB Strategy tends to work best with mid to large cap stocks, which do not show wild price swings intraday. I do not recommend trading this strategy with low float stocks that have gapped up or down. Ideally, the stock should trade within a range which is smaller than the Average True Range of the stock (ATR). The upper and lower boundaries of the range can be identified by the high and low of the 5-, 15-, 30- or 60- minute candlesticks. 

 To gain a better understanding of this strategy, let’s take a look at Figures 7.29 and 7.30 for e.l.f. Beauty Inc. (ticker: ELF) on March 9, 2017. ELF was on my Gappers watchlist that day, and had gapped up over 19% for good results. I decided to watch it closely to see if I could trade it on the short side. There was a good chance that many overnight investors and traders would try to sell their positions for profit. An overnight profit of 19% is very tempting for many investors. Why not take the profit? 

 Figure 7.29 - My Gappers watchlist on March 9, 2017 at 9 a.m. showing ELF may be a Stock in Play for that day. 

 As you can see in Figure 7.30 below, the stock opened at $31 and sold off heavily to below $30 in the first five minutes. That was the sign that investors were selling for profit after it had gapped up 19%. I waited for the first 5-minute battle of buyers and sellers to settle down. As soon as I saw that the price broke the 5-minute opening range, I went short below VWAP. As I mentioned before, ORB is a buy or sell signal, and you must define the proper exit and stop loss for it. For me, stop loss is always a close above VWAP for short positions, and a break below VWAP for long positions. Profit target point is the next important technical level. 

 As you can also see in Figure 7.30 below, I rode the wave down to the next daily level of $28.62 and covered my shorts at around that level. 

 Figure 7.30 - Example of the Opening Range Breakout Strategy on ELF 5-minute chart. 

 Another example could be Procter & Gamble Co. (ticker: PG) on February 15, 2017. The stock hit my Gappers scanner, see Figure 7.31, and I had it on my watchlist at the Open. 

 Figure 7.31 - My Gappers watchlist on February 15, 2017 at 9 a.m. showing PG may be a Stock in Play for that day. 

 As you can see below in Figure 7.32, in only the first five minutes more than 2.6 million shares were traded, but PG’s price only moved from $89.89 to $89.94; a range of only 5 cents while the Average True Range (ATR) of PG was $0.79. As I have mentioned, you need the opening range to be smaller than the daily ATR. If a stock moves near or higher than its ATR at the Open, it is not a good candidate for the ORB Strategy. It means that the stock is too volatile and without a catchable move. It is worth mentioning again, Stocks in Play move, and those moves are directional and catchable. If a stock constantly moves up and down $2 with high volume, but without any directional signal, you want to stay away from it. Those stocks are usually being heavily traded by computers. 

 In the PG example, as soon as I saw that it broke the opening range to the upside, I went long and rode the wave up toward the next resistance level of $91.01. If there was no obvious technical level for the exit and profit target, you can exit when a stock shows signs of weakness. For example, if its price makes a new 5-minute low, that means weakness, and you should consider selling if you are long. If you are short and if the stock makes a new 5-minute high, then it could be a sign of strength and you may want to cover your short position. In this PG example, if you did not previously identify the $91.01 level, you could exit when PG made a new 5-minute low just below $91. I marked it for you on Figure 7.32 below.   

 Figure 7.32 - Example of the Opening Range Breakout Strategy on PG daily chart. 

 To summarize my Opening Range Breakout Strategy: 

 After I build my watchlist in the morning, I closely monitor the shortlisted stocks in the first five minutes. I identify their opening range and their price action. How many shares are being traded? Is the stock jumping up and down or does it have a directional upward or downward movement? Is it high volume with large orders only, or are there many orders going through? I prefer stocks that have high volume, but also with numerous different orders being traded. A stock that has traded 1 million shares, but those shares were only ten orders of 100,000 shares each, is not a liquid stock to trade. Volume alone does not show the liquidity; the number of orders being sent to the Exchange is as important. 
 The opening range must be significantly smaller than the stock’s Average True Range (ATR). I have ATR as a column in my Trade Ideas scanner. 
 After the close of the first five minutes of trading, the stock may continue to be traded in that opening range in the next five minutes. But, if I see the stock is breaking the opening range, I enter the trade according to the direction of the breakout: long for an upward breakout and short for a downward move. 
 My stop loss is a close below VWAP for the long positions and a break above VWAP for the short positions. 
 My profit target is the next important technical level, such as: (1) important intraday daily levels that I identify in the pre-market, (2) moving averages on a daily chart, and/or (3) previous day close. 
 If there was no obvious technical level for the exit and profit target, I exit when a stock shows signs of weakness (if I am long) or strength (if I am short). For example, if the price makes a new 5-minute low, that means weakness and I consider selling my position if I am long. If I am short and the stock makes a new 5-minute high, then it could be a sign of strength and I consider covering my short position. 

 My strategy above was for a 5-minute ORB, but the same process will also work well for 15-minute or 30-minute opening range breakouts.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Other Trading Strategies 

 You have now read a summary of my trading strategies. You may be wondering what other traders do. As I mentioned before, there are unlimited numbers of trading strategies that individuals have developed for themselves. Traders often choose and modify their strategies based on personal factors such as account size, amount of time that can be dedicated to trading, trading experience, personality and risk tolerance. 

 You should develop your own strategy. A trading strategy is very personalized to each individual. My risk tolerance and psychology are most likely different from yours and from those of other traders. I might not be comfortable with a $500 loss, but someone who has a large account can easily hold onto the loss and eventually make profit out of a losing trade. You cannot mirror-trade anyone else; you must develop your own risk management method and strategy. 

 Some traders focus heavily on technical indicators like the RSI, the moving average convergence divergence (also known as the MACD), or the moving average crossover. There are hundreds, if not thousands, of sophisticated technical indicators out there. Some traders believe they have found the Holy Grail of technical indicators, and it might be a combination of RSI or the moving average crossover. I don't believe having a large number of technical indicators will automatically make you a successful day trader. Day trading is not mechanical and automated; it is discretionary: traders need to make real time decisions. The success of each strategy is based on judgment and the proper execution of it by the trader. 

 I am also skeptical of the strategies that have many indicators. I don’t think that having more indicators on your chart helps you in day trading, especially since you need to be able to process information very quickly, at times in just a matter of seconds. I have found that often indicators’ signals will also contradict each other and that will lead to confusion. 

 That is why my day trading indicators are limited to VWAP and a few other moving averages. For my swing trading, I use more complicated indicators such as MACD because I do not have to make quick decisions. I usually review my swing trading after the market closes, with proper due diligence and evaluation. You can easily find more information about the indicators I’ve mentioned in this section, along with many others, by doing a simple online search. 

 Some of my day trader colleagues may disagree with me, but as I mentioned above, my personal experience is that you cannot enter a trade with a mechanical and systematic approach and then let the indicators dictate your entry and exit. That is my next rule: 

 Rule 10: Indicators only indicate; they should not be allowed to dictate. 

 Computers are trading all of the time. When you set up a system for trading that has no input or requires no decisions by the trader, then you are entering the world of algorithmic trading, and you will lose trades to investment banks that have million-dollar algorithms and billions of dollars in cash for trading. 

 Of course, I use the RSI in my scanner for some of my trading strategies, and in particular for reversal trading. Obviously, I have scanners that rely on a high or low RSI, but those are more conditioned to find stocks at extremes. They are by no means a buy or sell indicator.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Develop Your Own Strategy 

 You must still find your own place in the market. I may be a 1-minute or a 5-minute trader; you may be a 60-minute trader. Some may be daily or weekly traders (swing traders). There’s a place in the market for everyone. Consider what you are learning in this book as pieces of a puzzle that together make up the bigger picture of your trading career. You're going to acquire some pieces here, you’re going to pick up pieces on your own from your own reading and research, and, overall, you will create a puzzle that will develop into your own unique trading strategy. I don't expect everything I do to work exactly the same for you. I am happy to help you develop a strategy that is going to work for you, your personality, your account size and your risk tolerance. Please contact me in our chatroom at www.BearBullTraders.com . 

 The key for now is that you master one strategy. Once you can tread water in the market with your one strategy, you can be a trader without blowing up your account. This is simply a matter of spending time in the chair. The more time you spend watching your charts, the more you will learn. This is a job where you survive until you can make it. You can start casting out later, but first you need to master just one strategy. It can be the VWAP trade, it can be a Support or Resistance Strategy, it can be a Reversal Strategy, or you can create a strategy of your own. Narrow the choices down, develop that area of strength into a workable strategy, and then use that strategy to survive until you are able to develop others. 

 It is absolutely critical for every trader to be trading a strategy. Plan a trade, and trade the plan. I wish someone had said to me when I first started training, “Andrew, you need to trade a strategy. If you're trading with real money, you must be trading a written strategy, and it must have historical data to verify that it’s worth trading with real money.” You cannot change your plan once you have already entered the trade and have an open position. 

 The truth about traders is that they fail. They lose money, and a large percentage of those traders are not gaining the education that you are receiving from reading this book. They're going to be using live trading strategies that are not even hammered out, they will just be haphazardly trading a little of this and a little of that until their account is gone, and then they will wonder what happened. You don’t want to live trade a new strategy until you’ve proven that it’s worth investing in. You may practice three months in a simulator, and then trade small size with real money for one month, and then go back to the simulator to work on your mistakes or practice new strategies for another three months. There is no shame in going back to a simulator at any stage of your day trading career. Even experienced and professional traders, when they want to develop a new strategy, test it out in a live simulator first. 
