
site improvement. “I have total confidence in GEICO,” he said, all the while invoking his new Internet
mantra, He who wins the Internet, wins the war.
Buffett paid more attention to GEICO than almost any other business he owned, simply because he loved it.
He was also a great fan of both Tony Nicely and his co-CEO Lou Simpson, whose investing track record he
now trumpeted to shareholders in his annual newsletter for the first time. For the past twenty-five years,
Simpson had averaged 20.3 percent, beating the market by an average of 6.8 percent a year. The stocks he
bought were different from Buffett’s, but the method was the same, and his record was almost as good as
Buffett’s own. Now it was obvious why Buffett granted him so much autonomy and paid him so well.
Simpson qualified as another of the Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville. Admittedly, however, as
competition increased, the Superinvestors’ job was getting harder all the time.
Still, the challenge of finding new investments wasn’t nearly as severe as bird-dogging the ones that Berkshire
already had. Coca-Cola was again evolving into a nightmarish preoccupation. Since the death of Goizueta,
quarter by quarter, month by month, its business had grown steadily worse. New evidence of accounting
manipulation appeared like barnacles on Coca-Cola’s earnings; the stock had sunk below $50, from a high in
the $80s. In percentage terms it was hovering somewhere around the sixtieth floor.
Doug Daft had earned a reputation for volatile moods and byzantine politicking; a number of senior members
of management had departed during his tenure.5 His subtle tweaking of the four main Coke brands had
produced unspectacular results, along with column after column of copy meowing at inept ads.6 Pepsi had
pulled off a huge success with Gatorade after Coca-Cola failed to make that deal with Quaker Oats back in
2000. Then, a whistle-blower declared that Coca-Cola rigged a marketing test for a fountain product called
Frozen Coke to impress a longtime customer, Burger King. The whistle-blower had also accused Coke of
accounting fraud, and the SEC, the FBI, and the U.S. Attorney’s office started investigating. The company’s
stock price shrank to $43. Buffett had had enough of the “managed earnings” that underlay these problems,
in which the Wall Street analysts’ predictions of what a company would earn enticed managers to dig behind
the sofa cushions in order to “make the numbers,” thereby meeting or beating “consensus” expectations to
please investors. Because the vast majority of companies had tried to set, then surpass Wall Street’s
expectations instead of simply reporting what they earned—making the practice uniform—even a pennyper-share shortfall made them look as though they were having problems and often led to precipitous declines
in stock prices. Thus, companies claimed they “must” manage earnings, in a vicious, self-fulfilling game. But
“earnings management” was a sort of Ponzi-ing. If carried on long enough, a petty form of cheating
snowballed into larceny.
“I can’t tell you how much I hate managed earnings in terms of what they do to people. The nature of
managed earnings is that you start out small. It’s like stealing five bucks from the cash register and
promising yourself you’ll pay it back. You never do. You end up the next time stealing ten bucks. Once you
start that kind of game, it draws everybody in. The organization picks up on it, people get cute and clever,
and it snowballs. I gave these speeches after we discovered it. I told them, ‘Now the monkey’s off our back.
We don’t have to predict anything to the analysts. Let’s just give the damn handout showing the results
every year, and whatever we earn, we earn.’”7
Buffett wanted out of the game. If asked off the record what his worst business mistake was, he no longer
listed “sins of omission” instead, he said, “Serving on boards.” He was weary most of all of the way it tied
his hands. Coca-Cola had changed its policy of requiring directors to retire at age seventy-four to one that
merely required directors at that age to submit a letter of resignation for the board to consider. Leaving the
Coke board would have let him tap-dance off into the sunset. But for the savior of Salomon to snub a
company in trouble would be like sticking a dagger in the stock. “I wouldn’t stay on the board, except I don’t
feel like leaving the other guys” to deal with the mess at Coca-Cola, Buffett said. His pro forma letter was,
of course, rejected. This was seen externally as a power play to maintain the coziness of a board of cronies.
Buffett had no idea what a plateful of misery he had just ordered.
As soon as the proxy statement was filed with Buffett’s name listed for election as a director, Institutional
Shareholder Services, a powerful organization that consulted on shareholder voting and voted proxies on

behalf of institutional investors, told its clients to withhold their votes for him. ISS said that Buffett’s
independence as a member of the audit committee could be affected by the fact that Berkshire Hathaway
companies like Dairy Queen and McLane bought $102 million of Coca-Cola products. At a time when
scandals involving conflicts of interest had shaken confidence in institutions ranging from the church to the
military, the government, and business and nonprofit organizations, accusations of conflicts of interest and
questions of governance were taken with a new seriousness. The cronyism of Coca-Cola’s board could have
been attacked on other grounds, but ISS lacked any sense of proportion in applying its principles regarding
conflict of interest. Its lack of proportion was in keeping with the lack of proportion shown by most who were
attacking business at the time (which, to be fair, some in the business world had more than earned)—but
nonetheless, disproportionate it was. Since Berkshire’s purchases of Coke for its businesses were trivial when
compared to Berkshire’s ownership stake in Coke, which was huge, how could Buffett’s behavior as a
member of the audit committee or the board of Coca-Cola be said to be compromised?8
The rules of ISS, however, were based on a checklist, with no leeway whatsoever for common sense.
CalPERS, the powerful California Public Employees’ Retirement System, also decided to withhold support
for half of Coke’s directors, among them Buffett, in his case because the audit committee on which he sat
had approved the auditors to do nonaudit work.9 While CalPERS was taking a principled stance on auditors,
this recommendation was sort of like putting out the candles on a birthday cake with a fire extinguisher.
Buffett made a quasi-joke of it in public, saying that he was paying CalPERS and ISS to rally votes against
him as an excuse to get off the board. But in fact he was mad, especially at ISS. It seemed obvious to him that
the billions of dollars’ worth of Coca-Cola stock that Berkshire owned grossly outweighed the Coke products
that Berkshire Hathaway bought.
“If I were a wino off the street, those amounts they’re talking about might be significant. But I own eight
percent of Coca-Cola. We’ve got so many more dollars in Coke than anything else. How would I possibly
favor Dairy Queen’s interests over Coke’s when I own so much more of Coke’s stock?”
Herbert Allen sent an emotional letter to the Wall Street Journal, citing the Salem witch trials, when
“reasonably stupid people accused reasonably smart and gifted people of being witches and casting spells.
Then they burned them…. Up until the geniuses at ISS said it, nobody knew that Warren was really a
witch.”10
When corporate board members were surveyed, they unanimously thought Buffett was their dream director.
“We would come and wash Buffett’s car to have him on our board…. There’s not a person in the world who
wouldn’t take himon their board…. CalPERS’s action shows the stupidity of corporate governance run
amok…analogous to an NFL coach preferring an unknown quarterback from a Division II college instead of
a Super Bowl quarterback…. If you were a shareholder, given the choice to have Warren Buffett on that
board or not, you’d want him.”11 The Financial Times referred to ISS as the Darth Vader of corporate
governance, citing a position that “smacked of dogma.”12 With inkwells of backlash spilling all over them,
CalPERS and ISS began to look foolish, “somewhere between hideous and self-promoting populists,” as one
retired CEO put it on the survey. “How could you bring yourself to a position where you would vote against
him as a director and think that was a pro-shareholder thing to do? What a ridiculous piece of advice.”13
Throwing Buffett off the board to improve the audit committee was like firing your doctor because you were
still sick. What Coca-Cola needed was more Buffett, not less. ISS responded by saying that it was not
advocating a vote against Buffett. Rather, it was saying to “withhold” votes from him because of his position
on the audit committee.14 But withholding a vote was not voting for Buffett, no matter how you parsed the
words or why you said you did it. The more ISS explained, the less anyone was convinced.
The bigger problem was that ISS was not just giving advice. Because so many investors had simply delegated
their voting rights to it, ISS was more like a single behemoth shareholder that controlled as much as twenty
percent of all the board votes for major corporations in the United States. The securities laws had not
anticipated that a situation could arise in which one unregulated, magisterial “shareholder” held so much

power over American businesses. But there it was.
Buffett had a passionate view of corporate board responsibilities, founded in his partnership and based on
alignment of interests. “I think owners should behave like owners, and I think they should care about
independence. And so those guys are right on two out of three. It’s just that they don’t have the faintest
notion of what independence is about or how boards actually work. This checklist approach is totally crazy.
If we’d gone out and found somebody in the unemployment line and paid them $125,000 to be a Coke
director, they’d be considered ‘independent.’ And CalPERS and ISS would have no problem voting for him,
even though he depended completely for his income on that paycheck from Coke.”
Studies, however, had shown either no correlation or negative correlation between board independence and a
firm’s performance.15 But for the Coke board to rail against ISS also lacked a certain credibility and
seemliness. Now that Coke’s stock was barbecue, its board members could convincingly summon no more
than low to middling dudgeon. The accusations of a “crony board” neared the mark. Although it had factions,
one faction ruled; or rather misruled; Buffett admitted that he should have done more to try to steer things
right at Coke. Indeed, if Coca-Cola had been run by him, assisted only by a six-pack of Cherry Coke, perhaps
many of its woes could have been avoided.
Instead, a brew of important people—several of them titanic personalities, and all of them accustomed to
being in charge—could not sit back and simply allow themselves to be led by a weak CEO; they had spun
into a vortex. That Daft had improved Coca-Cola’s profits, sales, and cash flows and had mended poisonous
relations with the bottlers were not enough to turn things around for him. In February, Daft suddenly told the
board he was resigning.
Daft was unpopular in many quarters, but his announcement set off dismay at the prospect of more bad
publicity for Coca-Cola. This time the next guy in line could not be simply plugged into the job. Some board
members viewed that as the chance to finally do the job right. In a move that had instantly attracted
controversy, however, concurrent with the announcement of Daft’s resignation, seventy-seven-year-old Don
Keough had joined the board; Keough, who had been sometimes referred to as the “shadow” CEO, became
chairman of the search committee. He and Buffett now spent hours on the phone trying to find a leader for
Coca-Cola.
The search for a fourth CEO in eight years quickly turned into a spectacle. The board looked at Coca-Cola’s
president, Steve Heyer, once considered a shoo-in, but the board members split over him, and once outside
candidates were proposed, his chances began to fade. Various celebrity CEOs considered then turned down
the job. Each rejection fed the media another bit of Schadenfreudenfodder. Slit-eyed rumors gathered for a
chat. Maybe Coke would buy another company. Maybe it would sell itself to Nestlé.
Buffett flew to the April 20 board meeting in Wilmington, Delaware, the evening before the Coca-Cola
shareholder meeting, prepared for two days of intense work. He was not looking forward to the reading of the
results of the director election, which would show a significant percentage of the vote withheld from him.
In the faded grandeur of the old Hotel du Pont, Buffett began with the meeting of the audit committee, which
was still conducting the inquisition and preparing to do corporate penance over the SEC investigation of
earnings management.16
“If you don’t come clean the first time you discover it, you’re stuck. And that may mean giving up your job
too. I can see how it happened. Roberto was a wonderful guy. He did a good job of running the company.
And the rest of them were decent people, pretty much. But if Roberto told them, ‘I want you to ship some
extra cases,’ it would have been unquestioned at the Coca-Cola Company.”
The audit committee felt all this had been concealed from them. Buffett, sentenced to remain on the Coke
board for another year, knew of no real solution except: Clean up the damned mess and never do it again. He
moved on to the finance committee, then the executive committee. The board had various thorny issues to
address. At last the evening ended.

The next morning, as he was getting dressed before heading down to the meeting, he reflected on the coming
day’s events. The Teamsters would already be clogging the street in front of the hotel with their blue tractortrailer truck parked among the students waving signs that said “Coca-Cola Destroys Lives, Livelihoods, and
Communities” and “Killer Cola, Toxic Cola, Racist Cola.” He couldn’t see from the window, however,
whether the Teamsters had brought their twelve-foot-high inflatable rat. The Coke shareholder meeting was
becoming a rite of brand-building within the activist community.
Then the phone in his hotel room rang. He picked it up and found the last person he was expecting on the
other end of the line—Jesse Jackson. Jackson merely said that he wanted to express his admiration for
Buffett. They talked for a minute or two of things of no consequence, and hung up. That’s odd, thought
Buffett. In fact, it was the first sign that this was going to be the Coca-Cola shareholder meeting to end all
shareholder meetings.
Downstairs, protesters in the lobby outnumbered the shareholders. The glassblowers’ union handed out
bumper stickers to protest the company’s purchases of bottles from Mexico.17 Protesters handed out leaflets
accusing Coca-Cola of conspiring with paramilitary groups in Colombia to assassinate labor leaders. College
students protested Coke’s presence on their campuses. Buffett quick-stepped across the lobby to the
ballroom, where he was recognized and let inside, along with the rest of the directors. He sat down in the
front row. The other attendees picked up credentials, then passed through security, their packages scanned by
metal detectors as they surrendered cell phones, cameras, recorders. The security check amid the gilded
molding and crystal chandeliers gave the place the feel of a crowded and unpleasant government palace in
some former colonial outpost that had suffered through one too many dictatorships. The travelers seemed to
have arrived at some dreary but dangerous destination. Coca-Cola put little brochures around the lobby
highlighting its community projects and offered a cooler of Coke and Dasani water for people to grab on their
way to the stiff-backed shoulder-to-shoulder seats into which the shareholders wedged themselves for the
two-hour journey through the Kafka novel that a modern annual meeting had become.
Doug Daft made some brief introductory remarks from the podium between the two long, funereal, whitecovered tables behind which the other executives had barricaded themselves. He asked if there was any
discussion of the proposal to elect directors. Buffett, seated up front with the rest, turned around when Ray
Rogers, president of Corporate Campaign, Inc., an agitator-for-hire group that worked mainly for labor
unions, stood up and yanked the microphone from the floater who was working the aisles. Rogers started
yelling that he had withheld votes “until a number of terrible wrongs are righted by this board.” Coca-Cola,
he said, was “rife with immorality, corruption, and complicity in gross human rights violations, including
murder and torture.” Daft was a liar, he screamed, the company’s leadership operated with “unrestrained
greed,” and the company was an “utter pariah” in the United States that made its money “on the destruction
of a lot of communities.” As Daft tried to reassert control of the meeting with all the success of a substitute
teacher, Rogers continued shouting, shuffling through what appeared to be many pages of text. Daft told him
his time was up and asked him to stop speaking, but Rogers carried on. The audio people turned off the
microphone’s sound, but Rogers’s vocal cords were far too well-exercised to be daunted by the mere absence
of amplification. Finally, a group of six security guards wrestled him to the floor and carried him away as the
audience stared in shock and Daft stood by helplessly, trying to restore order, pleading, “Be gentle, please,”
to the security guards. Then he muttered audibly to a colleague, “We shouldn’t have done that.”18
After this steer-wrestling session ended, the room settled into a jittery hush. Sister Vicky Bergkemp of the
Adorers of the Blood of Christ took the microphone next. She gave a short speech about AIDS and asked the
management of Coke to inform the stockholders of the business effect of the AIDS pandemic on Coca-Cola.
Since AIDS had nothing to do with Coca-Cola’s business, management agreeably supported this proposal.
Then shareholders introduced other proposals having to do with their view of excessive compensation given
to management. The company recommended votes against all of these.
At last, the results of the election of directors were reported. This was the moment Buffett had been dreading.
“Each of the nominees for election of director have received over ninety-six percent of the votes,” said the
general counsel, “with the exception of Mr. Buffett. Mr. Buffett received over eighty-four percent of the
vote.”19

Being singled out in public as the least-wanted director at Coca-Cola was humiliating. Never before had a
group of shareholders rejected him. Even though CalPERS and ISS accounted for virtually all of the sixteen
percent of the votes against him, and institutional investors had for the most part ignored CalPERS and ISS
and championed him, it didn’t feel like a triumph. Rarely had Buffett regretted serving on boards as much as
he did at this moment. However, there was little time for him to dwell on it, because Daft opened the
microphone to shareholder questions, and the Reverend Jesse Jackson promptly stood up and hijacked the
meeting.
“Mr. Daft, and members of the board,” he began in rolling tones, “let me say at the outset…that while many
disagreed with the first person making a comment…his violent removal…was beneath…the dignity…of this
company. It was…an overreaction…. It was…an excessive use of power…. I…would like to know,” Jackson
asked rhetorically, “if there is a person of color…in the mix under consideration for the job” of CEO. The
college students’ complaints about Coke on campus and accusations that the company had murdered union
leaders in Colombia now seemed anticlimactic. Daft struggled to conclude the most disastrous shareholder
meeting in Coca-Cola’s history, as board members vowed to themselves that the way this meeting had
escaped the CEO’s control must never be repeated.
After the fiasco, the search for a CEO took on the feeling of an emergency. Steve Heyer, the internal
candidate, had been ruled out at the last board meeting and was heading off to pursue other business interests
at Starwood Hotels, complete with a huge and controversial severance package that would, once again,
embarrass Coca-Cola. Finally, the board reached out to another candidate they had been discussing, sixtyyear-old Neville Isdell, who had retired after being clotheslined years before by Doug Ivester. A tall,
charismatic Irishman who had been raised in South Africa, Isdell was popular with the board. By then,
however, Coca-Cola could do nothing to please its audience. “Bringing in the old guys” was the reaction.
“They hired another Daft.”20 Isdell was already presumed a future victim of the board’s ax, for the board had
earned a fearsome reputation for irksomeness and whimsical behavior.21
Yet this was the same board that had sat primly for years as if it were Goizueta’s footstool. It was only after
Goizueta’s untimely death left the leadership in shambles that the board, which for the most part consisted of
the same people who had served under Goizueta, had split in two. During the six-year interregnum, a small
group of directors had grabbed for the reins of the Real Thing’s runaway stagecoach. All the while, the
company missed consumer trends and made strategic mistakes. To catch up and correct the problems,
Coca-Cola needed a determined and tough CEO who could tame the faction on the board that became
overbearing when deprived of a dominant leader to keep them in line. How long Isdell would survive would
depend on how strong a leader he turned out to be.
Buffett gave his speech about managing earnings; Keough started to help Isdell, as he helped every new
CEO. Isdell accepted the help, but as it turned out, he wouldn’t need all that much.
