
weren't done by Salomon Brothers because of him.
"Why on earth would you interfere with my deal if it is going to be a
profitable piece of business?" I asked.
I knew precisely why he would interfere with a profitable piece of
business. If he wasn't going to get the credit, he didn't want to see it
happen. It would shatter the illusion he was trying to create of having a
unique grasp of this new warrant business. If he succeeded in creating
the illusion, the firm would pay him more money at the end of the year.
Of all this, I was aware. He knew I was aware. That made him angry. And
getting angry was his biggest mistake.
"I can get you fired," he said, "with a single phone call [there was drama
in his phone calls]. All I've got to do is call [his boss] or John
[Gutfreund] and you are out of here."
That was it. I had just drawn a fourth ace. The opportunist was bluffing,
and it was written all over his face. Sitting on a trading floor all day
makes you that much more sensitive to people's little bluffs. They were
almost always transparent. And once you caught them, you owned them,
like a fish well hooked. You could let them off the hook, or you could reel
them in. In this case I had already made up my mind what to do. The
opportunist was way out of line. He couldn't get me fired. Not even close.
What is more, a lot of people would be angry when they learned of his
threat. He had stepped, albeit in a way I didn't expect, into trouble. I'd
never had a plot to destroy someone work out so well before. Come to
think of it, I'd never before had a plot to destroy someone.
There was no point in continuing. I feigned concern. I told him that I was
sorry, that I would never do it again, and that whenever I had a good
idea in the future, I would be sure to run straight away and give it to
him. Somehow he believed me.
What the opportunist had neglected to consider in his scheme was the
omniscient, omnipotent, omnivorous Presence. No, not God. A
person on the trading floor known as a syndicate manager. Syndicate
managers on Wall Street and in the City of London are charged with the
job of coordinating all deals; the London syndicate manager of Salomon,
one of the few powerful women within the firm, had coordinated our
German warrant. Syndicate managers are the investment banking
equivalents of chiefs of staff in the White House or general managers of
professional sports teams. John Gutfreund had made his reputation as a

syndicate manager. The role produces masters of realpolitik,
Machiavellian in the original sense of the word. They see all. They hear
all. They know all. You don't cross a syndicate manager. If you do, you get
hurt.
The next day I told the London syndicate manager of my conversation
the previous night. She knew the truth of the German warrant deal
because she had played a role in its success. She was even angrier than I
had hoped. She was also extremely plugged in at Salomon Brothers, in a
way that the opportunist was not. I mercilessly left his fate in her
hands; it was like leaving a goldfish in the care of an alley cat. Only then,
after it was too late to reverse the process, did I feel remorse. But not
much. Even my conscience was becoming calculating, permitting me to
feel just enough guilt to live with myself but not enough to prevent me
from doing in creeps.
I didn't learn until much later the end of the story. The woman I had
spoken with was directly responsible for deciding what the opportunist
was paid. The opportunist was expecting a lot of money and a promotion
from vice-president to director. The promotion was critical to his future.
This woman made five or six phone calls and squashed his plans. I had to
wait until bonus time, the end of December, to see the effect.
Promotions were announced a week before the money was passed out.
The opportunist remained a vice-president. Once his bonus had landed in
his bank account, he quit the firm.
At this point in the story, in the fall of 1986, my fortunes and the
fortunes of my firm diverge. The money poured in through my telephone,
but it didn't seem to register on the bottom line of Salomon Brothers.
The bull market in bonds finally lost its head of steam. Ii November the
market plunged briefly, and financial Darwinism prevailed. Many weak
Salomon traders, along with a few customers, blew themselves up. Fewer
customers and nervous traders meant that the volume of deals declined.
Most salesmen spent less time answering
phone calls from frenzied gamblers and more time trying to seem busy.
At the end of the year bonuses would be paid. For the first time in many,
many years at Salomon Brothers, Christmas looked to be a time of
sadness.
Little local wars were breaking out across the London trading floor. A
couple of hitherto quiet types with Prussian names were now keeping

copies of Clausewitz's On War on their desks. Investment bankers
usually read On War secretly not because they are embarrassed to be
caught with it but because they don't want to let anyone in on their
technique. I recommended Sun-tzu, an ancient Chinese war genius, to one
of my Prussian colleagues, and he looked at me with suspicion, as if I
were going to fool him into believing that a Chinaman knew something
about war.
When the money goes away on a trading floor, it feels very like when the
music stops in musical chairs. A few people close to their chairs amuse
themselves by watching the others engage in mortal combat to secure a
seat. Thoughts around Salomon Brothers turned away from the greater
glory of the firm and focused on self-preservation. Who was fucking up?
was the question most often asked.
The salesmen blamed the traders, and the traders blamed the salesmen.
Why couldn't we sell their bonds to stupid European investors? the
traders wanted to know. Why couldn't they find bonds that weren't so
embarrassingly awful? the salesmen wanted to know. I was told by one
trader, who was trying to off-load an AT&T style rip-off onto one of my
customers, that I needed to be more of a team player. I was tempted to
ask, "What team?" I could probably have sold his bonds and saved him
some money, but it would have come at the expense of a relationship.
Telling traders to live with their mistakes, which I did on rare brave
occasions, was not a moral but a business judgment. In my view, the
solution to AT&T nightmares was not to dump them into the portfolios of
my customers but to sack the traders who got us into the problems in
the first place. The traders, of course, didn't agree.
The plain fact was that a combination of market forces and gross
mismanagement had thrown Salomon Brothers into deep trouble. At
times it was as if we had no management at all. No one put a stop to the
infighting; no one gave us a sense of direction; no one put a halt to our
rapid growth; no one wanted to make the hard decisions that
businessmen, like generals, simply have to make.
Taking place on the trading floor was a strange inversion that became more apparent the longer management failed to grasp events. The
grunts were better able to diagnose the problems of our business than
the generals. Ordinary salesmen were on the telephone all day every day
with the source of our revenues: European institutional investors. And

Salomon salespeople in December 1986 heard a new tone in their
customers' voices and saw a couple of coincidental changes at once to
which management was blind.
First, investors were increasingly irritated with the slash-and-burn
approach Salomon Brothers and other American investment banks took
to customer relations. People who controlled enormous pools of capital
(investors in France and Germany, for example) were refusing to buy
their stocks and bonds from us. "You must understand," a weary French
female investor told me one day as she fended off a Salomon Brothers
priority, "we are tired of being ripped off by Drexel Burnham and
Goldman Sachs and Salomon Brothers and the other Americans."
There is, or was, a fundamental difference between European
institutional investors and their American counterparts, noticed by every
New York trader who spent any time in our office. Investment banking in
America is a long-standing oligopoly. A small number of "name"
investment banks compete to raise capital. American investors (the
lenders of money) have been trained to think that they can only do
business with a handful of large investment banks. And very generally,
the interests of lenders in New York take a back seat to the interests of
the corporate borrowers. So, in New York, bond and stock deals are
driven not by whether investors (lenders) want to buy them but by
whether companies want to raise the money.
I was never sure why this happened. I mean, you'd think that the
borrower of money would be just as likely to be screwed by the
middleman as the lender. But he isn't. The Wall Street oligopoly that
cost lenders so dearly doesn't seem to affect the borrowers, perhaps
because they are smart enough to play the few investment banks off
against one another, perhaps because they are less dependent on Wall
Street in the first place; after all, if they don't like the terms on a bond
deal, they can always take a loan from a bank. Anyway, no one dreams of
trying to fool, say, IBM into issuing cheap stocks or bonds. IBM is
regarded as too important to anger and therefore always issues its
stocks and bonds dear. Wall Street salesmen then try to fool investors
into buying the overpriced merchandise.
1
European lenders (my customers) didn't know how to roll over and play
dead. You could sucker them once, but if you did, they'd never come

back. Unlike their American counterparts, they didn't understand that
they couldn't live without the services of Salomon Brothers. A Salomon
trader in New York once told me, "The problem with the London office is
that the customers aren't trained." But why should they be? If they
didn't like us, they could simply deal with an English or a French or a
Japanese competitor. Whether the foreign banks were more userfriendly than we, I do not know. What was clear, however, is that
hundreds of firms could do most of what we did.
One could not and I would not attempt to persuade our management of
this sad fact. Its response would have been to shoot the messenger.
("Whaddya mean we're no different from anyone else? If it's true, then
you are not doing your job.") But I recall at the time a short trip to
Geneva, where I met with a man in control of a mere eighty-six million
dollars, who put the matter in a nutshell for me. As we sat in his office
speaking, one of his accountants barged in, waving a sheet of paper.
"Two hundred eighty-five," he said, then left.
The figure 285, it turned out, was the number of different investment
bankers he had dealt with in the previous year. If the episode was
staged to psych me out, it worked. I didn't know, I gulped, that there
were 285 investment bankers in the whole world.
"There aren't," he said. "There are more. And they are all the same."
In other words, the whole idea of globalization was a canard. The brave
new world of advanced communications and a single worldwide market for
capital did not necessarily imply that a small handful of investment banks
such as Salomon would dominate the world. It meant that money bounced
more freely around the globe. But there didn't seem to be the same
economies of scale in handling that money as in, say, frozen green beans.
Debt issuance and bond trading were no longer the domain of a single
firm, but of hundreds. Many of the new players didn't share our exalted
sense of self-worth. Japanese banks such as Nomura, American
commercial banks such as Morgan Guaranty, and European monoliths like
Credit Suisse all were willing to do the same job as Salomon Brothers in
Europe, and for far less pay. Even tiny firms of six mer in dingy offices
with low overheads were able to compete by slashing
N
prices to the bone. They had the same information we did. Information,
with communications, was becoming cheaper and easier to obtain. We

were being driven from our markets by lower-cost foreign producers just
as American steel and automobile companies were before us.
Our poor management had been saddled with an impossible task. The
orders received from the New York war room bore no relation to
conditions in the field. The London office had been charged by John
Gutfreund and Tom Strauss with implementing a flawed strategy. Gutfreund and Strauss were still enamored with the notion of global
domination. They were inclined to blame their lieutenants for poor
execution of a brilliant plan rather than question the plan itself. The
lieutenants responded with a resounding chorus of the Salomon Brothers
in Europe theme song, called "It's Not My Fault, I Only Just Got Here!"
That was true. The London managers, like the geeks, were too new to the
market to question the strategy. Miles Slater, our chief executive
officer, was a forty-three-year-old American who hadn't arrived in
London until June 1986, six months after I did. Bruce Koepgen, the head
of sales, was a thirty-four-year-old American who arrived in London for
the first time in 1985, six months before I did. The chairman of the
operation, Charlie McVeigh, was a forty-five-year-old American who had
a great deal of experience but was more the firm's diplomat than its
manager. At no time had there been a managing director of Salomon
Brothers in London who spoke any language but English.
In November 1986 our offices moved from the doughnut in the heart of
London's financial district into the airspace immediately above Victoria
Station, now named Victoria Plaza. The new office was nearly as large as
the station itself and more a sign of our optimism than our needs. "When
I saw the opening of the London office," says William Salomon, "with a
trading floor twice as big as New York's, I saw excess to the greatest
degree."
Our grand new place was only a short walk down Buckingham Palace Road
from that saintly creature the queen mother. A long escalator ran from
the street of kings through a passage of chrome and mirrors to the
dizzy heights of our trading floor. The trading floor wasn't at the top of
the escalator. That would have been too economical. At the top of the
escalator was a massive space with the feel of a Hyatt Regency lobby,
filled with sofas, plants, and an enormous bronze statue of a sprinting
rabbit. The rabbit was a non sequitur. Its design did not suggest
a Wall Street firm bravely speeding into the future so much as Bugs

Bunny scampering between holes one step ahead of Elmer Fudd. At
Christmastime the traders hung huge silver ornaments from the rabbit's
tail to give it balls; later an umbrella served as what the British call a
willy.
Clearly as much time had been spent on how the new office should look as
on how it should function. The space age escalator and exposed metal
piping of the foyer segued into a spiraling wooden staircase and crinkly
old master prints. This wasn't an office so much as a Hollywood set in
transition, with 2001: A Space Odyssey coming down and Gone with the
Wind going up. To British clients coming off the street, the place was
simply amusingly American. They'd whisper to each other that it looked
like some god-awful mistake they had once seen in New York, and that
was before they saw the flocked wallpaper, the fuzzy-wuzzy stuff New
Yorkers associate with Tad's Steak House and Londoners with about a
thousand Indian restaurants.
One day my Frenchman, by this time a skeptical owner of eighty-six
million dollars of Olympia and York bonds (he eventually escaped with a
small profit and never forgave me for the hell I put him through), came
to lunch and ran his critical hand along our carved oak banister. He then
examined the nearby red and cream wallpaper as if it were a vast furry
zit. "I suppose we paid for this, didn't we?" he asked. The tone in his
voice suggested not so much disapproval of our high coin-missions as
dismay at the use to which the proceeds had been put.
The new trading floor, once you found it, seemed more than twice the
size of the forty-first floor in New York and was equipped with all the
latest gadgetry. Four men could (and did) use it to pass and punt a Nerf
football unconstrained in any direction by space. The vastness was
otherwise a hindrance, however, like shoes five sizes too big. The place
had none of the high-strung tension of the New York trading floor. What
little energy we generated dissipated in the rafters. The silence made us
feel lazy and enabled people to hide. Hiding is what people did when they
weren't doing business. I had the urge to walk out into the center of the
trading floor and shout, "Allialliincomefree," just to see who had
bothered to show up for work. The empty feeling of the place niggled
management. Having spent years in New York before being sent to
London, the managers associated noise with profits and silence with
losses.

Quick, just give me my money while there is still some left. That was the
general sentiment in the air at the end of 1986 for the aforementioned
reasons. As we moved into Victoria Plaza, a jury of managing directors
was forming in New York to divide the spoils. The money was handed out
on December 21, and till that time people thought and spoke of nothing
but bonuses. The way our business froze was fascinating but, I suppose,
predictable. This is the moment we had all been waiting for.
By edict from Gutfreund, a floor and a ceiling were set each year around
the bonuses of first- and second-year employees irrespective of their
achievements. It was a tradition for first- and second- year Salomonites to speculate about the likelihood of the band's being lifted.
Much of my time during the last six weeks of the year was therefore
spent fielding phone calls from and placing phone calls to my former
training classmates, now spread throughout the Salomon system. We
spoke of nothing but the band. There were two sorts of conversations.
First, we discussed the band as it applied to us all.
"Last year it was sixty-five to eighty-five [thousand dollars]," one or the
other would say.
"I heard it was fifty-five to ninety."
"No way they would make the band that wide first year out."
"How else are they going to pay the producers?"
"You think they give a shit about the producers? They're out to keep as
much for themselves as they can."
"Yeah, guess you're right, oops, gotta hop."
"Later."
And, second, we discussed the band as it applied to one of us specifically:
"If they don't pay me eighty, I'm going to Goldman," one or the other
would say.
"Aw, they'll pay you eighty. You're one of the biggest producers in the
class. Fuck, they're already ripping you off."
"Goldman would guarantee at least a hundred and eighty. These people
are screwing us."
"Yeah."
"Yeah."
"Yeah!"
"Yeah!"
"Gotta hop."

"Later."
Bonus day, when it arrived, was a enthralling reprieve from rny daily
routine of chatting with investors and placing bets in the markets.
Watching the faces of other people as they emerged from their
meetings was worth a thousand lectures on the meaning of money in our
small society. People responded in one of three ways when they heard
how much richer they were; with relief, with joy, and with anger. Most
felt some blend of the three. A few felt all three distinctly: relief when
told, joy when it occurred to them what to buy, and anger when they
heard that others of their level had been paid much more. But the look
on their faces was always the same no matter what the sizes of their
bonuses: They looked sick to their stomachs. It was as if they had eaten
too much chocolate pie.
Being paid was sheer misery for many. On January 1, 1987, 1986 would be
erased from memory except for a single number: the amount of money
you were paid. That number was the final summing-up. Imagine being told
you will meet with the divine Creator in a year's time to be told your
worth as a human being. You'd be a little edgy about the whole thing, too,
wouldn't you? That's roughly what we endured. People felt a wave of
pure emotion waft over them immediately on the heels of a year of
single-minded pursuit of success, and it made their stomachs churn.
Worse, they had to hide it. The game had to be played. It was rude to
gloat too soon after being paid and embarrassing to show anger. The
people who had it best felt unpunctuated relief. They had been paid
pretty much what they had expected. No surprise. No reaction. Good.
That made it easier to seem impassive. It was over.
My own compensation meeting was late in the day. I met with rny jungle
guide, Stu Willicker, and the sales manager of the London office, Bruce
Koepgen, in one of the Gone with the Wind dining rooms. My jungle guide
simply listened and smiled. Koepgen, said to be destined for greatness in
Salomon Brothers, spoke for the organization.
I'd like to say I was as cold and calculating as a hit man facing a Mafia
don after the job has been done. But that just wouldn't be true. I was
more on edge than I had expected. All I-or anyone else-really wanted to
know was the size of my bonus. But I had to sit through a much longer
speech, for reasons I didn't at first understand.
The managing director shuffled some papers in front of him, then began.

"I have seen a lot of people come through here and shoot the lights out
in their first year," he said, then named a few young managing directors
as examples. "But I have never seen anyone have the kind of
year that you have had." He began to list names again. "Not Bill, not Rich,
not Joe," he said. And then: "Not even [the Human Piranha]." Not even
the Human Piranha? Not even the Human Piranha!
"What can I say," he said, "but congratulations?" He spoke for about five
minutes and achieved the desired effect. When he finished, I was
prepared to pay him for the privilege of working at Salomon Brothers.
And I thought I knew how to sell. The boss put my small abilities to
shame. He pushed all the right buttons. Most of the cynicism and
bitterness I was developing for the organization melted. I felt deeply
reverent about the firm, my numerous bosses, John Gutfreund, the
AT&T trader, and everybody who had ever had anything to do with
Salomon Brothers except perhaps the opportunist. I didn't care about
money. I just wanted this man to approve of my performance. I began to
understand why they gave you a talk before they give you the money.
Like priests, paymasters in the Salomon empire followed a time-honored
pattern. The money always came as an afterthought and in a knot you had
to disentangle. "Last year you made ninety thousand dollars,"he said.
Forty-five was salary. So forty-five was bonus.
"Next year your salary will be sixty thousand dollars. Now let me explain
those numbers."
While he was explaining that I was paid more than anyone else in my
training class (I later learned that three others were paid as much), I
was converting ninety thousand dollars into British pounds (fifty-six
thousand) and putting that into perspective. It was certainly more than I
was worth in the abstract. It was more than I had contributed to
society; Christ, if social contribution had been the measure, I should
have been billed rather than paid at the end of the year. It was more
than my father had made when he was twenty-six, even factoring in
inflation, which I did. It was more than anyone else my age I knew made.
Ha! I was rich. I loved my employer. My employer loved me. I was happy.
Then the meeting ended.
And I thought again. When I had a moment to reflect, I decided I
wasn't so pleased. Weird, huh?This was Salomon Brothers, remember.
These were the same people who had me blowing up customers with
