Lauer has six selection criteria, but five are defensive in nature, aimed at
capital preservation. All five of these factors can be in place and he would
not consider purchasing a stock without the sixth—a catalyst. "The key
question," he says, is "what is going to make the stock go up?"
Watson's stock selection process contains two essential steps. First,
the identification of stocks that fulfill his value criteria, which is the easy
part of the process and merely defines the universe of stocks in which he
prospects for buy candidates. Second, the search for catalysts (recent or
impending) that will identify which of these value stocks have a compelling reason to move higher over the near term. To discover these catalysts, he conducts extensive communication with companies, as well as
their competitors, distributors, and consumers. By definition, every trade
requires a catalyst.
Masters has developed an entire trading model based primarily on
catalysts. Through years of research and observation, he has been able to
find scores of patterns in how stocks respond to catalysts. Although most
of these patterns may provide only a small edge by themselves, when
grouped together, they help identify high-probability trades.

17. Limiting the Downside by Focusing on Undervalued Stocks
A number of the traders interviewed restrict their stock selection to the
universe of undervalued securities. Watson focuses on the stocks with
relatively low price/earnings ratios (8 to 12). Lauer will look for stocks
that have witnessed market-adjusted declines of at least 50 percent.
Okumus buys stocks that have declined 60 percent or more off their
highs and are trading at price/earnings ratios under 12. He also prefers to
buy stocks with prices as close as possible to book value.
One reason all these traders focus on buying stocks that meet their
definition of value is that by doing so they limit the downside. As Lauer
explains when talking about using a large price decline as a selection
screen, "Right now, I'm only focusing on the question of how I make sure

It should be stressed that although a number of traders considered

undervaluation a necessary condition for purchasing a stock, none of

W I Z A R D IfSSQlNS

20. Most Novice Traders Focus on When to Get in and Forget About When
to Get Out
When to get out of a position is as important as when to get in. Any market strategy that ignores trade liquidation is by definition incomplete. A
liquidation strategy can include one or more of the following elements:
Stop-loss points. Detailed in item 15.
Profit objective. A number of traders interviewed (e.g., Okumus,
Cook) will liquidate a stock (or index) if the market reaches their predetermined profit target.
Time stop. A stock (or index) is liquidated if it fails to reach a target
within a specified time frame. Both Masters and Cook cited time stops
as a helpful trading strategy.
Violation of trade premise. A trade is immediately liquidated if the
reason for its implementation is contradicted. For example, when IBM,
which Cohen shorted in anticipation of poor earnings, reported betterthan-expected earnings, Cohen immediately covered his position.
Although he still took a large loss on the trade, the loss would have been
significantly greater if he had hesitated.
Counter-to-anticipated market behavior. (See item 21.)
Portfolio considerations. (See item 22.)
Some of these elements may make sense for all traders (e.g., exiting
on counter-to-anticipated market behavior); others are very dependent
on a trader's style. For example, the use of stops to limit losses is essential to Minervini, who uses a timing-based methodology, but is contradictory to the approach used by Lauer, Okumus, and Watson, who
tend to buy undervalued stocks after very sharp declines. (The latter
traders, however, would still use stop-loss strategies for short positions,
which are subject to open-ended losses.) As another example, profit
objectives, which are an integral part of some traders' methodologies,
could be detrimental to other traders and investors by limiting profit
potential.

WIZARD LESSON

reported lower earnings, as Lauer anticipated, but then rallied anyway,
Lauer covered his short position. In his words: "I may think [it's] ridiculous, but if the news I expected is out, and the market still does not
respond as I had anticipated, I am not going to fight it."
When 1 interviewed Cohen, he was bullish on the bond market,
which at the time was in a long-term decline. He gave me a number of
reasons why he believed the bond market would witness a substantial
rebound in the ensuing months, and he implemented a long position as I
sat next to him. Over the following few days, the bond market did indeed
witness a bounce, but the rally soon faltered, with bond prices sliding to
new lows. When I spoke to Cohen on a follow-up phone interview a
week after my visit to his firm, I asked him whether he was still long the
bond market, which he had been so bullish on several weeks earlier.
"No," Cohen replied, "you trade your theory and then let the market tell
you whether you are right."

22. The Question of When to Liquidate Depends Not Only on the Stock but
Also on Whether a Better Investment Can Be Identified
Investable funds are finite. Continuing to hold one stock position precludes using those funds to purchase another stock. Therefore, it may
often make sense to liquidate an investment that still looks sound if an
even better investment opportunity exists.
Watson, for example, employs what he calls a pig-at-the-trough philosophy. He is constantly upgrading his portfolio—replacing stocks that
he still expects will go higher with other stocks that appear to have an
even better return/risk outlook. Similarly, Lauer will often liquidate a
stock after it achieves his target of a double, even if he still believes it has
significant upside potential, because by that point he will usually be able
to identify a better investment opportunity.
Thus, the key question an investor needs to ask regarding a current
holding is not "Will the stock move higher?" but rather "Is this stock still a
better investment than any other equity I can hold with the same capital?"

21. If Market Behavior Doesn't Conform to Expectations, Get Out
A number of traders mentioned that if the market fails to respond to an
event (e.g., earnings report) as expected, they will view it as evidence that
they are wrong and liquidate their position. For example, when Intel

23. The Virtue of Patience
Whatever criteria you use to select a stock and determine an entry level,
you need to have the patience to wait for those conditions to be met. For

WIZARD LESSONS;
example, Okumus will patiently wait for a stock to decline to his "bargain"
price level, even if it means missing more than 80 percent of the stocks
he wants to buy. In mid-1999, Okumus was only 13 percent invested
because, as he stated at the time, "There are no bargains around. I'm not
risking the money I'm investing until 1 find stocks that are very cheap."

24. The Importance of Setting Goals
Doctor Kiev, who has worked with both Olympic athletes and professional traders, is a strong advocate of the power of setting goals. He contends that believing that an outcome is possible makes it achievable.
Believing in a goal, however, is not sufficient. To achieve a goal, Kiev
says, you need not only to believe in it, but also to commit to it. Promising results to others, he maintains, is particularly effective.
Doctor Kiev stresses that exceptional performance requires setting
goals that are outside a trader's comfort zone. Thus, the trader seeking to
excel needs to continually redefine goals so that they are always a stretch.
Traders also need to monitor their performance to make sure they are on
track toward reaching their goals and to diagnose what is holding them
back if they are not.

25. This Time Is Never Different
Every time there is a market mania, the refrain is heard, "This time is different," followed by some explanation of why the particular bull market
will continue, despite already stratospheric prices. When gold soared to
near $1,000 an ounce in 1980, the explanation was that gold was "different from every other commodity." Supposedly, the ordinary laws of
supply and demand did not apply to gold because of its special role as a
store of value in an increasingly inflationary world. (Remember doubledigit inflation?) When the Japanese stock market soared in the 1980s,
with price/earnings ratios often five to ten times as high as corresponding
levels for U.S. companies, the bulls were ready with a reassuring explanation: The Japanese stock market is different because companies hold
large blocks of one another's shares, and they rarely sell these holdings.
As this book was being written, there was an explosive rally in technology stocks, particularly Internet issues. Stocks with no earnings, or
even a glimmer of the prospect of earnings, were being bid up to incredi-

WIZARD LESSONS
ble levels. Once again, there was no shortage of pundits to explain why
this time was different; why earnings were no longer important (at least
for these companies). Warnings about the aspects of mania in the current market were mentioned by a number of the traders interviewed. By
the time this manuscript was submitted, many of the Internet stocks had
already witnessed enormous percentage declines. The message, however,
remains relevant because there will always be some market or sector that
rekindles the cry, "This time is different." Just remember: It never is.

26. Fundamentals Are Not Bullish or Bearish in a Vacuum; They Are
Bullish or Bearish Only Relative to Price
A great company could be a terrible investment if its price rise has
already more than discounted the bullish fundamentals. Conversely, a
company that has been experiencing problems and is the subject of negative news could be a great investment if its price decline has more than
discounted the bearish information.
In his interview, Lauer provided a number of excellent examples of
this principle, among them Microsoft, an outstanding company in many
respects, but one he considered a very poor investment. In Lauer's
words, "This business is not about investing in great companies, it's about
profiting from inefficiently priced stocks." When asked for her advice to
investors, Galante expressed a similar sentiment: "A good company could
be a bad stock and vice versa."

27. Successful Investing and Trading Mas Nothing to Do with Forecasting
Lescarbeau, for example, emphasized that he never made any predictions and scoffed at those who claimed to have such abilities. When
asked why he laughed when the subject of market forecasting came up,
he replied: "I'm laughing about the people who do make predictions
about the stock market. They don't know. Nobody knows."
Lauer contrasted the distinction between forecasting and the analysis
of known information: "Any investment approach that is heavily reliant
on accurate forecasting . . . is inherently risky. . . . All that is required for
successful investing is the commonsense analysis of today's facts and the
courage to act on your convictions."

W I Z A R D LESSONS*

WIZARD LESSONS

28. Never Assume a Market Fact Based on What You Read or What Others
Say; Verify Everything Yourself

sure that he worked alone, even when the level of assets under management would have seemed to dictate the need for a staff. In addition, to

When Cook first inquired about the interpretation of the tick (the number of New York Stock Exchange stocks whose last trade was an uptick,
minus the number whose last trade was a downtick), he was told by an
experienced broker that if the tick was very high, it was a buy signal. By
doing his own research and recording his own observations, he discovered that the truth was exactly the opposite.
Bender began his option trading career by questioning the very core
premises underlying the option pricing models used throughout the
industry. Convinced that the conventional wisdom was wrong, he developed a methodology that was actually based on betting against the implications of the option pricing models in wide use.

safely vent his tip-following, gambling urges, he set aside a small
amount of capital—too small to do any damage—to be used for such
trades.
Doctor Kiev describes his work with traders as "a dialogue process to
find out what [personal flaws are] impeding a person's performance."
Some examples of these personal flaws he helped traders identify
included:
*• a trader whose bargain-hunting predisposition caused him to miss
many good trades because he was always trying to get a slightly better

29. Never, Ever Listen to Other Opinions
To succeed in the markets, it is essential to make your own decisions.
Numerous traders cited listening to others as their worst blunder. Walton
and Minervini lost their entire investment stake because of this misjudgment. Talking about this experience, Minervini said, "My mistake had
been surrendering the decision-making responsibility to someone else."
Watson got off cheap, learning this lesson at the bargain basement price
of a blown grade on a class project. Cohen talks about someone he knows
who has the skill to be a great trader but will never be one because "he
refuses to make his own decisions."

30. Beware of Ego
Walton warns, "The odd thing about this industry is that no matter how
successful you become, if you let )'our ego get involved, one bad phone
call can put you out of business."

entry price;
> a trader whose scaled-down entry approach was in conflict with his
experiencing these trades as a loss, even though they were entered in
accordance with his plan;
*• a trader who, to his detriment, always kept a partial position after he
made the decision to get out because of his anxiety that the stock
would go higher after he liquidated.
Awareness alone is not enough; a trader must also be willing to make
the necessary changes. Cook, who also works with traders, has seen people with good trading skills fail because they wouldn't deal with their personal weaknesses. One example he offered was a client who was
addicted to the excitement of trading on expiration Fridays. Although the
trader did well across all other market sessions, these far more numerous
small gains were more than swamped by his large losses on the four-peryear expiration Fridays. Despite being made aware of his weakness, the
trader refused to change and ultimately wiped out.

32. Don't Get Emotionally Involved
51. The Need for Self-Awareness
Each trader must be aware of personal weaknesses that may impede
trading success and make the appropriate adjustments. For example,
Walton ultimately realized his weakness was listening to other people's
opinions. His awareness of this personal flaw compelled him to make

Ironically, although many people are drawn to the markets for excitement, the Market Wizards frequently cite keeping emotion out of trad-

ing as essential advice to investors. Watson says, "You have to invest
without emotions. If you let emotions get involved, you will make bad
decisions."

WIZARD LESSONS

33. View Personal Problems As a Major Cautionary Flag to Your Trading
Health problems or emotional stress can sometimes decimate a trader's
performance. For example, all of Cook's losing periods (after he became a
consistent winning trader) coincided with times of personal difficulties
(e.g., a painful injury, his father's heart attack). It is a sign of Walton's
maturity as a trader that he decided to take a trading hiatus when an
impending divorce coincided with a rare losing period. The morale is: Be
extremely vigilant to signs of deteriorating trading performance if you are
experiencing health problems or other personal difficulties. During such
times, it is probably a good idea to cut trading size and to be prepared to
stop trading altogether at the first sign of trouble.

34. Analyze Your Past Trades for Possible Insights
Analyzing your past trades might reveal patterns that could be used to
improve future performance. For example, in analyzing his past trades,
Minervini found that his returns would have been substantially higher if
he had capped his losses to a fixed maximum level. This discovery
prompted a change in his trading rules that dramatically improved his
performance.

35. Don't Worry About Looking Stupid
Never let your market decisions be restricted or influenced by concern
over what others might think. As a perfect example of the danger of worrying about other people's opinions, early in his career, Minervini held on
to many losing positions long after he decided they should be liquidated
because of concern about being teased by his broker.

36. The Danger of Leverage
Lauer learned his lesson about leverage during the October 1987 crash.
The problem was not the crash or his stock selection methodology, as his
portfolio recovered in due time, but rather his use of leverage, which
resulted in a margin call, forcing premature liquidation of his positions.
Therefore Lauer's use of leverage (full margin) didn't merely double his
loss on the initial decline, but more importantly prevented him from participating in the subsequent recovery.

Ironically, even though Mark Cook won on most of his trades in his
initial market endeavor, he wiped out because of excessive leverage. If
you are too heavily leveraged, all it takes is one mistake to knock you out
of the game.

37. The Importance of Position Size
Superior performance requires not only picking the right stock, but also
having the conviction to implement major potential trades in meaningful
size. Doctor Kiev, who sees Cohen's trading statistics, said that nearly
100 percent of Cohen's very substantial gains come from 5 percent of his
trades. Cohen himself estimates that perhaps only about 55 percent of
his trades are winners. Implicit in these statements is that when Cohen
bets big, he is usually right. Indeed, his uncanny skill in determining
which trades warrant stepping on the accelerator is an essential element
in his success.
Lauer makes a similar point when he says, "I tell my guys that if we
come up with a good idea, and as a firm we only buy 50,000 or 100,000
shares instead of a million plus, then that trade is a mistake." As another
example, even though Lescarbeau is a systematic trader, he will occasionally increase the leverage on trades that he perceives have a particularly high likelihood of winning. Interestingly, he has never lost money on
any one of these trades.
The point is that all trades are not the same. Trades that are perceived
to have particularly favorable potential relative to risk or a particularly
high probability of success should be implemented in a larger size than
other trades. Of course, what constitutes "larger size" is relative to each
individual, but the concept is as applicable to the trader whose average
position size is one hundred shares as it is to the fund manager whose
average position size is one million shares.

38. Complexity Is Not a Necessary Ingredient for Success
Guazzoni's initial strategy when he formed his own fund was based on a
very simple idea—buying restricted shares at a deep discount. Although
the idea was very simple, it achieved the magic combination of high
return and very low risk that has eluded far more complex approaches.

wrz A-RISKS sons
39. View Trading As a Vocation, Not a Hobby
As both Cook and Minervini said, "Hobbies cost money." Walton offered

W I Z A R D LESSORS

Lynch's principle that if you can't summarize the reasons why you own a
stock in four sentences, you probably shouldn't own it.

similar advice, "Either go at it full force, or don't go at it at all. Don't
dabble."

44. Use Common Sense in Investing

40. Trading, Like Any Other Business Endeavor, Requires a Sound
Business Plan

Taking a cue from his role model, Peter Lynch, Watson is a strong proponent of commonsense research. As he illustrated through numerous
examples, the most important research one can often do is simply trying
a company's product or visiting its mall outlets in the case of retailers.

Cook advises that every trader should develop a business plan that
answers all the following essential questions:

> What markets will be traded?
> What is the capitalization?
> How will orders be entered?

> What type of drawdown will cause trading cessation and reevaluation?
O- What are the profit goals?
> What procedure will be used for analyzing trades?
> How will trading procedures change if personal problems arise?
> How will the working environment be set up?
> What rewards will the trader take for successful trading?
> What will the trader do to continue to improve market skills?

41. Define High-Probability Trades
Although the methodologies of the traders interviewed differ greatly, in
their own style, they have all found ways of identifying high-probability
trades.

42. Find Low-Risk Opportunities
Many of the traders interviewed have developed methods that focus on
identifying low-risk trades. Guazzoni says, "Every period of time has its
own opportunities where you can find investments that are extremely
discounted and have a very well protected downside."

43. Be Sure You Have a Good Reason for Any Trade You Make
As Cohen explains, buying a stock because it is "too low" or selling it
because it is "too high" is not a good reason. Watson paraphrases Peter

45. Buy Stocks That Are Difficult to Buy
Walton says, "One of the things I like to see when I'm trying to buy stocks
is that they become very difficult to buy. I put an order in to buy Dell at
42, and I got a fill back at 45. I love that." Minervini says, "Stocks that are
ready to blast off are usually very difficult to buy without pushing the market higher." He says that one of the mistakes "less skilled traders" make is

"waitfing] to buy these stocks on a pullback, which never comes."

46. Don't Let a Prior Lower-Priced Liquidation Keep You from Purchasing a
Stock That You Would Have Bought Otherwise
Walton considers his willingness to buy back good stocks, even when
they are trading higher than where he got out, as one of the changes that
helped him succeed as a trader. Minervini stresses the need for having a
plan to get back into a trade if you're stopped out. "Otherwise," he says,
"you'll often find yourself . . . watching the position go up 50 percent or
100 percent while you're on the sidelines."

47. Holding on to a Losing Stock Can Be a Mistake, Even If It Bounces
Back, If the Money Could Have Been Utilized More Effectively
Elsewhere
When a stock is down a lot from where it was purchased, it is very easy
for the investor to rationalize, "How can I get out now? I can't lose much
more anyway." Even if this is true, this type of thinking can keep money
tied up in stocks that are going nowhere, causing the trader to miss other
opportunities. Talking about why he dumped some stocks after their
prices had already declined as much as 70 percent from where he got in,
