Bottom points to determine it, and each down trendline, two Tops. In some cases,
the two determining points were formed only a few weeks apart, as in August and
September 1945. The Bottom points that fixed the early 1946 up trendline, on the
other hand, were months apart — February and June.
Many other experimental lines might have been drawn on this chart originally,
including several uptrends whose Intermediate authority was questionable because
they were “too steep” — as in early 1944, late 1945, and early 1946.
Only final trendlines are shown here.
There are here also some interesting examples of Pullbacks (after trendline penetration) which are discussed on the following pages. Note July 1944, April 1945,
September 1945, and May 1947.

How Trendlines Are Drawn
But first, how are trendlines drawn? A straight line is mathematically determined by any two points along it. In order to draw a trendline, therefore,
we require two determining points — two established Top Reversal points
to fix a Down Trendline and two established Bottom Reversal points to fix
an Up Trendline. The principle here is the same as the one we laid down in
our specifications for drawing Triangle boundary lines in Chapter 8. The fact
is that boundary lines of Triangles and Rectangles, as well as necklines of
Head-and-Shoulders Formations, are simply special types of trendlines.

AU3772_book.fm Page 256 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

256

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Suppose we start with a Major Bottom point and describe how a series
of Up Trendlines might develop therefrom. To make this first illustration
simple, let us assume that the Bear Market Bottom in our stock consisted of
a Rectangle area between 6½ and 8, and that the last move in this formation
arose from the 6½ level, broke through the pattern’s Top at 8, and proceeded
to 9. From 9, prices reacted to 8 and then headed back up again. As soon as
this last rally had gone far enough to leave the dip to 8 showing in the clear
as a Minor Bottom, we could draw our first Up Trendline because we then
had two Bottom points, the second (8) higher than the first (6½), to fix its
slope. This would be a Minor Up Trendline. We would rule it in lightly on
our chart in pencil, and extend it on up and ahead for, perhaps, a week or
more. (It will help you to visualize our example if you sketch it on a scrap
of chart paper.)
To proceed, suppose prices push up to 10, then move sideways for a few
days, or dip slightly, until they have approached and touched, once more,
our extended Minor Trendline. Then they start to move up in a third advance,
but run into supply again without making much progress, quickly make a
fourth contact with the trendline, hesitate, and then break down through it.
If prices now close clearly below the line, and if, in addition, there has been
some pickup in trading volume evident on the penetration, we may conclude
that our first Minor Trend is completed, and that our stock either will build
some sort of Consolidation Pattern before it stages another advance, or will
suffer a more extensive “Correction” than any of the brief dips it registered
during its first Minor Upswing.
The whole Minor Uptrend we have described as an example in the
foregoing paragraphs might well have run its course in 2 weeks, and our
first trendline would then have been very steep — too steep, obviously, to
hold for any very long period of time. Now, let us assume that a series of
downward fluctuations produces the more extensive correction which we
have foreseen as one probability following the trendline break, and that this
carries prices back to the Support Level set up at the Top of the original
Rectangle, i.e., at 8. (From our previous Support–Resistance studies, we
would recognize this as a prime “buy spot.”) Assuming that subsequent
developments pursue a normal course, prices should not linger long at 8,
but should start promptly on a new series of advancing fluctuations. As soon
as this becomes evident and the new Bottom at 8 is “in the clear,” we can
rule in a new trendline across the original base point at 6½ and the new
point at 8. This should be, and probably is, an Intermediate Up Trendline
which will not be penetrated for several weeks, and maybe for several
months, until the Intermediate Advance tops out.
Then, if that Intermediate Top takes the form of a Head-and-Shoulders
Reversal Pattern, our Intermediate Up Trendline may be broken by the
recession from the top of the head to the neckline. As a rule, however, the
final advance in a strong Intermediate Move accelerates far enough away
from the extended trendline to leave room (to the right on the chart) for

AU3772_book.fm Page 257 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen:

Trendlines and Channels

257

80
76
72

1935–1936

68
64
60
56
52
ATCHINSON, TOPEKA, & SANTA FE SF
48
Sales
100’s
50
40
30
20
10
OCTOBER
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY
MARCH
FEBRUARY
5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 7 14 21 28

FIGURE 148. This 1935–36 daily chart of Atchison illustrates how the latter part of
a long, strong Intermediate Advance may accelerate away from its trendline. (Notice
the action in late January and early February.) Prices dropped back to 66 in April
1936 after this Up Trendline was broken at the end of March. Note also that at the
point where the December 1935 reaction met Support, the trendline coincided with
a Triangle apex level. Such “coincidences” appear frequently in technical studies.

considerable pattern construction before the line is again touched and penetrated. Hence, the actual puncturing of the trendline is more apt to occur
either on the decline from the right shoulder to the neckline, or at about the
same time as prices break down through the neckline to complete the Headand-Shoulders signal. It is surprising to see how often the two lines, neckline
and trendline, are broken simultaneously. In other instances, and there are
many of them also, in which the trendline is the first to be punctured, perhaps
shortly after prices turn down from the right shoulder, we do not have to
wait for a neckline break but can take action at once. Here is one type of
trendline indication which produces a working signal a little earlier, and
often at a much more favorable price level, than is given by the completion
of a Reversal Formation.

Arithmetic vs. Logarithmic Scale
By this time, the more mathematically inclined among our readers must have
begun to ponder the difference between trendlines projected on the ordinary

AU3772_book.fm Page 258 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

258

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

or arithmetic scale and on the logarithmic or ratio scale. A series of points
which fall on a perfectly straight, up-sloping line on arithmetic chart paper
will, when transferred to a semilogarithmic sheet, produce a curved line that
rises sharply at first and then gradually rounds over. And points which fall
on a straight line on a semilogarithmic sheet will produce an accelerating
curve on an arithmetic sheet, a line which slants up more and more steeply
the farther it is projected.
As a matter of fact, this variance is of little or no importance in defining
Minor Trends, since they seldom run far enough for the dissimilar characteristics of the two types of scales to become effective. And the same holds
true for average Intermediate Moves of normal slope. But when it comes to
very long and strong Intermediates, the divergence may become marked,
may make a considerable difference in the time and level of ultimate
trendline penetration. Therein lies one of the strongest reasons for using
semilogarithmic paper in charting stocks for technical analysis. But let us
postpone further discussion of this point until we take up Major Trends, and
go on now with the Intermediate Lines which are much the same on either
type of scale. And, for the present, let us concentrate on Intermediate
Uptrends. (Intermediate Moves are emphasized rather than Minor for the
obvious reason that the latter are of little practical importance in either
trading or investing.)
To go back to first principles, and granting that price advances trend up
in more or less straight lines, it follows that if we can find and draw the lines
that accurately define those trends, they will serve two purposes, as follows:
1. When the trendline is broken (i.e., when prices drop down through
it in decisive fashion), it signals that the advance has run out. It calls
time for the intermediate-term trader to sell out that issue, and look
for reinvestment opportunities elsewhere.
2. When a small Top Reversal Pattern forms on the chart of an issue
well up and away from that issue’s Intermediate Up Trendline, so
that there apparently is room for the downside implications of the
Reversal Formations to be carried out before the trendline is violated,
then the intermediate-trend trader may well decide to ignore the
small Reversal Pattern. He can hold on so long as the trendline holds.
The advantages of the first-named trendline function are obvious. Those
of the second, though less obvious to the inexperienced, are equally important to the investor who has learned that it is an expensive practice to switch
out of every holding as soon as it shows evidence of a Minor Setback,
provided the chance of further Intermediate Advance still exists.
To accomplish these purposes it is necessary, as we have said, to find
and draw the line that accurately defines the Intermediate Trend, and then
to recognize when that line has been broken in decisive fashion. Our earlier

AU3772_book.fm Page 259 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen:

Trendlines and Channels

259

36
34

CRANE COMPANY

CR

1945

H
S

S

32
30

26
Sales
100’s
125
100
75
50
25

XD .25

XD .25

28

JANUARY FEBRUARY
MARCH
MAY
JUNE
APRIL
6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30

FIGURE 149. Trendlines which defined the short-term swings in Crane Company
in 1945. Note that three Bottoms formed on the first up-line and that the third rally
(late February) in this advance failed to reach a line drawn across the earlier Tops
parallel to the Basic Trendline. A failure of this sort frequently precedes a break in
the trend. The same thing happened at the end of the second uptrend in late May.
“Failures” and the use of parallel or “Return” Lines will be discussed later in this
chapter.
The downtrend in March assumed Wedge form. Observe how the April 6 reaction
met Support at its previously penetrated Top line. In June, a rally met Resistance at
the previously broken Up Trendline. Such Pullbacks are common. The small Complex
Head-and-Shoulders in June was never completed, since prices did not break down
out of it by the required margin.

quick review of how a trendline is constructed did not attempt to cover these
points thoroughly.

Tests of Authority
Here are some of the tests which may be applied to judge the technical
validity, the authority, of an Up Trendline:
A. The greater the number of Bottoms that have developed at (or very
near) a trendline in the course of a series of Minor Up Waves, the
greater the importance of that line in the technical sense. With each
successive “test,” the significance of the line is increased. A first and
tentative Up Trendline can be drawn as soon as two Bottoms have
formed, the second higher than the first, but if prices move back to

AU3772_book.fm Page 260 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

260

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

that line a third time, make a third Bottom there and start a renewed
advance, then the validity of that line as a true definition of the trend
has been confirmed by the action of the market. Should a fourth
Bottom later form on it, and prices move up away from it again, its
value as a trend criterion is very considerably enhanced, etc.
B. The length of the line, i.e., the longer it has held without being
penetrated downside by prices, the greater its technical significance.
This principle, however, requires some qualification. If your trendline
is drawn from two original Bottoms which are very close together in
time — say, less than a week apart — it is subject to error; it may be
too steep or (more often) too flat. If the latter, prices may move away
from it and stay high above it for a long time; they may then turn
down and have declined well along in an Intermediate Correction
before the trendline thus drawn is reached. But if the trendline has
been drawn from Bottoms which are far enough apart to have developed as independent wave components of the trend you are trying
to define, with a good rally and “open water” between them, then it
is more apt to be the true trendline. Greater weight should be given
to the number of Bottoms that have formed on a trendline (Test 1)
than to its length alone (Test 2).
C. The angle of the trendline (to the horizontal) is also, to some degree,
a criterion of its validity as a true delimiter of Intermediate Trend. A
very steep line can easily be broken by a brief sideways Consolidation
move — as, for example, by a compact Flag forming on an advance
of the “mast” type — only to have prices shoot up again in another
extensive advance. Such steep lines are of little forecasting value to
the technician. The flatter, more nearly horizontal the trendline, the
more important it is technically and, in consequence, the greater the
significance of any downside break through it.
But “steep,” as applied to stock trends, is a relative term, and one which,
we must frankly confess, defies exact definition. Experience, which can only
be gained by studying many charts and by actually building and working
with them over a period of many months, brings an almost intuitive ability
to distinguish between a trendline which is “too steep to hold” and one
whose angle of rise is reasonable and should be maintained until such time
as the trend is actually reversed from Intermediate Up to Intermediate Down.
Trend slopes will vary from stock to stock according to their characteristic
market habits. They will vary also according to the stages of the Primary
Cycle — tending to become somewhat steeper in its later phases. The more
chart history you have on any particular issue in which you are interested,
the better able you will be to judge its present trend.
(The foregoing statement, we might remark, applies to the interpretation
of most other technical patterns and phenomena as well as to trendlines.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 261 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen:

Trendlines and Channels

261

32
30
COMMERCIAL SOLVENTS

CV

28
26
24
22

1946

20
Sales
100’s
250
200
150
100
50
FEBRUARY
JANUARY
5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 2

MAY
MARCH
APRIL
JUNE
9 16 23 30 6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29

FIGURE 150. Intermediate Downtrend and Uptrend in Commercial Solvents in
1946. Note the increased volume on the March 30 penetration of the basic Down
Trendline (and, at the same time, a breakout from a small Head-and-Shoulders
Bottom). The drop through the lower parallel at the end of February had no technical
significance. The Up Trendline from the March low was broken on June 14, simultaneously with a breakout from a Descending Triangle which, as it turned out, was
the final Bull Market Top.

One clue to relative steepness is afforded to those who employ the
TEKNIPLAT semilogarithmic chart sheet, which has been used for most of
the illustrations in this book. When projected on this scale, Intermediate
Uptrends on the daily charts, in the great majority of issues selling in the
10 to 50 range, rise at an angle of approximately 30 degrees to the horizontal.
Some will be a trifle flatter, some a trifle steeper, but it is surprising to see
how often the trendline falls very close to the 30-degree slope in stocks of
average volatility and activity. Thin, highly speculative issues and heavy
investment stocks offer exceptions, the former usually steeper and the latter
flatter. The semilogarithmic scale has the virtue, of course, of reducing all
movements, regardless of price level, to a ratio or percentage basis. On a
straight arithmetic scale, the trendline will ordinarily be steeper on a stock
trading in the 50 range, for example, than on an issue selling around 15.
On weekly charts employing the same price scale, the angle of Intermediate Advance will, of course, be much steeper than on the daily plotting.
Different scaling will produce different angles. It is pure happenstance that
the TEKNIPLAT sheets tend to produce the 30-degree ascending line.

AU3772_book.fm Page 262 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

262

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Validity of Penetration
We have these three criteria, then, for appraising the authority or accuracy
of an Intermediate Up Trendline: (1) the number of times it has been “tested”
or contacted without breaking, (2) its length or duration, and (3) its angle of
ascent. Given a trendline which, by the application of one or more of these
criteria (preferably by at least two of them), appears to be a reasonably
accurate delimiter of the trend, our next problem is to determine when it
has been finally and definitely broken.
Again, we can set up three tests or criteria, two of which are practically
identical with the rules laid down in earlier chapters for determining decisive
breakouts from Reversal or Consolidation Formations. The first is extent of
penetration. To be decisive, prices must not only push through the line, but
close beyond it by a margin equal to about 3% of the stock’s price. This does
not need to be accomplished in a single day, although it often is. The 3%
penetration may come as a result of 2 or 3 days of gradual decline.
The second is volume of trading. We saw how activity should always be
expected to rise notably on a genuine upside breakout from an Area Pattern,
but need not increase to confirm a downside break. We have seen how, in
many cases, volume does not show much increase on the first day of downbreak from Descending Triangles, for example, but usually picks up rapidly
as the decline proceeds. In our present discussion, we are dealing with Up
Trendlines, and their penetration is, therefore, analogous to a downside
breakout. We should expect the same rules to apply, and in general, they do.
Given a close beyond the line by a price margin of 3%, it is not necessary
for volume to have expanded much at that point to confirm the validity of
the penetration.
The fact is, however, that the breaking of an Intermediate Up Trendline,
much more often than not, is attended by some visible intensification of
trading activity. To that extent, then, an increase in volume may be regarded
as confirmation of a decisive penetration. It is a particularly useful adjunct
in borderline cases. If, for example, prices start to decline from a point
somewhat above the trendline, move down through it on conspicuously
expanding turnover, and close beyond it, say, only 2% of the price but at or
near the bottom of the day’s range, our 3% margin rule has not been satisfied,
but the lesser margin plus the volume action may be construed as decisive.
Beware, however, and do not be stampeded into a hasty commitment
by the shakeout move which cracks down through a trendline with a great
flurry of activity — perhaps several minutes of late tape — and then turns
up again to close the day back above the trend or at least very close to it.
This may very well be — in fact, usually is — a false move so far as that
particular moment is concerned. But watch the next few days’ performance
very closely; the technical situation is evidently critical, else a shakeout could
not have been easily staged.

AU3772_book.fm Page 263 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter fourteen:

Trendlines and Channels

263

64
60
56
52
48
44
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26

PHILLIPS PETROLEUM P

1935–1938

24
22
20
19
18
17

Sales
100’s
1000
800
600
400
200

J

A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J
1935
1936

F M A M J J A S O N D J
1937

F M A M
1938

FIGURE 151. Valid trendline penetration and its normal consequences — Reaction
or Consolidation — is illustrated on nearly every chart in this chapter and on many
others throughout the book. The above weekly chart of Phillips Petroleum, however,
is reproduced here to show an outstanding exception. The Intermediate Up Trendline
projected from “P’s” September 1936 low up across its early October and late November Bottoms was penetrated downside decisively the third week of May 1937.
Moreover, a Multiple Head-and-Shoulders Top Reversal Pattern had been forming
since February, with a critical neckline at 52. And the then current Bull Market had
already run for 4 years; “P” had come all the way up from 2! Cover up the chart
from July 1, 1937 on, and you will agree that there was plenty of reason for any
technician to sell at once without waiting for the 52 neckline to be broken. But this,
as we have said, was one of the exceptions which occur to all technical patterns and
rules. “P” turned right around and shot up to 64 before it was finished. Nevertheless,
developments such as this carry a valuable warning. They very seldom appear unless
the Major Trend has almost run out; any further rise is dangerous to follow.

The third test is also one that applies particularly to breaks which are
borderline so far as margin of penetration is concerned. Suppose a stock
which is quoted in the neighborhood of 40 declines through a well-established Intermediate Up Trendline and closes 1 or 1⅛ points below it — a
margin which is only slightly less than our specified 3% — without much,
if any, enlargement in trading volume. Suppose it fluctuates there for a day
or two in a dull and narrow market, and then starts to rally. If there is no
pickup in activity on this recovery move — if prices simply edge up feebly

AU3772_book.fm Page 264 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

264

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

to the underside of the trendline and tend to “round over” there without
being able to close clearly above it — then the situation is indeed critical,
and the slightest sign of renewed selling pressure may be taken as a signal
that the uptrend has been decisively broken.
Such a return move as we have described in the preceding paragraph is
known as a Throwback or Pullback. We have previously described analogous
developments which follow breakouts from Head-and-Shoulders and other
patterns, and will have more to say about them in connection with trendlines
later on.
The three tests we have been discussing, which help to establish the
validity of a trendline penetration, cannot, unfortunately, be applied inflexibly and without a modicum of judgment. The majority of Intermediate
Trendlines can hardly be said to possess the precision of pattern boundary
lines, and even in the latter, some leeway must be allowed. There are exceptions, as we have taken occasion to remark several times before, to every
technical rule of price action. But judgment in the establishing of significant
trendlines and in interpreting their penetrations does come with experience.
