
Mass Psychology

Each price represents the consensus of value of all market participants at the
moment of transaction. Closing price reflects the most important consensus
of the day because the settlement of traders' accounts depends on it. When
the market closes higher, bulls make money and bears lose. When the market
closes lower, bears make money and bulls lose.
Most traders in all markets pay more attention to closing prices than to
any other prices. In the futures markets, money is transferred from losers' to
winners' accounts at the end of each trading day. RSI shows whether bulls or
bears are stronger at closing time- the crucial money-counting time in the
market.

Trading Rules

RSI gives three types of trading signals. They are, in order of importance,
divergences, charting patterns, and the level of RSI.
Bullish and Bearish Divergences

Divergences between RSI and prices give the strongest buy and sell signals.
They tend to occur at major tops and bottoms. They show when the trend is
weak and ready to reverse (Figure 31-2).
1. Bullish divergences give buy signals. They occur when prices fall to a

31. RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX

165
f

Figure 31-2. Seven-Day Relative Strength Index
RSI gives its best trading signals when i t diverges from prices. Its
strongest divergences are those in which prices rise to a new high or fall
to a new low, while RSI fails to cross its reference line.
RSI tends to break its trendlines ahead of prices. In addition to the
ones marked, you can find several other examples on this chart where
the breaking of RSI trendlines identifies turning points in the Swiss Franc.
At the right edge of the chart, as soon as RSI breaks above its trendline, it
will confirm a bullish divergence and give a strong buy signal.

new low but RSI makes a more shallow bottom than during its previous decline. Buy as soon as RSI turns up from its second bottom, and
place a protective stop below the latest minor price low. Buy signals
are especially strong if the first RSI bottom is below its lower reference line and the second bottom is above that line.
2. Bearish divergences give sell signals. They occur when prices rally to
a new peak but RSI makes a lower top than during the previous rally.
Sell short as soon as RSI turns down from its second top, and place a
protective stop above the latest minor high. Sell signals are especially
strong if the first RSI top is above its upper reference line and the second top is below it.

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

166

Charting Patterns

Classical charting methods work better with Relative Strength Index than
with other indicators. Trendlines, support and resistance, and head-andshoulders patterns work well with RSI. RSI often completes these patterns a
few days in advance of prices, providing hints of likely trend changes. For
example, RSI trendlines are usually broken one or two days before price
trendlines.
3. When RSI breaks its downtrendline, place an order to buy above the
price trendline in order to catch an upside breakout.
4. When RSI breaks its uptrendline, place an order to sell short below the

price trendline to catch a downside breakout.
RSI Levels

When RSI rises above its upper reference line, it shows that bulls are strong
but the market is overbought and entering its sell zone. When RSI declines
below its lower reference line, it shows that bears are strong but the market
is oversold and entering its buy zone.
It pays to buy using overbought signals of daily RSI only when the
weekly trend is up. It pays to sell short using sell signals of daily RSI only
when the weekly trend is down (see Section 43).

5. Buy when RSI declines below its lower reference line and then rallies
above it.
6. Sell short when RSI rises above its upper reference line and then
crosses below it.
More on RSI

Some traders try to find deeper meaning in RSI patterns. Some analysts have
described formations called positive and negative reversals, which they
said forecasted the extent of any price move using RSI patterns. So far, there
have been no reports of conspicuous success using these patterns from anyone but their promoters.

The Neglected Essentials

32. VOLUME
Volume represents the activity of traders and investors. Each unit of volume
in the market reflects the action of two persons: One trader sells a share and
another buys a share, or one buys a contract and another sells a contract.
Daily volume is the number of contracts or shares traded in one day.
Traders usually plot volume as a histogram-vertical bars whose height
reflects each day's volume (Figure 32-1). They usually draw it underneath
prices. Changes in volume show how bulls and bears react to price swings.
Changes in volume provide clues as to whether trends are likely to continue
or to reverse.
Some traders ignore volume. They think that prices already reflect all
information known to the market. They say, "You get paid on price and not
on volume." Professionals, on the other hand, know that analyzing volume
can help them understand markets deeper and trade better.
There are three ways to measure volume:
1. The actual number of shares or contracts traded. For example, the
New York Stock Exchange reports volume this way. This is the most
objective way of measuring volume.
2. The number of trades that took place. For example, the London Stock
Exchange reports volume this way. This method is less objective
because it does not distinguish between a 100-share trade and a 5000share trade.

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

168

.. Silver

.. Volume

0

Figure 32-1.

Q

..

468,l

..

446,7

.

77799

..
..

58349
38988

Volume

To interpret volume, you need t
A. An increase in volume
ahead. Buy or add to longs.
B. Prices jump on more than double the average volume. It is a sign of
a potential blow-off movenn long positds3
C. Prices rally near the level of their previous peak, but volume is
much lower. This bearish divergence signals a t o F n g s and
volume. Such climax bottoms are usustops on short p o s i t i o a
E. Silver falls to a new low, but volume is lower than it was at point
D-a typical retest of a climax b o t t o e e r shorts a n d 3
F. A new high in price is accompanied by an increase in volume, similar to what happened at point A. Continue to hold long positions.

3. Tick volume is the number of price changes during a selected time,
such as 10 minutes or an hour. It is called tick volume because most
changes equal 1 tick. Most futures exchanges in the United States do
not report intraday volume, and day-traders use tick volume as its
proxy.

32. VOLUME

169

Volume reflects the activity of buyers and sellers. If you compare volume
between two markets, it will show which one is more active or liquid. You
are likely to suffer less slippage in liquid markets than in thin, low-volume
markets.

Crowd Psychology
Volume reflects the degree of financial and emotional involvement, as well
as pain, of market participants. A trade begins with a financial commitment
by two persons. The decision to buy or sell may be rational, but the act of
buying or selling creates an emotional commitment in most people. Buyers
and sellers crave to be right. They scream at the market, pray, or use lucky
talismans. Volume reflects the degree of emotional involvement among
traders.
Each tick takes money away from losers and gives it to winners. When
prices rise, longs make money and shorts lose. When prices fall, shorts gain
and longs lose. Winners feel happy and elated, while losers feel depressed
and angry. Whenever prices move, about half the traders are hurting. When
prices rise, bears are in pain, and when prices fall, bulls suffer. The greater
the increase in volume, the more pain in the market.
Traders react to losses like frogs to hot water. If you throw a frog into a
boiling kettle, it will jump in response to sudden pain, but if you put a frog
into cool water and heat it slowly, you can boil it alive. If a sudden price
change hits traders, they jump from pain and liquidate losing positions. The
same losers can be very patient if their losses increase gradually.
You can lose a great deal of money in a sleepy market, such as corn,
where a one-cent move costs only $50. If corn goes against you just a few
cents a day, the pain is easy to tolerate. If you hang on, those pennies can add
up to thousands of dollars in losses. Sharp moves, on the other hand, make
losers cut their losses in a panic. Once weak hands get shaken out, the market is ready to reverse. Trends can last for a long time on moderate volume
but can expire after a burst of volume.
Who buys from a trader who sells his losing long position? It may be a
short seller taking profits and covering shorts. It may be a bargain hunter
who steps in because prices are "too low." That bottom-picker assumes the
position of a loser who washed out-and he either catches the bottom or
becomes the new loser.
Who sells to a trader who buys to cover his losing short position? It may

1 70

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

be a savvy investor who takes profits on his long position. It also may be a
top-picker who sells short because he thinks that prices are "too high." He
assumes the position of a loser who covered his shorts, and only the future
will tell whether he is right or wrong.
When shorts give up during a rally, they buy to cover and push the market
higher. Prices rise, flush out even more shorts, and the rally feeds on itself.
When longs give up during a decline, they sell and push the market lower.
Falling prices flush out even more longs, and the decline feeds on itself.
Losers who give up propel trends. A trend that moves on steady volume is
likely to continue. Steady volume shows that new losers replace those who
wash out. Trends need a fresh supply of losers the way builders of the
ancient pyramids needed a fresh supply of slaves.
Falling volume shows that the supply of losers is running low and a trend
is ready to reverse. It happens after enough losers catch on to how wrong
they are. Old losers keep bailing out, but fewer new losers come in. Falling
volume gives a sign that the trend is about to reverse.
A burst of extremely high volume also gives a signal that a trend is nearing
its end. It shows that masses of losers are bailing out. You can probably recall
holding a losing trade longer than you should have. Once the pain becomes
intolerable and you get out, the trend reverses and the market goes the way you
expected, but without you! This happens time and again because most amateurs react to stress similarly and bail out at about the same time. Professionals
do not hang in while the market beats them up. They close out losing trades
fast and reverse or wait on the sidelines, ready to re-enter.
Volume usually stays low in trading ranges because there is relatively little pain. People feel comfortable with small price changes, and trendless
markets seem to drag on forever. A breakout is often marked by a dramatic
increase in volume because losers run for the exits. A breakout on low volume shows little emotional commitment to a new trend. It indicates that
prices are likely to return into their trading range.
Rising volume during a rally shows that more buyers and short sellers are
pouring in. Buyers are eager to buy even if they have to pay up, and shorts
are eager to sell to them. Rising volume shows that losers who leave are
being replaced by a new crop of losers.
When volume shrinks during a rally, it shows that bulls are becoming less
eager, while bears are no longer running for cover. The intelligent bears have
left long ago, followed by weak bears who could not take the pain. Falling
volume shows that fuel is being removed from the uptrend and it is ready to
reverse.

32. VOLUME

171

When volume dries up during a decline, it shows that bears are less eager
to sell short, while bulls are no longer running for the exits. The intelligent
bulls have sold long ago, and the weak bulls have been shaken out. Falling
volume shows that the remaining bulls have a higher level of pain tolerance.
Perhaps they have deeper pockets or bought later in the decline, or both.
Falling volume identifies an area in which a downtrend is likely to reverse.
This reasoning applies to long and short timeframes. As a rule of thumb,
if today's volume is higher than yesterday's volume, then today's trend is
likely to continue.

Trading Rules
The terms "high volume" and "low volume" are relative. What is low for
IBM is high for Apple Computer, while what is low for gold is high for platinum, and so on. As a rule of thumb, "high volume" for any given market is
at least 25 percent above average for the past two weeks, and "low volume"
is at least 25 percent below average.

1. High volume confirms trends. If prices rise to a new peak and volume
reaches a new high, then prices are likely to retest or exceed that peak.
2. If the market falls to a new low and the volume reaches a new high,
that bottom is likely to be retested or exceeded. A "climax bottom7' is
almost always retested on low volume, offering an excellent buying
opportunity.
3. If volume shrinks while a trend continues, that trend is ripe for a reversal. When a market rises to a new peak on lower volume than its previous peak, look for a shorting opportunity. This technique does not
work as well at market bottoms because a decline can persist on low
volume. There is a saying on Wall Street: "It takes buying to put
stocks up, but they can fall of their own weight."
4. Watch volume during reactions against the trend. When an uptrend is
punctuated by a decline, volume often picks up in a flurry of profit
taking. When the dip continues but volume shrinks, it shows that bulls
are no longer running or that selling pressure is spent. When volume
dries up, it shows that the reaction is nearing an end and the uptrend is
ready to resume. This identifies a good buying opportunity. Major
downtrends are often punctuated by rallies which begin on heavy vol-

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

ume. Once weak bears have been flushed out, volume shrinks and
gives a signal to sell short.

More on Volume

You can use a moving average to define the trend of volume. The slope of a
5-day exponential moving average of volume can define volume's trend.
You can also draw trendlines of volume and watch for their breakouts (see
Section 21). Volume breakouts confirm price breakouts.
Volume-based indicators provide more precise timing signals than volume
alone. Traders' Index, Herrick Payoff Index, Force Index, and others include
volume data (see Chapters 6 and 8).

33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS
Traders can use several technical indicators to help them analyze volume.
Some traders track a 5-day exponential moving average of volume. Its slope
identifies the trend of volume (see Sections 25 and 32). Others use OnBalance Volume and Accumulation/Distribution.

On-Balance Volume

On-Balance Volume (OBV) is an indicator designed by Joseph Granville and
described in his book, New Strategy of Daily Stock Market Timing. Granville
used OBV as a leading indicator of the stock market, but other analysts have
applied it to the futures markets.
OBV is a running total of volume. It rises or falls each day, depending on
whether prices close higher or lower than on the previous day. When a stock
closes higher, it shows that bulls won the day's battle; its volume on that day
is added to OBV. When a stock closes lower, it shows that bears won the
day, and that day's volume is subtracted from OBV. If prices close
unchanged, OBV stays unchanged.
On-Balance Volume often rises or falls before prices - it acts as a leading
indicator. As Granville put it, "Volume is the steam that makes the choochoo go."

33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS

173

Crowd Psychology

Prices represent the consensus of value, while volume represents the emotions of market participants. It reflects the intensity of traders' financial and
emotional commitments, as well as pain among losers (see Section 32).
OBV is a running total of volume. It tracks changes in traders' involvement
in the market and the intensity of their pain.
A new high in OBV shows that bulls are powerful, bears are hurting, and
prices are likely to rise. A new low in OBV shows that bears are powerful,
bulls are hurting, and prices are likely to fall. When the pattern of OBV deviates from the pattern of prices, it shows that mass emotions are not in gear
with mass consensus. A crowd is more likely to follow its heart than its
mind. This is why changes in volume often precede changes in prices.

Trading Signals

The patterns of OBV tops and bottoms are more important than the absolute
levels of this indicator. Those levels depend on when you start to calculate
On-Balance Volume. When OBV rises or falls together with prices, the trend
is confirmed. If prices reach a new high and OBV reaches a new high, the
uptrend is likely to continue. If prices reach a new low and OBV falls to a
new low, the downtrend is likely to continue. It is safer to trade in the direction of a trend that is confirmed by OBV (Figure 33-1).
1. When OBV reaches a new high, it confirms the power of bulls, indicates that prices are likely to rise even higher, and gives a buy signal.
When OBV reaches a new low, it confirms the power of bears, calls
for lower prices ahead, and gives a signal to sell short.

-

2. OBV gives its strongest buy
and sell signals when
it diverges from
-__
p
r
If
prices
rally,
OBV
- sell off, and then rise to a new TiTgli,%ut
I
rallies to a lower high, it creates a bearish divergence and gives a
strong sell signal. If prices decline, rebound, and then fall to a new
low, but OBV falls to a more shallow bottom, it traces a bullish divergence and gives a strong buy signal. Long-term divergences are more
important than short-term divergences. Divergences that develop over
the course of several weeks give stronger signals than those that last
only a few days.
-\_

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

174

73
65
56

48

48
658581
534736
419964
281193
163421
Figure 33-1.

On-Balance Volume

When OBV moves in gear with a trading vehicle, it confirms its trend.
The uptrend A of OBV confirms the stock rally. Its break in March gives
a sell signal. There are two shorting signals at the top. The first, in early
April, is given by a bearish divergence between OBV and price. Two
weeks later, OBV breaks its support B, giving another signal to sell short.
The downtrendline C of O B V confirms the slide of Apple
Computer-hold shorts. An upside breakout in July gives a signal to cover
shorts.
3. When prices are in a trading range and OBV breaks out to a new high,
it gives a buy signal. When prices are in a trading range and OBV
breaks down and falls to a new low, it gives a signal to sell short.

More on OBV

One of the reasons for Granville's success in his heyday (see Section 6) was
that he combined OBV with two other indicators- the Net Field Trend
indicator and the Climax indicator. Granville calculated OBV for each
stock in the Dow Jones Industrial Average and rated its OBV pattern as rising, falling, or neutral. He called that a Net Field Trend of a stock: It could

33. VOLUME-BASED INDICATORS

175

be +I,-1, or 0. Climax indicator was a sum of the Net Field Trends of all 30
Dow stocks.
When the stock market rallied and the Climax indicator reached a new
high, it confirmed strength and gave a buy signal. If the stock market rallied
but the Climax indicator made a lower top, it gave a sell signal.
You can view the Dow Jones Industrial Average as a team of 30 horses
pulling the market wagon. The Climax indicator shows how many horses are
pulling uphill, downhill, or standing still. If 24 out of 30 horses pull up, 1
down and 5 are resting, then the market wagon is likely to move up. If 9
horses pull up, 7 pull down, and 14 are resting, then the wagon is ready to
roll downhill.
OBV, the Net Field Trend indicator, and the Climax indicator can be easily programmed on a computer. It would be worthwhile to apply them to a
database which includes all stocks of the S&P 500 index. That may produce
good signals for trading S&P 500 futures or options.

This indicator was developed by Larry Williams and described in his 1972
book, How I Made a Million Dollars. It was designed as a leading indicator
for stocks, but several analysts have applied it to futures. The unique feature
of Accumulation/Distribution (AD)is that it tracks the relationship between
opening and closing prices, along with volume.
If prices close higher than they opened, then bulls won the day and AD is
.-- - gosit~ve.If prices close lower than they opened, then the bears won and AD
is negative. If pricks close where they opened, then nobody won and A/D is
zero. A' running total of each day's AID creates a cumulative
Accumulation/Distribution indicator.
A/D credits bulls or bears with only a fraction of each day's volume. That
fraction depends on the day's range and the distance from opening to closing
price. Thegreater the spread be&een opening and closing *relative-f_o.-daily rakge, the greater thzhange in ~ c c u m u l a t i o n / ~ ~ u t i o n .

A/D=

Close - Open
High - Low

Volume

For example, if the distance from today's high to low is 5 points but the distance from the open to the close is 2 points, then only 2/5 of today's volume

176

THE NEGLECTED ESSENTIALS

is credited to the winning camp. The pattern of A/D highs and lows is more^
important than its absolute level, which depends on the starting date.
When the market rises, most people focus .on new highs. But if prices
open higher and close lower, then A/D, which tracks their relationship, turns
down. It warns that the uptrend is weaker than it appears. If A/D ticks up
while prices are down, it shows that bulls are gaining strength.

Crowd Behavior

Opening and closing prices are among the most important prices of the day.
The opening price reflects all the pressures that have gathered while the market was closed. Openings are often dominated by amateurs who read their
newspapers in the evening and trade in the morning.
Professional traders are active throughout the day. They often trade
against the amateurs. As the day goes on, waves of buying and selling by
amateurs and slow-moving institutions gradually subside. Professionals usually dominate the markets at closing time. Closing prices are especially
important because the settlement of trading accounts depends on them.
A D tracks the outcomes of daily battles between amateurs and professionals. It ticks up when prices close higher than they opened - when professionals are more bullish than amateurs. It ticks down when prices close
lower than they opened- when professionals are more bearish than amateurs. It pays to bet with the professionals and against the amateurs.
