
remaining for about two years in Rome, he proceeded once more to Africa, alone and
unprotected, to preach the Gospel of Jesus. He landed at Bona in 1314; and so irritated
the Mahometans by cursing their prophet, that they stoned him, and left him for dead on
the sea-shore. He was found some hours afterwards by a party of Genoese merchants,
who conveyed him on board their vessel, and sailed towards Majorca. The unfortunate
man still breathed, but could not articulate. He lingered in this state for some days, and
expired just as the vessel arrived within sight of his native shores. His body was
conveyed with great pomp to the church of St. Eulalia, at Palma, where a public funeral
was instituted in his honour. Miracles were afterwards said to have been worked at his
tomb.
Thus ended the career of Raymond Lulli, one of the most extraordinary men of his age;
and, with the exception of his last boast about the six millions of gold, the least inclined
to quackery of any of the professors of alchymy. His writings were very numerous, and
include nearly five hundred volumes, upon grammar, rhetoric, morals, theology, politics,
civil and canon law, physics, metaphysics, astronomy, medicine, and chemistry.
ROGER BACON.
The powerful delusion of alchymy seized upon a mind still greater than that of Raymond
Lulli. Roger Bacon firmly believed in the philosopher's stone, and spent much of his time
in search of it. His example helped to render all the learned men of the time more
convinced of its practicability, and more eager in the pursuit. He was born at Ilchester, in
the county of Somerset, in the year 1214. He studied for some time in the University of
Oxford, and afterwards in that of Paris, in which he received the degree of doctor of
divinity. Returning to England in 1240, he became a monk of the order of St. Francis. He
was by far the most learned man of his age; and his acquirements were so much above
the comprehension of his contemporaries, that they could only account for them by
supposing that he was indebted for them to the devil. Voltaire has not inaptly designated
him "De l'or encroute de toutes les ordures de son siecle;" but the crust of superstition
that enveloped his powerful mind, though it may have dimmed, could not obscure the
brightness of his genius. To him, and apparently to him only, among all the inquiring
spirits of the time, were known the properties of the concave and convex lens. He also
invented the magic-lantern; that pretty plaything of modern days, which acquired for him
a reputation that embittered his life. In a history of alchymy, the name of this great man
cannot be omitted, although, unlike many others of whom we shall have occasion to
speak, he only made it secondary to other pursuits. The love of universal knowledge that
filled his mind, would not allow him to neglect one branch of science, of which neither he
nor the world could yet see the absurdity. He made ample amends for his time lost in this
pursuit by his knowledge in physics and his acquaintance with astronomy. The telescope,
burning-glasses, and gunpowder, are discoveries which may well carry his fame to the
remotest time, and make the world blind to the one spot of folly -- the diagnosis of the
age in which he lived, and the circumstances by which he was surrounded. His treatise on
the "Admirable Power of Art and Nature in the Production of the Philosopher's Stone"
was translated into French by Girard de Tormes, and published at Lyons in 1557. His
"Mirror of Alchymy" was also published in French in the same year, and in Paris in 1612,

with some additions from the works of Raymond Lulli. A complete list of all the
published treatises upon the subject may be seen in Lenglet du Fresnoy.
Pope John XXII.
This Prelate is said to have been the friend and pupil of Arnold de Villeneuve, by whom
he was instructed in all the secrets of alchymy. Tradition asserts of him, that he made
great quantities of gold, and died as rich as Croesus. He was born at Cahors, in the
province of Guienne, in the year 1244. He was a very eloquent preacher, and soon
reached high dignity in the Church. He wrote a work on the transmutation of metals, and
had a famous laboratory at Avignon. He issued two Bulls against the numerous
pretenders to the art, who had sprung up in every part of Christendom; from which it
might be inferred that he was himself free from the delusion. The alchymists claim him,
however, as one of the most distinguished and successful professors of their art, and say
that his Bulls were not directed against the real adepts, but the false pretenders. They lay
particular stress upon these words in his Bull, "Spondent, quas non exhibent, divitias,
pauperes alchymistae." These, it is clear, they say, relate only to poor alchymists, and
therefore false ones. He died in the year 1344, leaving in his coffers a sum of eighteen
millions of florins. Popular belief alleged that he had made, and not amassed, this
treasure; and alchymists complacently cite this as a proof that the philosopher's stone was
not such a chimera as the incredulous pretended. They take it for granted that John really
left this money, and ask by what possible means he could have accumulated it. Replying
to their own question, they say triumphantly, "His book shows it was by alchymy, the
secrets of which he learned from Arnold de Villeneuve and Raymond Lulli. But he was
as prudent as all other hermetic philosophers. Whoever would read his book to find out
his secret, would employ all his labour in vain; the Pope took good care not to divulge it."
Unluckily for their own credit, all these gold-makers are in the same predicament; their
great secret loses its worth most wonderfully in the telling, and therefore they keep it
snugly to themselves. Perhaps they thought that, if everybody could transmute metals,
gold would be so plentiful that it would be no longer valuable, and that some new art
would be requisite to transmute it back again into steel and iron. If so, society is much
indebted to them for their forbearance.
Jean De Meung
All classes of men dabbled in the art at this time; the last mentioned was a Pope, the one
of whom we now speak was a poet. Jean de Meung, the celebrated author of the "Roman
de la Rose," was born in the year 1279 or 1280, and was a great personage at the courts of
Louis X, Philip the Long, Charles IV, and Philip de Valois. His famous poem of the
"Roman de la Rose," which treats of every subject in vogue at that day, necessarily makes
great mention of alchymy. Jean was a firm believer in the art, and wrote, besides his,
"Roman," two shorter poems, the one entitled, "The Remonstrance of Nature to the
wandering Alchymist," and "The Reply of the Alchymist to Nature." Poetry and alchymy
were his delight, and priests and women were his abomination. A pleasant story is related
of him and the ladies of the court of Charles IV. He had written the following libellous
couplet upon the fair sex :--

"Toutes etes, serez, ou futes
De fait ou de volonte, putains,
Et qui, tres bien vous chercherait Toutes putains, vous trouverait."
[These verses are but a coarser expression of the slanderous line of Pope, that "every
woman is at heart a rake."]
This naturally gave great offence; and being perceived one day, in the King's
antechamber, by some ladies who were waiting for an audience, they resolved to punish
him. To the number of ten or twelve, they armed themselves with canes and rods; and
surrounding the unlucky poet, called upon the gentlemen present to strip him naked, that
they might wreak just vengeance upon him, and lash him through the streets of the town.
Some of the lords present were in no wise loth, and promised themselves great sport from
his punishment. But Jean de Meung was unmoved by their threats, and stood up calmly in
the midst of them, begging them to hear him first, and then, if not satisfied, they might do
as they liked with him. Silence being restored, he stood upon a chair, and entered on his
defence. He acknowledged that he was the author of the obnoxious verses, but denied that
they bore reference to all womankind. He only meant to speak of the vicious and
abandoned, whereas those whom he saw around him, were patterns of virtue, loveliness,
and modesty. If, however, any lady present thought herself aggrieved, he would consent
to be stripped, and she might lash him till her arms were wearied. It is added, that by this
means Jean escaped his flogging, and that the wrath of the fair ones immediately
subsided. The gentlemen present were, however, of opinion, that if every lady in the
room, whose character corresponded with the verses, had taken him at his word, the poet
would, in all probability, have been beaten to death. All his life long he evinced a great
animosity towards the priesthood, and his famous poem abounds with passages reflecting
upon their avarice, cruelty, and immorality. At his death he left a large box, filled with
some weighty material, which he bequeathed to the Cordeliers, as a peace-offering, for
the abuse he had lavished upon them. As his practice of alchymy was well-known, it was
thought the box was filled with gold and silver, and the Cordeliers congratulated each
other on their rich acquisition. When it came to be opened, they found to their horror that
it was filled only with slates, scratched with hieroglyphic and cabalistic characters.
Indignant at the insult, they determined to refuse him Christian burial, on pretence that he
was a sorcerer. He was, however, honourably buried in Paris, the whole court attending
his funeral.
NICHOLAS FLAMEL.
The story of this alchymist, as handed down by tradition, and enshrined in the pages of
Lenglet du Fresnoy, is not a little marvellous. He was born at Pontoise of a poor but
respectable family, at the end of the thirteenth, or beginning of the fourteenth, century.
Having no patrimony, he set out for Paris at an early age, to try his fortune as a public
scribe. He had received a good education, was well skilled in the learned languages, and
was an excellent penman. He soon procured occupation as a letter-writer and copyist, and
used to sit at the corner of the Rue de Marivaux, and practise his calling: but he hardly
made profits enough to keep body and soul together. To mend his fortunes he tried

poetry; but this was a more wretched occupation still. As a transcriber he had at least
gained bread and cheese; but his rhymes were not worth a crust. He then tried painting
with as little success; and as a last resource, began to search for the philosopher's stone,
and tell fortunes. This was a happier idea; he soon increased in substance, and had
wherewithal to live comfortably. He, therefore, took unto himself his wife Petronella, and
began to save money; but continued to all outward appearance as poor and miserable as
before. In the course of a few years, he became desperately addicted to the study of
alchymy, and thought of nothing but the philosopher's stone, the elixir of life, and the
universal alkahest. In the year 1257, he bought by chance an old book for two florins,
which soon became the sole study and object of his life. It was written with a steel
instrument upon the bark of trees, and contained twenty-one, or as he himself always
expressed it, three times seven, leaves. The writing was very elegant and in the Latin
language. Each seventh leaf contained a picture and no writing. On the first of these was
a serpent swallowing rods; on the second, a cross with a serpent crucified; and on the
third, the representation of a desert, in the midst of which was a fountain with serpents
crawling from side to side. It purported to be written by no less a personage than
"Abraham, patriarch, Jew, prince, philosopher, priest, Levite, and astrologer;" and
invoked curses upon any one who should cast eyes upon it, without being a sacrificer or a
scribe. Nicholas Flamel never thought it extraordinary that Abraham should have known
Latin, and was convinced that the characters on his book had been traced by the hands of
that great patriarch himself. He was at first afraid to read it, after he became aware of the
curse it contained; but he got over that difficulty by recollecting that, although he was not
a sacrificer, he had practised as a scribe. As he read he was filled with admiration, and
found that it was a perfect treatise upon the transmutation of metals. All the process was
clearly explained; the vessels, the retorts, the mixtures, and the proper times and seasons
for the experiment. But as ill-luck would have it, the possession of the philosopher's stone
or prime agent in the work was presupposed. This was a difficulty which was not to be
got over. It was like telling a starving man how to cook a beefsteak, instead of giving him
the money to buy one. But Nicholas did not despair; and set about studying the
hieroglyphics and allegorical representations with which the book abounded. He soon
convinced himself that it had been one of the sacred books of the Jews, and that it was
taken from the temple of Jerusalem on its destruction by Titus. The process of reasoning
by which he arrived at this conclusion is not stated.
From some expression in the treatise, he learned that the allegorical drawings on the
fourth and fifth leaves, enshrined the secret of the philosopher's stone, without which all
the fine Latin of the directions was utterly unavailing. He invited all the alchymists and
learned men of Paris to come and examine them, but they all departed as wise as they
came. Nobody could make anything either of Nicholas or his pictures; and some even
went so far as to say that his invaluable book was not worth a farthing. This was not to be
borne; and Nicholas resolved to discover the great secret by himself, without troubling
the philosophers. He found on the first page, of the fourth leaf, the picture of Mercury,
attacked by an old man resembling Saturn or Time. The latter had an hourglass on his
head, and in his hand a scythe, with which he aimed a blow at Mercury's feet. The reverse
of the leaf represented a flower growing on a mountain top, shaken rudely by the wind,

with a blue stalk, red and white blossoms, and leaves of pure gold. Around it were a great
number of dragons and griffins. On the first page of the fifth leaf was a fine garden, in the
midst of which was a rose tree in full bloom, supported against the trunk of a gigantic
oak. At the foot of this there bubbled up a fountain of milk-white water, which forming a
small stream, flowed through the garden, and was afterwards lost in the sands. On the
second page was a King, with a sword in his hand, superintending a number of soldiers,
who, in execution of his orders, were killing a great multitude of young children,
spurning the prayers and tears of their mothers, who tried to save them from destruction.
The blood of the children was carefully collected by another party of soldiers, and put
into a large vessel, in which two allegorical figures of the Sun and Moon were bathing
themselves.
For twenty-one years poor Nicholas wearied himself with the study of these pictures, but
still he could make nothing of them. His wife Petronella at last persuaded him to find out
some learned Rabbi; but there was no Rabbi in Paris learned enough to be of any service
to him. The Jews met but small encouragement to fix their abode in France, and all the
chiefs of that people were located in Spain. To Spain accordingly Nicholas Flamel
repaired. He left his book in Paris for fear, perhaps, that he might be robbed of it on the
road; and telling his neighbours that he was going on a pilgrimage to the shrine of St.
James of Compostello, he trudged on foot towards Madrid in search of a Rabbi. He was
absent two years in that country, and made himself known to a great number of Jews,
descendants of those who had been expelled from France in the reign of Philip Augustus.
The believers in the philosopher's stone give the following account of his adventures: -They say that at Leon he made the acquaintance of a converted Jew, named Cauches, a
very learned physician, to whom he explained the title and the nature of his little book.
The Doctor was transported with joy as soon as he heard it named, and immediately
resolved to accompany Nicholas to Paris, that he might have a sight of it. The two set out
together; the Doctor on the way entertaining his companion with the history of his book,
which, if the genuine book he thought it to be, from the description he had heard of it,
was in the handwriting of Abraham himself, and had been in the possession of
personages no less distinguished than Moses, Joshua, Solomon, and Esdras. It contained
all the secrets of alchymy and of many other sciences, and was the most valuable book
that had ever existed in this world. The Doctor was himself no mean adept, and Nicholas
profited greatly by his discourse, as in the garb of poor pilgrims they wended their way to
Paris, convinced of their power to turn every old shovel in that capital into pure gold.
But, unfortunately, when they reached Orleans, the Doctor was taken dangerously ill.
Nicholas watched by his bedside, and acted the double part of a physician and nurse to
him; but he died after a few days, lamenting with his last breath that he had not lived long
enough to see the precious volume. Nicholas rendered the last honours to his body; and
with a sorrowful heart, and not one sous in his pocket, proceeded home to his wife
Petronella. He immediately recommenced the study of his pictures; but for two whole
years he was as far from understanding them as ever. At last, in the third year, a glimmer
of light stole over his understanding. He recalled some expression of his friend, the
Doctor, which had hitherto escaped his memory, and he found that all his previous
experiments had been conducted on a wrong basis. He recommenced them now with
renewed energy, and at the end of the year had the satisfaction to see all his toils

rewarded. On the 13th January 1382, says Lenglet, he made a projection on mercury, and
had some very excellent silver. On the 25th April following, he converted a large quantity
of mercury into gold, and the great secret was his.
Nicholas was now about eighty years of age, and still a hale and stout old man. His
friends say that, by the simultaneous discovery of the elixir of life, he found means to
keep death at a distance for another quarter of a century; and that he died in 1415, at the
age of 116. In this interval he had made immense quantities of gold, though to all
outward appearance he was as poor as a mouse. At an early period of his changed
fortune, he had, like a worthy man, taken counsel with his old wife Petronella, as to the
best use he could make of his wealth. Petronella replied, that as unfortunately they had no
children, the best thing he could do, was to build hospitals and endow churches. Nicholas
thought so too, especially when he began to find that his elixir could not keep off death,
and that the grim foe was making rapid advances upon him. He richly endowed the
church of St. Jacques de la Boucherie, near the Rue de Marivaux, where he had all his life
resided, besides seven others in different parts of the kingdom. He also endowed fourteen
hospitals, and built three chapels.
The fame of his great wealth and his munificent benefactions soon spread over all the
country, and he was visited, among others, by the celebrated Doctors of that day, Jean
Gerson, Jean de Courtecuisse, and Pierre d'Ailli. They found him in his humble
apartment, meanly clad, and eating porridge out of an earthen vessel; and with regard to
his secret, as impenetrable as all his predecessors in alchymy. His fame reached the ears
of the King, Charles VI, who sent M. de Cramoisi, the Master of Requests, to find out
whether Nicholas had indeed discovered the philosopher's stone. But M. de Cramoisi
took nothing by his visit; all his attempts to sound the alchymist were unavailing, and he
returned to his royal master no wiser than he came. It was in this year, 1414, that he lost
his faithful Petronella. He did not long survive her; but died in the following year, and
was buried with great pomp by the grateful priests of St. Jacques de la Boucherie.
The great wealth of Nicholas Flamel is undoubted, as the records of several churches and
hospitals in France can testify. That he practised alchymy is equally certain, as he left
behind several works upon the subject.
Those who knew him well, and who were incredulous about the philosopher's stone, give
a very satisfactory solution of the secret of his wealth. They say that he was always a
miser and a usurer; that his journey to Spain was undertaken with very different motives
from those pretended by the alchymists; that, in fact, he went to collect debts due from
Jews in that country to their brethren in Paris, and that he charged a commission of fully
cent. per cent. in consideration of the difficulty of collecting and the dangers of the road;
that when he possessed thousands, he lived upon almost nothing; and was the general
money-lender, at enormous profits, of all the dissipated young men at the French court.
Among the works written by Nicholas Flamel on the subject of alchymy, is "The
Philosophic Summary," a poem, reprinted in 1735, as an appendix to the third volume of
the "Roman de la Rose." He also wrote three treatises upon natural philosophy, and an

alchymic allegory, entitled "Le Desir desire." Specimens of his writing, and a fac-simile
of the drawings in his book of Abraham, may be seen in Salmon's "Bibliotheque des
Philosophes Chimiques." The writer of the article, "Flamel," in the "Biographie
Universelle," says that, for a hundred years after the death of Flamel, many of the adepts
believed that he was still alive, and that he would live for upwards of six hundred years.
The house he formerly occupied, at the corner of the Rue de Marivaux, has been often
taken by credulous speculators, and ransacked from top to bottom, in the hopes that gold
might be found. A report was current in Paris, not long previous to the year 1816, that
some lodgers had found in the cellars several jars filled with a dark-coloured ponderous
matter. Upon the strength of the rumour, a believer in all the wondrous tales told of
Nicholas Flamel bought the house, and nearly pulled it to pieces in ransacking the walls
and wainscotting for hidden gold. He got nothing for his pains, however, and had a heavy
bill to pay to restore his dilapidations.

GEORGE RIPLEY.
While alchymy was thus cultivated on the continent of Europe, it was not neglected in the
isles of Britain. Since the time of Roger Bacon, it had fascinated the imagination of many
ardent men in England. In the year 1404, an act of parliament was passed, declaring the
making of gold and silver to be felony. Great alarm was felt at that time lest any
alchymist should succeed in his projects, and perhaps bring ruin upon the state, by
furnishing boundless wealth to some designing tyrant, who would make use of it to
enslave his country. This alarm appears to have soon subsided; for, in the year 1455,
King Henry VI, by advice of his council and parliament, granted four successive patents
and commissions to several knights, citizens of London, chemists, monks, mass-priests,
and others, to find out the philosopher's stone and elixir, "to the great benefit," said the
patent, "of the realm, and the enabling of the King to pay all the debts of the Crown in
real gold and silver." Prinn, in his "Aurum Reginae," observes, as a note to this passage,
that the King's reason for granting this patent to ecclesiastics was, that they were such
good artists in transubstantiating bread and wine in the Eucharist, and therefore the more
likely to be able to effect the transmutation of baser metals into better. No gold, of
course, was ever made; and, next year, the King, doubting very much of the practicability
of the thing, took further advice, and appointed a commission of ten learned men, and
persons of eminence, to judge and certify to him whether the transmutation of metals
were a thing practicable or no. It does not appear whether the commission ever made any
report upon the subject.
In the succeeding reign, an alchymist appeared who pretended to have discovered the
secret. This was George Ripley, the canon of Bridlington, in Yorkshire. He studied for
twenty years in the universities of Italy, and was a great favourite with Pope Innocent
VIII, who made him one of his domestic chaplains, and master of the ceremonies in his
household. Returning to England in 1477, he dedicated to King Edward IV. his famous
work, "The Compound of Alchymy; or, the Twelve Gates leading to the Discovery of the
Philosopher's Stone." These gates he described to be calcination, solution, separation,
