
When the usual SEC channels reported this officers selling, a rash
of heavy trading broke out in Texas Instruments shares with relative-
ly little change in price. Much of this selling, I suspect, was induced
by various brokerage comments that appeared. Most of these fur-
nished the past statistical record and commented on the historically
high price, the competition that lay ahead, and the inside selling. One
such bulletin went so far as to express complete agreement with the


Five More Don’ts for Investors 151

management of Texas Instruments. It reported the officers were sel-
ling and stated: “We agree with them and recommend the same
course!” The major buyer during this period, I have been told, was a
large and well-informed institution.

What happened in the next twelve months? Texas Instruments’ geo-
physical and military electronic business, overlooked in the flurry of
controversy, continued to grow. The semi-conductor (transistor) division
grew even more rapidly. More important than the growth in transistor
volume were the great strides taken by this able management in
research, in plans for mechanization, and in building up the distribution
organization in this key semi-conductor field. As evidence piled up that
1956 results were not a flash in the pan but that this relatively small
company would continue as one of the largest and lowest cost producers
in what promises to be one of the fastest growing segments of American
industry, the financial community began revising upward the price-
earnings ratio it would pay for a chance to participate in this well-run
enterprise. As the summer of 1957 came around and the management
publicly estimated that year’s per-share earnings at around $1.10, the
54 per cent growth in earnings had produced in just twelve months an
approximate 100 per cent increase in market value.

In the original edition I went on to say:

“T suspect that if the headquarters of the principal divisions of this
company were not located in Dallas and Houston, but were situated along
the northern half of the Atlantic seaboard or in the Los Angeles metropol-
itan area—where more financial analysts and other managers of important
funds could more easily learn about the company—this price-earnings
ratio might have gone even higher during this period. If, as appears prob-
able, Texas Instruments’ sales and earnings continue their sharp upward
trend for some years to come, it will be interesting to see whether this con-
tinued growth, of itself, does not in time provide some further upward
change in the price-earnings ratio. If this happens, the stock would again
go up at an even faster rate than the earnings are advancing, the combina-
tion which always produces the sharpest increases in share prices.”

Has this optimistic forecast been confirmed? A look at the record
may jolt those who still insist that it is possible to appraise an investment
by a superficial analysis of past earnings and little more. Profits rose from
$1.11 per share in 1957 to $1.84 in 1958 and give promise of topping


152 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

$3.50 in 1959. Since the first edition of this book was completed, the
company attained honors that were bound to rivet the attention of the
financial community upon it. In 1958, in the face of competition from
some of the generally acclaimed giants of the electronics and electrical
equipment industry, International Business Machines Corporation,
overwhelmingly the largest electronic calculating machine manufactur-
er in the world, selected Texas Instruments to be its associate for joint
research effort in the application of semi-conductors to this type of
equipment. Again, in 1959 Texas Instruments announced a technologi-
cal breakthrough whereby it was possible to use semi-conductor mate-
rial of approximately the same size as existing transistors, not alone for
a transistor but for a complete electronic circuit! What this may bring
about in the way of miniaturization almost staggers the imagination. As
the company has grown, its unusually able product research and devel-
opment groups have increased proportionately. Today few informed
people have much doubt that the company’s long series of technical and
business “firsts” will continue in the years ahead.

How has the market price of these shares responded to all this? Has
the price-earnings ratio continued to advance as, twenty-two months
ago, I indicated appeared probable? The record would appear to be in
the affirmative. Per-share earnings have a little more than tripled since
1957. The stock is up over five times from the price of 26% at which it
was selling when the first edition was completed. The current price,
incidentally, represents a gain of better than 1000 per cent from the
price of 14, which was mentioned in the original edition as the price at
which a fair-sized block of this stock had been bought less than three
and one-half years before. In spite of this steep rise it will be interesting
to see whether further gains in sales and earnings in the years ahead do
not produce still more worthwhile appreciation.

This brings up another line of reasoning which causes some
investors to pay undue attention to these unrelated statistics on past
price ranges and per-share earnings. This is the belief that whatever has
happened for a number of years is bound to continue indefinitely. In
other words, some investors will find a stock the per-share earnings and
market price of which have risen in each of the past five or ten years.
They will conclude that this trend is almost certain to continue indefi-
nitely. I will agree that this might happen. But in view of the uncertainty
in timing the results of research and of the costliness of bringing out the
new products that make this type of growth possible, it is quite common


Five More Don’ts for Investors 153

for even the most outstanding growth companies to have occasional
one- to three-year dips in their rate of earnings. Such dips can produce
sharp declines in their shares. Therefore, to give emphasis to this kind of
past earning record, rather than to the background conditions that can
control the future earning curve, may prove very costly.

Does all this mean that past earnings and price ranges should be
completely ignored in deciding whether to buy a stock? No. It is only
when given an importance they do not deserve that they become dan-
gerous. They are helpful as long as it is realized they are only auxiliary
tools to be used for specialized purposes and not major factors in decid-
ing the attractiveness of a common stock. Thus, for example, a study of
per-share earnings for various prior years will throw considerable light
on how cyclical a stock may be, that is, on how much the company’s
profits will be affected by the varying stages of the business cycle. More
important, comparing past per-share carnings with price ranges will fur~
nish the price-earnings ratio at which the stock sold in the past. This
serves as a base from which to start measuring what the price-earnings
ratio may be in the future. Here again, however, it must be kept in mind
that it is the future and not the past which governs. Perhaps the shares
for years have steadily sold at only eight times earnings. Now, however,
changes in management, establishment of an outstanding research
department, etc., are putting the company into the class that is current-
ly selling around fifteen times earnings instead of eight. Then anyone
estimating future earnings and figuring the anticipated value of the
shares at only eight instead of fifteen times earnings might again be
leaning too heavily on past statistics.

I headed this subdivision of my comments “Don’t forget your
Gilbert and Sullivan.” Perhaps I should have headed it “Don’t be influ-
enced by what doesn’t matter.” Statistics of former years’ earnings and
particularly of per-share price ranges of these former years quite fre-
quently “have nothing to do with the case.”

4. Don’t fail to consider time as well as price in buying
a true growth stock.

Let us consider an investment situation that occurs frequently. A compa-
ny qualifies magnificently as to the standards set up under our fifteen
points. Furthermore, very important gains in earning power are going to
appear about a year from now, due to factors about which the financial


154 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

community is, as yet, completely unaware. Even more important, there
are strong indications that these ncw sources of earnings are going to
grow importantly for at least several years after that.

Under normal circumstances this stock would obviously be a buy.
However, there is a factor that gives us pause. Success of other ventures
in prior years has given this stock so much glamour in the financial
world that if it were not for these new and generally unknown influ-
ences, the stock might be considered to be reasonably priced around
20 and out of all reason at its present price of 32. Assuming that five
years from now these new influences could easily cause it to be fully
worth 75, should we, right now, pay 32—or 60 per cent more than we
believe the stock is worth? There is always the chance that these new
developments might not turn out to be as good as we think. There is
also the possibility that this stock might sink back to what we consider
its real valuc of 20.

Confronted with this situation, many conservative investors would
watch quotations closely. If the stock got near 20 they would buy it
eagerly. Otherwise they would leave the shares alone. This happens often
enough to be worthy of somewhat closer analysis.

Is there anything sacred about our figure of 20? No, because it
admittedly does not take into consideration an important element of
future value—the factors we know and most others don’t know which
we believe will in a few years justify a price of 75.What is really impor-
tant here is to find a way that we can buy the stock at a price close to
the low point at which it will sell from here on in. Our concern is that
if we buy at 32, the stock may subsequently go somewhere around 20.
This would not alone cause us a temporary loss. More significant, it
would mean that if the stock subsequently went to 75, we would have
for our money only about 60 per cent of the shares that we could have
gotten if we had waited and bought at 20. Assuming that in twenty years
still other new ventures would have given these shares a value not of
75 but of 200, this factor of the total number of shares we could have
obtained for our money would prove extremely importante.

Fortunately, in a situation of this sort there is another guide-post
which may be relied on, even if some of my friends in the insurance
and banking worlds seem to regard it as about as safe as trying to walk
over water. This is to buy the shares not at a certain price, but at a cer-
tain date. From a study of other successful ventures cartied through in
the past by this same company, we can learn that these ventures were


Five More Don’ts for Investors 155

reflected in the stock’s price at a particular point in their development.
Perhaps it averaged about one month before these ventures reached the
pilot-plant stage. Assuming that our company’s shares are still selling
around 32, why not plan to buy these shares five months from today,
which will be just one month before the pilot plant goes on stream? Of
course, the shares can still go down after that. However, even if we had
bought these shares at 20, there would have been no positive guarantee
against a further drop. If we have a fair chance of buying at about as low
a price as possible, aren’t we accomplishing our objective, even if we feel
that on the basis of the publicly known factors the stock should be
lower? Under these circumstances, isn’t it safer to decide to buy at a cer-
tain date rather than a certain price?

Fundamentally, this approach does not ignore the concept of value
at all. It only appears to ignore it. Except for the probability that there
would be a far greater increase in value coming in the future, it would
be just as illogical as some of my financial friends claim it to be to decide
to buy on a specific future date rather than at a specific price. However,
when the indications are strong that such an increase is coming, decid-
ing the time you will buy rather than the price at which you will buy
may bring you a stock about to have extreme further growth at or near
the lowest price at which that stock will sell from that time on. After all,
this is exactly what you should be trying to do when you make any
stock purchase.

5. Don’t follow the crowd.

There is an important investment concept which is frequently difficult
to understand without considerable financial experience. This is because
its explanation does not lend itself easily to precise wording. It does not
lend itself at all to reduction to mathematical formulae.

Time and again throughout this book I have touched upon differ-
ent influences that have resulted in a common stock going up or down
in price. A change in net income, a change in a company’s management,
appearance of a new invention or a new discovery, a change in interest
rates or tax laws—these are but a few random examples of conditions
that will bring about a rise or fall in the quotations for a particular com-
mon stock. All these influences have one thing in common. They are
real occurrences in the world about us. They are actions which have
happened or are about to happen. Now we come to a very different


156 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

type of price influence. This is a change which is purely psychological.
Nothing has changed in the outside or economic world at all. The great
majority of the financial community merely look upon the same cir-
cumstances from a different viewpoint than before. As a result of this
changed way of appraising the same set of basic facts, they make a
changed appraisal of the price or the price-earnings ratio they will pay
for the same shares.

There are fads and styles in the stock market just as there are in
women’s clothes. These can, for as much as several years at a time, pro-
duce distortions in the relationship of existing prices to real values
almost as great as those faced by the merchant who can hardly give away
a rack full of the highest quality knee-length dresses in a year when
fashion decrees that they be worn to the ankle. Let me give a specific
example: In 1948 I was chatting with a gentleman whom I believe to
be an able investment man. I Je has served as president of the New York
Society of Security Analysts, a position which is usually awarded only to
the more able in the financial community. At any rate, I had just arrived
in New York from a visit to the headquarters of the Dow Chemical
Company at Midland, Michigan. I mentioned that earnings for the fis-
cal year just closing would be at new high levels and that I thought the
stock was a real buy. He replied that he felt it was of historic and per-
haps statistical interest that a company such as Dow could ever earn this
much per share. He felt, however, that these earnings did not make the
stock attractive, since it was obvious that the company was enjoying a
temporary postwar boom that could not last. He further explained that
he felt it was impossible to judge the real value of stocks of this sort
until there had occurred the same type of postwar depression that
within a few years followed the Civil War and World War I. His rea-
soning, unfortunately, completely ignored all the potential further
increase in value to this stock promised by the many new and interest-
ing products the company was then developing.

That in no future year did Dow’s earnings fall anywhere near as low
as this supposedly abnormal peak is not what should concern us here.
Neither is the fact that from this supposedly high plateau at which it was
then selling, the stock has since climbed many hundreds per cent. Our
interest should be in why this normally able investment man would take
this set of facts and derive from it a quite different conclusion as to the
intrinsic value of the stock than he would have derived from the same
facts in some other year.


Five More Don’ts for Investors 157

The answer is that for these three years, from 1947 to 1949, almost
the whole financial community was indulging in a mass delusion. With
all the ease of hindsight we can now sit back and see that what appeared
so frightening then was almost as little related to reality as the terror that
gripped most of Christopher Columbus’s crew in 1492. Night after
night most of the common seamen on the Santa Maria were unable to
sleep because of a paralyzing fear that at any moment their ship would
fall off the ends of the earth and be lost forever. In 1948, the investment
community gave little value to the earnings of any common stock
because of the widespread conviction that nothing could prevent the
near future bringing the same type of bitter depression and major stock
market crash that happened about the same number of years after each
of the two preceding major wars. In 1949, a slight depression did occur.
When its modest nature was appraised and the financial community
found that the subsequent trend was up, not down, a tremendous psy-
chological change occurred in the way common stocks were regarded.
Many common stocks more than doubled in price in the following few
years, due to nothing more than this psychological change. Those com-
mon stocks which also had the benefit of more tangible outside occur-
rences improving their fundamental worth did a great deal better than
just doubling.

These great shifts in the way the financial community appraises the
same set of facts at different times are by no means confined to stocks
as a whole. Particular industries and individual companies within those
industries constantly change in financial favor, due as often to altered
ways of looking at the same facts as to actual background occurrences
themselves.

For example, in certain periods the armament industry has been
considered unattractive by the investment community. One of its most
outstanding characteristics has been considered to be domination by a
single customer, the government. This customer in some years goes in
for heavy military procurement, and in others cuts buying way down.
Therefore the industry never knows from one year to the next when
it may be subject to major contract cancellations and drying up of
business.

To this must be added the abnormally low profit margin that
customarily prevails in government work, and the tendency of the
renegotiation laws to take most of what profit is made, but never
correspondingly to allow for a mistake in calculations that causes a


158 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

loss. Furthermore, the constant necessity to keep bidding on new mod-
cls in a field where engineering changes come continuously means that
risk and turmoil are the order of the day. It is impossible, no matter how
good your engineering, to standardize anything that gives your compa-
ny a long-term advantage over the aggressive competition. Finally, there
is always the “danger” that peace might break out with an accompany-
ing decline in business. When this view prevails, as it has many times in
the past twenty years, the defense shares sell at a quite low price in rela-
tion to their earnings.

However, the financial community has at times in the recent past
derived other conclusions from the same set of facts. The world situa-
tion is such that the need of heavy expenditures for airborne defense
equipment will be with us for years. While the total value may vary from
year to year, the pace of engineering change is causing more and more
expensive equipment to be needed, so that the long-range wend will be
upward. This means that the happy investor in these securities will be in
one of the few industries which will in no sense feel the next business
depression, which sooner or later will be felt by most other industries,
While the profit margin is limited by law, so much business is available
to the well-run company that this proves no ceiling upon total net prof-
its. When this view prevails, a quite different appraisal is being given to
exactly the same background facts. These stocks then sell on a quite dif
ferent basis.

Examples could be given for industry after industry which in the past
twenty years has been looked upon first one way, then another, by the
financial community, with a resultant change in quoted values. In 1950,
pharmaceutical stocks were generally regarded as having about the same
set of desirable characteristics usually credited to industrial chemical
companies. Endless growth due to the wonders of research and a steady
rise in the standard of living seemed to warrant the best of these shares
selling at the same ratio to earnings as the best of the chemicals. Then a
single manufacturer got into trouble on a heretofore glamorous item. The
realization swept the financial community that this was a field in which
dominance today is no assurance of being even one of the top compa-
nies tomorrow. A reappraisal of the entire industry took place. Com-
pletely different price-earnings ratios prevailed, due, in all cases but one,
not to a different set of facts but a different appraisal of the same facts.

In 1958, just the reverse took place. In the business slump of that
year, one of the few industries that enjoyed increased rather than


Five More Don’ts for Investors 159

decreased demand for its products was the drug manufacturing indus-
try. Profits of most companies in this group rose to new highs. At the
same time earnings of the chemical producers fell rather sharply—
largely because of excess capacity from major expansion moves that had
just been completed. The volatile financial community again started
sharply upgrading the price-earnings ratio of drug shares. Meanwhile
sentiment started to grow that the chemical stocks were not as attrac-
tive as had previously been supposed. All this represented only changed
financial appraisals. Nothing of findamental or intrinsic consideration
had happened.

A year later, some of this new sentiment had already been reversed.
As the better chemical companies proved among the first to recover lost
earning power and as their growth trend caused profits soon to go to
new all-time high levels, they rather quickly regained their temporarily
lost prestige. With the long-range significance of an ever-growing num-
ber of important new drugs tending further to bolster the status of the
pharmaceutical stocks as against governmental attacks on pricing and
patent policies of this industry working in the opposite direction, it will
be interesting to observe over the next several years whether the recent-
ly regained standing of the pharmaceutical stocks grows still further or
starts to shrink.
