
T

VOLUME IS THE BEST PRICE CONFIRMATION
TOOL AND TREND INDICATOR
In Chapter 1, we went over the basic rule structure for volume analysis. But
how can we apply that to help confirm market price extremes? This is actually fairly simple, if you know what to look for. That is what this section
is designed for. It does not matter what market you are trading, whether it
be stocks, futures, or forex. The principles are the same and apply to all
three markets. Remember that a good trader has a reason for entering a
trade. A great trader waits until the signal triggers and then acts on that sig111

112

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

nal. Just because a market goes up and is “too high” in value does not mean
it is going down, at least not until the signals are present. Market price extremes are generally a reflection of high volatility; and with high volatility
comes increased market participation or action, and that action is measured or reflected by high volume.

OVERBOUGHT MARKET CONDITION—
A DEAD GIVEAWAY
If you drop a boulder off a cliff, it falls at a speed that is much greater than
the speed of the boulder being pushed up a hill. That is the analogy of what
happens when a bull market or uptrend stretches too far too fast, or is
“overbought.” So we look for these types of conditions in which to ride the
price direction if we are looking to establish a short position or we want to
exit a long position before the boulder falls. Using volume analysis in conjunction with indicators is a powerful tool to help you determine whether a
market price trend may continue. Look at Figure 4.1. This chart on Amazon

FIGURE 4.1
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

Momentum Changes

113

is a dead giveaway that the price appreciation was unsustainable; as we
see, the market moved from a bullish trend to a consolidation phase with
higher highs. However the volume levels were declining, giving a direct
clue that the price advance was unsustainable. When combined with the
low close doji pattern, which we will disclose in Chapter 8, and a shooting
star, there was no reason to stay long this market. Notice that as prices
started to depreciate, the volume increased, which reflected sellers’ active
participation, which attracted more selling.

THE “COMEBACK” KID STOCK
In Figure 4.2, we see one of the greatest success stories in 2005 for any company, Apple Computer. It just could do no wrong, except when the price of
the stock advanced too far too fast, culminating in an overbought unsustainable price extreme. The fundamentals were quite rosy, as holiday sales
were through the roof on iPods and accessories. You want to talk about a

FIGURE 4.2
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

114

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

racket; this company has products on top of products that accessorize the
accessories, none of which are inexpensive. What a gold mine! Holiday
sales were strong, and the market blasted off. In fact, notice the gap up,
then notice the gap down, leaving what we technicians call an island top.
(This formation is covered in Technical Trading Tactics on page 75.) It
also formed the low close doji pattern. It really is the volume that helped
confirm the market’s overbought condition. As prices broke out of the sideways pattern, from a high near 75 as it went onward to over 85, see
the volume decline showing fewer market participants wanting to join the
price advance. As the sell-off materialized, like a boulder falling off a cliff,
more participants started selling as volume increased, signaling a strong
price reversal.

BLOW-OFF TOPS ON VOLUME SPIKES
Volume levels help confirm the true strength of a price move if the market
demonstrates a price increase. If volume does not confirm the market’s
new assigned value, something is wrong and a price reversal is imminent.
Volume is also a great indicator of blow-off tops, or what is called an exhaustion rally. Volume spikes or surges can and do indicate price reversals,
especially after a price advance on declining volume is preceded by a lack
of price follow-through. As we study the chart in Figure 4.3, you see that the
huge price advance is accompanied with abnormal or heavier than usual
volume. You would anticipate that a breakout to sharply higher levels
would occur. The high volatility reflects the increased volume levels; and as
the next time frame shows, there is no follow-through to back the price advance. This is a clear sign of a price reversal. The low close doji trigger also
seals the deal that this was simply a one-day wonder rally that failed, and a
price reversal was to be expected.

Momentum Changes

115

FIGURE 4.3
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

INTEGRATE VOLUME AND INDICATORS
Volume helps the position trader identify the strength of the trend of the
lack of conviction of market participants. Take a look at Toll Brothers in
Figure 4.4. This stock took a complete nosedive starting in mid-July. Many
thought that the bottom was in and that a rally would take this home
builder back to the highs. Not quite so, said the volume! There was a rally
attempt, but it was on lower volume. Adding the MACD indicator shows
confirmation that a price trend or market rally would not occur. The MACD
signaled a negative zero-line cross, and the moving average components
crossed as well. The low close doji trigger did not help matters for hopeful
bulls either. As the failed rally crumbled, the downtrend resumed and volume started to increase, confirming a bear trend. The MACD indicator continued to back that downtrend, warning traders that lower prices would
prevail.
I want to illustrate how you can integrate volume with both MACD and

116

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 4.4
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

stochastics so you can see how helpful volume analysis can be to indicate
overbought market conditions. Armed with this information, you will have
an easier job identifying trading opportunities and a less stressful time
choosing a strategy. Figure 4.5 shows Toll Brothers at its peak. It was a
media darling. The housing bubble was ready to burst; so when people say
they never saw it coming, they just did not know what to look for. The market went into a blow-off phase, which resembles the pattern or condition
that Apple Computer was in in Figure 4.2. The volume was declining on
higher prices, the MACD had a lower high, and stochastics confirmed the
bearish divergence. A low close doji pattern formed at the top (which was
within pennies of the monthly pivot resistance number). Once the price reversal occurred, you can see how much volume picked up, confirming the
trend reversal. In fact, the average daily volume levels increased as the
downtrend materialized.

Momentum Changes

117

FIGURE 4.5
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

BULLS TAKE CHARGE
I illustrated the relevance of volume confirming technical indicators and
stated the principles that apply to all actively traded markets, including
forex or spot currency traders. The opposite signals work for identifying
bottoms in all actively traded markets. Let’s look at one of my favorite
stocks, Starbucks. What an experience! Paying two bucks for a cup of black
joe! I’ll tell you what, if it hadn’t been for my friend Les Zieba (my coffee
connection) and Starbucks, this book would most likely never have been
finished. Just on my intake of Ventes alone writing this book, I probably
added a dollar per share to the value of this stock. In any event, let’s look at
the chart in Figure 4.6. The stochastics and, more important, the MACD displayed a solid bullish convergence, with corresponding higher lows as
prices made lower lows. As the price dipped, forming a hammer, notice
how the volume levels declined. As we discussed in Chapter 3, the MACD
can trigger a signal later than stochastics can, and here we see that occur.
The point is, the volume levels were declining on newer lows, indicating
that this market was percolating—ready to reverse higher, full steam
ahead!

118

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 4.6
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

TRADERS NEED TO ASK MORE QUESTIONS
I always like to ask myself questions about a market or a potential trading
opportunity. One such question is, If a market is so bearish, why does it not
go down? Figure 4.7 shows Agilent Technologies, a solid company that was
one of the many tech darlings that imploded. As we see, the market appears
ready to decline and fill the gaping hole called a gap between 26 and 28 in
August 2005. Notice that the chart pattern makes a lower low formed by a
hammer candle. But the market decline was on significantly lower volume.
On one hand, one would think the gap would be “filled” as prices trade back
near the low end of where the gap was created near 26 per share. But on the
other hand, volume and both the MACD and stochastics indicators worked
together to indicate otherwise. Prices reversed sharply higher based off the
jackhammer pattern (we discuss this very bullish pattern and the rules to
trade it in Chapter 8). As the price of this stock traded higher, notice the
volume levels moved in the price direction, meaning volume was increasing
on increasing prices.
You can identify overbought or oversold conditions based on a variety

Momentum Changes

119

FIGURE 4.7
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

of methods. Volume studies help me understand what the true strength or
weakness of a trend is. When prices are making what can be perceived as a
“false high,” meaning a higher high, it is accompanied on lower volume levels. When volume levels are not moving parallel with prices, a divergence is
occurring. So if prices are moving up, we should see volume moving up.
When price is going up and volume is going down, something is wrong and
I need to ask myself why. It is at this point that I am aware that something
is not internally correct with the market, especially if the fundamentals are
wildly bullish. If volume is not confirming the price action, I should take
that clue and should start looking for strategies in which to capture a potential trend reversal opportunity, whether it is by liquidating a long or by
initiating a short position or by buying a put option or by taking on another
option strategy.
The same holds true for the opposite condition: When prices are making a false bottom, we have a bullish convergence or oversold condition.
That situation exists and can be spotted as the price direction is not confirmed by volume. If prices are making lower lows, if the market is truly
bearish, we should see heavy volume. When volume levels are light and

120

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

prices are declining, it is a signal that selling pressure is drying up. Then as
prices reverse higher to confirm a true turnaround, we should see volume
increase as buyers come into the market. This is exactly what happens in
Figure 4.7. In addition, using the indicators to help spot these false bottoms
will give you added confidence not only to execute a trade but also, more
important, when.

CHAPTER 5

Pivot Points
Determine Key Price Support
and Resistance Areas and
the Importance of Confluence

his chapter is the heart and soul of the book. It will explain the
methodology of pivot point analysis from “A to Z,” or should I say “R3.” This chapter will describe in full detail the principles behind the
mathematical calculations and the rationale behind the psychological impact that drives traders to make decisions around these predicted support
(S) and resistance (R) levels. I will break this chapter into separate sections
to explain how pivot points can be used for short- and longer-term stock
trading; how it applies to futures trading, especially when day trading stock
index futures; and finally how it applies to the spot foreign exchange
(forex) markets. Each investment vehicle has its own nuances, such as
trading session hours, time periods in which volume flows change, contract
sizes, and decimal point placement so that you know how to correctly calculate the pivot point levels. You need to know the foundation of the
methodology of pivot point analysis first, so you will know how to then
apply it to the specific markets of interest that you are trading.
The power in using pivot point analysis is that it works in all markets
that have established ranges, based on significant volume or a large group
of collective participants. After all, the current market price equals the collective action of buyers and sellers. Pivot point analysis is a robust, timetested, and, best of all, testable form of market analysis; that is, you can
back-test to see the accuracy of this trader’s tool’s predictive analysis. The
really unbelievable aspect of pivot point analysis is who uses it. In fact,
many traders feel compelled not to learn about it because it seems complicated. I will dispel that myth. Other traders who had read my previous book

T

121

122

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

felt that since I had mentioned futures, rather than equities or forex, pivot
analysis did not apply to those specific markets. The truth is that many
leading educators in the field of forex and stock trading have either bought
my advanced trading course or attended one of my live two-day trading
seminars and now share these methods. These are the same techniques I
will explain and teach in the following chapters and reveal in the accompanying CD (compact disc).
Remember I explained previously that as a trader you have the right
and the obligation to understand everything there is about trading. You
need to have a good understanding of game theory. Many traders today use
a “black box” method, which is run by algorithm means, that triggers trades
automatically. You must understand what goes into building a trading system and how it triggers the automatic reaction when a market price hits at
or near a specific level. You are competing not just against fellow traders,
but against institutions and major investment groups as well as savvy computer experts, who have a method for removing the emotional element
from trading. So what are these levels, and why do we see major reactions
or reversals from these mysterious points on the charts?

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE IN DISGUISE
If a market departs too far from the mean or moving average, there are two
sides to consider: one from a profit perspective, and the other from a risk
perspective. Institutions and professional traders know this and will have a
predetermined price level calculated to either enter or exit a position. In
laymen’s terms, if a market went too far too fast, it is time to get out and
take a profit or to take advantage of an extreme price move by initiating a
countertrend trade. So in order to gauge what the standard deviation is,
many professional traders use pivot point analysis because it is based on a
testable method.
Pivots are disguised price points because they cannot be detected most
times using such conventional technical analysis techniques as traditional
support and resistance trend lines, Fibonacci levels, and Gann fan angles,
and indicators like moving averages and such oscillators as the CCI (commodity channel indicator), stochastics, and the MACD (moving average
convergence/divergence) studies. It is imperative that you know how to determine where the pivots are so you are aware at what time and price level
the market will most likely change direction. That does not mean to say that
at times pivot points coincide or line up near one of these other technical
studies. In fact, pivot point levels coincide frequently with Fabonacci extension correction levels, which are referred to as confluence or coincidental factors. I will explain that in more detail as well.

Pivot Points

123

Pivot point analysis is the best “right side” of the chart indicator, as I
like to call it, due to its predictive accuracy. It is a mathematical formula, as
I understand, originally developed by Henry Wheeler Chase in the 1930s.
Chester W. Keltner used part of the formula to develop the Keltner bands as
described in his book, How to Make Money in Commodities (Keltner Statistical Service, 1961). However, it was really Larry Williams who was credited with repopularizing the analysis in his book How I Made One Million
Dollars Last Year Trading Commodities (Windsor Books, 1979). Don Lambert, the creator of the commodity channel indicator, uses the pivot point
formula that makes the CCI work.
In my first book, A Complete Guide to Technical Trading Tactics
(Wiley, 2004), I illustrated many trading methods that you can apply using
pivot point analysis, including the power of multiple time frames or what is
know as confluence of various target levels. This book will highlight those
techniques, as well as explain how to incorporate the pivot point as a moving average trading system and how to filter out and narrow the field of the
respective support and resistance numbers, and will divulge various formulas that are popular today.

MATHEMATICAL CALCULATIONS
Pivot point is a mathematical formula designed to determine the potential
range expansion based on a previous time period’s data, which include the
high, the low, and the close or settlement price. One reason why I believe
in using these variables from a given time period’s range is that they reflect
all market participants’ collective perception of value for that time period.
In the beginning of the book, I quoted Jesse Livermore: “The patterns the
traders and technicians observe are simply the reflections of human emotional behavior” [Richard Suitten, Trade Like Jesse Livermore (Wiley, 2005,
p. 70)]. The range, which is the high and the low of a given time period, accurately reflects all market participants’ exuberant bullishness and pessimistic bearishness for that trading session. The high and the low of a
given period are certainly important as they mirror human emotional behavior. Also, the high is a reference point for those who bought out of
greed, thinking they were missing an opportunity; they certainly won’t forget how much they lost and how the market reacted as it declined from that
level. The opposite is true for those who sold the low of a given session out
of fear that they would lose more by staying in a long trade; they certainly
will respect that price point the next time the market trades back at that
level. So the high and the low are important reference points of interest.
With that said, pivot point analysis incorporates the three most important
elements—the high, the low, and the close—of a given trading session.

124

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

THE LEADING INDICATOR
The definition of the pivot point is the average of the high, the low, and the
closing price. Pivot point analysis is mainly used as support and resistance
levels. The pivot point is the heartbeat of the analysis; without it, projected
ranges and market condition cannot be determined. It does act as a support
or resistance level as well. Pivot point analysis helps as a leading price indicator for traders because it gives traders advanced indication of potential
highs or lows or, in some cases, both in a given time period, unlike Fibonacci
studies, where there is no predicted time period in which a projected price
correction or projection will occur. I want to step up the concept so that you
can develop a trading system on some powerful setups and on what triggers
a trade. As I disclosed, professional stock, forex, and futures traders
have had significant success in utilizing these “hidden lines”; and I think
that with a more thorough understanding of the concept, so will you.
As a quick review, one of the main benefits for using pivot point calculations is that they help determine when to enter and when to exit positions. As a trader, you already know you can only book a profit when you
exit; and if you don’t exit a losing trade quickly, it is hard to maintain, or
keep, what you have already made. Pivot points are used to project support
and resistance or actual highs and lows of trading sessions. These numbers
are derived from a mathematical formula; there are several versions that,
for your benefit, I will go into; but keep in mind that I still use the most common method to derive my analysis. Here are the most common formulas:
• Pivot Point—the pivot point (P) is the sum of the high (H), the low (L),
and the close (C) divided by three.
P = (H + L + C)/3
• Resistance Level 2—R-2 is the pivot point number plus the high and
minus the low.
R-2 = P + H – L
• Resistance Level 1—R-1 is the pivot point number times two minus
the low.
R-1 = (P × 2) – L
• Support Level 1—S-1 is the pivot point number times two minus
the high.
S-1 = (P × 2) – H

125

Pivot Points

• Support Level 2—S-2 is the pivot point number minus the high plus
the low.
S-2 = P – H + L
Some analysts are adding a third level to their pivot calculations
to help target extreme price swings on what has occurred on such occasions as a price shock news-event-driven market reaction. It seems
that I have noticed that the spot forex currency markets tend to experience a double dose of price shocks beause they are exposed to foreign
economic developments and U.S. economic developments that pertain to a specific country’s currency. This tends to make wide trading
ranges. Therefore, a third level of projected support and resistance were
calculated
Resistance Level 3—R-3 = H + 2 × (Pivot – Low) or (P – S-1) + R-2
Support Level 3—S-3 = L – 2 × (High – Pivot) or P – (R-2 – S-1)
There are other variations that include adding the opening range, in
which case you would simply find the sum of the open, the high, the
low, and the close; and then divide it by four to derive the actual pivot
point.
P = (O + H + L + C) /4
One more variation of that concept—to factor in gaps from adverse
price moves from one day to the next—is to take the previous session’s
high, low, and close, add in the new trading session’s open, and then
add in those variables and divide by four. In using both open prices,
you still calculate the extreme support and resistance levels with the same
formulas.
P = (new O + old H + old L + old C) /4
Let’s go over what these numbers mean and how price action reacts
with these projected target levels. But first, let me state that I personally do
not use the R-3 or S-3 levels because I believe in looking at the progressively
higher time period’s price support or resistance projections. For example,
from the daily numbers, I would look at the weekly numbers, and then from
the weekly numbers I would look at the monthly numbers. The longer the
time frame, the more important or significant the data. Also, it is rare that
the daily numbers will trade beyond the extreme R-2 or S-2 numbers; and
when the market does, it is generally in a strong trending condition, in
