
43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM

237

For example, if you want to carry a trade for several days or weeks, then
your intermediate timeframe will be defined by the daily charts. Weekly
charts are one order of magnitude longer, and they determine the long-term
timeframe. Hourly charts are one order of magnitude shorter, and they determine the short-term timeframe.
Day-traders who hold their positions for less than an hour can use the
same principle. For them, a 10-minute chart may define the intermediate
timeframe, an hourly chart the long-term timeframe, and a 2-minute chart the
short-term timeframe.
Triple Screen demands that you examine the long-term chart first. It
allows you to trade only in the direction of the tide- the trend on the longterm chart. It uses the waves that go against the tide for entering positions.
For example, daily declines create buying opportunities when the weekly
trend is up. Daily rallies provide shorting opportunities when the weekly
trend is down.

First Screen-Market Tide

Triple Screen begins by analyzing the long-term chart, one order of magnitude greater than the one you plan to trade. Most traders pay attention only to
the daily charts, with everybody watching the same few months of data. If
you begin by analyzing weekly charts, your perspective will be five times
greater than that of your competitors.
The first screen of Triple Screen uses trend-following indicators to identify long-term trends. The original system uses the slope of weekly MACDHistogram (see Section 26) to identify the market tide. The slope is defined
as the relationship between the two latest bars. When the slope is up, it
shows that bulls are in control-it is time to trade from the long side. When
the slope is down, it shows that bears are in control and tells you to trade
only from the short side (Figure 43-1).
A single uptick or a downtick of weekly MACD-Histogram indicates a
change of a trend. The upturns that occur below the centerline give better
buy signals than those above the centerline (See "Indicator Seasons" in
Section 36). The downturns that occur above the centerline give better sell
signals than the downturns below the centerline.
Some traders use other indicators to identify maior trends. Steve Notis
wrote an article in Futures magazine showing how he used the Directional
System as the first screen of Triple Screen. Even a simpler tool, such as the

238

TRADING SYSTEMS

'I

Gold Weekly

b

sen

MACD-Histogram

2,8826
buy

buy

I

I.

I

T

Rising

Falling

Feb

l C a ~ Apr

Figure 43-1.

Nay

Jun Jul

Aug

Sep

..

0,9884

, I .. -0,2017
I
.. -1,439
II

Oet

+ -2,640

lh

Weekly MACD-Histogram- The First Screen of

Triple Screen
The slope of MACD-Histogram is defined by the relationship between its
two latest bars (see inset). Triple Screen tells traders to examine weekly
charts before looking at the dailies. When the weekly trend is up, it
allows us to trade only from the long side or stand aside. When the
weekly trend is falling, it allows us only to trade from the short side or
stand aside.
Weekly MACD-Histogram gives a buy signal when its slope turns up.
The best buy signals are given when this indicator turns up below its
centerline. When MACD-Histogram turns down, it gives a sell signal.
The best sell signals are given when it turns down from above its centerline (see "Indicator Seasons," Section 36). Once you find the trend of the
weekly MACD-Histogram, turn to daily charts and look for trades in the
same direction.

slope of a 13-week exponential moving average, can serve as the first screen
of the Triple Screen trading system. The principle is the same. You can use
most trend-following indicators, as long as you analyze the trend on the
weekly charts first and then look for trades on the daily charts only in that
direction.

43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM

239

Screen One: Identify the weekly trend using a trend-following indicator and trade only in its directkn.

A trader has three choices: buy, sell, or stand aside. The first screen of the
Triple Screen trading system takes away one of those choices. It acts as a
censor who permits you only to buy or stand aside during major uptrends. It
allows you only to sell short or stand aside during major downtrends. You
have to swim with the tide or stay out of the water.

Second Screen-Market Wave

The second screen identifies the wave that goes against the tide. When the
weekly trend is up, daily declines point to buying opportunities. When the
weekly trend is down, daily rallies point to shorting opportunities.
The second screen applies oscillators to the daily charts in order to identify deviations from the weekly trend. Oscillators give buy signals when
markets decline and sell signals when markets rise. The second screen of the
Triple Screen trading system allows you to take only those daily signals that
point in the direction of the weekly trend.
Screen Two: Apply an oscillator to a daily chart. Use daily declines
during weekly uptrends to find buying opportunities and daily rallies
during weekly downtrends to find shorting opportunities.

When the weekly trend is up, Triple Screen takes only buy signals from
daily oscillators and ignores their sell signals. When the weekly trend is
down, Triple Screen takes only shorting signals from oscillators and ignores
their buy signals. Force Index and Elder-ray are good oscillators to use with
Triple Screen, but Stochastic and Williams %R also perform well.
When the weekly MACD-Histogram rises, the Zday EMA of Force Index
(see Chapter 8) gives buy signals when it falls below its centerline, as long as it
does not fall to a new multiweek low. When the weekly MACD-Histogram
declines, Force Index gives shorting signals when it rallies above its centerline,
as long as it does not rise to a new multiweek high Figure 43-2).
When the weekly trend is up, daily Elder-ray-(see Section 41) gives a buy
signal when Bear Power declines below zero and then ticks back up toward

240

Figure 43-2.
Screen

TRADING SYSTEMS

Daily Force Index-The Second Screen of Triple

The 2day EMA of Force lndex is one of several oscillators that can work
as the second screen of the Triple Screen trading system. Force lndex
marks buying opportunities when it falls below its centerline. It marks
selling opportunities when it rallies above its centerline.
When the weekly trend is up, take only buy signals from the daily
oscillator for entering long positions. When the weekly trend is down,
take only sell signals for entering short positions. At the right edge of the
chart, the weekly trend has turned down. Wait for a rise in Force lndex
in order to sell short.

the centerline. When the weekly trend is down, daily Elder-ray signals to go
short when Bull Power rallies above zero and then ticks back down.
Stochastic (see Section 30) gives trading signals when its lines enter a buy
or a sell zone. When weekly MACD-Histogram rises but daily Stochastic
falls below 30, it identifies an oversold area, a buying opportunity. When the
weekly MACD-Histogram declines but daily Stochastic rises above 70, it
identifies an overbought area, a shorting opportunity.
Williams %R (see Section 29) needs a 4- or 5-day window to work with
Triple Screen. It is interpreted similarly to Stochastic. The Relative Strength

241

43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM

Index does not react to price changes as fast as other oscillators. It helps with
overall market analysis, but is too slow for Triple Screen.
Third Screen-lntraday Breakout

The first screen of the Triple Screen trading system identifies market tide on
a weekly chart. The second screen identifies a wave that goes against that
tide on a daily chart. The third screen identifies the ripples in the direction of
the tide. It uses intraday price action to pinpoint entry points.
The third screen does not require a chart or an indicator. It is a technique
for entering the market after the first and second screens gave a signal to buy
' or sell short. The third screen is called a trailing buy-stop technique in
uptrends and a trailing sell-stop technique in downtrends (Figure 43-3).
When the weekly trend is up and the daily trend is down, trailing buystops catch upside breakouts. When the weekly trend is down and the daily
trend is up, trailing sell-stops catch downside breakouts.

Triple Screen Summary
Weekly Trend

Daily Trend

Action

Order

UP
UP
Dowri
Down

UP
Down
Down
uP

Stand aside
Go long
Stand aside
Go short

None
Trailing buy-stop
None
Trailing sell-stop

When the weekly trend is up and a daily oscillator declines, it activates a
trailing buy-stop technique. Place a buy order one tick above the high of the
previous day. If prices rally, you will be stopped in long automatically when
the rally takes out the previous day's high. If prices continue to decline, your
buy-stop will not be touched. Lower your buy order the next day to the level
one tick above the latest price bar. Keep lowering your buy-stop each day until
stopped in or until the weekly indicator reverses and cancels its buy signal.
When the weekly trend is down, wait for a rally in a daily oscillator to
activate a trailing sell-stop technique. Place an order to sell short one tick
below the latest bar's low. As soon as the market turns down, you will be
stopped in on the short side. If the rally continues, keep raising your sell
order daily. The aim of a trailing sell-stop technique is to catch an intraday
downside breakout from a daily uptrend in the direction of a weekly downtrend.

r

370,0
366.1
362,2
358.3
354.4
350,6
34.7
342,8
338.9
335,U

Figure 43-3.

Trailing Buy-Stop- The Third Screen o f Triple

Screen
Weekly MACD-Histogram has turned up in midSeptember. When the
first screen points up, every decline of the second screen-the 2-day EMA
of Force Index-marks a buying opportunity.
a. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order for tornorrow 1 tick above the high of day a.
b. The decline continues. Lower the buy order to 1 tick above the
high of bar b.
c. Bought at the opening. Place a stop at the low of bar b. The new
high in Force lndex shows that the rally is strong, likely to continue.
d. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order at the bar's
high.
e. Bought when prices rallied above the high of d. Place a stop at the
low of bar d.
f. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order at the bar's
high.
g. Decline continues. Lower the buy-stop to within 1 tick of the high
of bar g.
h. Bought when prices rallied above the high of g. Place a stop at the
low of bar g.
i. Force lndex falls below its centerline. Place a buy order at the bar's
high.
j. Decline continues. Lower the buy-stop to within 1 tick of the high
of bar j.
k. Bought at the opening. Place a stop at the low of bar j.
I. Gold opens lower and hits the protective stop. It is important to use
stops because no indicator is perfect.
1

43. TRIPLE SCREEN TRADING SYSTEM
Screen Three: Use the trailing buy-stop technique when the weekly
trend is up and the daily oscillator is down. Use the trailing sell-stop
techniquemwhenthe weekly trend is down and the daily oscillator is up:

Stop-Loss
Proper money management is essential for successful trading. A disciplined
trader cuts his losses short and outperforms a loser who keeps hanging on
and hoping. The Triple Screen trading system calls for placing very tight
stops.
, As soon as you buy, place a stop-loss order one tick below the low of the
trade day or the previous day, whichever is lower. Once you sell short, place
a protective stop-loss one tick above the high of the trade day or the previous
day, whichever is higher. Move your stop to a break-even level as soon as the
market moves in your favor. Afterwards, the rule of thumb is to move your
stop to protect approximately 50 percent of paper profits (see Section 48).
The reason for using such tight stops is that Triple Screen trades only in
the direction of the tide. If a trade does not work out fast, it is a sign that
something is fundamentally changing below the surface of the market. Then
it is better to run fast. The first loss is the best loss-it allows you to reexamine the market from the safety of the sidelines.
Conservative traders should go long or short on the first signal of the
Triple Screen trading system and stay with that position until the major trend
reverses or until stopped out. Active traders can use each new signal from
the daily oscillator for pyramiding the original position.
A position trader should try and stay with a trade until the weekly trend
reverses. A short-term trader may take profits using signals from the second
screen. For example, if a trader is long and Force Index becomes positive or
Stochastic rises to 70 percent, he may sell and take profits, then look for
another buying opportunity.
The Triple Screen trading system combines different timeframes and several types of indicators. It uses a trend-following indicator with the long-term
charts and a short-term oscillator with the intermediate charts. It uses special
entry techniques for buying or selling short. It also uses tight money management rules.

TRADING SYSTEMS

44. PARABOLIC TRADING SYSTEM
The Parabolic trading system was described in 1976 by J. Welles Wilder, Jr.
It was named after the pattern of its stops during runaway moves, which
resembled a parabola. The Parabolic system is now included in many software packages.
Parabolic aims to catch trends and to reverse positions when trends
reverse. Its unique feature is that it responds to the passage of time as well
as to changing prices. Most traders focus on prices but ignore time (see
Section 36).
How to Construct Parabolic

Parabolic is a reversal system, designed to keep a trader in the market all the
time. When Parabolic stops you out of a long position, it tells you to go short
at the same price. If it stops you out of a short position, it tells you to go long
at the same price and time. This method worked well during the inflationary
markets of the 1970s, but has led to many whipsaws in later years. Now
Parabolic should be used selectively, only when markets are trending.
Parabolic is based on a good old rule - move your stops only in the direction of the trade and never against it. If you are long, you may raise your
stops but never lower them. If you are short, you may only lower your stops.
Parabolic stops are set daily, using a formula:

where Stoptday
Stoptomo,

= the current stop.

= the stop for the next trading day.

EPtrade

= the extreme point reached by the market in the

AF

current trade. If a trader is long, EP is the highest
high reached since the day he bought. If a trader is
short, EP is the lowest low reached since the
day he went short.
= the acceleration factor. This unique tool determines how fast to move a stop in the direction of a
trend. AF depends on the number of new highs
since the entry into a long trade or the number of
new lows since the entry into a short trade.

On the first day in a trade, Acceleration Factor equals 0.02. This means
that the stop is moved by 2 percent of the distance between the extreme point

44. PARABOLIC TRADING SYSTEM

245

and the original stop. AF increases by 0.02 each day the rally reaches a new
high or a decline reaches a new low, up to the maximum of 0.20.
If the market reaches 3 higher highs during a long trade, AF equals 0.08
[0.02 + (0.02 3)], and if the market reaches 9 new highs, AF rises to its
maximum of 0.20, or 0.02 + (0.02 9). In the latter case, the daily stop gets
moved by 20 percent of the distance between the extreme point of the trade
and the latest stop.
In the beginning of a trade, Acceleration Factor is small and stops move
slowly. As the market reaches new highs or new lows, AF increases and
stops move fast. If the market does not reach new highs or lows, AF keeps
moving stops in the direction of the trade. By doing so, Parabolic forces
traders to get out of trades that go nowhere.
Many traders change the Acceleration Factor. They adjust the size of the
basic 0.02 step and the 0.20 maximum size of AF. Some increase them to
make the system more sensitive, others decrease them to make the system
react slower. The size of a step often varies from 0.015 to 0.025 and the
maximum size of AF from 0.18 to 0.23.
Trading Psychology

Losers go broke by hanging onto losing positions and hoping for a reversal.
The Parabolic system protects traders from indecision and imposes an iron
discipline on them. It sets a stop the moment you enter a trade and tells you
to move it in the direction of the trade.
If you go long or short but prices remain flat, it gives you a message that
your timing was wrong. You would not have bought or shorted unless you
expected prices to move right after you put on a trade! Parabolic does not let
you hang onto a trade that goes nowhere. It moves stops in the direction of
the trade, saying in effect "Put up or shut up."
The Parabolic system is extremely useful during runaway trends. When
prices soar or crash without a pullback, it is hard to place stops using normal
chart patterns or indicators. Parabolic is the best tool for placing stops under
those conditions.
Trading Rules

When you begin using Parabolic in any given market, go back several weeks
to calculate its stops. Adjust Parabolic stops daily, with one exception: If it
tells you to move the stop into the previous day's range, don't do it. Stops
should be kept outside of the previous day's range.

TRADING SYSTEMS

246

Step=0.02 AF=0.20

Figure 44-1.

Parabolic System

Parabolic works well when the markets are moving, but not when the
markets are flat. If you get whipsawed twice in a row, it signals a flat
market. Stop using Parabolic, but continue to track it on paper until you
get two good signals.
Parabolic shines in fast-moving markets. Here it took most of the
profit out of a 30+ point run in IBM and its subsequent decline, with a
single whipsaw in April. Two whipsaws in a row in May gave a signal to
stop using Parabolic.

The Parabolic system works well in trending markets but leads to w h i p
saws in trendless markets. It can generate spectacular profits during price
trends but chop up an account in a trading range. Do not use it as an automatic trading method.
The original Parabolic was a true reversal system. When a trader was long
one contract, it told him to place an order to sell two contracts if his stop was
hit. Then he sold his long position and automatically went short. When a
trader was short one contract, Parabolic told him to place an order to buy two
if his stop was hit. Then he covered his short position and went long.
A trader is better off entering the market using some other trading
method, such as the Triple Screen trading system, and then switching to

45. CHANNEL TRADING SYSTEMS

247

Parabolic only if he finds himself riding a dynamic uptrend or a downtrend
(Figure 44-1).
1. When you find yourself in a strong uptrend, go over the past several
weeks of data and apply the Parabolic system. Having updated
Parabolic to the current day, begin calculating stops daily and use
them to protect profits on your long position.

2. When you find yourself short in a fast downtrend, apply Parabolic to
the past several weeks of data and update it to the present day. From
that day on, calculate its stops daily to protect profits on your short
position.
The Parabolic system ties together price and time and moves stops in the
direction of the trade. The faster the trend, the faster Parabolic moves its
stops. Parabolic is an excellent tool for getting the most out of a strong trend
that was entered using any method.

45. CHANNEL TRADING SYSTEMS
Prices often flow in channels, the way rivers flow in valleys. When a river
touches the right edge of its valley, it turns left. When a river touches the left
rim of its valley, it turns right. When prices rally, they often seem to stop at
an invisible ceiling. When they fall, they often seem to hit an invisible floor.
Channels help traders identify buying and selling opportunities and avoid
bad trades. The original research into trading channels was conducted by J.
M. Hurst and described in his 1970 book, The Profit Magic of Stock
Transaction Timing.

Four Ways to Construct a Channel
Channels help traders because their boundaries show where to expect support or resistance to come into the market. There are four main ways to construct a channel:
1. By drawing a channel line parallel to a trendline (see Section 21).

2. By plotting two lines parallel to a moving average: one above it and
another below.

248

TRADING SYSTEMS

3. Same as above, only the distance between each line and the moving
average changes depending on the market's volatility (Bollinger
bands).
4. By drawing a moving average of the highs and another of the lows.
Channels parallel to trendlines are useful for long-term analysis, especially
on the weekly charts. Channels around moving averages are useful for shortterm analysis, especially on daily and intraday charts. Channels whose width
depends on volatility are good for catching early stages of major new trends.
Support is where buyers buy with greater intensity than sellers sell.
Resistance is where sellers sell with greater intensity than buyers buy (see
Section 19). Channels show where to expect support and resistance in the
future.
A channel's slope identifies a market's trend. When a channel lies flat,
you may trade all swings within its walls. When a channel rises, it pays to
trade only from the long side, buying- at the lower wall and selling at the
upper wall. When a channel declines, it pays to trade only from the short
side, shorting at the upper channel wall and covering at the lower wall.

Moving Average Channels

A 13-day exponential moving average can serve as the backbone of a channel (see Section 25). Draw upper and lower channel lines parallel to it. The
width of a channel depends on the coefficient selected by the trader.
Upper Channel Line = EMA + Channel Coefficient EMA
Lower Channel Line = EMA - Channel Coefficient EMA
You need to adjust channel coefficients until a channel contains 90 percent to 95 percent of the price action. A channel shows the boundaries
between normal and abnormal price action. It is normal for prices to be
inside a channel, and only unusual events push them outside. The market is
undervalued below its lower channel line and overvalued above its upper
channel line.
For example, in 1992, the channel coefficient on the daily chart of the
S&P 500 futures was 1.5 percent. If the 13-day EMA stood at 400, then the
upper channel line was 406 [400 + (400 1.5/100)] and the lower channel
line was 394 1400- (400 1.5/100)].
