
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

46

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

The fastest way to fail in trading is to be on the wrong side of a trend,
not recognize the trend, fight the trend, overleverage against the trend, and
ignore the trend. In addition, the longer a trader delays the process of getting on the trend, the greater the chance the market will reverse and really
whip the trader’s mind into mush as fear is increased.
So how do improve your chances of trading a trend?
The best way to catch a trend, trade a trend, and stay on a trend is to
anticipate the trend. Just like Apple anticipates trends in consumer behavior, retail traders need to anticipate the trends in their market. Look at any
chart. There are trends.
Most retail traders recognize a trend in hindsight. What most retail
traders do not do is anticipate a trend. If you don’t anticipate a trend, how
do you know when one may be developing? You don’t. In all likelihood
you see a nontrending market that begs you to sell a high or buy a low.
Why? Because that is what the market has been doing during the sideways
market.
Do you look to anticipate a trend? Do you know of any market clues
that would help you predict a trend-type move? If you had an idea a trend
was on the horizon, the only thing you would need to do would be to get the
direction right. Wouldn’t knowing the market was poised for a trend allow
you to attack the currency trend more successfully? Later in the book I will
explain ways that traders can anticipate trends from the price action and
the use of trading tools.

DON’T BE LIKE THE REST . . . CHANGE!
Do you want to be the stereotypical trader who thinks trading is easy, who
doesn’t understand fear, who relies too much on fundamental trading yet
does not pay attention to the important fundamental requirements that will
keep risk down? Do you want to say you want to trade the trends but never
can? Do you want to be in the fat part of the bell curve and continue to lose
money doing it your way?
If you want to change from the norm—from the stereotypical retail
trader—then take that look at yourself and make that change.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 2

The Six
Attributes of a
Successful
Currency Trader
If you don’t try what you can’t do today, you will
never know if you can do it tomorrow.
—Anonymous

hat defines a successful currency trader? We have learned so far
that it is not the trader who thinks it is easy, nor the trader who
takes a hit-or-miss approach similar to flipping the proverbial coin.
It is more than likely that the successful traders treat trading as a business and have the motivation to get better. Does that mean that you have
to trade eight hours a day? Not necessarily, although the more time you
spend the better. What does it take to be successful?

W

WHAT ARE YOU GOOD AT DOING?
Think of the thing or things outside of trading that you have shown a positive progression at doing. It may be parenting. It may be a job you currently
have or had. It may be preparing for, taking, and passing the CPA exam like
my wife did. It may be writing, performing, and recording a song like my
son Matt does. It may be a card game or hobby like bridge or wood carving
like my mother and mother-in-law do. It may be an athletic endeavor like
golf, tennis, or biking. It may be enhancing your spiritual life, whether you
are Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, Muslim, Buddhist, or Hindu. Maybe it’s a
skill like coaching youth baseball, public speaking, even authoring a blog

47

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

48

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

or book—things that I started with a low knowledge level and have shown
a progression toward success.
If you think back to when you first started a new venture, you may have
said to yourself, “How am I ever going to do this?” You most likely thought
of failure before thinking of success.
However, after overcoming your initial fear, if you truly liked what you
were doing, that new passion most likely motivated you to work harder
at it. Through that effort, you likely got better at doing it as well. Negative
thoughts about failure were likely replaced with thoughts of success. Along
that journey, you may have been rewarded with signs that your children
did learn the lessons you taught them, or maybe a salary increase. Perhaps
you saw your golf handicap come down or a new heavier weight lifted.
Maybe you completed that 10K run for cancer or became a leader at your
church.
If you are new to currency trading and it all seems daunting now, think
of those things you are now good at and recall how imperfect you were
when you first started. For those who are more experienced in trading,
think of the steps you made that have contributed to your progression as a
trader.
Just like the steps you may have taken to become better at cooking or
running, there are steps you can take with your currency trading that will
help you progress as a trader. You will learn how to execute a trade, the
definition of a stop loss, how to set a stop loss, and what the currency
acronym CHF means. I have heard it referred to as the Chinese franc,
but CHF actually stands for Confederation Helvetica franc, which is the
Latin name for the Swiss franc. Is the name something you need to know?
No. Do you need to know you are trading the Swiss currency and not a
Chinese currency (the Chinese currency is yuan, anyway)? Needless to
say, yes.
For the more advanced trader who is several steps along, maybe your
efforts have already led to monetary rewards—after all, making money is
what we should all be striving to do as currency traders. However, you may
not be achieving those rewards. In fact, it may be that a vast majority of you
who are reading this book have nothing but losses from the steps you have
taken to date. Something is amiss and needs to be fixed.
Just like professional baseball players, traders need to have a “spring
training season” where the fundamentals of trading are reaffirmed and for
some, learned properly for the very first time. The fundamentals form the
foundation for your trading strategy. By building a stronger foundation, you
will likely start to replace the “No, I can’t” with “Yes, I can.” Remember, if
you don’t try what you can’t do today, you will never know if you can do it
tomorrow.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

49

THERE WILL ALWAYS BE PEAKS
AND VALLEYS
Like everything in life that has a payoff, there is a level of effort that needs
to be exerted, and there will always be peaks and valleys. Think of the
peaks as the winning trades and the valleys as the losing trades. You will,
of course, have your share of losing trades. You may also develop negative
attributes that are not conducive to being successful.
Like the husband or wife who makes the mistake of focusing on a
spouse’s negative attributes, traders can be too focused on the negative
attributes of trading. You will need to be able to focus on the positive. Focus and develop those attributes that will lead to your success as a trader
and put all the bad off to the side.
Over the course of my career in the financial markets I have been able
to uncover six attributes that most successful traders possess. These attributes help build the foundation needed to make money trading currencies. None can be ignored. To do so would seriously jeopardize the longterm success of the trader. In fact, lacking even one of these attributes, you
are likely to fail. The attributes that I will define and illustrate have their
roots in my experience as a trader and in my observations of thousands
of currency traders and what makes them successful or not successful.
Through time, I have also discovered that I can apply the same attributes
to other jobs, life skills, or even hobbies.
For example, my middle son has the ambition to become a college football coach. Through our many conversations about the dynamics involved
with his potential career choice, I found that applying my “Six Attributes of
a Successful Currency Trader” could be massaged to the “Six Attributes
of a Successful Football Coach.”
Learning these attributes and striving to apply them in your trading
will build a strong foundation for success. Don’t take them lightly. Don’t
take any shortcuts. Focus on them. They are essential for developing your
business as a successful currency trader.

1. SKILL OR APTITUDE
Let’s face it, we are not all cut out to be anything or do everything. We each
have certain God-given skills or aptitudes. Other skills or aptitudes we just
don’t have.
As mentioned, my wife is a CPA. I cannot be a CPA or work in the accounting field as a bookkeeper or other equivalent position. I do not have

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

50

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

the necessary education, and although I could possibly go off to school
to gain that education, I do not have the desire to spend the time to develop that skill or aptitude. It is one thing to say you want to be an accountant. It is another to actually go out and do it. Accounting is just not my
thing.
The good news is that if you have the desire, you can develop the skills
and aptitude needed to be a successful currency trader. There are numerous resources that can help you learn how to trade better.
There are books out there—including this one—that can and will improve your trading. However, there are also trading plans and ideas that I
feel can be detrimental to most retail traders. I hope that with what you
learn from this book, you will be able to pick out that which is beneficial to
your trading and that which is not.
Other resources that can increase your skill and aptitude include things
like traders’ conventions where professionals give workshops. Local trader
clubs are a good source for trading ideas and knowledge. The Wall Street
Journal has a currency section. CNBC, Bloomberg Television, and Fox
Business give economic and market news during market hours. Some currency brokers conduct free webinars. I personally conduct webinars on a
regular basis that allow for the live analysis of current market conditions
and also provide education on how to be a more successful trader.
As you develop your skill and aptitude, some of the information you
will absorb will be good; some of it, although perhaps accepted by professional traders, can actually be bad for your trading. You will need to learn
to filter the good from the bad.
At times, business television and sometimes print material can manifest the negative attributes of trading. I think this can in part be attributed
to the natural instinct to be shocking. Shock sells, but it is often not good
for retail traders to follow. For example, whenever I read an article or listen to an analyst that puts a target level for the currency pair at a level that
is outside what is normal, I look to expunge the thought immediately from
my mind.
In a Wall Street Journal article published on February 26, 2010, the
headline read “Hedge Funds Try ‘Career Trade’ Against Euro,” and the article talked about the EURUSD going to parity with the U.S. dollar (i.e.,
1.0000) from the 1.3500 area. This type of article is the perfect example of
something retail traders should simply ignore.
First, 3,500 pips is a pretty healthy move and would likely take a length
of time that is outside a retail trader’s normal tolerance for a trade period.
A successful trader should focus on trade ideas that are more normal, not
abnormal like 3,500 pips. Trading retail currency is not about taking the
proverbial Black Swan position that is outside the norm and waiting for
the desired result.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

51

Second, these kinds of articles often don’t mention the risk a trader
might face. In my trading analysis, I always balance the current price with
the risk that traders can expect to experience. If the risk is a 200-pip correction, what will that 200 pips do to your trading account? Will you be
able to sustain a corrective move of this magnitude without closing out
with the loss? Most retail traders will have a very difficult time with this
type of trading in the currency market.
Third, a dramatic article like that can become the reason for a corrective move in and of itself. The trading gods tend to love doom and gloom
articles. Many a top and bottom are made after a front-page article or cover
story trumpets the end of some benchmark—including currencies. There is
no explanation for this except to say that if sentiment is so bearish, it takes
new added sellers to overpower the profit-taking/dip buyers. If the sellers
are already short, sometimes the only way the market can go is up. Once
the upside starts, shorts get scared and prices move even higher. Markets
have and will always have periods of retracement.
In this instance, what specifically made me cautious was that the
EURUSD had already come down from a high of 1.5100 to 1.3500, 10.6 percent in a relatively short period of time (three months). The pair was trading at the three-month low, and although the trend is indeed your friend,
there were signs the pair might be bottoming or at a significant support
level, because 1.3483 was the 61.8 percent Fibonacci retracement of the
2009 low-to-high trading range.
As shown in Figure 2.1, the day before the article was printed, the
EURUSD closed at 1.3548. Over the next 14 trading days not a single day
had a closing price below the 1.3548 level. Over that time the price rose to a
high of 1.3817. The article picked a short-term bottom instead of leading to
new lows.
Articles in the press and commentary on television or other media outlets, no matter how passionate, need to be put in a context that is congruent with your risk tolerance and trading style. Selling the EURUSD at
1.3548 and waiting for the collapse to 1.0000 becomes a different feeling
in the gut of a shorter-term-oriented retail trader after a 260-pip corrective
move higher. Are you prepared to take that longer-term look at the market? (I am not.) Is your trading more geared toward trading the trend in a
shorter-term time horizon, while keeping your risk to a minimum? These
are the questions you will need to answer before you put all your faith in
something you may read that is designed to shock.
Ultimately, the EURUSD may indeed go to parity and those who wrote
the article, and who were quoted in the article, can toast their good fortune.
If you follow the rules of trading I will discuss in this book, you too will be
toasting your good fortune. However, in your case you will do it the right
way for the retail trader.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

52

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

FIGURE 2.1 Evaluating the Risk First

Ultimately, I like to tell traders whom I mentor that it is my job to teach
you how to fish for yourself. In other words, I want to develop your skills
and aptitude for trading so you can do it, and do it successfully. I will look
to guide you with specific clues to follow, but it is only through applying,
doing, and believing in what you are learning that you will become a successful trader.
Although I like to think that everyone can learn how to be a better
trader, not all will be able to develop the necessary skill or aptitude to be
successful enough. You need to spawn the necessary love affair with trading by making money. Without a love (or at least a strong like), your skill
or aptitude will likely slip. You will become lazy. Your skills will diminish.
At that point, your account balance will tell the story and you may have
to look in the mirror and say, “I just don’t have the skill or aptitude to do
this or the desire to make it happen.” That is okay. I cannot be an accountant. I cannot be a doctor. I cannot be a 10-handicap golfer. So, instead, find
something you can be passionate about, and go do it instead. You will be
happier, and more than likely you will be find success, too.

2. PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE
A young man is walking down the street in New York City and stops an
elderly man to ask, “Excuse me, sir, how do you get to Carnegie Hall?” The

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

53

elderly man looks the young man in the eye and replies, “Practice! Practice!
Practice!” Sometimes you don’t like to do it, but some form of practice is
needed in order to improve.
My mom loves playing bridge and has taken to online games. By playing
online, she keeps her mind sharp. It also gets her ready for more serious
tournament play where she really strives to excel. My son plays guitar and
writes his own music. He compares his playing and his music writing to
the professional musicians he admires. He gets better by playing his guitar
every day and by comparing himself to the best.
Baseball players have batting practice each day so they can hope to hit
a ball successfully three out of ten times. Basketball players practice free
throws every day. Golfers putt hundreds of three-foot putts. Even stars in
the big leagues need to practice.
Foundations for successful trading are also rooted in practice. I believe
practice can have a few forms depending where you are in your currency
trading career. One is through the use of a demo platform. Experienced
and inexperienced traders can benefit from this method of practice. Most,
if not all, retail brokers have a free demo platform. They tend to limit the
demo period from one to three months, but often if you call up, you can
have the demo period extended, keeping the continuity in place.
The purpose of the demo platform is to gain familiarity with the trading
platform, including how to execute a trade, how to place stop and limit
orders, how to cancel orders, how to utilize the chart packages including
setting up the charts, and even training your eyes to watch the charts that
you are most interested in. The more familiar you are with the tools of
your trade, the better chance you have at success. Don’t underestimate the
importance of platform familiarity and the idea of training your senses to
what you are doing.
Practice with your trading platform. Train your eyes; practice doing
the keystrokes. If you use other senses such as sound, you need to practice
without relying on that sense. The benefits of the practice far exceed the
time commitment. Once that familiarity is achieved, trading practice needs
to take place. In this book, I will teach a method for trading that will allow
you to attack the currency trends in a logical way. You will need to practice
what I preach and become comfortable with it. Doing it on the demo is one
way of practicing.
A second way to practice is to trade on a live or real trading platform.
By doing this, it puts some skin in the game. Demo traders often find that
trading is more difficult when real money is in place. It shouldn’t be, but it
is for many.
Thankfully, in the retail market, a trader can vary the trade size fairly
easily. A trader can trade a micro account (1000 units of the base currency)
that has risk of around $0.10 per pip. A mini account, which is 10,000 units
of the base currency, has a pip value of around $1.00 per pip. I would

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

54

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

suggest using these amounts and building the trading size as your confidence grows.
A third way to practice is for more experienced traders who are fully
familiar with the platform and other functionality of trading. It is a way
that I practice and get better. The way is simply to observe and study the
markets closely.
Most retail currency traders suffer from trading too much and not
watching the market flow or rhythm enough. The currency market tends
to have a rhythm to it. That rhythm can change just like the rhythm of
music changes. At times, the rhythms in the market price are smooth and
logical. I find this occurs during trending markets up or trending markets
down. At other times the market can lack rhythm. During these times the
market tends to be randomly choppy and irrational. This tends to occur
during nontrending markets, when the market has no discernable trend.
For example, a key support level for your trading system may be
breached and instead of continuing in the direction of the break, like the
market should do, the price may reverse back above the old support level.
Observing and studying what happens after a failure like this is telling and
often leads to great trading opportunities—in the opposite direction.
Trading successfully is a lot about deciphering the clues the market is
giving you and making an educated judgment about what should happen. If
the clues you follow are consistent and reliable, make sense, are what the
market should follow, and the market does not do what it should do, that
tells you something.
Observing and studying what the market does, especially if you have a
sound plan for your trading, will help to develop your confidence in what
you are doing. It may seem like you are missing out on real trading—
especially if the trade you would do is profitable. However, think of the
time you spend observing and studying the markets as the price you pay
to increase your understanding of the market and gain confidence in your
trading methodology.
The more you practice by watching the markets, the easier it will be
for you to see the low-risk/high-reward trading opportunities that present
themselves over the course of a trading day. You cannot just go out and
play and hope to be successful. Practice! Practice! Practice! You cannot
get enough practice.

3. KNOW YOUR RISK
In life we are constantly evaluating risk. When we drive, we are processing the road ahead, behind, and to our sides through our mirrors. We pay
attention to our speed partly in reaction to the risk of getting a speeding

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

55

ticket and partly to consider the risk to injury of ourselves and others in
the event of an accident. Analyzing risk is second nature when most of us
drive. It becomes instinctive.
However, think back to the time when you were first learning to drive.
If you can’t remember that far back, perhaps I can jog your memory with
mine. When I first got behind the wheel of a car, processing the risks was
much more difficult than it is now. I was told to check the mirrors, watch
the road, and monitor the speedometer. This was a process I had to think
about carefully each time I got in the car.
Eventually, as I became more familiar and comfortable, the careful
driving gave way to a more cavalier attitude. Now, friends were in the car.
The cassette player was on full volume. Adjusting mirrors was a thing of
the past. Speed was less of a concern. I realized that the risk of getting
caught speeding was not that great. On the highways, if I led the pack, I did
not have to worry about the guy stopping in front of me; he had to worry
about me.
Then one day while pulling out of a parallel parking spot with a friend
chatting in the front seat, and the radio blaring, I failed to check the blind
spot. To my surprise, a car hit the side of my parents’ Jeep. My heart started
to race. The sweat started to bead on my brow. The police came and I made
excuses. “I checked my mirrors, officer. I did not see the car. So obviously
she must have been going too fast.” Deservedly, I got the ticket, and I had
to explain the damage to my parents. I had to pay the price both literally
and figuratively.
Compare that to trading. When a trader first starts, the common reaction is fear. There tends to be an ultraconservative approach. This is mainly
bred from the lack of experience. New traders are getting behind the wheel
of the car for the first time. It happened to me. It happens to us all. So the
evaluation of risk is congruent with that fear.
As time goes by, traders develop requirements one and two—that is,
they advance their skills and aptitudes and they practice more. In the process, their feelings about risk start to change.
One reason is that they probably have some success. The success
may extend from learning how to scalp the market—taking small profits
quickly along the way and doing a lot of trades in the process. Traders become comfortable behind the wheel. Risk is less a concern. Trading out of
the losses by doubling and tripling up (or even more), or waiting out the
losses becomes the risk management employed by overconfident beginner
traders. They may even get away with this strategy, which is the equivalent of the reckless driver. In this phase of the journey, the trader becomes
giddy. With that attitude comes carelessness.
Then one day, the accident happens. The trader gets caught buying a
dip in what ends up being the end of a bullish market, and the price moves
lower. The trader buys against another support level and the price rallies a
