which then gives us a sense of the importance of each region. As we would expect, the most dense area of
volume is in the first area of price congestion, with two volume bars denoting the significance of this area, one
above average and one extreme.
The area of congestion above this level is modest by comparison, with only two volume bars of any
significance, both of which are well below average. A very minor area of price congestion indeed.
Next we move to the third level and here we see more sustained volumes at this level with two above average
volume bars denoting an area of price congestion which is significant. Finally, we move to the current price
area, where we can see one extreme volume bar. What can we deduce from this analysis?
First we can see immediately which of those areas are likely to be significant in the future in terms of resistance
and support. When these areas are revisited during future price action, then these levels will become our
invisible barriers, and from visual volumes we can judge the likely level of support or resistance. Obviously,
time also plays a part here. The longer a market is in a congestion phase, then the higher the concentration of
volumes we expect to see within the price range. It goes without saying that if the market pauses for days or
weeks, then all this volume is contained in a relatively narrow price range, which in turn will be reflected in the
VAP histogram on the left hand side of the chart.
However, whilst this is perhaps an obvious statement to make, what is more revealing as always, is when we
bring in the time aspect of the volume and price relationship. Let's take a look and see what VAP is telling us
here.
The chart is over a five day period, and the first phase of price congestion lasted for three days. What we see
here is what we expect, some high volume bars confirming a dense region of price congestion. All we can say
about this price region is that it is significant, and had we been trading, then on the breakout we would have
been very comfortable with the volume histogram, confirming a strong platform of support below with the market
breaking higher. Equally in the future, if the market reverses to test this region, once again we can say with
confidence that there is a strong platform of support, which will take some extreme volumes to penetrate and
break.
Moving to the next area of price congestion, which in this case only lasted for a handful of bars, a few hours at
most, before the market broke higher once again, and moved on. This is a secondary area of congestion, and
instantly recognisable as such with our VAP volumes. These are below average, and only two are of any
significance, so if this region were tested in the future, it would not take much effort to penetrate this level, either
from below or above.
Finally, we come to the third and fourth levels of price congestion on the chart which are the most revealing.
The first of these lasted 14 price candles (approximately 4 hours) whilst the second lasted the entire session of
a day. However, look at the associated volume bars and compare these to the price congestion that lasted for 3
days. The most recent price congestion phase at the top of the chart, which lasted a day, has almost the same
concentration of volume as in the first area of price congestion, which lasted for three times as long – 3 days.
What is the volume telling us about this congestion phase of price? And once again, as with all volume analysis
it is in comparing one with another that the anomalies are revealed giving us the validation we are always
searching for in any analysis of price using volume, and in this respect VAP is no different. In this example in
Fig 9.12 we have an intraday chart, with the congestion phase at the bottom of the chart giving us our
benchmark against which to measure other areas of price congestion and their significance.
Whilst the second phase of congestion is, as we would expect, with below average volume bars in a short
phase of sideways price action, the next level above, our third level, is already starting to ring the alarm bells.
And the reason is this.
Because here we see a price congestion phase, over a short period of time, but with above average volume
bars and spread over a deep area of price. So an alarm signal is sounded. From a trading perspective if we
were holding a position, this would give us the confidence on the break out higher, that this was a significant
area of price support and we could therefore continue to hold the position with confidence.
Then we arrive at the fourth level on our chart at the top of the price action, with the congestion phase marked
with ultra high volume on our VAP, and additional high volume bars in a very narrow trading range on our

traditional volume bars. Clearly the market is weak at this level and the volumes are heavy, and likely to be
selling in this region. After all, on volume of this strength we would expect to see the market move higher but it
hasn't, instead it has remained range bound.
In case you think this was a chart deliberately 'hand picked' to reveal the power of VAP, nothing could be further
from the truth. It was the first one I happened to select when writing this chapter, and indeed, you may find this
hard to believe, but as I was writing, the market opened, and the Microsoft stock price fell like a stone, down
$1.40 on the open.

Fig 9.13 Microsoft (MSFT) 15 Minute Chart – After Open
And here it is! As you would expect the volume at price profiles have now changed, as we are seeing heavy
volumes coming into the market, as evidenced on both the VAP and also on our traditional volume bars at the
bottom of the chart. This once again demonstrates the power of volume at price analysis. Not only are we
seeing a potential support region being built visually, we are also seeing this validated in our volume bars at the
bottom of the chart, and when we begin to analyse this with our price spread, a complete story of price action
backed by volume is created. It still defeats me as to how anyone can ever trade without using volume, and I
hope fervently that by now I have convinced you to at least consider it as one of, if not the only one of, your
analytical techniques. I sincerely hope so.
Just to round off this chapter, let's take a look at some other examples of VAP.

Fig 9.14 Alcoa (AA) – Hourly Chart
Fig 9.14 is a really interesting chart. It's an hourly chart this time for Alcoa, but look at the huge volume spike in
the centre of the volume at price histogram. It is enormous, and more importantly is right in line with the current
price action which is in congestion. The market has traded in this range before, and clearly this represents a
very significant area of price consolidation as evidenced by the VAP. As you can see, in the past few hours the
market has rallied and attempted to breach this level, but failed. And no wonder, given the volume profile on the
left of the chart in the VAP histogram. At this point we would be moving to our traditional Volume Price Analysis
to look for anomalies and validation, which may well confirm this view, and suggest that any break out is likely
to be to the down side.

Fig 9.15 Proctor & Gamble (PG) – Daily Chart
Now this looks a really nice stock in Fig 9.15 to be trading right now and the reason is that, as an investor, you
would almost certainly have been looking at this as a longer term buy and hold. It is a daily chart and the chart
period covers around 6 months in total. And, as we can see for the first three months, this stock was in
congestion. However, look at the volumes in the VAP. One extreme volume bar with another of average
volume. Whilst the congestion phase was long, looking higher up the chart, we see a further phase of
congestion, which lasted for two months, but the volume bars here are only moderate and above average. This
gives us our benchmark as clearly the support platform at the lower level is a substantial one, so in the event of
any reversal lower, there is an extremely strong, natural barrier in place.
More importantly, when the breakout from this region occurred, it moved higher on a gap up, which is always a
strong signal, and then validated by our Volume Price Analysis. From there this stock has risen strongly, and
following the second phase of congestion, has moved higher once more. However, the key thing about the
second congestion phase is that the volumes, relatively speaking, are lower, and therefore this price region may
not offer the same degree of support in the event of a reversal lower. This helps when placing our stop orders in
the market, which are always governed by our risk and money management rules.
Nevertheless, the point is this. These visual regions created using the VAP approach, give us vital clues and
signals which help us in many different ways. They help to validate the current price action. They reveal the
'depth' of support and resistance in key congestion areas, and they give us confidence on breakouts, when the
platform of support or resistance is there for us to see. If it is strong, then we have additional confidence to take
a position, if it is weak, we may hold back and wait for other signals. Finally VAP reveals the strength of support
and resistance for future price action, which again helps us to visualise and analyse risk.
Now in the next chapter we are going to examine some further examples using Volume Price Analysis (VPA).
However I would urge you to discover more about VAP for yourself. The examples I have used here have all
been using stocks, but it is a technique that applies equally well to many other markets and instruments.
The CME themselves used to provide a facility called Chart -EX which produced a similar picture for traders in
futures, but I believe this is no longer available. However, as I said earlier, most good charting platforms will

have this indicator in one form or another.

Chapter Ten
Volume Price Analysis Examples
Two… key factors: correct action and patience. These you must supply yourself.
Charles Brandes (1943-)
I hope by now I have managed to convince you of the merits and power of Volume Price Analysis in all its
various forms. My purpose in writing this book has been twofold. First to guide you in the direction that I was
fortunate to take, when I first began trading all those years ago. Albert was a rogue, and even though he has
attracted many detractors over the years, I for one will always be grateful for the day I happened to stumble
across his article in the newspaper. Volume to me just makes sense, it is logical, and is the only way I believe
that you can truly see INSIDE market behaviour, manipulated or otherwise. All the charts used here are taken
from either my NinjaTrader platform, or my MT4 brokerage account.
My second reason for the book is to explain this methodology in a straightforward way. The markets may be
complex, but they are not complicated or difficult to understand, and if you are prepared to learn and study the
charts yourself, you too can become an expert in VPA in no time. There are no short cuts, but just like riding a
bicycle, once learnt, you will never forget. As I have said before, I do not believe any software program can do
the analysis for you. Trading is an art, not a science and the subtleties and nuances of the market are simply
beyond the capabilities of machine code, no matter how sophisticated the program. And the principle reason
why trading is an art, is because markets are driven by people and their money and underpinned by fear and
greed.
Therefore, as we near the end of this book, I'd like to to through some examples from various markets, and from
different platforms. All have volume. Some is actual volume, as in the cash markets and the futures markets,
others are from the spot forex market. But all of them have one thing in common. The application of VPA is
identical in each case, and where we have VAP data, I have added this as well to complete the picture.
And I would like to start with some examples from the US stock markets and the first chart is the daily chart for
Honeywell (HON) which if Fig 10.10.
This is a nice example which teaches us several lessons on this one chart. Whilst this is a daily stock chart, our
VPA principles still apply, regardless of market or instrument.

Fig 10.10 Honeywell (HON) Daily Chart
The stock sells off, moving lower, and initial weakness is signalled by the small shooting star candle, which is
then confirmed with rising volume and a wide spread down candle. So no anomaly here. This is then followed
by a narrow spread down candle with higher volume than on the previous bar. This is an anomaly, and could be
stopping volume. The following day, the market closes with a hammer candle, and high volume again. We are
now looking for this stock to pause at this level, perhaps move into a congestion phase, or perhaps see more
accumulation before a breakout and move higher.
In this case, Honeywell moves higher immediately on the following day with a gapped up open, but the volume
is only average. The following day the price spread is narrow, and although higher on the day, the volume is
falling away. This is not a good sign and suggests weakness. The stock is possibly not going to move too far,
and does move into a congestion phase. However, towards the end of this phase we start to see daily selling
pressure absorbed with a narrow spread down candle and high volume, again an anomaly. After all, if this was
selling, then we would expect to see a wide spread candle, and we haven't. We have a narrow spread candle,
followed by another, three candles later.
The selling is being absorbed, and we are now waiting for a potential break out from this region, which duly
arrives. Rising volume with wide spread up candles. A positive signal that the market is bullish. We also have a
nice platform of support below. The market then moves sideways again at the higher level for two weeks,
sliding lower, but note the down candles. The selling volumes are falling all the time at this level, not a sign of a
bearish market. If the stock were truly bearish then we would expect to see falling prices and RISING volume.
We have falling volume. Remember, it takes effort to rise AND fall.
Therefore, we are expecting to see buyers come into the market soon, which is precisely what happens next,
and with attitude! The buyers come in with above average volume, and note the tail on this candle which is the
last in the current congestion phase. This looks positive.
The following day we get the breakout, with high volume. This is NOT a trap up move, but a genuine move
higher. And we know it is genuine because VOLUME reveals everything. Not only have we seen a breakout,
but this has been accompanied by a gapped up open as well. All signs of a bullish market, PROVIDED this is

validated with volume. Three months later the stock was trading at $76.08.
The next US stock is a particular favourite of mine. David (my husband) and I first starting trading Duke Energy
back in the days when it was $17! Now it’s over $70. In those days we held this stock and wrote covered calls
which is a great options strategy, and the topic for another book.

Fig 10.11 Duke Energy (DUK) Daily Chart
Once again, there are several lessons to be learnt here, and the most valuable one is patience. If you recall
what I said at the start of the book. When I first started trading using VPA I used to get very excited as soon as I
saw a hammer candle, or stopping volume and would immediately take a position in the market. However,
remember the oil tanker. It takes time to stop. Therefore, what can we learn from Duke Energy.
First, at the extreme left of the chart we can see that the stock has been rising on relatively low volume. The
volume on the last bull candle, a wide spread up candle, is only marginally higher than on the previous candle,
which was half the price spread. Clearly there is an early sign of weakness ahead, which duly arrives two
candles later. The stock attempts to rally before entering a price waterfall with falling prices and rising volumes,
with stopping volume initially putting the brakes. At this point Duke Energy attempts to move higher, but with a
wick to the upper body of the candle, this is not a strong response, and the stock price falls further, but on
average volumes.
In fact the spreads on both of these candles is wide, and when compared to the equivalent spreads in the
waterfall, the volumes should be MUCH higher, so clearly selling is being absorbed at this level. Duke Energy
attempts to rally, this time with a bullish engulfing candle, but the volume is average once again, and clearly this
is not a sign of strength just yet.
The market then pulls back with two small hammers on low volume. Is this the final phase of mopping up the
selling pressure? The answer is delivered on the next candle with a LOW VOLUME test. The insiders are
preparing the ground. The selling has been absorbed, the market has been tested for further selling, and the
low volume test signals success, Duke Energy is now primed and ready to move.
The stock moves higher on good volume and is subsequently followed by a gap up day, supported with strong

volume, not a trap up move but a genuine move higher. The insiders are joining in! Then we move into a
congestion phase, followed by a further gap up and breakout on high volume, and from this move, the stock
price then declines slowly lower, BUT note the volume. It is low! An anomaly! We can be pretty sure that the
stock price is not going to fall far. After all, if it were, we would see high volume and this is certainly not the case
with below average volumes.
The final candle in this group was then followed by a bullish engulfing candle, and the following day, with a
gapped up move higher. HOWEVER – note the volume on the gap up, it's LOW. Is this a trap up move by the
insiders? It certainly looks weak, and the volumes following the move higher are well below average. But note
where we are in the overall price action. We are back where we started in terms of price, and this is therefore an
area of potential price resistance given the earlier failure at this level. So we should be DOUBLY on guard. A
gap up move on low volume, and resistance ahead !!
So what happened next?

Fig 10.12 Duke Energy (DUK) Daily Chart - Moving Forward
Duke Energy stayed at this price level price of $65.75 for several days, before finally breaking above the
resistance area, and then moved steadily higher on steady volumes. Finally, the move runs out of steam, and
volume as always tells the story. Right at the end of this trend we have three ultra high volume bars, beneath
narrow spread candles. Is the market strong or weak? And the answer of course is weak, and we see the price
fall sharply. But once again, the selling volumes are average, so clearly not a major turning point for Duke
Energy which continued higher and remains bullish, for the time being. At time of writing Duke Energy is trading
at $74.41.

Fig 10.13 SLV - ETF 5 Min Chart
I now want to consider different markets and time frames and the first example is the SLV which is an ETF
(Exchange Traded Fund) for silver. ETFs are a very popular way for many traders to enter the commodity
markets, and the SLV is certainly one of the most popular. It is a straightforward ETF, un-leveraged and is
backed by the physical metal. Here we have the 5 min chart, so perfect for an intra day, scalping strategy.
As we can see from the chart, starting at the far left the SLV had been moving sideways, albeit with a bullish
tone before starting to fall, breaking below the interim platform of support with 5 consecutive down candles, on
rising volume. A signal that the price action was being validated by volume, which at this point is above
average.
The SLV then drifts sideways for a few bars before we see two narrow spread down candles, the first with
above average volume, an anomaly, and the second with extremely high volume. This must be stopping
volume and therefore buying, otherwise the candle would be wide. Instead it is narrow. This is followed by the
hammer candle, on high volume, signalling more buying in the market. The response is muted with the up
candle, which moves higher on low volume, not a sign of strength, but is followed on the next candle with rising
volume and a wide spread candle, so an encouraging signal. The insiders then test on low volume, and move
higher on solid volume, before weakness starts to appear with a wide spread up candle and a subsequent
failure at the same level.
What happened next was that SLV then drifted along at this level for some time, before selling off again the
following day.
It would be very easy for me to show you hundreds of examples where VPA gives us great trends and great
trading opportunities. It does. But what it also does, is give us sound common sense logic on which to base our
trading decisions, and more importantly to quantify the risk on the trade itself, which is what trading is all about.
In this example we are looking at this opportunity as a scalping trader. However, if you were an aggressive
trader, then you may well have taken a position based on the hammer alone. After all, this looks like a strong
signal. However, the following candle suggests weakness at this level. The volume is well below average, and
at this point we would be wondering if this was a wise decision. Any stop loss by the way would be below the

wick of the hammer, with the market setting this level for us. Assuming we continue to hold, the next candle is
much more encouraging, a wide spread up candle with high volume, so a good sign. No reason to exit just yet.
The next candle suggests weakness, a shooting star (although not at the top of a trend, weakness nevertheless
with the deep upper wick) and above average volume. We are expecting a reversal on the next bar, when in fact
we see a positive signal – a low volume test which is followed by a wide spread up candle with above average
volume once more, with a further pause before the final leg to the top of the move.
At this point a more cautious trader would have seen the initial response to the hammer, and taken this as a
sign of weakness, which it is, and decided, based on this signal to stay out of the market for the time being, and
perhaps waited for the second candle, which IS a sign of strength, before entering a position. If so, in this case,
this would probably have ended as a small profit, a small loss, or perhaps break even. But my point is this.
The examples I have chosen here are designed to teach, to educate and also to show you VPA applied in a
variety of time frames and markets, and perhaps more importantly, that all trends and trading opportunities are
relative. Here we might have taken a position as a scalping trader and netted perhaps 20 or 30 cents on the
contract.
In the earlier examples with stocks, market positions there may have been in place for days, weeks or even
months and netted hundreds, if not thousands of dollars. It is all relative. The beauty of VPA is that your trading
decisions are based on logic. The logic of volume and price. From there, it is down to your skill as a trader to
balance your money management with your own risk tolerance and trade accordingly. VPA will give you the
trading opportunities, but you will have to judge the risk on the trade, and how much capital you are prepared to
risk based on your assessment.
And remember, your assessment of risk will also be based on your analysis using multiple time frames, and in
the example above, a slower time frame may well have been signalling a warning that this was a weak move
and therefore the risk on the trade was high. This may even have been against the dominant trend. In fact it
was, as the general trend for silver at the time was bearish, so by definition, the trade was a higher risk trade
anyway.
