
Overconfidence Bias
Psychological research shows, time and again, that people tend to have an inflated view
of their abilities and skills. Most people believe they are better, smarter, and more skilled
than average. (Of course, it is impossible for most people to be better than the average!)
This problem is exacerbated because trading tends to attract competitive, confident people to begin with. Thinking that we are better than we are is a recipe for disaster and is
probably one of the reasons why so few traders make it past the learning curve.
There are traders whose hubris extends to every aspect of trading, but the market
usually eliminates those traders quickly and efficiently. It is far more common to find
traders who believe they have a special skill or affinity for an asset class. Do you just
know what a certain set of stocks is going to do? Do you have a special sense for the
relationship between a currency and a commodity? Do you have a touch for a certain
trade setup? Well, one of the great things about trading is that it is easy to evaluate performance: are you making money? If you have a special skill, the only way it matters is
if you are making consistent money over a large sample of trades. There are no excuses.
In many cases, traders are much more confident about their trading abilities, about their
analytical abilities, and about the epistemological limits of market knowledge than can

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

The Trader’s Mind

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

355

possibly be justified by their results. We are never as good as we think we are, and markets are far more random and far less knowable than we wished they were.

Confirmation Bias
Confirmation bias is the tendency to overweight information that reinforces our beliefs
and to ignore or downplay information that contradicts. This bias is a key part of keeping
many other biases alive. For instance, traders could not be overconfident in their ability
with a certain trade setup if they were truly, objectively evaluating their results. However, when they remember two winners and forget about five losers, or come up with
reasons why the five losers shouldn’t matter, they are engaging in confirmation bias.
Record keeping, both of trade results and of research, is critical, because this bias often
distorts memory—you simply will not remember contradictory information, or it will be
somehow fuzzy and obscured. In most cases, the confirmation bias is not a deliberate
attempt to deceive or to manipulate data, but it occurs as a result of the fundamental
ways in which we process information.

Anchoring Bias
Anchoring bias is the tendency to place undue weight on one particular piece of information and to ignore everything else. In the case of the overconfident trader, maybe she
has made a trade 20 times with 18 losers, but one of the winners was dramatic. It is easy
to find your entire perspective colored by a large outlier event, whether it was good or
bad. Careful, objective analysis of trade results and pattern studies will guard against
this bias. Paradoxically, though it is important for traders to spend time studying the
market and its patterns, studying carefully chosen trade examples can actually be counterproductive; too many traders waste time trying to figure out how to reproduce the
1-in-10,000 trade. Do not spend undue time analyzing your big winners or losers; rather,
spend time studying the entire set, and understand how those large outcomes fit within
the framework of all possible trades.

Recency Bias
Recency bias is the tendency to overweight recent information, or information near the
end of a series. Good public speakers know this and structure their speeches around this
effect—always end with whatever you want the audience to remember. Good teachers
know this when they review key information at the end of a lesson. Traders do not always
realize how much they may be swayed by the most recent results of their trading system.
There is a potentially nasty interplay between this bias and the tendency of the market
to spend time in certain regimes or phases. Imagine a trader trading a good system that
just happens to have a large loss due to a market distortion such as a large gap opening.
On the next trade, the trader is probably going to be focusing on this loss rather than on
the long history of the system. Once again, careful record keeping and broad studies of
patterns are important; learn to see each event, regardless of where it falls in the time

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

356

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

line, as only one of many possible outcomes, and avoid attaching too much significance
to large events, good or bad, near the end of the series.

Hindsight Bias
“Coulda, woulda, shoulda”—these are the poster children for this bias. When you are
evaluating a trade and think you should have seen something or you could have avoided
a loss if you had realized a piece of information was significant, be careful. It is far easier
to say this after the fact than it is to act on this kind of information in the middle of
the trade. This is another reason to avoid putting too much emphasis on the outcome of
any one trade. If you spend too much time reviewing large winners or losers, there is a
temptation to try to see what you could have done differently as the trade developed.

Illusion of Control
Research has shown that, particularly in stressful and competitive environments, people
are unable to distinguish between outcomes due to skill or chance. Langer (1975), who
first coined the term illusion of control, showed that it was more prevalent in tasks when
“skill cues” were present—competitive tasks with clearly defined and familiar outcomes
where the individual seems to have the ability to make a choice. In an experimental
setting, if you have someone sit and watch a box with randomly flashing numbers and
tell them they win when the numbers increase, they are not likely to think their skill has
any effect on their results. However, give them a button to push, even if the button does
nothing, and their assessment of their skill and its relevance to the task goes through the
roof. Casinos know this when they design games of chance; why else would thousands
of people push a button or pull a lever attached to a random outcome, and one with
a negative expectancy, for hours at a time? For traders, this can be fatal. Many of the
other biases are wrapped into one powerful package here—overconfidence, attribution,
hindsight, confirmation—and these all reinforce the illusion that traders are really better
than they are, and suppress the role that randomness plays in the bottom line.
For traders brave enough to try it, Mauboussin (2010) proposes an interesting solution: can you lose deliberately? At first, you will think the answer is obviously yes, but
think deeper. Are you really confident that you could, for an extended period of time,
trade against your methodology trying to lose, and show results that would be significantly different than what you have achieved trying to win? If you cannot lose deliberately, then whatever wins or losses you are experiencing are merely the result of chance.
In short, you are wasting your time. It is better to know you do not know—to know you
do not have an edge—than to waste your time and money on a futile exercise.

THE RANDOM REINFORCEMENT PROBLEM
In the rational, sane world, correct actions are met with rewards, and doing the wrong
thing results in punishment. This is simple cause and effect, but unfortunately, this is

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

The Trader’s Mind

Printer: Hamilton Printing

357

not the way the market works. Imagine a completely crazy teacher in a classroom, who
without any rhyme or reason randomly screams at some students, ignores some, rewards
a few, and punishes others. A student could hand in a perfect paper and get a failing
grade, sometimes more than once, while a student who puts a big “X” in the middle of
a single sheet of paper receives a perfect score for what was supposed to be a 25-page
essay. It is not that the teacher is actively punishing the good students; there is no pattern
at all to the teacher’s actions. Can you imagine trying to learn in such an environment?
This is a problem for traders, because the market is like this teacher; it often rewards
incorrect behaviors and punishes perfectly correct actions. You can do exactly the right
thing on a trade and lose money several times in a row, or you can make a serious mistake
and make a lot of money. The statistical edges in our trading setups become valid only
over a large sample size; on any one trial, anything can happen. Especially for developing
traders, this random reinforcement, coupled with the extreme emotional charge of both
winning and losing, conspire to create one of the most challenging learning environments
imaginable.
Random reinforcement is a profoundly powerful tool for behavior modification, and
is frequently used to train animals. If you train dogs and reward them every time they
obey, their good behavior will probably stop as soon as the rewards stop. On the other
hand, if you randomly reward their obedience by sometimes giving a treat and sometimes not, the modifications to their behavior will usually be permanent. (Again, do
you see any parallels with slot machines?) It may be counterintuitive, but random reinforcement is actually a much more powerful tool to shape behavior than consistent
reinforcement.
There is so much random noise in the market that even excellent trading systems
have a large random component in their results. Over a small set of trades, random reinforcement of both good and bad behavior is normal for our interactions with the market.
Excellent decisions are just about as likely to be met with good results as bad results,
and poor decisions will also result in a number of winning trades. Traders trying to be
responsive to the feedback of the market and trying to learn from their interactions with
the market are likely to be confused, frustrated, and eventually bewildered.
The market’s reinforcement is not truly random; over a large number of trades, results do tend to trend toward the expected value, but it certainly can seem random to
the struggling trader. The solution should not surprise you by now: evaluate your trading
results over a large sample size, and use statistics to separate reality from your emotional
perceptions. Learn from 20 or 30 trades, not one. Make decisions about changing your
trading rules based on the results from 50 trades, not five. The market is a capricious
teacher.

EMOTIONS: THE ENEMY WITHIN
As logical and rational as we try to be, there is no denying it: our decisions are made
based on a combination of reason, intuition, and feeling, each in degrees depending on

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

358

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

our personal makeup and the specific situation. Once again, this is a mode of decision
making that has great utility in many situations, but it can misfire in the context of trading
and markets. Emotions can create stress that unbalances the brain on a chemical level.
Emotions can cause us to overweight and underweight certain factors, and sometimes
to make decisions without any reasoning at all. Successful traders have many strategies
for dealing with their emotions, but that is the common thread—they have all found a
way to integrate their emotions into their trading process. Some deny and control them
with iron discipline and try to become logical machines, some seek modes of trading
that remove emotion from the decision process, and some embrace their emotionality
and actually build their trading process around it; but in all cases, they understand their
emotional balance and how to control it within the framework of their work flow.

Ego
We all have egos. (I am using the term ego here in the colloquial sense to mean selfimage rather than in any formal, psychoanalytical context.) Everyone likes to be right,
likes to be seen as intelligent, and likes to be a winner. We all hate to lose, and we hate
to be wrong; traders, as a group, tend to be more competitive than the average person. These personality traits are part of what allows a trader to face the market every
day—a person without exceptional self-confidence would not be able to operate in the
market environment. Like so many things, ego is both a strength and a weakness for
traders. When it goes awry, things go badly wrong. Excessive ego can lead traders to
the point where they are fighting the market, or where they hold a position at a significant loss because they are convinced the market is wrong. It is not possible to make
consistent money fighting the market, so ego must be subjugated to the realities of the
marketplace.
One of the big problems is that, for most traders, the need to be right is at least as
strong as the drive to make money—many traders find that the pain of being wrong is
greater than the pain of losing money. You often have minutes or seconds to evaluate a
market and make a snap decision. You know you are making a decision without all the
important information, so it would be logical if it were easy to let go of that decision once
it was made. For nearly all traders, this is not the case because we become invested in
the outcome once risk is involved. Avoiding emotional attachment to trading decisions
is a key skill of competent trading, and being able to immediately and unemotionally exit
a losing trade is a hallmark of a master trader.
Being wrong is an inescapable part of trading, and, until you reconcile this fact with
your innate need to be right, your success will be limited. Earlier in this book, I suggested
that an appropriate way to look at normal trading losses is not as losses at all, but simply
as a planned, recurring cost of doing business. Though many traders feel shame, anger,
and hurt over losing trades, this is illogical—the market is so random that it is absolutely
impossible to trade without losing. Many good traders are wrong far more often than
they are right; trading is not about being right or predicting the future. All you can do is

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

The Trader’s Mind

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

359

to identify places where you might have a small edge in the market, put on the trade, and
open yourself to the possible outcomes.

Hope and Fear
Scylla and Charybdis were two sea monsters in Greek mythology situated in a narrow
strait so that ships had to pass close to one or the other; captains had to choose because
it was not possible for a ship to make the passage and to avoid both. For traders, fear
and hope are the twin monsters, and no matter how experienced we may be as traders,
we are unable to completely conquer them. What we can and must do, however, is to
become aware of our weaknesses and our responses to these emotions. If we can monitor ourselves for susceptibility to errors, we can often intervene before the emotional
reaction has resulted in a poor decision.
The reasons for fear are obvious. Most traders are afraid of loss, though this is probably rooted in a misunderstanding. It is wrong to be concerned about or to focus on
the normal losses that accrue as part of the trading process, but there is certainly the
danger of the unexpected and uncontrollable loss from an outlier event. Recent flash
crashes have shown that stable markets can have unprecedented sell-offs; who would
have thought that a big blue-chip stock could drop 80 percent in a few minutes? Many
traders also face deeper, darker fears that are tied in to questions of self-worth, security,
and personal finance. Even for a well-balanced person, trading can be a serious emotional
challenge at times.
As powerful as fear is, many traders find that hope is actually more dangerous. Hope
encourages us to take potentially reckless risks that we might not otherwise take. It can
keep us in winning trades long after the profit potential is gone; many traders give back a
lot of open profit because they are clawing for even more. Many traders are also loath to
exit their losing trades, sometimes even at their predetermined stop level, because they
are hoping that the trade will turn around and become a smaller loss. Once again, one
of the distinguishing characteristics of successful traders is an ability to cut losers with
minimal emotional attachment. No individual trader can succeed without mastering both
hope and fear.
After many years and many mistakes fighting these twin monsters, I found a solution
that works for me. It is deceptively simple, but it is difficult to do consistently. Here it is:
for every trade you put on, immediately assume you are wrong. This is your baseline
assumption, and, if you find evidence to the contrary (that you are right), be pleasantly
surprised. This works because it takes all pressure off you and all hope out of the trade.
Normally, once you have made a decision to buy a market, confirmation bias kicks in
and you will start to subtly overweight information that supports your position. Instead,
think, “I bought it thinking it will go up, but I’m probably wrong.” There is no struggle,
no fight against the reality of the market, and also no fear because you are expecting to
be wrong. This is a subtle shift in your thinking, but it can produce a powerful change in
your perspective and your behavior.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

360

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

INTUITION
Intuition is an important part of the trading process for many traders and styles of trading. It is certainly more important to some types of traders than to others, but even highly
quantitative work benefits from intuitive leaps at some points in the process. Though
there is a lot of misinformation and misconception about intuition, the best working definition might be that it is a way of knowing that falls outside rational thought. Someone
who arrives at an answer through reason can usually explain every step—how an answer
led to another question, which led to another answer, in an unbroken logical chain. When
someone arrives at an answer intuitively, the individual will often say that he or she “just
knows” or “feels that it is right,” and cannot explain much, if any, of the thought process behind the answer. Intuition works in leaps and bounds. This is not a sign of sloppy
reasoning; it is a completely different mode of thought, another way of knowing entirely.
Many developing traders overestimate the importance of intuition, believing that it
will cure all of their trading ills. They may think that great traders have a sixth sense
that other people do not, that they just trade based on this gut feeling. Some people
believe that great traders are born with market sense—either you have it or you don’t.
Other traders, particularly systematic traders, may believe that intuition does not really
exist or that it is unreliable and mostly useful only in hindsight. As usual, all of these
viewpoints contain an element of truth, but they are also wrong because they miss some
essential points.

Developing Intuition
There is no magic in intuition. Rather, it is a normal problem solving skill that functions on a level outside of consciousness. As such, it cannot be forced, but it can be
cultivated—there are things you can do to foster the growth and development of intuition. Everyone has had the experience of working very hard on a problem and being
unable to solve it during the work session, and then the answer coming spontaneously
after a break or a night’s sleep. The answer seems to come easily and naturally, with no
effort at all, but this is not quite true. The sudden flash of intuition is really the result of
a lot of hard work and an extended period of focused effort that activated the cognitive
machinery on another level. There are two important elements to building intuition. One
is repeated exposure to consistently structured data, which is the focus of much of this
book. Equally important, though, is that the work be approached in the right emotional
context, which is basically an open, receptive, and almost playful attitude. This is something that is so profound, but is often ignored. Most adults understand the need for hard
work and focus, but they are not so in touch with the need for novelty and play. Perhaps
this is one reason why children find it easier to acquire new skills, particularly in the
artistic/intuitive/right brain domain.
There is a large and growing body of research on neuroplasticity, which says that
high-level skill acquisition actually depends on physical changes in the brain—the brain
rewires itself to accommodate these new skills. There are structural differences, for instance, between the way a chess grandmaster’s brain processes chess patterns and the

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

361

The Trader’s Mind

way a typical person’s brain works. They fundamentally see and think differently because
their brains are different, and this difference is the result of intense training. This also
explains why skill acquisition does not happen overnight: It takes time for the brain to
build and reinforce these new structural connections, which requires intense work over
a long period of time.
Teachers of high-level skills have known for generations that the correct emotional
context and environment facilitate high-level skill development, but they did not realize
that students were actually, physically rewiring their brains. Learning should be fun, not
only because the student will be motivated to work harder, but because the emotional
charge of this enjoyment actually encourages the physical changes needed for skill development. It is very difficult to excel at something unless you love it. This is a real problem
for newer traders, for whom the market is an out-of-control emotional roller coaster.
Until those emotions are brought under control, it is impossible to approach the market
with the correct, receptive mind-set.
Where Does Intuition Come From?
There have been many studies in the social sciences and in psychology that have established the reality of human intuition. Focusing speciﬁcally on trading and market-related
intuition, Bruguier, Quartz, and Bossaerts (2010) structured a set of experiments designed
to “better deﬁne what is meant by ‘trader intuition,’ and to understand why some traders
are better than others.” They did this by creating a number of scenarios representing markets that both had and did not have trading by informed insiders, with the goal of seeing if
novice traders could intuit the intentions of these informed insiders through price movements. Perhaps surprisingly, they found that uninformed traders with no experience in
ﬁnancial markets were quickly able to discern the intentions of these informed insiders,
based on nothing more than information contained in price changes themselves.
The logical question, of course, is how did they do that? Bruguier et al. postulated
a connection between traders’ intuition in market situations and a speciﬁc ability known
in the literature as theory of mind (ToM). ToM is the human ability (perhaps shared by
some other primates) to read benevolence or malevolence through the patterns in one’s
surroundings—for instance, the ability to read another person’s intentions through eye
expression or through moves in a strategic game. Since markets with insiders represent
an environment that may be deliberately manipulated against the uninformed trader, ToM
becomes a potentially relevant skill. Not only did Bruguier et al. ﬁnd that trader intuition
in their market simulations was strongly correlated with tests for broader ToM-based abilities, but it was speciﬁcally uncorrelated with ability on mathematical or logical tests.
Last, they conﬁrmed in brain scans that subjects were activating areas of the brain that
have been associated with ToM in previous tests and experiments. It appears that subjects were using highly evolved portions of their brains in new contexts and applications
to drive market intuition.
