
They met for a few hours in a conference room at my firm’s head-
quarters on top of Kings Mountain, in California. Jim and I then drove
north a few hours toward the Russian River and our destination; and en
route Jim kept asking me about “that question.” I had no clue what he
was talking about, and I knew my father better than anyone in the world.
It embarrassed me that I had no idea what he was seeking from me. For
about an hour, Jim staggered trying to put it together and pretty much
gave up. As often happens with our minds, when he quit trying, it popped


xviii Preface

right out, and he said, “What are you doing that your competitors aren’t
doing yet?” What a great question! The emphasis was on the word yet.
Staggering. Most folks, when you ask them that question, aren’t doing
one darned thing of any great significance their competitors aren’t
already doing and feel awestruck that you asked them this and they hadn’t
thought of it themselves.

The firm that is always asking itself that question never becomes
complacent. It is never caught behind. It never starves for intellectual
grist to chew through toward a better future. It is the firm that, coupled
with integrity and raw management intellect, lives the fifteen points.
“What are you doing that your competitors aren’t doing yet?” implies
driving the product market, forcing others to follow, and dominating for
the betterment of customers, employees, and shareholders, which is sheer
greatness. Jim’s question both summed up my father’s lifelong aspirations
and summarized the gist of his fifteen points. And where he got it from
I still don’t know to this day. But it is a stunningly-cunning question.

Jim, who always had a nose for the twist that made a great story,
returned to New York after our weekend and composed a Forbes article
wrapped around that question. It combined the best of Jim and my
father, and the whole thing reminded me of how often in my life I was
the plodding, mechanical fly-wheel around my father’s eclectic bril-
liance. I’m not meaning to demean myself. I’ve done very well in life;
but I am more linear, more deductive, harder working, more driven, and
more direct than my father, who was vastly more a non-linear genius.

My firm has applied the fifteen points and scuttlebutt to firms of
most varieties, although primarily smaller, beat-up ones. Retailers,
technology companies of various forms, service firms, concrete, steel,
specialty chemicals, consumer products, gambling, you name it. The
fifteen points hasn’t always been the final decisive phenomena that
compelled me or the firm, but they often added value. I’ve always felt
free to pretty much do my own thing. While contemplating on a large
scale and attempting to reach conclusions on hundreds of stock yearly,
my firm mass-produced the process for many years in a proccess we
called Twelve-Call, which was run off an operations manual with
remote-location workers doing telephone interviews of customers,
competitors, and suppliers. It wasn’t as powerful by far as doing it your-
self on a single stock, but it let us cover lots of ground. Today, we have
replaced that with subsequent capital-markets technology; but that is,
again, another story and outside the scope of this book.


Preface xix

Today my firm is managing many, many billions of dollars aimed at
a handful of different goals while buying stocks around the globe and
using 500-plus employees. You probably aren’t doing that. You therefore
shouldn’t do what I’m doing, and I shouldn’t do what you need to do.
If you’re an individual, all of the fifteen points still apply. Tactically, you
use them the way I did as a young man when | didn’t have the machine
I have today. And you can’t cover the turf I now can, but that probably
isn’t necessary or even desirable to you. My point is that the fifteen
points are worthwhile whether used exactly as my father originally
envisioned them or on an altered, more superficial but more mass-
spectrum basis, for domestic or foreign stocks, for growth or value, or,
for that matter, if you move away from public stocks to buy private busi-
nesses, many or just that one that you might want to own and operate
personally, no matter how small. All of the same principles apply.

MUCH MORE AVAILABLE

Now, don’t get the idea that the only worthwhile parts of Common Stocks
and Uncommon Profits are scuttlebutt and the fifteen points. It’s just chat I
think they are the jewels. There are smaller sparkles, too, bits of wisdom
well worn. For example, by 1990 I'd been a professional for eighteen
years and fairly successful. I'd been a Forbes columnist for six years. Enter
Saddam Hussein. As the threat of war grew, investors grew timid. The
market buckled. I’ve studied quite a bit of history and written two
financial history books. The history as I saw it said, “Buy.” But | hadn’t
lived that much history. One weekend, I buttressed my resolve by review-
ing Chapter Eight, “Five Don’ts for Investors,” and Chapter Nine, “Five
More Don'ts for Investors,” in Part One. And I knew that the war scare
had to be a market buying opportunity. From it, along with some of my
economic forecasting, came my well-timed late-1990 “buy” columns.
Timing that right, when most others were bearish, helped secure my
long-term place in Forbes, for which I’ve always been grateful. But you
might have found the same things useful more recently as we had
the 2000-2002 bear market and what could be thought of as Saddam
Hussein I.

As I write, in 2002, we have had the worst bear market since,
depending on how you look at it, my early career in 1974 or the Great
Depression in 1937-1938. Many have had their faith in prior


xXx Preface

investment beliefs shattered. Many have developed new-found faith in
other concepts that they will soon surely find shallow, vapid, and void
of eternal truth. What would my father say looking forward. He would
say simply that capitalism will prevail and the United States and the
Western world will progress, that you can debate where the market
bottom is, and that he rarely considered himself to be very good at that
(although he made a few spectacular market calls in his long carecr). He
would say that if you own companies that have the fifteen points and
don’t get carried away by what he referred to as “fads and fancies,” you
will come through this period just fine. He would say that if you don’t
own stocks, this is a perfectly fine time to buy companies that possess
his fifteen points. The bear market of 2000-2002 has seen to that.
Might they go lower before they go up? He would always acknowledge
that possibility. But he would say that it won’t matter much a few years
from now. Would he contemplate cutting, running, and selling out to
avoid the market here? Not for a moment. There is nothing he would
be less likely do. Yes, he did lighten up on stocks several times in his
ultra-long career, but only when he could know that the market
hadn’t fallen yet and still might, not after it had fallen, hoping it would
fall still more.

Would my father fear Saddam Hussein, Osama bin Laden, or ter-
rorists? No. Would he fear war? He tells you directly in these pages
that he would not. Would he admire President Bush for pointing us
toward war? No. He rarely admired presidents because he saw them as
politicians and he came to not much care for politicians; and the few
he ever cared for weren’t so high up. He said, “The higher they go, the
liar they get.” And he hated war and rarely could see its justification.
Would he have worried about the myriad of other negatives in con-
temporary media, like corporate integrity, double-dip recession possi-
bilities, high market price-earnings ratios, the risk of Brazil defaulting,
or whatever? No, not much. He would have used this time while oth-
ers focused on the wrong things to refocus on the basic fundamentals
of the firms he owned and to sce if he should still own them. And in
looking at the weakest among them, he would be contemplating if
there were one or two better firms he could find somewhere to
replace them. He always saw volatile, down markets as a great oppor-
tunity to upgrade the quality of his few stocks. And the more folks
fretted about the markct, the more he would be fretting about what
he owned and didn’t own.



Preface xxi

Late in his career when asked about market timing or sector issues,
he would say something like, “Well, my son has proven he can navigate
those waters much better than I’ve ever been able to, and here is what he
says... but, I still wouldn’t trust him.” He never trusted anyone to make
those kinds of decisions for him. He trusted the ownership of firms that
possessed his fifteen points to take care of him. And he would today.

Many times in my career, someone would tell me (a) that I was
wrong (which may have been and always may be quite true) and (b) that
my father never would have done what I’m doing. I would always know
generally that this person clearly didn’t know my father’s brain one iota
as well as I did and that he or she almost certainly hadn’t read his writ-
ings as often as I had. So, I never much worried about people’s assess-
ment of what my father would and wouldn’t have done. My point here
is that even being the one who knew him best, in a business sense, I read
him more than most. Even if you understand the material really well,
you will benefit from rereading these pages multiple times as your
investing life progresses, and you will hurt yourself if you rely solely on
the lessons from one reading. First, they fade in your mind. Second, the
more you read them, the more you get out of them. Without meaning
to sound heretical, it is like a little investing bible—a book that is meant
to be read multiple times and whose usefulness does not end with the
last page.

You will find lots of other jewels of your own in these pages that
may do as much for you as they have for me. But an important con-
cluding point to make on Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits is to
note its sheer fundamentalness. Not only does it teach the true basics of
fundamentals of investing, but it has been a core part of the training of
many leading investment practitioners. For many years, it has been part
of the curriculum in the investment class at the Stanford Graduate
School of Business. Students of all forms passed through Stanford, read
the book, and went on to become some of the nation’s leading investors.
But the book’s breadth was broader than that. For example, Warren
Buffett has long credited my father and Common Stocks and Uncommon
Profits as being fundamental to the development of his investment phi-
losophy. The first of my father’s “Don’ts” in Chapter Nine—‘Don’t
overstress diversification”—gets you quickly to a key cornerstone of
Buffettism. And you can find it in the very same place Buffett first did.

Not much of great importance to market fundamentalism changed
between the writing of my father’s first book and that of his third and


xxl Preface

last book, Conservative Investors Sleep Well. But a lot of water went under
the investment bridge: a huge bull market, a huge bear market, 1958 to
1974—lots of fads and fancies. By then my father was sixty-seven.
His last book was good, but it wasn’t nearly what Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits was. He had done it so well the first time that his two
subsequent books only made incremental additions. If you can read only
one of my father’s writing, lct it be his first book. It was his best. Still, if
you want to read more from my father, his next most important writ-
ing was his last book. It was also contributing fundamental ideas. It was
a bit topical at the time but has remained timeless.

I think in Conservative Investors Sleep Well that Chapter Six’s Motorola
section is vintage Phil Fisher. In it, he shows why Motorola, which others
then didn’t like so well, was a great firm and one for which he was per-
sonally ready to put his neck on the line in thinking forward a very long
time. It’s tough to read this section of that book and not appreciate that
Motorola was a true quality company. But look what happened after-
ward. In the next twenty-five years, the stock appreciated thirty-fold,
that is, before dividends—and all in a safe, well-managed firm, incurring
no brokerage costs year to year, no mutual fund operating expense
ratios, and not much effort for a true believer. How oftcn docs some-
one give you a successful multi-decade-long look-ahead? Darned near
never. Would anyone actually hold one stock for all those twenty-five
years? Well, I’m here to tell you for a certainty that one Philip A. Fish-
er did, as his largest personal holding, all the while it was trouncing the
Standard & Poor’s 500. And that is and was what Phil Fisher was all
about. Finding a very few great companies that he could really know
and holding them for a long, long, long time while those very stocks
appreciated phenomenally. Conservative Investors Sleep Well is simply the
best treatise I know on how to buy and hold growth stocks without tak-
ing much risk. You could get that, certainly, from either book, his first
or his third. The two in many ways are intellectually linked at the bod-
ies, separated by sixteen years. Still, if you only read one, read Common
Stocks. It offers more, is more radical for its time, is better written, is
more timeless, covers more turf, and is more intellectual. If you can read
both, do it.

In the book’s second preface, I tell you a little about my father that
isn’t well known. But over the years, people often asked me about my
relationship with my father, father and son having been in the same
industry and all that. And because he was weird, and I’m weird, and



Preface xxiii

often they are weird, I sometimes give weird answers. For example,
when they asked, as they often did, what experience from my memo-
ries with my father is my favorite, I regularly answered, “The next one.”
That is no more, but it was for a long time. They often tried to pin me
down with something like, “Well, wéren’t there favorite moments when
you were younger?” I readily admit there were. He was the world’s
greatest bedtime storyteller, and his stories had absolutely nothing at all
to do with the stock market. Many were his own fictional creations. As
a small child, I loved every moment of those stories—and folks like the
growing legions of Buffett-philes hate that answer. They want some
notion about researching some stock. But there was never really a lot of
emotion about that. It was just work. So, then, in frustration, I’m often
asked, “Well, if you could distill advice from your father down to a single
sentence, what would it be?” I'd say, “Read his writings and try to live
them out.” And that is what you get with these pages. Enjoy them.

KENNETH L. FISHER

Kings Mountain, California
July 2003




Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits
and Other Writings




Introduction

Kenneth L. Fisher

This is among the most beloved investment books of all times, among
the bestselling of classic investment books, and now forty-five years old.
My father wrote his original preface at my childhood home in September
1957. It remains herein. Forty-five years later in October 2002, in my
current home, I dare write this, this book’s first new preface in all those
decades.

If you've read my revised preface, you might think my father is
deceased. No. As I write, he is ninety-five and alive. But he is reduced
by the awesome wreckage induced by late stages of aged senile demen-
tia and probably by Alzheimer’s disease (there is no right way to be sure).
He is at home, in bed, about thirty feet away from where he wrote Com-
mon Stocks and Uncommon Profits and his other writings.

He deteriorates steadily. To those few of us taking care of him, it is
startlingly quickly. By the time you read this, he may well be deceased.
He will never read these words—were they read to him, he couldn’t fol-
low their meaning for more than a sentence or two before losing the
thread in dangling disconnects cut by his dread disease. He was a great
man but is now just a little, old man very late in life. But he is my litele,
old man. What this disease routinely does to people is nothing to be
ashamed of; it is just a disease, not a failing. When I wrote my third book,
based on one hundred cameo biographies of dead pioneers of American
finance, I defined it as “dead” pioneers only on the premise that dead
people don’t sue, just in case I got anything wrong. But I also did so
because I purposefully didn’t want to cover my father in any regard. I
didn’t want to say anything that might hurt him if I interpreted him dif-
ferently than he might have wished, which I well might have.


2 Introduction

Now I need not worry about that because he won't know what I
say here. So it is time to tell you a bit about the man who wrote one of
the best beloved investment books of all time. I’m best qualified to do
so because I know him better than anyone if you combine business and
personal matters. Oh, certainly, in other ways my mother, his wife, knew
him far better than anyone. My aunt, his sister, knew him longer than
anyone. But their relationships were basically personal, not business. Yes,
I have an eldest brother who worked very closely with him briefly and
was temporarily my business partner and to whom I’m close. But
Arthur’s professional time span around Father was fairly short. He
evolved to academic humanities, where he is today. Father always loved
Arthur foremost of his threc sons, and Arthur was more emotionally
linked to Father than I was. But Arthur would be first to tell you I spent
vastly more business time around Father over many more years and had
a day-to-day relationship with him when Arthur couldn’t, materially
because Arthur lived a thousand miles away.

BEGINNINGS

My paternal ancestors were Jewish, mainly from Prague, Czechoslovakia,
and Germany, all arriving in San Francisco in the early 1850's. My father’s
paternal grandfather was Philip Isaac Fisher and was both Levi Strauss’s
original accountant and the person who opened and closed Strauss’s first
store for him om a daily basis and served Strauss his entire career. My
great-grandfather was not wealthy but at his death was financially com-
fortable. His wife died young, and his eldest daughter, Caroline or Cary,
donned an important role caring for her siblings. My grandfather,
Arthur Lawrence Fisher, the youngest of eight, adored Cary, who played
partial surrogate mother. Born in 1875 in San Francisco, Arthur
Lawrence Fisher grew, graduated from UC-Berkeley, and attended Johns
Hopkins Medical School, graduating in 1900 and returning to San
Francisco to practice medicine as a general practitioner. Later (perhaps
in World War I but maybe earlier, during post-doctoral scholarship-
based research at Rockefeller University), he developed a specialty in
orthopedics, becoming the third orthopedic surgeon west of the
Mississippi and a founding member of the Western Orthopedics Society.
In 1906, Philip Isaac Fisher died, stalling briefly Arthur Fishcer’s marriage
to Eugenia Samuels. The marriage stalled again behind the infamous


Introduction 3

1906 fire and earthquake. Finally they married, and my father was born
the next year, on September 8, 1907. He was named originally Philip
Isaac Fisher, after his recently deceased grandfather.

Pour years later in 1911, my father’s sister, his only sibling, was born.
She was named Caroline after Aunt’Cary. Aunt Cary had married well,
to a Levi Strauss relative named Henry Sahlein, who was introduced to
Cary through her father. Aunt Cary played an important role in the lives
of Fishers for two generations, those of both my grandfather and father.
Aunt Cary not only secretly bankrolled my father’s education (some-
thing he never, ever knew), but also secretly gave my grandfather money
to buy a car for Father that became serendipitously seminal to his career
evolution. And Cary provided ongoing family social structure that
enriched Father's fragile emotional existence as a child—a process that
continued for decades. If my parents had had a daughter, she would have
been named Cary, as was their first grandchild.

Unlike many doctors, my paternal grandfather was largely unin-
terested in money. He did a great deal of charity work and academic
medicine, but he didn’t care for business or money. When his private prac-
tice patients couldn’t pay, he simply cared for them anyway. When he
sent out bills that went unpaid, he ignored rebilling or collection
attempts. He was thought of by myriad people as saintly for his kind,
warm, and generous persona. Fortunately for his immediate family, he
had Aunt Cary to “secretly” bankroll him behind the scenes. Without
Cary, you likely would never have gotten this book.

Father was originally privately tutored. My grandfather didn’t
believe in the elementary schools of the day, and Aunt Cary could afford
better. Later, Father was enrolled in San Francisco’s prestigious Lowell
High School. He graduated at age sixteen. Smart, too young, well edu-
cated from tutoring, Father was also awkward and lacking in social skills
other children normally learn in elementary school. He was frail, brittle,
and uncoordinated sports-wise; and being young by comparison, he was
small relative to Lowell classmates. So he felt socially insecure, which was
furthered by his mother’s incessantly critical and negative nature. At
sixteen, Father started at UC-Berkeley; but later, with financial aide
from Aunt Cary and a car paid for by her, he transferred to smaller and
friendlier Stanford University. That transfer also proved fateful.

He dutifully returned to San Francisco on weekends, which began
with a ritual Friday night family dinner at Aunt Cary’s and Uncle
Henry's. These dinners spanned almost fifty years, starting before Father’s


4 Introduction

birth, and included even distant family members. The dinners were cen-
tral to building Father’s early social skills. (The ritual still existed briefly
when I was a child.) My grandparents always attended. Father arrived
directly from Berkeley or later Stanford. Cary’s house, which if it existed
today would be called a mansion, was built in the 1890's by Uncle Henry
on Jackson Street, just off Van Ness. The multi-course feast involved
much discourse and after-dinner debate that often turned various family
participants combative, something my grandfather loved watching. There
were lots of child-aged females; but as the only male of his generation,
Father became a particular favorite of Uncle Henry, which made these
events particularly memorable to father—his one chance as a young man
to stand out in a crowd. After dinner, Father returned home with his par-
ents, heading back to college Monday morning,
