
Muffle. Muffle. "Frank, some new guy with Salomon."
Frank Diderognon: "I don't talk to Salomon. Bastards. Tell him to go
away."
"Frank says he'll have to call you back."
Fuck. Why did I take this job?
A geek is a carnival performer who bites the heads off live chickens and
snakes. Or so says the red American Heritage dictionary. At Salomon
Brothers in London, a geek meant whatever the traders said it meant,
and they had two definitions, neither of which bore any resemblance to
the dictionary's. Upon my arrival a trader told me that a geek was both
(a) "any person who sucks farts from swans" and (b) "a person
immediately out of the training program and in a disgusting larval state
between trainee and man." I, he said, was a geek.
By December 1985, having served my time as both a waiter and a
punching bag for traders in New York, I was happy to stop being a
trainee, even if it meant becoming a geek. I planned to drift away from
the forty-first floor, from Ranieri, Gutfreund, Strauss, and Voute and
their oppressive turf war. Don't get me wrong. I liked the action as much
as the next guy, but in New York, when you're starting out, action comes
at the price of freedom. I couldn't stand the thought of being sat
upon by fat mortgage traders until I learned to do my job. That could
take a lifetime.
If you wished to detach yourself from the soul of Salomon Brothers,
London was the only place to go. Everywhere else the standards were set
by the forty-first floor-in the American branches and also in Tokyo. But
the older Europeans who staffed the London office of Salomon were
freedom fighters. The top six management positions in the office were
held by Americans who had worked on 41. The Europeans nevertheless
set the pace. You had only to compare the reaction of our office to a
visit from Gutfreund with those of the other offices to see the
difference between us and them.
When Gutfreund appeared in any American branch office, the employees
put on a show. They affected a casual confidence. Although their
stomachs churned and their pants moistened, young Americans jested
with the wandering Gutfreund. They said nothing terribly
adventuresome, you understand. Jokes about the latest bond issue were
in. Jokes about Gutfreund's wife were out. As long as the ground rules

were properly observed, Gutfreund gave it right back.
When Gutfreund visited the Tokyo office, the Japanese employees
bowed their heads at their desks and worked the phones furiously, as if
playing charades and assigned to communicate "Men at Work." The
slumbering Japanese in our training program notwithstanding, the
concept of playing cool apparently doesn't exist in Japan. No young
Japanese peered skyward to chat with cherubic Gutfreund-san. An
American friend of mine happened to be in the Tokyo office on one of
Gutfreund's visits and was taken aside by the boss for a discussion.
When my friend returned to the trading floor, he recalls, "All the
Japanese were staring at me as if I had just had a personal conversation
with God and he had made me a saint."
In London Gutfreund was treated, quite simply, like a gauche American
tourist. It would only have confirmed many people's opinion of him if he
had turned up wearing psychedelic Bermuda shorts and a T-shirt with a
camera around his neck. People laughed behind his hack, especially as the
firm spiraled into decline.
"What's he here for?" one European would ask another.
"Must be on his way to Paris to do some shopping," the response would
inevitably be. It was indeed often the case.
The next question was then: "Is Susan with him?" (In fact, wife
Susan was with him about as often as Paris was his ultimate destination.)
There is, in short, no question that the Europeans took less heed of
authority than Salomon's Americans and Japanese. These free spirits
were on average ten to fifteen years my senior and old hands in high
finance. They were less interested in the latest financial gadget to come
out of America than in establishing relationships with customers. There
is a genus of European, species English, to whom slick financial practice
comes naturally. The word for them in the Euromarkets is spivs. Oddly,
we had no spivs. Our Europeans-especially our Englishmen-tended to be
the refined products of the right schools. For them work was not an
obsession or even, it seemed, a concern. And the notion that a person
should subordinate himself to a corporation, especially an American
corporation, was, to them, laughable.
The Europeans had a reputation, probably exaggerated, of sleeping late,
taking long, liquid lunches, and stumbling through their afternoons. The
source of this reputation was, as ever, the forty-first floor in New York.

One New York trader referred to them as "Monty Python's Flying
Investment Bankers." The colorful and loud clash between their culture
and the culture of the imported American management was a dust cloud
behind which a geek could hide and retain a measure of personal
freedom.
Between the time I arrived at Salomon Brothers in London in December
1985 and the time I left in February 1988 a great deal changed. The
staff grew from 150 to 900. We overhauled our image and moved into
shiny, new offices. Tens of millions of dollars were poured into our
operation by the men on the forty-first floor in New York who were
intent on transforming Salomon Brothers into a "global" investment bank.
John Gutfreund and Tom Strauss (who oversaw our international
operations) shared the conventional wisdom of Wall Street that there
would one day be just a few truly global investment banks and that the
losers would, presumably, stay home. Those few global banks would form
an oligopoly that could lift the price of its capital raising services and
prosper. The firms regularly mentioned as likely to form the global club
were the Japanese investment bank Nomura, the American commercial
bank Citicorp, and the American investment banks First Boston, Goldman
Sachs, and Salomon Brothers. And the European banks? I don't think we
even knew their names.
Tokyo was the obvious site for our rapid expansion because Japan's
trade surplus left it gorged with dollars it had either to sell or to invest.
The Japanese were the Arabs of the 1980s. But because American firms
felt unwelcomed by Japan's financial establishment, and because
financial regulation was labyrinthine in Japan, the Japanese offices of
Wall Street firms tended to be small and tentative.
Meanwhile, there was no obvious barrier to entry in Europe. There was
little financial regulation. And the Atlantic cultural divide seemed less
daunting than the Pacific to native New Yorkers. When a kid from
Brooklyn disembarked at Heathrow Airport, he didn't need an
interpreter to hire a limousine. When he sat down to dinner in his
expensive hotel (Claridges and the Berkeley were favorites), he wasn't
served raw fish (there was at Salomon an oft-repeated story about an
American managing director in Japan who tossed his sushi on top of a
small bonfire he ignited at the table) but stuff that looked pretty much
like American food. It was easy for this man to fool himself that Europe

was a lot like New York because on two thousand dollars a day it was. So
London became the key link in this drive for world domination; its time
zone, its history, its language, its relative political stability, its large
pools of dollar-hungry capital and Harrods (don't underestimate the
importance of shopping opportunities in all this) made London central to
the plans of all American investment bankers. And the global aspirations
of Salomon Brothers settled in London.
I was a geek salesman, one of twelve from my training class airmailed
business class to London. Our offices when I began occupied two small
doughnut-shaped floors in a building owned by Morgan Guaranty in the
City. Trading is meant to require a vast hangar in which everyone can see
and shout at everyone else. Our building had been effectively cored, by
the placement of too many elevators and staircases at its center. The
trading floor wound around the core. Fully extended, it might have
stretched fifty yards, but sitting on it, you could see only ashortway.
Still, there was a cramped, commercial feel about the place. We sat
elbow to elbow. Everyone knew what everyone else was doing. It was loud
and, with the exception of its postcard view of the river Thames and the
dome of St. Paul's Cathedral, unpleasant.
The twelve sales units in the London office were merely extensions of
the New York parent operations. One unit sold corporate bonds, a
second mortgage bonds, a third government bonds, a fourth American
equities, and so on. What I would sell had been decided for me while I
was in the training program. The man to whom I was now committed, for
better or for worse, for richer or for poorer, was named Dick Leahy. He
ran Salomon Brothers' bond options and futures sales department, a
rogue offshoot of the government department. That made me, by birth
as it were, a member of the Strauss family.
Leahy and his right-hand woman, Leslie Christian, formally assumed
responsibility for me in the final days of the training program, over
turkey sandwiches. This was a lucky break, first because no one else
wanted me except the equity department and second because I liked
them. Being their geek was an unusual assignment. Unlike most managers
who had an obsessive concern with moving their products out the door,
Rabbi Christian and Rabbi Leahy told me to find any way I could to make
money and not to worry too much about pushing options and futures.
They, rightly, aligned their self-interest with the interests of the firm

as a whole. This made them highly unusual. It made me, in a firm of
specialists seeking to please their bosses, an unofficial generalist with a
license to roam the entire firm.
On my first day in London I introduced myself to Leahy's London
manager, Stu Willicker. Before I arrived, his unit consisted of three
other salesmen. Willicker was another lucky break. He hadn't caught the
Salomon disease. He'd been in London four years but refused to forget
that Bald Knob was his birthplace; that was refreshing. More to the
point, he had taken one look at the mass of written and unwritten rules
that governed the behavior of most Salomon employees and chose to
have nothing to do with them. He valued his liberty. He paid almost no
attention to what he was told to do and encouraged his charges to
intransigence.
Paradoxically, he suffered from bouts of tyranny. Every so often he
would issue orders, such as "Call everyone in Paris." But these were rare
and well worth what he gave in return. He let us cut office meetings and
work our own hours. He led by example, by arriving at work each morning
an hour after the rest of the sales force had made its first phone calls.
This, I think, was an inspired gesture. His was the most profitable unit in
the office, year in and year out, and I am sure it was because its
members were left with room to think for themselves.
Thinking, as yet, was a feat beyond my reach. I had no base, no
grounding. My only hope was to watch the salesmen around rne and
gather what advice I could. Learning what to do meant learning an
attitude: how to sound on the telephone, how to deal with traders, and,
most important, how to spot the difference between a financial
opportunity and a rip-off.
Two days after I'd found a seat on the London trading floor, with the
phones going berserk with Frenchmen and Englishmen wanting to gamble
in the great American bull market, I received my first piece of advice.
The young man directly across from me, a member of my unit whom I'd
spend the next two years gazing upon in wonderment, leaned over and
whispered, "Wanna know a lay-up? Short the stock of Salomon Brothers."
A lay-up, it should be said, was jargon for agamble that was sure to
succeed. To sell short, or to short, is to sell a security that you don't
own, hoping that it will decline in price and you can buy it back later at a
lower price. To short our own stock would be to bet on its taking a nose

dive.
I should have gasped and recoiled in horror. First, shorting the stock of
your own company is illegal. And second, it didn't sound like such a great
idea, though perhaps it wasn't a bad hedge, to bet against Salomon
Brothers. The firm was having the second most profitable year in its, and
Wall Street's, history. My friend, who goes here by his chosen
pseudonym of Dash Riprock, didn't mean I should actually do the deed.
He was simply making a point, stating a fact, in his inimitably succinct
style. He had sized me up, he later explained, and had decided to take me
under his wing. This meant he would occasionally cast in my direction the
pearls of wisdom he had accumulated in nine months on the job. He was
American, and only twenty-three, two years younger than I. Still, in the
way of the world he was light-years ahead of me. Dash Riprock was a
proven money-maker.
I soon grew used to him. Dash often made remarks I didn't understand,
such as "Buy two-year notes and short old tens," or "Short Salomon's
stock," or "Save a client, shoot a geek" and expect me to figure out why
on my own. Often I hadn't aclue what he meant. But Dash, for all his
pithiness, had a kind heart. And eventually, after he'd sold four
different money managers in three different countries on whatever new
scheme he was promoting, he'd elaborate. In this way I learned about
trading, selling, and life.
Dash's point on this occasion was that Salomon Brothers was a poor
investment in spite of all the vital signs of the company's being healthy.
This, I was to learn, is the best time to short: the moment before
business turns sour. But how did he know that the time had come for
Salomon?
As a geek, you see, I was like a newly elected president. I wasn't
expected to know anything except that I didn't know and that it wasn't
my fault. So I asked, "Why?"
Of course, I didn't expect him to come right out and explain. That would
have been too easy. Dash spoke in cryptic sentence fragments. He just
waved his hand in the direction of the rest of the trading floor and said,
"It's a corporation."
Strictly speaking, this was a truism. Salomon Brothers was a corporation:
Phibro Salomon Incorporated. Bjut I knew what he meant. We liked to
think we were free from most of what that terrible word implies:

superfluous meetings, empty memos, and stultifying hierarchy. Dash had
looked up from his phone one day and seen a growing bureaucracy, and it
disturbed him. To support his case, Dash raised his index finger, like a
Roman orator, and said, "Consider the book and the bowl."
That said, he wheeled around in his swivel chair and picked up a blinking
light. Soon he was well into a sales rap. . . . "Fed's doing reverse, I don't
know, market might soften a touch overnight, we're seeing supply, you
might put on twos to tens. ..." All of which meant nothing whatever to me.
I scribbled a note to ask about it later.
The book and the bowl. Salomon was then celebrating its seventy-fifth
anniversary. To commemorate the great day, all employees received two
gifts: a large silver-plated bowl, with the name of the company inscribed
on its side, and a book. The bowl was good for putting Doritos in. The
book, called Salomon Brothers: Advance to Leadership, was a selective
history of the company that had as its sole purpose the glorification of
the people on top. It accomplished the task in a nice enough way.
Gutfreund, Ranieri, Horowitz, Voute, Strauss, and Massey were quoted as
if following a script. They were modest about themselves and thoughtful
about the world. The author then filled in the blanks about how wise,
handsome, brave, and team-spirited they were. The book was a fine little
specimen of clumsy fascist propaganda. Those in future training
programs were made to memorize its contents.
Even to a trainee, the book was a ridiculous cover-up job. The firm had
advanced to leadership, but not as one big happy family. At that point
there were more skeletons in the firm than there was closet space to
hold them. The son of the founder, William Salomon, otherwise reserved
and dignified, marched about the place calling Gutfreund a
disgrace to any reporter who'd listen. The flowers were still fresh on
the grave of former Chairman David Tendler, whom Gutfreund had
muscled aside in ascending to the chairmanship of Phibro Salomon Inc.
The struggle between Ranieri, Strauss, and Voute was nearing its bloody
climax. Bond traders were streaming out of the door for better offers
elsewhere. Of course, little of the firm's dark past and present
appeared in the official, sanitized history.
In explaining the birth of the mortgage department, for example, the
author unearthed old newspaper quotes from the likes of Bob Dall,
saying, "What Salomon has that no other major firm has is a tremendous

flexibility to let your skills end up where they are most productive." The
most interesting thing about this statement is what was going on behind
the speaker's back when he made it. The quote was recorded six months
before Dall was shoved aside by Ranieri to be left twisting in the wind by
Gutfreund.
Gutfreund is the book's hero. He is cast as a kind of Isaiah figure, an
unworldly suffering servant of Salomon. He describes making his
transition from trader to manager, for example, with this passage:
"While I enjoy the management role," he said, "it's because I feel a
challenge, not because I think it's the most gratifying job in the world.
The world of finance can, on occasion, involve us in the highest calling.
From time to time we have had the opportunity to influence society in a
favorable way."
"He sounded like an elder statesman," coos the accompanying text.
But the disinformation was not what bothered Dash about the book and
the bowl. Once you knew the truth about the firm, you realized it was far
better to disinform than to inform. And if our leaders were going to lie
about their methods, they were almost by necessity going to tell a
whopper. What bothered Dash was that Salomon Brothers had actually
spent money to make these things. A book and a bowl? Who gave a shit,
he said, about a book and a bowl? He'd rather have the money. What's
more, he added, the people who worked at Salomon in the old days would
never have done such a thing; they, too, would rather have had the
money. The book and the bowl violated what Dash considered to be the
Salomon ethic. And that's why he told me to short the stock.*
* Shorting Salomon's stock would indeed have been a lay-up, no, a slam
dunk. The share price declined in almost a straight line from fifty-nine to
thirty-two dollars before the crash of October 1987, in spite of the
predictions of other brokerage houses, notably First Boston and Drexel
Burnham, that Salomon stock was a great investment. After the crash it
fell to sixteen dollars.
I made a careful note of this exchange in the slim volume in which I
stashed anything that sounded like wisdom. Early on, my notes indicate, I
was made aware of the possibility that my seemingly robust employer was
in fact in a state of decay. Otherwise I don't trust myself when
describing my first few months on the job because the memory of how I
arrived was very quickly obscured by what I became.

For an honest appraisal of my early self I must rely, to an extent, on
others. Plenty of people at Salomon Brothers made a hobby of brutally
frank character analysis. For example, Dash later often amused himself
between phone calls by reflecting on my^early career, usually with a pen
in the corner of his mouth. He was fond of saying that as a geek I bore
the stamp of whomever I had last spoken with. I was, he felt,
uncommonly soft-brained upon my arrival. If I had last spoken to the
mortgage bond trader, I would be on the phones to people to say what a
good deal mortgage bonds were. If I had last spoken to a corporate bond
trader, I would think that the latest issue of IBM bonds was a gold mine.
Unfortunately Dash did not make real-time observations about my
character. He let me know of my flaws only after they had wrought a
great deal of damage. In fairness to him, he had no choice. Like all of us,
he lived by the law of the jungle, and the law of the jungle said geek
salesmen are red meat for traders. No exceptions. If the corporate
trader had managed to dupe me into thinking that IBM bonds were hot,
that was my problem. Had Dash disabused me of the notion, the
corporate trader would have tried to take whatever it cost him out of
Dash's next bonus. Dash liked me, but not that much.
Still, I relied heavily on Dash and on the other members of our unit, a
woman and two men. We sat at a single desk, divided artificially to
accommodate five. We had a hundred telephone lines; each line was a
channel through which money, tasteless jokes, and rumors flowed. If you
ever care to see how all the world's most awful jokes spread, spend a day
on a bond trading desk. When the Challenger space shuttle disintegrated,
six people called me from six points on the globe to explain that NASA
stands for "Need Another Seven Astronauts."
Rumors were far more relevant than bad jokes because rumors moved
markets. It was widely believed that a small, bald man in a grubby room in
Moscow started all rumors to wreak havoc on our Western market-based
economy. The rumors bore an uncanny resemblance to whatever people
feared most. Often the most unlikely of rumors caused panic in
II
me markets. In two years, for example, Paul Volcker resigned from his
post as chairman of the Federal Reserve seven times and died twice.
We had, on our desks, three telephone receivers each. Two were

standard phones; the third enabled you to shout directly at any person in
any office in the Salomon empire. Several dozen phone lights flashed
continually on our telephone boards. European investors (I shall refer to
them collectively as "investors" or "customers" even though most were
pure speculators and the rest not-so-pure speculators) wanted to place
their bets on the American bond market from eight in the morning until
eight at night.
There was good reason for their eagerness. The American bond market
was shooting through the roof. Imagine how crowds would overwhelm a
casino in which everyone who plays wins big, and you'll have some idea of
what our unit was like in those days. The attraction of options and
futures, our specialty item, was that they offered both liquidity and
fantastic leverage. They were a mechanism for gambling in the bond
markets, like superchips in a casino that represent a thousand dollars but
cost only three. In fact, there are no superchips in casinos; options and
futures have no equivalent in the world of professional gambling because
real casinos would consider the leverage they afford imprudent. For a
tiny down payment, a buyer of a futures contract takes the same risk as
in owning a large number of bonds; in a heartbeat he can double or lose
his money.
When it came to speculation, European investors didn't require a great
deal of encouragement or instruction. They'd been doing crazy things
with money for centuries. The French and the English, in particular,
shared a weakness for get-rich-quick schemes. And like a crap-shooter
who has a pretty lady to blow on his dice, the speculators in both
countries had an amazing array of irrational systems to help them win
money. They had to guess which direction the American bond market
would take: up or down. The systems usually involved staring for hours at
charts showing the history of bond prices. As in Rorschach ink blots, an
unlikely formation, such as a human head and shoulders, made itself
privately known to the viewer. The chartist-for that is what such a
person called himself-would then use his ruler and pencil to draw the
future of bond prices based on the assumption that the historical
pattern could be projected forward. Miraculously, in a bull market, the
resulting forecast was usually that the market was going up.
Actually there was one good reason for using the charts: Everyone else
did. If you believed that large sums of money were about to be invested
