to put into your trading account.” That is what you are going to say to
yourself.
ME: And I am going to realize that the money I lost trading actually represents something that I have to work for.
HARVEY: It will change the way you think about the money in your trading
account.
ME: You’re forcing me into this, you know.
HARVEY: No, I’m not. You don’t have to go back to work. You can take your
remaining savings and you can trade it. You can start trading it right now
if you want. You can trade the Euro short with me, you can go see if
Craig will talk to you, or if you can get someone else to help you. You
don’t have to ever do anything that I tell you to do. I am not going to
force you. But I will promise you something.
ME: What?

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

2:25 PM

Page 147

Breakfast with Harvey

147

HARVEY: I promise you that if you do this, if you take this first step, that I’ll
never threaten to stop helping you again. I promise you that you will
make a huge step forward in your discipline. And that before you know
it, we’ll be working together again.
ME: This is really hard for me.
HARVEY: It’s hard for me to see you in this spot, too. But I am not going to
let you off the hook. So what’s your answer?
ME: I’ll do it. I will. I will go back to Mr. Johnson tomorrow and I’ll ask for
my job back. I can’t believe that he would ever let me have it back, but I
will ask. And if he says no, I’ll find something else.
HARVEY: Anything else?
ME: Right. I will deliver pizzas if I have to. But I will earn back the $5,000
that I lost.
HARVEY: Agreed. Assuming you shape up this week, I want you to start on
the next law of trading by yourself—it’s the law of testing, and I am
going to leave you to figure out the details. If you can get that done, then
we’ll be seeing each other again. Now I have to go.

I SEE HERBIE AGAIN
Harvey left me sitting in the booth with a lot to think about. Mostly, I was
thinking about Herbie Johnson tearing my head off and throwing it across
the office. I considered checking my passport to make sure it was still valid
and then leaving the country, rather than facing Herbie or my wife.
I also realized that losing the $5,000 could have been something totally
inconsequential. Without Harvey’s help, I probably would have waited a
week and deposited more money. I wouldn’t have told my wife about the
loss. I could see that without Harvey, I would have seriously depleted all
our savings very quickly.
So I decided to show my gratitude to Harvey by not wasting any time
asking for my job back. I hadn’t paid Harvey anything for his time or effort
with me, and I had been nothing but a problem to him so far. By following
his instructions, at least I showed that I valued and appreciated his help.
And I did appreciate the help. Choosing now to ask for my job back, instead of waiting another day, proved my commitment to do the right thing.
And getting a job now was the only right answer to the quandary I
faced. I did not want to tell my wife that I needed to trade more of our savings. We had a limited amount of money and I planned to keep it safe for as
long as possible. My plan was to regain the losses from that morning, even
if it took me two or three months, then start trading again with the money
I earned, and this time protect it instead of flushing it away. We didn’t have

book_c15.qxd

12/20/06

148

2:25 PM

Page 148

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

to dip into the savings that way. I had to return to working for other people,
I had to face the people who had fired me, and I had to admit that I had
carelessly squandered a great opportunity to make a lot of progress in my
trading. Honestly acknowledging this missed opportunity was nearly the
most difficult thing that I’d ever done.
Traffic was light so I hailed a cab, which got me to the office much
more quickly, where I could experience the wrath of Herbie more quickly,
and then I could forget about that job and instead go to work delivering
pizzas for Bleeker Street Pizza in the West Village. At least I liked their
pizza.
I didn’t have a plan. Or a good reason that they should hire me back.
Maybe I could start off by talking to the office receptionist, and find out if
they had hired someone to replace me. By the time I started up the elevator, I planned to first speak to Christy Matthewsen, the office administrator. She’d fire me a second time, or explain to me how very uninterested
the firm was in my services, thus saving Herbie Johnson the effort and torment of screaming at me.
Fat chance.
As I exited the elevator on Floor 44, Herbie Johnson was standing right
at the reception desk.
“Banes!” he cried. “Just the man I wanted to see. Get in my office.
Now.”

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 149

CHAPTER 16

Back to
Where It
All Began

erbie didn’t look as angry as the last time that we had spoken. In
fact, he seemed almost happy to see me. I hadn’t ever seen him
happy before, so this was a total surprise and I didn’t know how to
act. Walking back toward his office, with him walking behind me, I had the
feeling that I still worked there and that not much had changed.
On the way down the hall, I peered over to the central work area outside the filing room. There were stacks upon stacks of files to be organized, sitting on my old desk. It was more than I’d ever seen before, even
more than I had seen after returning from vacation.
“Banes,” he told me when he got me into his office and closed the door.
“Let’s get something out of the way right from the start. Did you know anything about that dirtbag Scott Needleway selling the Anderson files? Did
you know anything about that at all?”
“No, definitely not,” I told him. “Of course not. If I’d known something
about that, I would have fired him myself. Is that what happened to the
missing file? Is that why I was fired?”
He nodded. He then said something nasty about Scott that I won’t repeat here. He also seemed pleased to find me completely unaware of what
had happened. “It’s why you were fired, yes. It’s why we fired Scott last
week, too. He was selling letters and depositions from the file to the business press. We caught him on the phone with a reporter from television.
Too bold for his own good at the end. Not too bold after I finished with
him. Now I figure that’s why you’re back. You heard that we caught him
and now you want some revenge.”

H

149

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

150

2:34 PM

Page 150

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I shook my head. “I haven’t heard anything about it until right now,
sir. And I certainly don’t care to get any revenge. In fact, I came here to
apologize.”
He grunted. “Apologize? For what?” He motioned for me to sit down in
front of his desk, and then he sat on the corner of it, just a few feet from
me, much too close for comfort. At least he wasn’t yelling.
Then I let him know, with his phone chirping in the background, what
a terrible employee I’d been for so many years. I explained that I hadn’t always given him an honest hour’s work for an honest hour’s pay. That I had
taken a few hundred extra 15 minutes at the end of lunch. That I had left
early and come in late far too many times. That near the end, I had done
some trading on company time. That I had lied to him on occasion. And
that I was sorry. And then I surprised him and myself by what I said next:
“And I want to pay that time back. I owe it to the firm.”
I learned later that, in all of his years as a partner in a law firm, he’d
never heard a staff member say such a thing. He hadn’t ever heard of anything like it at all. And he didn’t want to hear it again.
“Don’t ever want to hear that again, Banes,” he told me. His phone
buzzed again. Surprisingly, he didn’t reach for it. He hadn’t taken his eyes
off me for the entire time. He spoke: “In fact, I don’t have much time to
care about your past indiscretions on the job. I’ve got seven associates out
there right now who I ought to fire for overbilling, but I’m not going to do it
because we have more work than we can handle right now. The Anderson
case has ten attorneys now and it’s a thorn in my side and a mountain of
files. And no one around here has time to hire a replacement. We’ve got
stackloads of paper out there for you to file.”
I didn’t hesitate. “I’d like to come back and help out. I don’t know for
how long I can stay, maybe a month, maybe two. I’ve got to earn some
money fast, and if you need the help, I need the money.”
He didn’t mention the severance pay. I didn’t either. He grunted: “I
don’t know how much we were paying you, but if you can start right now,
I’m sure we can work it out. How much do you want? How much is this
going to cost me?”
His phone rang again. This was the longest period I’d ever seen him do
only one thing at one time. He was buckling under the pressure to multitask.
“I can work as a contractor. I can help you find a replacement for me in
two months. You can pay me five thousand dollars a month.”
“Done,” he said, and this time, when the phone rang, he picked it up.
“Now get out of here.”
I went straight back to my desk and moved the heap of files over to
one side, and found my old phone. There was no longer a computer on the
desk, and I sort of liked that. I didn’t want any distractions. I lifted the receiver and dialed home.
My wife answered on the first ring.

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 151

Back to Where It All Began

151

MEANWHILE, BACK IN THE CUBICLE . . .
I explained everything to her. I originally intended to tell her about the
trading losses in person, but I didn’t want to hold anything back. Better to
get all the apologies out at one time and in one place. She was shocked that
I had asked for my job back, and she was encouraged that I was willing to
earn back the money I’d lost, even though I would have to work at a job I
didn’t much like. I told her that in the evenings I was going to dedicate myself to figuring out where I went wrong, to developing the right attitude
about trading, so that I never made the same mistakes again. She understood. If I hadn’t gone back to work, this conversation would have ended a
lot differently.
After I hung up, I went straight to work. I got a lot done in the next five
hours, staying later than I ordinarily would have. It would take me at least
two weeks to catch up with this material alone. But it actually felt good to be
working again, to be actively engaged in supporting my family and earning
back the money that I had lost. Harvey was right. This was the only course of
action that I could take to salvage my trading career. Saving my trading by
not trading at all didn’t seem to make much sense at first, but now that I was
working, I realized how important it had been to protect my account.
At 7:00 P.M., I stopped working for the day. I pulled a piece of blank
paper from my desk and wrote on it in capital letters:
YOU MUST PROTECT YOUR ACCOUNT BALANCE
Then I thumbtacked it to the board and headed for the elevators. But I
didn’t go all the way down. I stopped at the 31st floor, the trading floor of
Ernest Wellington & Company. I wrote a note to Craig explaining that I had
taken my old job back to earn some money to cover my losses, that I had
made a boneheaded trading decision, and that I would like to talk with him
when he had a chance. I planned on working through lunch for the coming
weeks, but I hoped we could find some time after work. I left the note at
the receptionist’s desk, and started to leave when a voice called out to me.
“Harry Banes? Is that you?”
It was Anderson.

ANDERSON LOSES HIS MIND
Anderson wanted to talk and I for sure wasn’t going to refuse. He led me
back onto the trading floor, still staffed with a few people who, he told me,
were watching the Asian markets.

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

152

2:34 PM

Page 152

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“We have people in Japan and other parts of the world, of course,” he
said, “but we like to keep most of the folks close to home.”
“Sounds reasonable.”
“Craig tells me you’ve been doing some trading. How’s it coming
along?” He found a place for us to sit at two empty workstations. In front of
each of us were four flat-panel monitors, and when my elbow bumped the
keyboard, the monitors lit up and showed charts, current quotes on the
major currencies, and some web pages. Anderson looked over. “Looks like
the EUR/USD is trading higher again.” I glanced at the quotes.
It was trading at 1.2160. All day it had tried to approach the 1.2200
mark but hadn’t been able to reach it.
“Yes, I traded the Euro this morning,” I told him. “I lost. I am going to
take some time off trading for a week or two.”
“Reached a drawdown limit?”
I nodded. I wondered why he was talking to me. He didn’t even seem to
know that I’d been fired. From what I’d learned about Anderson so far, he
wasn’t the type of person to engage in idle chat. There had to be a purpose
behind this.
“Yes,” I admitted. “I lost just about all of my trading capital this morning.” Ordinarily a confession like this would make me feel horrible. Instead
I felt great. Why lie to him? He didn’t have any plans to hire me. I had no
reason to impress him.
“We all have those experiences starting out. All of us. I sure did.”
He then looked off into the distance and proceeded to tell me a longwinded story about how he had been out of college for six months, then
was hired into a major bank, and how he did the working tour, like all the
recent graduates, of the different parts of the bank. At the end of his sixmonth tour, he started working at the equities trading desk. Then he lost a
bunch of money, almost got himself fired, and ended up with a story far
more boring and far less informational than everything I had already
learned.
When he was finished, he patted the desk in front of him. “Harry, if
you’d like to come down here after work and talk with some of the traders,
that would be fine with me. When you’re ready to start trading again, we’ve
can put a computer down here for you and you can access your account
from here.”
What was he talking about? I wondered. Why had he offered this? Had
he lost his mind?
It had to be that he knew Harvey Winklestein, and I was getting the
royal treatment because of it. But I thought I had remembered that Harvey
hadn’t ever met, or didn’t know, or didn’t like, Anderson. Maybe Craig had
talked with him. Certainly I wasn’t going to spend all day thinking about it,
though. I readily accepted.

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 153

Back to Where It All Began

153

“I appreciate the offer. I will usually finish in the late afternoons and
maybe in a week or so, when I catch up with some work, I will start coming down here.”
“Sounds good. I won’t be here tomorrow but if you stop by, I’ll have a
badge made for you so you can at least get in the door. A computer should
be ready for you in a few days. The IT guys are fast. If you have any problems, just call me on my cell,” and then he handed me his card. Then he
stood up, shook my hand, and looked me in the eye.
“I can see a good budding trader a mile away, Harry,” he told me.
“I think we might be able to do some business together in the long run.
Shake off those losses. Get back on the horse. Don’t let the losses get the
best of you.”
I nodded.
“You can sit around here for a while if you’d like,” he added. “I’m going
to run now, but you’re already logged into Ellen Hansell’s computer. If you
want to look at some charts, be my guest. The door will lock automatically
behind you. Dial 9 to get an outside line.”
Then he walked away to check up on some traders a few desks away.
He pointed back at me, obviously introducing me to them and making sure
they knew I’d be there.
Stunned, I sat motionless for at least five minutes. I didn’t know if I
should really touch the computer. What if I screwed up and made a trade?
What if he intended for me to trade? Was this some kind of job interview, like Craig had when he sneaked in? Did Anderson want to see what I
could do?
I called my wife and told her where I was, and that I was going to
check some things out so that when I came home I wouldn’t be tempted to
open anything up. It would be smart to do my research here, because I
wouldn’t have access to any of my own trading accounts. That was a good
thing.
The first thing I did when I gathered my senses was to open a chart on
the EUR/USD. It was the short-term chart, and it only reminded me of the
experience I’d had earlier that morning. That’s when I realized that I should
have been looking at the longer term charts anyway—that’s what Harvey
wanted me to do in the first place. So I switched over to the four-hour chart
again, and drew a horizontal line across the 1.2200 mark. Without any other
thoughts, I started to mark on the chart all the points at which the currency
pair had hit the 1.2200 level. The chart looked like Figure 16.1.
I started to feel excited. Not to trade, which I knew I couldn’t do, but
because I finally might have done some actual, real, valuable, not worthless, analysis. And on my own!
Had the 1.2200 price, for some unknown reason, simply been a hard
number to break? Was that it? Could it be that simple? I remembered that

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

154

FIGURE 16.1

2:34 PM

Page 154

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

The currency pair hits 1.2200.

some of the books I’d read had said that sometimes round numbers were
good barriers for currencies. I had also read that once a resistance line (a
price level above the current price) was broken, it would tend to become
support, or a strong floor. This made sense to me. Once a currency pair did
all that work to break above a level, some emotional and financial investment would be put toward keeping it above that level.
Likewise, if the currency pair could break below a certain support
level, then that level would tend to become strong resistance, or a ceiling.
Once again, this immediately made sense to me. And it seemed to be happening on the chart in front of me.
I noticed that three times in early March, the EUR/USD had tried to
break below the 1.2200 level. Then on March 24, it finally broke through
and closed below 1.2200. And what happened when it tried to rise back
above that mark? It couldn’t do it. It was stopped cold at least two times
that I could see on the chart. Those would have been nice times to sell.
Perfect times, in fact. Just like now?
On March 30, it had broken above and below and shot upward. Then it
had smashed through the line on April 2. Did that ruin my support/resistance theory? Was the strength of the 1.2200 number diminished because of
that (see Figure 16.2)?
It seemed to me that the line still retained some strength. A four-hour
candle had broken the line. But what about the five-minute chart? Maybe it
looked like the four-hour candle had an easy time of breaking the level—
but it could have bounced on the shorter time frames.

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

2:34 PM

Page 155

Back to Where It All Began

FIGURE 16.2

155

The strength of 1.2200.

I decided to switch down and look at a shorter time frame chart. It
might sound lame to you, but when I saw the five-minute chart, chills ran
up my spine (see Figure 16.3).
The five-minute chart showed me exactly what I needed to see: that
the 1.2200 level, overall, had retained its strength. Even though a four-hour

FIGURE 16.3

The five-minute chart and 1.2200.

book_c16.qxd

12/20/06

156

2:34 PM

Page 156

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

candle passed through the number, it wasn’t as if all the traders had forgotten about the importance of the number. The five-minute candle had
briefly traveled lower than 1.2200, but then snapped back upward. This
meant that the number could still have importance now, for the present
time, and that if the price rose up to hit that level in the next few hours or
days, it was very likely to stall and fall back down.
Was this the system that Hank Doorecker had used? All I had on the chart
was a simple line. It seemed so sparse, so . . . easy. I imagined that Hank
surely looked for supporting information before he traded—a quick horizontal line would never be enough. But maybe it would be enough for me.
I grabbed a Post-it note from the desk and wrote down, “Sell
EUR/USD, 1.2200.” If I wasn’t going to trade it in my own account, at least
I could declare my intention to trade it. I had my entry; but what was going
to be the cutoff point, at which I knew I’d been wrong? How far did the pair
have to go before I would need to jump out?
The farthest I could see that the pair had ever traveled beyond the
1.2200 line before snapping back had been about 40 pips. That was across
eight recent examples. I felt comfortable saying that if the price went 50
pips beyond the line, then I had been wrong. So next to the “Sell EUR/USD,
1.2200,” I wrote, “Stop: 1.2250.” This mean that if the price rose up and shot
through the line, I would get out with a loss of 50 pips. But I would have
that as a buffer. I had recent history on my side.
It felt good and right to have a cutoff point. At least I wasn’t risking a
huge amount. This was all fake trading, of course. But just writing it down
on a piece of paper helped me feel more responsible. I knew Harvey would
approve of the way I was doing this.
But what of a profit target? What would be a profit target?
I looked over all the other examples on the four-hour chart of when the
price had been rejected by the 1.2200 mark. The March 11 bounce yielded
a maximum of 186 pips before it turned around and returned to the 1.2200
level. The March 12 gave 172 pips, and on the 17th, 234 pips. March 24 produced 30 pips, March 25 did 131 pips, and March 26 gave 153. On March 30,
it had bounced off the line and fallen back 40 pips. And going back to that
five-minute chart, from April 2, it had hit the support level and then risen
back up 20 pips. It had never failed to at least bounce enough to give some
profit. The average move was 120 pips. I decided that would be my profit
target. Figure 16.4 shows how the Post-it note now read.
I stuck it on the desk in front of me, intending to keep it there as a reminder for the next day. Then I left. This was the best I had felt in a long
time. I was working to support my family. And finally, at the very least, I
knew that I had discovered the beginnings of a system. It needed more
work; I still wanted to test a lot more trades and talk to Craig and Harvey
and anyone else who would listen to me. I hoped they would listen to me.
