Steel (11.8 percent compared with 6.5 percent). Nucor is also working on de-
veloping a processing technique that will lower the costs of producing thin-
rolled products. Ifthe production technique is commercially feasible on a large
scale, it will provide Nucor with yet another cost advantage over its rivals.
Those rivals must spend on efficiency improyements just to keep the competi-
tive gap with Nucor from widening, although they have little hope of attaining
its level of efficiency.

While companies funnel a great deal of the money they spend on tech-
nology into efficiency improvements, product innovation can still play a cru-
cial role in the industry. For chemical companies, new products represent one
of the only available sources of internal sales growth. Chemicals giant
DuPont earned its stripes by developing a series of groundbreaking chemical
fibers between 1930 and 1960, including Nylon, Polyester, and Lycra. Diver-
sified powerhouse 3M has excelled at incremental innovation, using slow-
growth products such as tapes and adhesives in the production of high-tech

applications such as mobile phones.


ECONOMIC MOATS IN INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

Some companies have found ways to take a raw commodity and alter it
so it adds value for their customers. Such value-added products command a
premium to what a basic commodity would fetch. For example, between
1993 and 2002, Alcoa spent more than $1.5 billion on R&D to develop new
processes that make aluminum stronger, lighter, and better suited to more
applications. These producers occupy a valuable niche within the basic mate-
rials sector.

Innovation is hardly an easy task, though. A whopping 80 percent of
R&D projects result in economic failure. DuPont, for example, has main-
tained its industry-leading research and development budget, but block-
buster products have been noticeably absent in recent years. Furthermore, its
former flagship products have become commoditized as low-cost Asian pro-
ducers entered the market, stole share, and crimped the profitability of
DuPont's textile business.

DuPont's experience highlights the problem with innovation in a slow-
growth industry. Companies can pour millions of dollars into new product
research, only for competitors to copy their technology without bearing the
same development costs. This reduces the incentive for companies to inno-
vate, and they have responded by focusing their R&D spending on process
technology and manufacturing efficiency—to improve what they already
do—rather than invent new products.

Another problem with innovation presents companies with a tricky bal-
ancing act. In the appliance industry, for example, companies must spruce up
their products with new and convenient features to induce customers to buy
new appliances before their existing ones wear out. Companies also need to
create reliable, long-lasting products to maintain their brand image and cus-
tomer loyalty. Better, innovative products can lengthen the replacement cycle
and reduce product turnover and raise the hurdle rate of innovation. The bet-
ter the product, the more difficult it becomes to get customers to replace that
product.

Because of intense competition, especially in the basic materials sector,
the main beneficiaries of research in industrial materials are the users of the
new and cheaper products that result, not necessarily the investors who fi-

nanced their development.

323


324

INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

Hallmarks of Success in Industrial Materials

Efficiency is what it’s all about in the industrial sector. Firms that can squeeze
more from their assets than their competitors can are the ones that tend to
make great long-term investments. As mentioned previously, competition only
increases the pressure to lower costs, so the ideal situation is for a company to
produce goods at the lowest cost in its industry.

Why? In general, there are two paths to strong profitability (as measured
by return on invested capital, our favorite measure): high profit margins or
high asset utilization. In the industrial sector, stiff competition often results
in limited pricing power and, consequently, relatively meager profit margins.
Thus, the firms with the best share performance are often those that generate

the most revenue from their assets:

> ‘Total asset turnover (TATO), one of the more commonly used measures of
efficiency, is an easy ratio to calculate: annual sales divided by total assets
(either average or year-end assets; just be consistent). To calculate average
total assets, add the current year’s total asset balance and the previous year’s
balance, and divide the sum by two. A general rule of thumb is that a
TATO ratio above 1.0 is pretty good for an industrial firm. Such a ratio
means that for every dollar that the company has invested in assets, it, in
turn, generates at least one dollar in revenue every year.

Two wide-moat companies in this sector, United Technologies and
General Dynamics, are also two of the most efficient operators. UTX
managed a TATO of 1.0 in 2002, while GD’s ratio was even higher at 1.2.

> Another popular efficiency metric is fixed asset turnover (FATO), which
corresponds to total annual sales divided by net fixed assets. Net fixed as-
sets are listed on the balance sheet, usually as “property, plant, & equip-
ment, net of accumulated depreciation” or “net PP&E,” for short. The
FATO ratio is even more telling than TATO for industrial firms because
industrials are so dependent on tangible assets such as factories and
equipment to produce goods and generate revenue. Importantly, the
FATO ratio excludes the impact of goodwill, which often weighs on the
TATO of highly acquisitive industrial concerns.

Again, our wide-moat companies, UTX and GD, are standouts.
UTX’s FATO in 2002 came in at 6.2, while GD’s was 7.7. Not surprisingly,


HALLMARKS OF SUCCESS IN INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

some of the no-moat commodity businesses that we cover are less success-
ful when it comes to this metric—Dow’s FATO ratio is regularly around
2.0, while DuPont's is even lower, typically below 2.0.

We mentioned that those industrials that are the most efficient tend
to have the best performance. Looking at just the four companies dis-
cussed in this section, we see that UTX and GD experienced the best
performance between 1992 and 2002, with total annualized returns (in-
cluding reinvested dividends) of 17.2 percent and 31.5 percent, respec-
tively. The total annualized returns of the less efficient firms, Dow and
DuPont, are not nearly as good, 9 percent and 8.7 percent, respectively.
Granted, there are numerous factors affecting long-run share perfor-
mance, but we'd argue that efficiency is one of the most important factors
for industrial firms.

Besides fixed assets, an industrial company needs to manage working cap-
ital efficiently. Looking at trends in how many days’ worth of inventory
are sitting in warehouses or how many days its takes to collect customer
receivables can reveal a great deal about a firm’s operations. If, for exam-
ple, inventories are rising rapidly, a company may be producing more
than it can sell merely to keep its factories busy. This could sock the com-
pany with goods that will have to be sold at rock-bottom prices down the
road. Similarly, a jump in the number of days’ sales outstanding (mea-
sured as accounts receivable divided by sales revenue and multiplied by
365 days per year) could indicate that the firm is pushing inventory on its
customers to mask a slowdown in demand.

Most industrial firms have high operating leverage, which means that
most of their costs are fixed regardless of volume and sales levels. If they
can move more volume through the system by selling more of their
products, profit margins should increase because sales should rise while
costs stay about the same. However, operating leverage can cut both
ways. For example, truck maker Navistar saw operating margins climb
steadily to nearly 10 percent during the late 1990s as sales built to a cycli-
cal peak. But in 2001, as demand for new trucks waned and Navistar’s
revenue dropped by about 20 percent, operating margins plunged to 2
percent. With sales weak again the following year, Navistar found itself
deeply in the red.

325


326

INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

> Another indicator of success is a regular and growing dividend payment
to shareholders. In the industrial materials sector, dividends never really
went out of style. Dividends not only represent a strong indicator of a
company’s financial health (its ability to make profits and pay them to
investors), but also temper the volatility associated with these cyclical
stocks. Regular cash payments in the form of dividends reward investors
for holding stocks whose prices fluctuate depending on the pace of the

overall economy.

Highly efficient operations are key to sustainable long-term profitability
in the industrial sector. Look for firms that excel in getting more from their
assets than competitors do, and you'll be on your way to finding the best in-

dustrial firms in which to invest.

Red Flags

Because industrial companies typically operate very traditional business mod-
els, spotting trouble often requires the use of only a few basic accounting mea-
sures. That’s not to say there aren’t complex companies in the sector—you
need look no further than GE’s opaque financials to see how complex an in-
dustrial firm can become. By and large, though, industrials are pretty straight-
forward, and looking at a few key measures can keep investors out of trouble.
Keep an eye on three areas: too much debt, excessive pension obligations, and

poorly planned acquisitions.

Debt

Because sales and profits can swing wildly, a heavily indebted firm may not
be able to meet its obligations during a downturn. A useful indicator of a
firm’s debt level is the debt-to-capital ratio. This ratio expresses the amount
of the company’s obligations to creditors as a fraction of the firm’s book
value. The higher the ratio, the more risky the firm’s financial position. Debt
to capital can be calculated simply by dividing the company’s total debt
(long term and short term) in the liabilities section of the balance sheet by
total assets, also on the balance sheet. Some companies adjust the denomi-

nator by excluding current liabilities, which gives a better long-term measure


RED FLAGS

of the company’s leverage. In general, a ratio above 40 percent adds some
risk to the company, and we consider a ratio above 70 percent a bad sign.

Deere illustrates the importance of keeping debt levels reasonable. The
maker of agricultural equipment survived the severe farm recession of the
early 1980s, whereas financially weaker rivals, such as International Harvester
(the predecessor of Navistar), weren’t so lucky. Deere’s debt-to-capital ratio
(excluding current liabilities in the denominator) rose from 30 percent in
1979 to 53 percent at its peak in 1982, whereas International Harvester’s ratio
rose from 41 percent to 86 percent in the same period. International Har-
vester’s ensuing bankruptcy and reorganization was one of the most spectac-
ular business failures in history, and by 1985, Harvester had exited the farm
equipment business altogether. Today, Deere enjoys a strong brand reputa-
tion while most of its competitors are amalgamations of restructured firms
pulled out of bankruptcy.

Pensions

Pension and other postretirement benefit obligations also bear watching be-
cause many of the companies in this sector have been around for decades and
have offered defined benefits to employees for years. (For a refresher on how
pension plans affect a company, see Chapter 8.)

Let’s use Deere as an example again. Because of increasing health care
costs and revised actuarial assumptions, at the end of 2002, Deere’s pro-
jected pension benefit obligation stood at $6.8 billion, up from $6.4 billion
in 2001, while negative returns in its pension portfolio left the value of its
plan assets at $5 billion, down from $5.9 billion at the end of 2001. The plan
was thus underfunded by $1.8 billion. Accounting guidelines required
Deere to increase the pension and postretirement benefit liability on its
books at the end of 2002, which decreased shareholders’ equity by about
st billion.

Because a company can spread out the payments it will make to prop up
a pension plan, an underfunded pension plan is not necessarily a red flag in
and of itself. However, investors should use their judgment when evaluating
how big a drain the deficit could be on a company when its pension plan is

underfunded by a large amount, as in Deere’s case.

327


328

INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS

Acquisitions

Industrial firms tend to grow slowly, so some are tempted to use acquisitions
as a means to expand. Acquisitions give companies a great opportunity to de-
stroy shareholder value, as well as an opportunity to take big upfront integra-
tion charges that can serve to inflate future margins.

For example, in early 2001, Dow Chemical acquired commodity chemi-
cal producer Union Carbide, adding $2 billion to the firm’s debt load and in-
creasing the number of its shares outstanding by one-third to close the deal.
Subsequent events proved that the increased risk from the additional debt
load and the dilution of shareholders’ interests was not worth the trouble of
integrating another firm’s operations. Union Carbide’s commodity product
lines increased Dow’s vulnerability to the economic cycle while the merger
distracted management during a prolonged downturn.

The U.S. and global economies remained sluggish after the merger, but
instead of focusing on positioning Dow for an eventual recovery, management
was distracted by merging the companies and tackling Union Carbide’s mas-
sive asbestos liability, which culminated in the CEO’s removal by Dow’s board
in late 2002. Three years after the merger was announced, the company’s stock
price languished 38 percent below its level at the time of the announcement,
about the same performance as the S&P 500 in the same time frame.

Chasing Market Share

Many firms benefit from positive operating leverage and then chase market
share by cutting prices sharply, but we're wary of investing in industrial firms
that are more focused on market share than profitability because they often
confuse market share gains with efficiency. Many firms highlight their mar-
ket share gains because the increased volume from these gains can lead to
higher profit margins, but unless their TATO and FATO actually improve,
market share itself is not an indicator of efficiency.

Freightliner, a unit of DaimlerChrysler, serves as a classic example. In the
mid-1990s, as the maker of big-rig trucks was facing strong competition from
rivals Volvo, Navistar, and Paccar, it began to guarantee the resale values of
the trucks it sold. Although Freightliner’s market share increased sharply in
1999, the strategy had a disastrous effect on the company’s finances. At the
end of 2001, the commercial vehicle division of DaimlerChrysler reported an


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

operating loss in the billions, thanks in part to the guaranteed payments. At
the end of the day, companies should be focused on chasing sustainable prof-

its, not market share.

Finding Opportunities in Industrial Materials

To identify industries in the industrial materials sector with the best long-
term fundamentals, figure out which industries have already undergone sig-
nificant consolidation. Then, look for the low-cost producer relative to
domestic and foreign competitors, and check that it is in excellent financial
health and has additional revenue streams from value-added products or ser-
vices that supply a variety of industries. Finally, determine what you think
the company’s stock is worth, subtract a fair margin of safety, and wait for a

good buying opportunity.

Investor's Checklist: Industrial Materials

> This is a very traditional Old Economy sector, with many hard assets and
high fixed costs.

> Industrial materials are divided into commodity producers (steel, chemi-
cals) and producers of noncommodity value-added goods and services
(machinery, some specialty chemicals).

> Buyers of commodities choose their product on price—otherwise, com-
modities are the same product, regardless of who makes them.

> The sales and profits of companies in this sector are very sensitive to the
business cycle.

> Very few industrial materials companies have any competitive advan-
tages; the exceptions are those in concentrated industries (e.g,, defense),
those with a specialized niche product (e.g., Alcoa, some chemicals mak-
ers), and, above all, those that can produce their goods at the lowest cost
(e.g,, Nucor).

> Only the most efficient producers will survive a downturn: The best bet
is to be the low-cost producer and owe little debt.

> Asset turnover (total asset turnover [TATO] and fixed asset turnover
[FATO]) measure a manufacturing firm's efficiency.

> Watch out for industrial firms with too much debt, large underfunded

pension plans, and big acquisitions that distract management.

329




25

Energy

ALTHOUGH ENERGY CAN be harvested from myriad sources—coal, nu-
clear, hydroelectric, wind, solar—nothing can come close to challenging the
dominance of oil and gas as a source of energy. Roughly two-thirds of the
world’s energy needs are supplied by oil and gas—not only to propel our cars
and heat our homes, but also to fuel a large and growing number of electric
power plants. It’s no coincidence that the biggest companies in the energy

sector are oil companies, such as ExxonMobil and BP.

From the Ground
Most of the energy we use starts out under the ground, locked up in the hy-
drocarbons of dead plants and animals. Finding and mining this oil and gas,
known as exploration and production, is how energy companies create a
great deal of value.

In oil and gas, a large percentage of the world’s resources are under coun-

tries that are members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries

(OPEC) cartel, primarily in the Middle East. While this creates plenty of

Paul Larson with Pat Dorsey.


332

ENERGY

political issues, OPEC’s existence is also a large benefit to the companies dig-
ging up the oil. OPEC’s goal is to maintain industrywide profitability by
keeping commodity prices artificially high, achieved by coordinating and
limiting supply. Though OPEC’s members often cheat on their quotas, the
cartel is extremely successful at manipulating commodity markets for the in-
dustry’s benefit.

While the BPs and ExxonMobils of the world (the so-called major inte-
grated energy companies) are involved in pumping oil and gas from the
ground, some companies focus specifically on this activity, which is usually
called exploration and production or the upstream portion of the industry.
Although OPEC’s production limits help these firms as well, they don’t have
the diverse assets of the major integrated firms. As a result, the volatility of
commodity prices against the backdrop of a largely fixed cost structure makes
profits wildly variable from one year to the next for firms that focus on explo-
ration and production.

One question that inevitably pops into every energy investors head is,
“Will we run out?” Although there is indeed a finite amount of oil and gas on
the planet, it will not be depleted in our lifetimes and probably not the life-
times of our grandchildren, either. Technology has done an excellent job of
making oil available that was previously thought to be inaccessible, such as
deep under the ocean. Though some established areas, such as the Alaskan
North Slope and the North Sea, are today starting to see diminished produc-
tion, new finds and improved technologies continue to add to proven re-

serves at a faster rate than production is depleting them.

To the Pipelines

Once petroleum is lifted from the ground, it must be transported to refiner-
ies and then again to the end users. Although ships play an important role,
pipelines are an often-overlooked method of transportation. In the United
States, pipelines and the rates they can charge are regulated by the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission and various state agencies. Though revenue
from a pipeline tends not to grow much from year to year, the vast majority
of pipelines generate positive cash flow and provide services that are difficult

to duplicate.


PROVIDING THE SERVICES

Pipelines also tend to be one of the energy businesses that are least sen-
sitive to commodity prices. As long as commodity prices stay away from
their extremes and volumes stay relatively consistent, pipelines are typically
very profitable assets for a company to own. Major integrated oil companies
generally own portions of many of the pipelines they use, but there are also
several large independent pipeline companies in existence, such as Kinder

Morgan.

To the Refineries
Once oil and gas makes it to the refineries, it is said to be downstream. Refiner-
ies break apart crude oil into its component parts and refine it into end prod-
ucts, such as gasoline, jet fuel, and heavy lubricants. Although there are a
handful of independent refiners, most refineries are part of major integrated oil
companies. For instance, ExxonMobil, which has some of the largest reserves
in the ground, is also the largest refiner in the industry.

Over the long term, refining is typically a less profitable business than
getting oil out of the ground because there is no refining cartel maintaining
profits. Refining profit margins also tend to be cyclical, though the cycles do

not necessarily happen with the same frequency as commodity prices.

To the Consumers

The other portion of downstream operations is called marketing, which in-
cludes operating convenience stations, as well as marketing fuels for indus-
trial uses and electricity production. Sometimes service stations are owned by
small independent marketers who franchise brands from the big oil com-
panies, and other times the major integrated oil companies own and operate
the stations themselves. ExxonMobil and Royal Dutch/Shell are some of the
largest marketers of fuel, each with nearly 50,000 stations around the globe
selling their brands.

Providing the Services
Oil and gas is such a big business that there is an entire industry focused on
providing products and services to the oil companies. Typical services that
