
Forex for Beginners
you place trades. You should never trade impulsively or exit from trades
prematurely because the desired movement hasn’t materialized quickly
enough. In short, you should strive for discipline—in planning, in analysis, in
preparation, in monitoring, in journaling—in all aspects of your approach to
forex.
Ultimately, you should try to limit the role that your emotions play in forex.
You will certainly feel a sudden pang of euphoria after each winning trade.
While you are entitled to feel a sense of accomplishment, don’t let this cloud
your judgment; many traders experience their largest losses immediately
following their largest gains. In addition, don’t allow yourself to be
overcome by feelings of revenge after one or more trades don’t go your way.
Trying to prove a point or get even with the market won’t help your account
balance recover and could ignite a vicious cycle of anger and further losses.
Just like a boxer seeks to fight without any personal animus toward his
opponent, so should you approach forex unencumbered by emotion. Try to
cultivate equanimity when trading. Don’t allow big wins to overinflate your
confidence, and try to shrug off your losses. Understand your demons and, if
need be, develop behavioral rules—such as those included in the hypothetical
trading plans of Table 11-3—so that you don’t fall victim to the innate
psychological pitfalls that I introduced earlier. Take time off when you find
that you cannot manage the stress of trading or when you feel that your
emotions are negatively affecting your trading. Above all, make an effort to
stick to your trading plan and execute it mechanically so that emotion never
even has a chance to take root.

The Business of Trading Forex
If your goals for forex are ambitious (such that it will come to represent a
significant component of or even the lion’s share of your income), then you
should approach forex as though it were a business. In other words, you will
need to adopt an organized approach. Forex should not be something that you
try to squeeze in whenever you feel like it; rather, you should strive to set
aside a fixed amount of time for it and work forex into your daily routine.
You should dedicate time exclusively toward education and research, distinct
from the time that you actually spend trading and monitoring your account.
Ideally, you might want to leave such homework for the weekends, when you
won’t be distracted by live markets and the possibility of executing trades.

257

258

Chapter 11 | Successful Investing
A business also requires its own space. Establish an office where personal
and other external stimuli cannot penetrate. Depending on the rigor or your
forex regimen, you may also want to consider purchasing a separate
computer that is dedicated exclusively to forex-related activities. Forex is not
like your 9-to-5 job, which is probably interrupted by your frequent checking
of your Facebook account and espn.com. When your forex notebook
computer is powered on, it is forex time.
Finally, you need to manage the finances of your forex business. All
expenses should be dutifully recorded, and you should try to calculate the
return-on-investment for all expenditures, including this book! At monthly,
quarterly, and yearly intervals, you should perform a review of your account.
If you maintain a trading log, you should be able to view profitability and
performance metrics in real-time. Did your performance meet your
expectations? If so, you should consider withdrawing a fraction of your
profits from your account so that your earnings become real and not only
digital. (So real that you will also unfortunately need to pay taxes on them . .
.) If your performance was unsatisfactory, what can you do to improve it?
Remember that, as is the case with any new business, it will take time for
your forex business to develop. Give yourself a reasonable time period
within which you hope to achieve success. Profits will not come overnight,
but with hard work, your forex business will one day be able to stand on its
own two feet!

Conclusion
Who knew that forex was so complicated? To succeed takes not only
analysis, but also understanding; not only planning, but also execution; not
only the pursuit of gains, but also the limiting of losses. Fortunately, you are
now well on your way to becoming an expert—or at the very least, toward
becoming a successful currency trader.
My aim in writing this book was to provide you with a solid foundation and
knowledge base for engaging with the forex markets. How you apply that
knowledge is up to you. Take things slowly, and good luck!

