
92

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Figure 5.5 Moving Average—Major Trend
An exponential moving average is slow but steady, like a directional
indicator on a steamroller. EMA works in all timeframes but shines on
the weeklies, where it helps you stay with the major trend no matter
how hard it tries to shake you off. Trading in the direction of a weekly
moving average should help you get ahead of many traders. You can position yourself in the direction of the EMA and hold, or else trade in and out,
using daily charts.
This 26-week EMA has tracked the entire glorious bull market in YHOO,
from its obscure beginnings, to the breathtaking $250 peak, and back into the
doghouse. If you wake up in the morning, look at the weekly EMA, and trade
in its direction, you will not be in too bad a shape!
There are no perfect indicators, and an EMA has its share of difficulties when markets go flat. When the EMA starts to quiver, as it did in
1999, it is time to stand aside or trade short term, not counting on a
major trend.
Notice the three tails in YHOO (and the fourth, not as pure as the first
three). Every time there was a tail, the price got halved within weeks.
At the right edge of the chart prices are flat and EMA is declining. Prices
are closer to the bottom than they are to the top, but there is no rush
to buy. Let the EMA flatten out and tick up before positioning for a new
major bull move.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

93

“greater fool theory trades.” Most uptrends are punctuated by declines, when
prices return to the EMA. When we buy near the moving average, we buy
value and can place a tight stop slightly below the EMA. If the rally resumes,
we’ll make money, but if the market turns against us, the loss will be small.
Buying near the EMA helps maximize gains and minimize risks.

E

F
C

Value

A
B
D
Value

Figure 5.6 Value Trades and Greater Fool Theory Trades
When you buy near a rising moving average, you buy value (points D and F).
Waiting for such opportunities requires patience, but it is infinitely safer than
chasing rallies. Those who buy high above the EMA pay above value, hoping
to meet a greater fool who will pay them even more. Anxious traders who
buy near the tops (points C and E) get shaken out, or else they tensely wait
to get out at breakeven.
Many stocks and futures have typical behavior patterns, and you should
try to identify them and use them. At the time of this writing, EBAY likes to
have kangaroo tails (A, B, C, and E). The C tail had the most classical shape,
but others worked also. Knowing what pattern to expect helps you recognize
it a little sooner when it appears.
At the right edge of the chart the EMA has stopped rising and begun to flutter. The bull move is over. If you are a trend trader, it is time to move over to
other, trending stocks. Keep an eye on EBAY, waiting for a new trend to emerge.

94

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

If we buy high above the EMA, our actions say, “I am a fool, I am overpaying, but I hope to meet a greater fool down the road who’ll pay me
even more.” Betting on the greater fool theory is a poor idea. There are
very few fools in the markets. Financial markets do not attract foolish people, and counting on them is a losing proposition.
There are times when wild rallies in high-flying stocks seem to vindicate the greater fool theory. Stocks with no assets or earnings can fly on
hot air. A value trader who feels he is missing those spectacular moves
has a choice. He can stick to his method, soberly saying, “Can’t catch
them all.” Or he may decide, “When living with the wolves, howl like a
wolf” and start buying upside breakouts. If you do that, remember, you
are now engaged in greater fool theory trading and the only asset separating you from the manic crowd is your risk control—your stops and
money management.
The same rules apply to shorting in downtrends. When you go short on
a rally to the EMA, you are selling value—before the market reverses and
starts destroying value again. A greater fool theorist shorts far below the
EMA—the farther away, the greater the fool.
Use a system of dual moving averages to identify trends and enter positions. You may select an EMA that tracks your market well, but it moves
so explosively that prices never react back to that EMA, denying you a
chance to put on a value trade. To solve this problem, you can add a second moving average. Use the longer EMA to indicate the trend, and the
shorter to find entry points.
Suppose you find that a 22-day EMA does a good job identifying trends
in your market. Plot it, but then divide its length in half and plot an 11-day
EMA on the same screen in a different color. Continue to use the 22-day EMA
to identify bull and bear moves, but use pullbacks to the shorter EMA to
identify entry points.
Moving averages help identify trends and decide whether to trade long
or short. They help mark value areas for entering trades. To find exit points,
we turn to our next tool, channels on moving averages.

Channels
Markets are manic-depressive beasts. They rise in powerful rallies, only
to collapse in breathtaking declines. A stock catches the public’s fancy,
shoots up 20 points one day, and then slides 24 points down the next.
What drives those moves? Fundamental values change slowly, but waves
of greed, fear, optimism, and despair drive prices up and down.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

95

How can you tell when a market has reached an undervalued or overvalued level, a zone for buying or selling? Market technicians can use
channels to find those levels. A channel, or an envelope, consists of two
lines, one above and one below a moving average. There are two main
types of channels: straight envelopes and standard deviation channels,
also known as Bollinger bands.
In Bollinger bands the spread between the upper and lower lines keeps
changing in response to volatility. When volatility rises, Bollinger bands
spread wide, but when markets become sleepy, those bands start squeezing the moving average. This feature makes them useful for options traders
since volatility drives options prices. In a nutshell, when Bollinger bands
become narrow, volatility is low, and options should be bought. When they
swing far apart, volatility is high, and options should be sold or written.
Traders of stocks and futures are better off with straight channels or
envelopes. They keep a steady distance from a moving average, providing steadier price targets. Draw both lines a certain percentage above or
below the EMA. If you use dual moving averages, draw channel lines parallel to the longer one.
A moving average reflects the average consensus of value, but what is
the meaning of a channel? The upper channel line reflects the power of
bulls to push prices above the average consensus of value. It marks the
normal limit of market optimism. The lower channel line reflects the power
of bears to push prices below the average consensus of value. It marks the
normal limit of market pessimism. A well-drawn channel helps diagnose
mania and depression. Most software programs draw channels according
to this formula:
Upper channel line = EMA + EMA • Channel coefficient
Lower channel line = EMA − EMA • Channel coefficient
A well-drawn channel contains the bulk of prices, with only a few
extremes poking out. Adjust the coefficient until the channel contains
approximately 95 percent of all prices for the past several months. Mathematicians call this the second standard deviation channel. Most software
packages make this adjustment very easy.
Find proper channel coefficients for any market by trial and error. Keep
adjusting them until the channel holds approximately 95% of all data, with
only the highest tops and the lowest bottoms sticking out. Drawing a channel is like trying on a shirt. Choose the size in which the entire body fits comfortably, with only the wrists and the neck poking out.

96

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Different trading vehicles and timeframes require different channel
widths. Volatile markets require wider channels and higher coefficients.
The longer the timeframe, the wider the channel; weekly channels tend to
be twice as wide as dailies. Stocks tend to require wider channels than
futures. A good time to review and adjust channels in futures is when an
old contract nears expiration and you switch to the new front month.
A channel drawn in an uptrend tends to fit the peaks. Rallies in a bull
market are much stronger than declines, and bottoms seldom reach the
lower channel line. In a downtrend, a channel tends to track bottoms,
while the tops are too limp to rise to the upper channel line. It is unnecessary to draw two separate channels, one for the tops and the other for
the bottoms; just follow the dominant crowd. In a flat market expect both
tops and bottoms to touch their channel lines.
When we are bullish, we want to buy value near the rising EMA and take
profits when the market becomes overvalued—at or above the upper channel line. When bearish, we want to go short near the falling EMA and cover
when the market becomes undervalued—at or below the lower channel line.

K

I

J

G
E

H

B
F
C

D

A

Figure 5.7 Channels for Profit Taking
When the EMA rises, it identifies an uptrend. It is a good idea to buy near that
EMA or slightly higher or lower, depending on the stock’s recent behavior.
At point A, EMA stands at 35, while the low point of the bar reaches 33—a

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

97

If you buy near a rising moving average, take profits in the vicinity of
the upper channel line. If you sell short near a falling moving average,
cover in the vicinity of the lower channel line. Channels catch swings
above and below value but not major trends. Those swings can be very
rewarding. If you can catch a move from the EMA to the channel line in
bond futures, you’ll make about $2,000 in profit on a $2,000 margin. If
you can do this a few times a year, you’ll find yourself far ahead of many
professionals.
A beginner who sells his position near the upper channel line may
regret it several weeks later. In a bull market, what looks overvalued today
may look like a bargain the next month. Professionals do not let such feelings bother them. They are trading, not investing. They know it’s easy to
be smart looking at old charts, but hard to make decisions at the right
edge. They have a system, and they follow it.
When prices blow out of a channel but then return to the moving average, trade in the direction of the slope of that MA, with a profit target near
the channel line. Prices break out of channels only during the strongest
trends. After they pull back, they often retest the extremes of those break2-point downside penetration. At point C, the price low penetrates the EMA
by 1 point, at D by 2.25, at F by 4, at point H by 0.75, and at J by 4. Those
short-term bottoms keep alternating between shallow and deep—an important piece of intelligence when you try to decide where to place your buy
order. If the latest penetration was shallow, expect the next one to be deep,
and vice versa, and place your buy orders accordingly.
The place to sell stocks purchased near the EMA is at the upper channel
line. Looking back, it is easy to see that buy-and-hold would have worked
even better in TARO, but the future is not nearly as clear at the right edge of
the chart. Buying value near the EMA and taking profits above value, near the
upper channel line, is safer and more reliable. Stock bought at A can be sold
at B, bought again at C or D and sold at E, and so on.
A trader can grade his performance, based on the percentage of the channel he takes in profits on any given trade. For example, at the right edge of
the chart, the upper channel line stands at 97 and the lower at 69, making
the channel 28 points high. An A trader should get the minimum of 30% or
8.4 points out of the next trade, a B trader 20% or 5.6 points, and a C trader
10% or 2.8 points.
At the right edge of the chart, prices are hitting the upper channel line. It
is time to take profits on stocks purchased in area J, near the EMA, and wait
for a pullback.

98

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

outs. A breakout from a channel gives us confidence to trade again in its
direction.
Prices occasionally take off on wild runaway trends. They break out of a
channel and stay out for a long time, without pulling back to their EMA.
When you recognize such a powerful move, you have a choice: stand aside
or switch to a system for trading impulse moves. Professional traders, once
they find a technique that works for them, tend to stay with it. They’d rather
miss a trade than change to an unfamiliar style.
If a moving average is essentially flat, go long at the lower channel line,
sell short at the upper channel line, and take profits when prices return to
their moving average. The upper channel line marks an overbought zone.
If the market is relatively flat on long-term charts, rallies to the upper
channel line then provide shorting opportunities, whereas declines to
the lower channel line provide buying opportunities. Professionals tend
to trade against deviations and for the return to normalcy. Amateurs think
that every breakout will be followed by a massive runaway move. Once
in a rare while the amateurs are right, but in the long run it pays to bet
like the pros. They use channels to find when the market has outrun itself
and where it is likely to reverse.
How to Grade Your Performance Imagine two friends taking a college
course. Both have similar abilities and backgrounds, but one takes a test
each week, while the other waits for a final. All other factors being equal,
which of them is likely to get a higher grade on the exam? The one who
waited or the one who took weekly tests?
Most educational systems test students at regular intervals. Testing
prompts people to fill the gaps in their knowledge. Students who take
tests throughout the year tend to do better on their finals. Frequent tests
help improve performance.
Markets keep testing us, only most traders don’t bother to look up their
grades. They gloat over profits or trash confirmation slips for losing trades.
Neither bragging nor beating yourself makes you a better trader.
The market grades every trade and posts results on a wall, only most
traders have no clue where to look. Some count money, but that’s a very
crude measure, which does not compare performance in different markets
at different prices. You may take more money from a sloppy trade in a big
expensive market than from an elegant entry and exit in a difficult narrow
market. Which of them reveals a higher level of skill? Money is important
but it doesn’t always provide the best measure of success.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

99

Channels help us grade the quality of our trades.
When you enter a trade, measure the height of the channel from the
upper to the lower line. If you use daily charts to find trades, measure the
daily channel; if you use a 10-minute chart, measure the channel on a 10minute chart; and so on. When you exit that trade, calculate the number
of points you’ve taken as a percentage of the channel. That is your performance grade.
If a stock is trading at 80 with a 10% channel, then the upper channel line
is at 88 and the lower at 72. Suppose you buy that stock at 80 and sell it at
84. If you take 4 points out of the 16-point channel, then your grade is 4⁄16
or 25%. Where does that place you on the rating curve?
Any trade where you take 30% or more out of a channel earns you an
A. If you take between 20 and 30%, your grade is a solid B. If you grab
between 10 and 20%, you earn a C. You get a D by taking less than 10%
out of a channel or running a loss.
Good traders keep good records. Your first essential record is a spreadsheet of all your trades (we’ll review this in Chapter 8, “The Organized
Trader”). Add two columns to your spreadsheet. Use the first to record the
height of the channel when you enter the trade. Use the second to calculate
what percentage of that channel you’ve grabbed exiting that trade. Keep monitoring your grades to see whether your performance is improving or deteriorating, steady or erratic. Back in college, professors used to grade you. Now
you can use channels to find out your grades and become a better trader.
What Markets to Trade? Channels can help us decide which stocks or
futures to trade and which to leave alone. A stock may have great fundamentals or beautiful technical signals, but measure its channel before you
put on a trade. It’ll show you whether the swings are wide enough to be
worth trading.
You may look at a volatile stock whose channel height is 30 points. If
you are an A trader, you should be able to get 30%, or 9 points, out of a
trade. That will be more than enough to pay commissions, cover slippage,
and leave you with profits. On the other hand, if you look at an inexpensive stock whose channel is only 5 points high, then an A trader would be
shooting for a paltry 1.5-point gain. That would leave you with next to
nothing after commissions and slippage—leave that stock alone, no matter how good it looks.
What if your performance slips a bit or the market throws you a curve?
What if you earn only a C and take only 10% out of a channel? The first

100

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

stock, with its 30-point channel, will return 3 points profit—enough to make
some money after expenses. The stock with a 5-point channel will return
only half a point, and commissions and slippage may push you into negative territory! Beginners are often seduced by low-priced stocks with strong
technical patterns. They cannot understand why they keep losing money.
When there is no room for the stock to swing, a trader can’t win.
A good technical analyst who was slowly losing money called me for
a consultation. When I asked him to fax me his charts, he showed $10
and $15 stocks whose channels were only $2 to $4 tall. There was simply
no room for price swings, while commissions, slippage, and expenses
continued to chip away at his equity. If you’re going to support yourself
by fishing, find a channel where the fish are big enough.
Once you become interested in a new stock, draw a channel to see
whether it’s wide enough to trade. We like to think of ourselves as A traders
and all-around A people, but what if you pull only a C trade? If you take
only 10 percent out of this channel, will it be worth trading? Beginning
traders should leave alone any stock whose channel is narrower than 10
points, meaning that a C trader can take one point out of it.
A few traders said to me it was OK to trade stocks with narrrow channels, as long as one increased trading size. They think that trading 10,000
shares in a three-point channel is the same as trading 1,000 shares in a
30-point channel, but it is not, because the ratio of slippage to channel is
much higher in narrow channels, raising the external barrier to victory.
Low-priced stocks with slender channels can make good investments.
Think of Peter Lynch, a famous money manager, looking for his elusive
10-bagger, a stock that goes up 10-fold. A $5 stock is much more likely to
rise to $50 than an $80 stock to rally to $800. But those are investments,
not trades. As a trader, you are looking to take advantage of short-term
swings. That is why you should not waste your energy on any stock whose
channel is narrow.
The Rewards of Day-Trading Day-trading seems deceptively easy, and
beginners flock to it like moths to a flame. Amateurs look at intraday charts
and see strong rallies and steep declines. It looks like the money is there
for the picking by any sharp-witted individual with a computer, a modem,
and a live data feed. Day-trading firms make fortunes in commissions. They
promote day-trading because they need to replace the great majority of customers who flame out. The firms hide customer statistics from the public,
but in the year 2000 state regulators in Massachusetts subpoenaed records
which showed that after 6 months only 16% of day-traders made money.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

101

There is an old Russian saying: “your elbow is near, yet you can’t bite
it.” Try it now—stretch your neck, bend your arm, go for it. So near, yet
so far. It’s the same with day-trading—the money is right in front of your
face, yet you keep missing it by a few ticks. Why do so many people lose
so much money day-trading? There is simply not enough height in intraday channels to make profits. Using channels to select trades sends a
powerful message to day-traders.
Look at a few popular actively traded stocks—YHOO, AMZN, and AOL
are in the forefront of public attention on the day I write this. The figures are
likely to change by the time you read this book, but today I get the following numbers for channel heights on their daily and five-minute charts:

Daily
channel

A-level
trader
(30%)

C-level
trader
(10%)

Fiveminute
channel

A-level
trader
(30%)

C-level
trader
(10%)

AOL

20

6

2

3

0.9

0.3

AMZN

21

6.3

2.1

3

0.9

0.3

YHOO

54

16.2

5.4

7

2.1

0.7

A swing trader who uses daily charts to buy and hold for a few days can do
very well in these active stocks. He can really clean up if he is an A-level
trader, but even if he is a C trader, taking 10% out of a channel, he can stay
afloat while he’s learning. A person who day-trades the same stocks must
be a straight-A trader in order to survive. Anything less, and he’ll be eaten
alive by slippage, commissions, and expenses.
I can hear a howl of protests from the crowd of vendors who make a
good living from day-trading—brokers, software dealers, system sellers,
etc. They can roll out their examples of successful day-traders, as if that
proves anything! Brilliant day-traders do exist, and I am friends with a
handful of them myself. Sadly, it’s a very small handful.
The chances of becoming a successful day-trader are very low because
the channels on intraday charts are not high enough. You must be a
straight-A trader to make money out of those minute swings. The slightest
distraction, a bit of market noise, a slight slip of performance, and another
day-trader bites the dust.
Day-trading provides fantastic entertainment value. Recreational athletes expect to pay for their sport rather than make money from it.

102

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Recreational day-traders who expect to make money are deluding themselves into believing that they will reach their elbow with their teeth.
Maybe tomorrow . . . .
