
8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 8

• 8 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

of a large line of issues such as: United States Steel, Montgomery Ward, Simmons Co., General Electric, American
and Foreign Power and half a dozen other of the market’s
pivotal issues. He then initiated his familiar hammering tactics under which the market first faltered, then broke.
Cutten, the Fishers, Durant and others of the group
known in Wall Street as the “Big Ten” were large holders of
these particular stocks and have seen their plans and pools
wrecked by what were natural economic developments, coupled with much shrewd short selling.
One of the tales started and circulated in the financial district yesterday, was that Livermore had the backing in a bear
campaign of Walter P. Chrysler, who was said to be piqued
because he suspected that the Chicago-Detroit group had
hammered at Chrysler motors in the market, driving it down
below 55 from its high of 135 this year.
The outstanding bear leader appears to be Livermore, who
has regained a tremendous fortune through adroit short selling and who, temporarily at least, is regarded as being exactly
“right” on this market. Cutten, who started as a grain trader,
has amassed an estimated $100 million or more in the stock
market during the last three years of bull markets. Cutten is
the leader of the bull faction and is temporarily at least
regarded as “wrong” on the market.
Mr. Cutten was in New York and watched the market
from the office of the head of the stock exchange. His
expressed opinion to friends is that much of the selling had
been hysterical, and that he believes good stocks should be
held for higher prices. He has not changed his formerly
stated position about the long distance outlook. Neither has
he made any statement about the market for publication.
Naturally they have nothing to say about their market

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 9

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 9 •

positions at the moment or what they have been doing in
recent days.
The Times article had more to tell:
Jesse L. Livermore, who has been in eclipse, so far as stock
market operations are concerned, for several years, has made
a smashing comeback, if Wall Street reports are true. The
comeback of Mr. Livermore as one of the foremost market
players is another Wall Street wonder. As a boy he was a board
marker in Boston brokerage houses where he developed such
skill at tape reading that, despite limited capital he was barred
from every bucket shop in Boston and New York. This gave
him the nickname that has stuck to him through later years of
the “Boy Plunger.”
Coming to New York and playing the markets skilfully
after long series of ups and downs he struck an extended winning streak and made a fortune of many millions. It is
reported that in the current bull market he decided that
stocks were too high and guessed wrong. The continued
advances of such issues as General Motors, Steel, General
Electric and others is said to have taken back a large part of
his fortune. He was short of them all and covered time and
time again. It was reported in the financial district that he was
down to his large irrevocable annuities, of which he has several for himself and his family, acquired during years of earlier
prosperity.
Arthur Cutten, Livermore’s rival, might be mistaken for a
country storekeeper. He cares nothing for conventions,
appearances or customs. Shy, quiet and unassuming, he has
many times sat back in the corner of a Pullman smoking
room and heard casual travelers discussing his stock market

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 10

• 10 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

feats without disclosing his identity. When not attending to
his businesses, he is a gentleman farmer on his estate near
Chicago.
On the other hand, Livermore is the fastidious, welldressed man of the city. Slight and blond, and he wears his
dark clothes well, rides in Rolls-Royce cars, maintains a retinue of servants, half a dozen places of residence and probably the most luxurious offices in New York located atop the
Hecksher Building.
Temperamentally, the two are entirely unlike. Cutten is
calm, slow of speech and not at all impetuous. Livermore is
quick, nervous and excitable, given to superstitions, but willing to bet his last nickel if he thinks he is right. Livermore has
been down not once, but half a dozen times. Cutten at least
in the last years, has typified the bull market.
The markets of the next month or so are likely to prove
wildly exciting affairs, because of the direct pull and haul
against each other of a wide variety of economic factors, all
of them powerful. It is now pretty certain that when stocks
go up, Mr. Cutten will be there helping them along. It is
equally certain that when they decline, Mr. Livermore will be
in the market hammering away. There is however no personal
battle between them.
“Humph, it’s never personal!” uttered Livermore, as he finished
the article and placed it on his desk. He and Cutten had often been
trading adversaries for years now, ever since they had been young
men buying and selling commodities in the Chicago grain pits.
The phone rang, and Livermore signaled to his assistant Dache,
who had just arrived, that he would answer.
“Hello.”
“This Jesse Livermore?”

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 11

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 11 •

“Speaking.”
“You bastard, Livermore. This is your doing and you are going
to pay. I’m broke thanks to you. No, I’m more than broke. I owe
my broker thousands of dollars of margin money, but I still got my
gun. I’m headed down there to blow your brains out. Next time
you answer your door I’ll be standing there and the next thing you
know you’ll be walking through the gates of hell, which is where
you deserve to be you . . .”
Livermore slammed the phone down. It all sprang from these
articles, picked up by every paper in the United States, blaming
him for the crash. But it wasn’t him. He wasn’t that powerful; no
one was, not even the men from the great House of Morgan. But
that wouldn’t stop the public from thinking he had triggered the
crash and was driving it down by selling, selling, selling. He had
called the Times and given them an interview explaining that he
was not to blame, but it had not worked. No matter what, it
seemed people wanted to blame him, maybe just so they could
have someone to call on the phone and threaten. He reread the
headline of the interview he had given that appeared in the October 22, 1929 edition of the Times: “Livermore Not in Bear Pool.”
He read on:
Jesse L. Livermore, who has been widely reported in Wall
Street to have been heavily short of the market on the present
break, and to be the leader of a bear pool, denied yesterday
any connection with such a pool.
Mr. Livermore’s statement, issued from his offices at 730
Fifth Avenue, follows:
“In connection with the various reports, which have been
industriously spread during the last few days through the
newspapers and various brokerage houses, to the effect that a
large bear pool has been formed, headed by myself and

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 12

• 12 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

financed by various well known capitalists; I wish to state that
there is no truth whatever in any such rumors as far as I’m
concerned, and I know of no such combination having been
formed by others.
“What little business I do in the stock market has only
been as an individual and will continue to be done on such a
basis.
“It is very foolish to think that any individual or combination of individuals could artificially bring about a decline in
the stock market in a country so large and so prosperous as
the United States. What has happened during the last few
weeks is the inevitable result of a long period of continuous,
rank manipulation of many stock issues causing their prices to
rise many times above their actual worth, based on real earnings and yield returns.
“The men who are responsible for bringing about these
fictitious prices are the same men who are directly responsible for what is happening in the stock market today. It is
unfortunate for the general public when such a condition
arises that real sound investment issues have to suffer along
with the readjustment of issues of least merit.
“If anyone will take the trouble to analyze the selling prices
of different stocks, as for instance, United States Steel, which
is selling around eight to ten times its current earnings, many
other issues must look, and have looked for a long time, as
selling at ridiculously high prices.
“The Federal Reserve Board through its various warnings
and many expressions from very high banking authorities
could not stop the market from going up, so it must be plain
and seem utterly ridiculous for any sane person to presume
that one lone individual could have any material effect on the
course of the prices of securities.”

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 13

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 13 •

“Fools,” Livermore mumbled on finishing the interview.
“Fools, to think I could have brought an entire market to its knees.
Impossible!”
Perhaps he was part of the trigger mechanism, but it was a pregnant situation. Wild speculation always brought the market to its
knees. He had been trading for 35 years, since he was 14 years old.
He had made and lost millions of dollars. In 1929, he was at the
height of his power, and he knew this was another moment of
euphoria.
Livermore pondered the situation carefully. The threatening
phone calls had shaken him. He was well aware of the deep psychological wounds that a loss in financial fortune could cause. He
had been through it himself many times in his career. He would
have to make another statement, and quickly—his family could
also be in jeopardy. They had been threatened before.
He waited quietly by the stock ticker that sat on top of his massive desk. The mahogany desk was clean except for the brass-based
ticker, a single pad of paper, a pencil, and a matching pair of
mahogany in- and out-boxes.
By now, the office was fully staffed. Six markers were up on the
boards, wearing alpaca jackets so they would not smear the chalk
symbols. Each board marker wore earphones and had a mouthpiece. They were connected directly to the floor of the New York
Stock Exchange. Each had a domain of stocks or commodities to
administer. The ticker began to click, spitting out a strip of paper
like a white snakeskin with perforated scales—the symbols of most
of the companies in the United States. These stock symbols represented much of the wealth of the country.
For Livermore, reading the ticker tape was like reading the
newspaper. He knew all the symbols by heart, and he had an
exceptional mathematical brain that could remember all the
quotes, just as a good bridge player can remember all the cards that

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 14

• 14 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

have been played. To be doubly sure, he watched his board crew as
the markers began to move under Dache’s supervision, filling the
length of the chalkboard with trades. Today, he paid particular
attention to his stock holdings. Livermore could look up at the
board and instantly calculate to the dollar where his overall portfolio stood. There was silence in the office aside from the sounds of
the tickers and the chalk on the boards. There was always silence
in the Livermore trading room when the market was open. There
was no need for idle chatter when the market was open, and all the
board men knew it.
Today Livermore’s total profits plus equity were pushing $100
million. This did not change his expression. The main office phone
rang again. He motioned for Dache not to answer the call. He did
not want to be bothered by another threatening call now that the
market was open. The calls broke his concentration; he had
nothing to say to anyone, and he did not want to hear from anyone.
With the market open he was like a wolf on the prowl. He could
only concentrate on what he was doing. Every 1 percent move, up
or down, in his portfolio meant he made or lost $1 million.
The slightest loss of attention could cost him millions of dollars.
It was exactly the way he loved to trade—every fiber of his being
was alive. Nothing else existed but the tape. The tape would tell
him everything if he was smart enough to read it, find the hidden
clues, and act on them. He was fighting the two great emotions of
the stock market: fear and greed. He had a huge bet on the table.
That night he went home to King’s Point and found his wife,
Dorothy, and two sons, Paul and Jesse Jr., gone. The paintings had
been taken down, some of the Persian rugs were gone, and the silver had disappeared. He went up to the safe on the second floor
where Dorothy kept her jewels—a fabulous collection, mostly
from Harry Winston and Van Cleef and Arpels. All gone.

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 15

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 15 •

He went into the kitchen and found the four cooks and two
butlers working, preparing dinner for the family.
“Where are Mrs. Livermore and the boys?” he asked.
“They have moved into the chauffeurs’ apartments sir,” the
main butler answered. “We have all heard about the great crash.
We are very sorry, Mr. Livermore.”
Livermore stared at them for a few seconds, expressionless, and
walked to the apartments above the car stables. There were two
chauffeurs, one for Dorothy, or “Mousie,” as he called her, and
one for himself, or “J.L.,” as he liked to be called. The car stables
were attached to the great stone mansion. He walked into the living room of the apartment, stepping over the rolled-up carpets and
around the priceless works of art and antique furniture. Dorothy
sat on the couch with the two boys. They were fully dressed in
their best clothes.
“Mousie, what’s going on? What are you doing?”
“We heard. I’m very sorry, J.L.,” she replied.
“What are you talking about?”
“We heard that everybody has gone broke in the crash. It has
been on the radio all day. Men jumping out of windows, shooting
themselves in their offices, disappearing. Some of my girlfriends
called. I’m so sorry, J.L.”
He looked at her. Long seconds passed. She was beautiful sitting
there with the two handsome boys, one on each side, her jewelry
in a special leather case next to her.
She was his opposite: effusive, full of life, funny, instinctive. A
true social animal who was at her best in the middle of a crowd of
people. She would blurt out whatever was on her mind. She was a
great natural comedian, and the best part was that she did not
make jokes on purpose. In fact, she was often confused as to why
people were laughing.

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 16

• 16 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

He looked down at the jewelry case. He had gone to her several
times in his worst moments, his worst defeats in the market. He
had taken that case to Harry Winston more than once when he
was broke and needed a stake. The jewels, worth close to $4 million, were always good for a million in cash from Harry, a stake to
start up again. When he went back to retrieve the jewels, after he
was on his feet, he always took care of Harry with a wad of cash.
“Mousie, you and the boys come back to the main house for
dinner. Bring the jewelry case.”
“Oh, J.L., you need them again?”
“No. Today was the best day I ever had in the market. I closed
out half my holdings. We’re going to be fine. I certainly won’t be
needing those jewels. Now, you and the boys come along.”
He turned and walked out, a smile on his face. What a day. She
never failed to surprise him, to make him smile. They were having
personal problems, mostly his fault due to the other women. Nevertheless, he hoped they would make it. He knew that if they
divorced he would miss her very much. His eyes misted as he
thought of their love. Then he shook his head to rid himself of
those thoughts. He would enjoy her and the boys while they were
still with him. Who knew what the future held?
The threatening phone calls stayed with him; more came in as
the days passed. He needed to ward off these threats. He rang up
the New York Times again, a newspaper that was always ready to
quote the secretive Jesse Livermore. The headline of the November 13 edition read: “Livermore Now a Bull: Announces That
Stocks Are Too Far Down and Some Are Sound Bargains.” He
read on:
Jesse L. Livermore, who for many weeks past has been
enlisted on the bear side of the market and is credited with
having sold-short more stocks in this plummeting market

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 17

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 17 •

than any other single individual, announced to the New York
Times last night his conviction that the leading stocks had
been driven down too far. Although Mr. Livermore made no
statement as to his own positions his statement left the presumption that he has covered his shorts and again is on the
buying side of the market.
“Leading stocks with good dividend records and a certain
future are on the bargain counter right now,” declared Mr.
Livermore. “Many of them have been driven down too far.
People throughout the country have become panic stricken
and have thrown their sound securities over without regard to
values. To my mind this situation should go no further. There
is no reason why first-class securities should be ruthlessly
thrown into the market in such fashion as we have seen in the
last few trading days.
We have seen within the last few days large blocks of these
securities thrown on the open market by sellers, many of
whom had no other reason than they had been gripped by
fear.”
But the calls kept coming anyway: “Livermore, you dirty liar. I
know how smart you are. You say you are on the positive side of
the market while you beat the prices down into oblivion. I’m
coming for you. I hope you never get another good night’s sleep,
you miserable bastard.”
And coming: “I’m coming for you. What do I have to lose? I lost
everything in the market, thanks to you and your rotten friends.
You think you can crush the little man, destroy my family and me
with your illegal operation. You are a dead man, you just don’t
know it. My family suffered, now your family is going to suffer!”
And coming: “I lost my house today Mr. Livermore, what do
you think about that? My house that I spent 23 years paying off.

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 18

• 18 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

They evicted me today. I’m out on the street like a bum, with my
wife and four kids. You did it, and you’re going to pay for it.”
Nonstop the threats poured in over the phone, in letters, even
in hand-delivered telegrams.
By December 21, 1929, Jesse Livermore had had enough. He
hired his old friend Frank Gorman, a former Nassau County
police officer, as a precaution. Gorman and Livermore were old
friends by 1929. Livermore had used him several times in the past
when things had gotten hairy. The last time, he had employed
Gorman to protect him from “Boston Billy” Monaghan a notorious thief who had robbed Livermore’s mansion, been caught, and
sworn revenge.
Gorman immediately moved into the King’s Point mansion. He
accompanied the boys to school every day and became Dorothy’s
shadow.
Livermore maintained his routine, going in to the office every
day and watching the tape, making his moves. One afternoon, Livermore walked to the window and pulled open the drapes. The
view took in the bustling metropolis that was New York City in
the early days of 1930. As the ticker tape slid unattended between
his fingers, carrying its endless quotations—all negative, like casualty lists from a battlefield—he looked out.
He wondered how his life had come to this point. And he wondered why he was not happier. After all, these had been the days of
his greatest financial success.

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 19

*

chapter two

*

The Back Story

The childhood shows the man
As morning shows the day.

John Milton

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 20

• 20 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

JESSE LIVERMORE WAS BORN ON JULY 26, 1877, IN SHREWS-

bury, Massachusetts. His parents were Laura and Hiram Livermore.
Livermore’s father was a poor farmer who tried to plow a living
out of the unforgiving New England soil. Hiram Livermore lost
his first farm early in Jesse’s life, and the family moved to Paxton,
Massachusetts, to live with Jesse’s grandfather. Hiram eventually
saved enough money to buy some farm property in South Acton.
Livermore quickly learned what it was like to farm the rockfilled fields of New England. Picking up large rocks the plow
brought up was his first job. Scraping out a living on a small patch
of land in Massachusetts was tough, backbreaking work that
yielded small rewards in turn-of-the-century America.
As a boy, Livermore was slender, slight, and often sick. This lead
to a lot of reading, especially of the few newspapers and magazines
that he could get his hands on. He devoured any available books
and escaped into the theater of the mind that they opened for him.
He was imaginative and intelligent, able to use deductive reasoning to arrive at logical conclusions. It did not take him long to
conclude that his boyhood dreams of success and adventure could
not be built out of punishing New England farm life.
Livermore’s father was a distant, reserved man who did not show
affection easily. He ruled the household with a hard-edged, nononsense attitude toward life. Livermore’s mother was the opposite—loving and gentle, with plenty of time for her gifted boy.
At school, Livermore excelled in mathematics. He could finish
equations in his head and just give the answers, or find an alternative way to solve the problems given to the class. Once, he challenged a teacher to a race to solve a complex math problem. He
won. He was quickly promoted in math and given more advanced
courses to satisfy his yearning to learn more.
Mathematics was his friend; it came easily to him. He did three
years’ worth of arithmetic schoolwork in only one year. He could

8467_Smitten_02_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 21

THE BACK STORY

• 21 •

keep multitudes of numbers in his head, forming patterns. The
numbers always yielded to his computerlike brain.
When Livermore was 13, his father explained that education
was unnecessary, useless for a simple farmer’s life. At the age of 14,
Livermore’s father yanked him out of school and handed him
overalls. His father explained that he was going to be a full-time
farmer and was obliged to contribute to the family welfare.
But Livermore was smarter. He appeared to comply with his
father’s wishes, but he actually conspired with his mother to escape.
Within weeks—with $5 supplied by his mother in his pocket—he
sneaked off the farm and hailed a wagon on the road headed for
Boston. He knew it was the right thing to do. He needed to set out
into the world and make his fortune. While he had no specific plan,
he knew he was moving in the right direction.
He was still only 14 when he reached Boston and, with it, the
adult world, but his life patterns were already programmed, burned
into his brain. He realized the value of hard work. He had the taciturn, quiet strength and determination of so many New Englanders—people who were used to dealing with hard, unyielding soil,
unforgiving weather, and financial maelstroms.
His image of men was based on his father: silent, hard-working,
stubborn, distant, unemotional, determined, noncommunicative,
and supreme dictators of the household. His image of women was
based on his mother and the few girls that he had met at school:
gentle, nurturing, intelligent, emotional, and loving. He also knew
that women seemed to like him, and they were always good to him.
He realized, even at 14, that success, wealth, and fame could
come directly from working with the brain, not the body. He also
realized that it was action that counted, not talk—this he had
learned from his father.
But it was his mother who had given him the meager finances
he needed to break for Boston and a new life. He would repay her
