INSIDE THE
CURRENCY MARKET

Since 1996, Bloomberg Press has published books for ﬁnancial professionals on investing, economics, and policy affecting investors. Titles are written
by leading practitioners and authorities, and have been translated into more
than 20 languages.
The Bloomberg Financial Series provides both core reference knowledge and actionable information for ﬁnancial professionals. The books are
written by experts familiar with the work ﬂows, challenges, and demands of
investment professionals who trade the markets, manage money, and analyze
investments in their capacity of growing and protecting wealth, hedging risk,
and generating revenue.
For a list of available titles, please visit our web site at www.wiley.com/
go/bloombergpress.

INSIDE THE
CURRENCY MARKET
Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies

Brian Twomey

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 by Brian Twomey. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability
or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or
written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall
be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special,
incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Twomey, Brian, 1961Inside the currency market: mechanics, valuation and strategies / Brian Twomey.—1
p. cm.—(Bloomberg ﬁnancial series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-95275-7 (hardback); ISBN 978-1-118-14933-1 (ebk);
ISBN 978-1-118-14934-8 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-14935-5 (ebk)
1. Foreign exchange market. 2. Interest rates. I. Title.
HG3851.T88 2011
332.4'5—dc23
2011021444
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To the memory of my grandfather,
Richard Francis Schmidt, the greatest stock
trader I’ve ever known and a man who
taught me not only valuable lessons of life
but foundations of the markets at a young age.

Contents
Foreword

ix

Preface

xi

Acknowledgments

xv

CHAPTER 1
Foreign Exchange Reports

1

CHAPTER 2
Currency Trading Beyond the Basics

15

CHAPTER 3
Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

39

CHAPTER 4
Short-Term Interest Rates and Money
Market Instruments

73

CHAPTER 5
LIBOR

103

CHAPTER 6
Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves,
and Currency Prices

147

CHAPTER 7
Swaps and Forwards

197

CHAPTER 8
Stock and Bond Markets

221

vii

viii

Contents

CHAPTER 9
Currency Cycles, Currency Futures,
Options, and Volatility

269

CHAPTER 10
Technical Analysis

283

Bibliography

299

About the Author

303

Index

305

Foreword
I met Brian Twomey about ﬁve years ago when he came to my ofﬁce here in
North Carolina for a day visit. What immediately struck me about Brian
was his “ﬁre-in-the-belly” spirit and go-getter attitude. Brian impressed me
with his knowledge of the markets as well as his outstanding analytical prowess. We’ve kept in touch over the years and I was honored to be contacted by
Brian’s publisher for the purpose of writing this foreword.
For anybody interested in trading or studying the Forex markets, I would
consider this book required reading. I was astounded at the level of detail,
especially in terms of the nation-by-nation analyses that is provided. Detailed
methodologies, trade strategies, a terriﬁc chapter devoted exclusively to the
Libor, and an extensive analysis of currency pairs are also discussed.
At the book’s conclusion, Brian explains “My purpose for this book was
to address all the various issues involved that comprise a currency pair not
only from a strict trading perspective but to bring an understanding from a
whole host of perspectives.” I believe that Brian has achieved this objective
tenfold. I predict that this book will serve as an important reference resource
for all those interested in the inner workings of world currencies.
I hope you enjoy this book as much as I did.
John R. Hill
President
Futures Truth Co.

ix

Preface
This book answers the question what are the components, the constituent
factors that comprise the second side of a currency-pair equation and how
should those factors be considered in terms of a trade strategy. A currency
pair comprises two sides, a two-nation perspective. In order to understand a
currency-pair combination, both sides of the pair must be considered from
the two-nation perspective.
The two-nation perspective was fully outlined in this text with not only
the trader in mind but researchers, market professionals, and present and
future students of the markets.
The genesis of the book framework was derived from the many biases
I saw over the years from the academic journals, trader publications, or years
of prior books. Each book, each article, and each journal publication offered a
point, an insight that would help the reader further his or her knowledge. But
each publication taught a perspective, an insight that would eventually lead to
the overall understanding of the two-nation operational framework. Yet years
may pass before the full learned concepts could actually become operational
in a trade strategy and understanding of the market due to the proper knowledge
never advanced in one publication. Publications had biases, toward the U.S.
dollar side of the currency-pair equation, with no consideration of the second
part of the pair.
Spot-currency prices move in the markets based on factors of interest
rates but interest rates between two nations rather than one side of a currency
pair. The question must then be asked: How does the second nation calculate and factor interest, and what market instruments are available to track
the various rates that trade every day in the markets in order to track a trade
throughout the various markets?
To trade Australian dollar/Japanese yen, one must understand Japanese
TIBOR and Euroyen rates in terms of bank bills and Overnight Cash Rates
in Australia. To trade U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar, one must know the U.S.
Fed funds rates in relation to Canada’s CORRA and OMMFR interest rates.

xi

xii

Preface

How those speciﬁc interest rates trade and direction of their movements can
have profound effects on currency-pair prices.
This book sets out to outline the two-sided currency-pair trade from a
whole host of perspectives as it relates nation to nation. It addresses currency
pairs from the eight major nations because that is where the vast majority of
trade occurs.
Chapter One is an outline of the Triennial Survey released every three
years by the Bank of International Settlements (BIS). While that is not new to
any publication, the historical surveys are addressed and analyzed so readers
can understand the historical composition of the market in its proper context
as well as the rise of many varied currency pairs and ﬁnancial instruments
associated with the historical rise of the markets.
Beside the Triennial surveys, the BIS offers annual and quarterly reviews
of the currency markets and each is addressed in terms of the speciﬁcs of the
markets, types of topics addressed, and factors for consideration to understand and evaluate the market.
Foreign-exchange committees formed in the late 1970s and mimic the
work of the BIS. Each nation has an FX Committee, but that committee is speciﬁc to the nation of trade. Each nation’s FX Committee is fully
highlighted.
Chapter Two offers foundation and theories of money and interest. It
begins with a historical perspective and answers such questions as supply
and demand of money from an operational framework, always highlighted
nation by nation. Historically, the demand and supply of money begins with
the classical theorist, moves into Keynes, Von Hayek, and Milton Friedman.
Theories and perspectives of Purchasing Power Parity are explored in ﬁne
detail.
Chapter Three explores trade weight indices from a whole host of perspectives: historical, methodological, index composition, and theories of
composition from an economic perspective. Each nation is addressed speciﬁcally in terms of formulas, calculations, currency composition, and economic
framework, and trade strategies are explained in detail.
Chapter Four begins the open-market valuation and knowledge of interest rates and currency-pair prices from the perspective of repurchase agreements. Each nation is addressed speciﬁcally due to the many factors nations
consider as they approach their open-market operations. Repo rates establish
a ﬂoor for interest, yet interest rates rise and fall with markets and economic
conditions. Each nation is addressed in all its minute detail to fully understand the operational framework of repurchase-agreement markets.

Preface

xiii

Chapter Five addresses the most important of open-market interest rates,
LIBOR. LIBOR is explained, addressed, and highlighted not only from the
well-known British Bankers Association perspective but each nation has its
own LIBOR. Each nation’s LIBOR is fully explained in terms of factors
of interest rates and what moves currency pair prices associated with those
LIBOR rates, and historical views are addressed to the best of my ability.
Many currency-pair chart examples accompany each nation’s LIBOR so readers
can fully understand each nation’s LIBOR and factors of currency-pair movements and prices.
Chapter Six addresses yield curves ﬁrst from their historical perspective then each nation’s yield curve is explained and calculated with
bond examples and historical perspectives offered. The U.S. market is
the most important of the four, so currency-pair chart examples accompany yield curve charts. Factors such as how to trade yield curves are also
fully highlighted.
Chapter Seven moves further along the interest-rate curve to address
swaps in all their various forms from currency swaps, cross-currency basis
swaps, and overnight interest-rate swaps. Each nation’s swap market is highlighted speciﬁcally due to the varied nuances of every market. The chapter
then moves into outright forwards and forward points. Formulas and calculated examples are offered. A forward point calculated example includes a
yield curve and spot price calculated to a forward point.
Chapter Eight addresses stock markets as they relate to currency prices
and the bond/yield interplay. Each nation’s stock market is discussed in terms
of time of trade, formulas of each nation’s stock market, factors for trade consideration, and relationship to bonds and yields in each market.
Chapter Nine addresses currency-pair conversions, volatility and volatility indicators, formulas, and calculated examples as they relate to currency
pairs. A full discussion of volatility is offered not only for currency pairs, but
currency options are addressed. Futures contracts in terms of standard versus
micro contracts are discussed and fully addressed in terms of currency-pair
prices and conversions.
Chapter Ten offers technical indicators, ready-made indicators employed
to evaluate trade decisions. Simple moving averages, Bollinger Bands,
Ichimoku, and pivot points are addressed due to features speciﬁc to the markets. Ichimoku is vital to the Japanese and Asian currency markets since it is
not only widely employed but its operational framework must be understood
in order to trade Asian markets. Bollinger Bands is important to volatility,
simple moving averages to means, and pivot points to support and resistance.

xiv

Preface

Simple moving averages go a step further, as a simple moving average is
converted into a volatility indicator. Trend lines are discussed in all their ﬁner
details and histories offered. Volume and open interest studies, COT reports,
correlations, and the Baltic Exchange is offered due to its importance to the
commodity currencies such as Australian dollar, New Zealand dollar, and
Canadian dollar.

Acknowledgments
Without the dedicated and efﬁcient help of the Wiley and Bloomberg professionals, this book would not have been possible.
I thank Stephen Isaacs of Bloomberg Press for allowing me an opportunity to write this book. Kevin Commins, Executive Editor of Wiley, assisted
in every regard. His decency, dedication, and professionalism is appreciated.
Meg Freeborn’s dedication to the manuscript deserves my gratitude. A special
thank you to Kimberly Bernard who developed the manuscript; she is appreciated more than words would allow. Her efﬁciency, dedication, expertise,
and knowledge in the development process were genius. A thank you to all at
Wiley for their work and effort.
I offer my solemn and heartfelt thank yous to many dedicated market
professionals who were vitally important in more than one vital detail of this
book. My acknowledgments are offered in a nation-by-nation framework.
New Zealand:
Daniel Pringle calculates the NZX indices on a daily basis. His knowledge,
his market skills, his access, and attention to my questions were vitally
important to bringing the New Zealand information to my text. A sincere thank you is offered as well to others at the NZX. Thank you to the
New Zealand Financial Markets Association for help and time.
Switzerland:
Gazmend Maliqi deserves a special gratitude. Gazmend calculates the Swiss
SMI, Switzerland’s main stock market index. His dedication, his help,
and market depth and knowledge is again appreciated.
Canada:
Lois Sperling of Insideinformation.com, a high-quality business-intelligence
service in Vancouver, British Columbia, I owe a debt of gratitude. When
I was pressed for time in terms of due dates, Lois jumped into action and
we literally spent Christmas Eve working on the Bibliography together.

xv

xvi

Acknowledgments

Europe:
Cedric Quemener manages the steering committees at the EURIBOREuropean Banking Federation and not only offered his valuable time but
shared his market insights, access to research publications, and granted
permission for use of the Eurepo, EONIA, EURIBOR, and EONIA Swap
Index charts. His dedication, professionalism, and decency are appreciated
more than words would allow me to offer here.
Thank you to the dedicated market professionals at the London Wholesale
Market Brokers Association in London for access to charts and SONIA
and EURONIA information.
Martin Duffell is Head of Dealing at the U.K. Debt Management Ofﬁce.
Martin’s time, help, attention, and access to publications to understand
gilts in all its ﬁnest forms is sincerely appreciated.
Thank you to Euribor-rates.eu for access to charts.
Japan:
Naohiko Baba is one of the most proliﬁc scholar/writers on not only Japan
and their markets but his work spans many markets over many years. His
work is appreciated.
United States:
A special thank you to Peter Wadkins of Thomson Reuters. Not only is Peter
a long-time scholar, trader, and historian of the currency markets but
his help over the years with all my questions is sincerely appreciated.
Basic questions began more than ﬁve years ago and graduated as my own
knowledge expanded. Peter’s time, effort, and knowledge is most appreciated. I’m not only honored to know Peter but I’ve looked forward on a
daily basis to reading his expert market commentary.
Thank you to Joseph Haubrich at the Cleveland Fed for his years of scholarly
work and help to me on my examples.
A special thank you to Jaclyn Sales at FXCM whose dedication is always
appreciated.
I’m not only honored to know John Hill, but his dedication as a long time
market professional of decency and honesty is widely known throughout
the industry of professionals. To John, thank you.
Ron Griess at thechartstore.com I offer my many thank yous.

Acknowledgments

xvii

York County Library:
Special thank you to my friend Troy Beckham, whose computer skills
and knowledge helped guide me through well over a year while working on
the manuscript. Without Troy’s assistance, this book would never have seen the
light of day. Kyle Merck as well deserves my gratitude and thank yous for
assisting me with my many chart examples. His computer skills are expert
and his devotion to my cause gratifying. My friend Page Hendrix, a research
librarian, is thanked for her dedication in compiling research for many, many
days. Her attention to my research efforts over these many years is appreciated. And thank you to the many dedicated professionals at the library who
have a sincere love for books and information.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 1

Foreign Exchange
Reports
Foreign exchange (FX) reports are market-intelligence documents that comprise
many facets. Bank reports for example address direct and sometimes short-term
market variables such as a short- or long-term trade, a possible central bank
interest rate change, or economic variable that directly relates to the market.
Institutional reports address bigger-picture issues that comprise market
intelligence in terms of overall trading volume, types of instruments traded,
and a fundamental or technical aspect that must be addressed in order for the
market to function. Yet these reports address overall market fundamentals and
functions so traders and market professionals can understand the big picture
as it relates to their overall trade plan. Institutional reports are always forward
looking and written by market professionals with the ability to understand and
analyze big-picture issues. Much information can be derived from professional
reports in terms of strategies, risks, and highlighting of possible scenarios with
future implications to proﬁt. The key is to understand the various reports and
their implications because some reports are nation speciﬁc while others address
the overall market as it relates from nation to nation.
This section addresses a variety of market-intelligence reports that relate
both to a speciﬁc nation and overall market picture. This section incorporates
not only reports from a market-intelligence perspective but institutional histories, frequencies of reports, and types of information released and addressed.
Bank of International Settlements

Before we discuss the much-publicized implications of the Bank of International Settlements’ Triennial Survey and the not-so-publicized quarterly
report, here’s a quick and basic overview of the role, functions, and historical
1

2

Inside the Currency Market

aspects of the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) due to its profound
importance to not only world banking and economic stability, but the markets in particular, both yesterday and today.
Established in 1930 as the world’s banker, the BIS today is much more than
the facilitator of gold and FX transactions for the 54 central banks that contributed to its 2007 report. It was originally established to repatriate German
monies to the Allies after the war at the behest of the Bank of England, which
called for its establishment. How to implement further Treaty of Versailles’
arrangements between nations after World War I further heightened its need
as intermediator to facilitate multilateral payments and currency conversions.
Its location in Basel, Switzerland, attests to not only its neutrality but its commitment to carry out its mandate (BIS 2010).
The real existential challenge to the BIS came during the 1930s at the
height of the currency wars, when the Bank of England suspended its gold
standard in 1931 and the United States did the same in 1933. Gold-backed
nations sought stability due to currency price ﬂuctuations by the United
States and the United Kingdom as trade imbalances seriously deviated from
the norm of gold-backed nations and threatened their economic existence
(BIS 2010).
The resolution was the Tripartite Agreement signed by the United
States, France, and England in 1936 to ensure price stability and to abstain
from competitive economic devaluations of currency prices as long as currency prices didn’t destabilize the economic balance of trade. While the world
prevented a crisis, the BIS maintained its existence until the bank was rescued
by President Truman in 1948 when the United Nations voted for its dissolution in 1944. Ironically, Franklin Roosevelt died shortly after in April
1945, so Truman assumed the presidency and, with the help of the United
Kingdom, ensured the bank would remain today as one of the oldest world
institutions (BIS 2010).
Moreover, the BIS provides short-term collateral loans to nations through
their respective central banks and settles trades every trading day at 5:00 p.m.
eastern standard time through its Committee on Payment and Settlements
(BIS 2010). Closing spot currency, outright forwards, currency options, and
swap prices are established at the 5:00 p.m. settlement to end a full-cycle trading day. Trading institutions must then reﬂect these changes to all accounts
the world over through their respective central banks.
The Committee on Payment and Settlements ensures that world markets
not only function properly but further ensures this functionality replicates
itself every trading day. Rollover debits and credits are marked to market
at the 5:00 p.m. close. Market bid/ask spreads tend to change dramatically at
