
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

258

TRADING STRATEGIES

preference is to use my volatility spike indicator, which simply expresses the current day’s change (last print to previous day’s close) as a standard deviation of the
past 20 trading days. I have a screen that updates the day’s change as a standard deviation for a number of markets and color codes any move larger than three standard
deviations up or down. This makes it very easy to see, at a glance, what is going on
even if I am looking at a quote screen with several hundred tickers. If you look at the
board and see only white, it is probably a boring day. If you look back later and see
a sea of red, then you know that something has changed and that long positions may
demand attention.
Last, you may want to consider other measures of unusual activity in the markets
and positions you are following. The simpler these tools are, the more robust and useful
they are likely to be. It is easy to be seduced by the power of the programming tools
available and to try to create elaborate, complex monitoring tools. In most cases, this
is not necessary and is even counterproductive. You simply need to know when your
positions or related markets are moving with unusual activity on the day.
A Tool for Tracking Positions Intraday
Some of the best ideas really are the simplest. For intraday position monitoring, I also
use a tool that shows where the current price is in the day’s range in a simple text graph
format. This has proven to be an extremely useful tool for intraday traders to visualize
order ﬂow and relationships across many markets, and can even help longer-term traders
read the ﬂow in a market. Here is the basic eight-step procedure for creating this tool:
1. Calculate the close as percent of day’s range = [(last print – day’s low)/day’s range] ×
100.
2. Calculate the open as percent of day’s range = [(open – day’s low)/day’s range] × 100.
3. Create a text variable that consists of 10 dashes = “- - - - - - - - - -”.
4. Each dash is a decile. Replace the dash that corresponds to the open as percent of day’s
range with the colon (:) character.
5. Replace the dash that corresponds to the close as percent of day’s range with the pipe
( | ) character. If the colon already occupies that space, overwrite it with the pipe.
6. If the current price is the absolute high of the day, replace the entire string with
“ = = = = = = = = = >”.
7. If the current price is the absolute low of the day, replace the entire string with
“< = = = = = = = = = ”.
8. Color code as desired. One idea might be to color code the entire indicator red for any
values where close as percent of day’s range ≤ 20, and green if ≥ 80.

Practical Tips on Execution
It is difficult to give guidelines on execution that will apply across many different asset
classes and time frames, but there are a few commonalities to consider. First of all, you

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

Trade Management

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

259

can choose to be either a price maker or a price taker—to add or take liquidity from
the book. Particularly for very short-term traders who do a lot of volume, the rebates
associated with adding liquidity to the book can help to offset a significant portion of
their transaction costs, so it makes sense for these traders to execute on limit orders,
adding liquidity as often as possible. However, it is also important to consider the adverse
selection effect associated with limit orders, meaning that if you focus on limit order
executions, you will always be in every losing trade, but you will price yourself out of
some winning trades.
In general, be careful with market orders. True market orders have no price limit and
you have no recourse in the event of a very poor fill. It is even possible, in some markets,
to be filled outside the day’s range at a price where the asset never traded. We refer to the
difference between the intended price and the actual execution price as slippage, and it
is a serious cost in some markets. Very large market orders will eat through a significant amount of the liquidity in the book, sometimes moving prices significantly. A market maker’s biggest fear is running into an informed trader who executes a large order
in the market, placing the market maker, by definition, on the other side of that order.
Market-making algorithms monitor the way orders are hitting the bids and offers, and
they identify large market orders taking a lot of liquidity as potentially informed traders.
To protect themselves, the market makers then widen spreads and step away from the
inside market, which further exacerbates the impact of these large market orders.
When and if you must use market orders, do so with discretion. Break up large orders
into smaller pieces if possible and execute them over a longer time period. Marketable
limit orders should almost always be used instead of pure market orders. A marketable
limit order is an order that is placed on the wrong side of the market: a limit order to buy
normally goes on or under the bid, but a marketable buy limit order is placed at or above
the offer. A marketable sell limit order similarly goes at or under the bid. Marketable limit
orders may well clear liquidity and result in slippage up to the limit price, but they avoid
the possibility of a very large adverse fill with the trade-off that a marketable limit order
may not be filled at all. If the order scares the market and sends price moving without
completely filling the order, the remainder will continue to work as a limit order at the
limit price. Perhaps the only time you may want to consider an outright market order is
as a stop loss on a position, when you really want out at whatever cost. Otherwise, make
the marketable limit order your standard tool.
Most traders, especially shorter-term traders for whom the spread represents a
greater portion of their profit and loss, should think about executing at least one side
of the trade on a limit order if possible. If you enter on a market order (marketable limit
order), get out of your position on a limit order. If you enter via a limit order, you can
use a market order for exit. Paying the spread on both sides of the trade can be a serious
loss of efficiency. For instance, a short-term scalper may be playing for a profit of 0.10
with an intended risk of 0.10. If she gives up 0.02 on both the entry and the exit due to the
spread, then her winning trades become 0.06 and her losers become –0.14. For highertime frame traders, this factor is less important, but it is still good to build the discipline
of trying to execute one side of the trade on limit orders as much as possible. Of course,
when you are wrong, it is usually better to get out without messing around. Far better to

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

260

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

simply hit a bid to get out than to offer at successively lower prices, as your offers will
add pressure that will drive the price still lower. Most traders will find best results in not
being too obsessive about execution prices in losing trades—just get out.
Large Orders, Thin Markets
Executing large orders in thin markets can be challenging, but it is often possible, with
time and skill, to do even a multiple of the average daily volume in many markets without
moving price too much. There is an unavoidable trade-oﬀ between urgency of execution
and adverse price impact; the faster you must do an order, all other things being equal,
the more you will move the market. Executing large orders is a speciﬁc skill that must
be developed over time, and, like everything else in trading, probabilities apply—it is not
possible to do this perfectly every time. There are three approaches to consider for these
executions:
1. Break them up into smaller pieces and do them as much as possible on the bid or just
in front of the bid. Use hidden orders whenever possible, and experiment with probing
in between the bid and the oﬀer to see if there are other hidden orders. For instance,
assume that you need to buy 200,000 shares in a thin stock that does an average of
100,000 shares a day, is currently bid at 10.00 and oﬀered at 10.20, and is not printing.
Your ﬁrst approach should be to place a hidden order at 10.02 to 10.05 and see if you
are ﬁlled there. Once that order is working, you can try other hidden limit orders from
10.05 to 10.18, seeing if you will ﬁnd any hidden orders there. You will usually have
best luck placing very large orders so that if they meet another large order they will
be ﬁlled. Be aware, if you do get lucky and print 50,000 shares at 10.12, the stock will
probably adjust instantly and be bid at 10.20 and oﬀered at 10.50 or something even
worse. Be patient after these ﬁrst ﬁlls and continue the process until the order is done.
Above all, avoid paying the oﬀer, as even a few hundred shares taken on the oﬀer can
send the stock bid well above those last prices. (Similar considerations apply in thin
futures markets.)
2. This is highly counterintuitive, but many times thin books are a lot more liquid than
they look. If you are trying to buy large size in a thin market, you may have good
results showing most or all of your bid at a price near the oﬀer. If you are unable to
ﬁnd any ﬁlls in the middle of the spread (10.00/10.20 as in the preceding example),
you may want to show your full size at 10.15 or so. Being willing to give up most of
the spread and showing your full size clearly tells the marketplace that you are a real,
natural buyer. Yes, there will be times when the market instantly goes 10.40 bid, but
these are oﬀset by the times a natural seller will ﬁll your whole order at 10.15.
3. Use an algorithm to do the execution. Most traders will start here, and this is probably
the best plan for most situations. Most algorithms will follow some variation of the plan
in the ﬁrst bullet point, but they will do so with the advantage of being able to monitor
many levels in the order book with constant vigilance. In addition, some algorithms
have preferred access to various dark pools, and may be able to cross a signiﬁcant
portion of the order there.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

Trade Management

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

261

Thin, illiquid markets are a double-edged sword. On one hand, illiquidity is good
when you’re on the right side of a trade. An illiquid market will usually move in the anticipated direction much faster, as there is less two-way trading and disagreement over
price—the quest for the theoretical market-clearing price is much cleaner when there
is less noise in the order book. Common sense dictates that partial exits in these cases
should be taken in the direction of the price movement: sell existing longs into strength
and buy back existing shorts on weakness. Yes, this means you will almost never sell
the very top of a move or cover the very bottom, but you will, in general, be much more
efficient if you do not pay the spread. The cost of getting out of thin markets when you
are on the wrong side can be extreme. Even if you are watching the order book, you may
not be able to execute against displayed liquidity, as it is pulled from the book far faster
than you can humanly react.
One last thing to consider is the issue of mistakes. Everyone makes mistakes. Even if
you are trading a completely automated system with little human interaction, there will
still be some errors. You will make mistakes, and, while it is important to minimize the
frequency with which they occur, it is equally important to accept that they will happen
and to plan for how to handle them. Perhaps you buy instead of sell. Perhaps you mean to
execute in one market but you actually execute an unintended order in another market.
Perhaps you enter a stop or limit order with a wrong price and it triggers when you did
not intend it to. Perhaps an exit order was canceled and you find yourself with a position
you did not expect to have, at either a profit or a loss. The question is not so much how
you make yourself mistake-proof as what you do when these things happen, and the
answer is simple: fix the mistake immediately. Do not consider whether you are happy
to have the position or whether you can trade out of it somehow. Do not think. Do not
justify. Just fix the mistake. This is a matter of discipline and it must be enforced every
time an error happens.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 9

Risk Management

It is important to see distant things as if they were close and to take a
distanced view of close things.
—Miyamoto Musashi, The Book of Five Rings (1645 CE)

any of the problems of trading reduce to risk management. In most styles of
trading, the trader’s job is essentially to manage the risk in trades, focusing on
exiting losing trades at the correct points, and letting the upside take care of
itself. Risk management is critical, as a few outsized losses can offset the profits from
many winning trades; it does not take many errors to completely erode a trading edge.
This chapter considers risk management from both practical and theoretical perspectives. We begin with practical, applied tools for risk management and position sizing that
traders in all time frames will find useful. Many large losses come from having trades with
inappropriate position sizes, and many traders do not understand the impact of trading
size on the bottom line. The chapter moves on to a higher-level perspective on risk, incorporating some ideas from modern academic thinking and focusing on a few specific
measures of risk, before concluding with a look at some of the less common risks that
self-directed traders often overlook.

M

RISK AND POSITION SIZING
From a practical perspective, there are three main questions to answer with respect to
risk. The first two have been addressed in the previous chapter, but the third is supremely
important:
1. Where do we place our initial exit orders, both for profits and losses?
2. How do we adjust the trade as it develops through time?
3. How many shares, contracts, or other units do we trade on each position?

263

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

264

TRADING STRATEGIES

First, Know Your Risk
There are few absolutes in trading. Most trading rules are flexible, and many master
traders have a rule that basically says, “Know when to break the other rules.” However,
there is one rule that cannot be broken—it is perhaps the single most important rule in
discretionary trading: Always know where you are getting out of the trade if you are
wrong, before you get in. The choice of exactly where to place the stop will depend on
the pattern, the trader, the profit target, the time frame, the specific market, and perhaps
a number of other conditions, but the most important thing is that this level is defined at
the time of entry.
As you consider your options, it is important to make sure that your stop is placed
at a meaningful level that is outside of the range of the market’s noise; with very few
exceptions initial stops must not be placed too close to the market. A rough guideline is
given by the average range of a single bar on the time frame you are trading. If you try
to place your initial stops closer than one average bar’s range, you are probably working
within the noise level and have significantly impaired whatever edge you might have had.

%R and Position Sizing
Once this initial price movement risk level is known, the question of trading size must
also be addressed. There is a large body of literature that deals with the theoretical ideas
behind asset allocation and position sizing for individual traders. For the most part we
will avoid these discussions and will simply limit discussion here to two points: some
practical guidelines I have used with success in my own trading and an illustration of
why consistent sizing is important.
Many traders are familiar with the Kelly criterion, which is a formula that gives the
optimal amount to bet in a game of chance, assuming that a number of very important
simplifying assumptions hold true. If these assumptions are met, then the Kelly formula
will outperform all other approaches, usually dramatically.
If you are interested in the theoretical background of asset allocation and position sizing
for individual traders, good places to start are J. L. Kelly Jr.’s seminal 1956 paper “A New
Interpretation of Information Rate” and Ralph Vince’s The Leverage Space Trading Model
(2009).

However (and for actual trading this is very important), if Kelly is applied in cases in
which the simplifying assumptions do not hold, then it will all end in tears. For reference,
the classic Kelly criterion gives f , the percentage of the account to risk on every trade,
by this formula:
Odds × Probwin − Probloss
Odds
Sizewin
Odds =
Sizeloss
f =

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Risk Management

265

The Kelly criterion and Vince’s extension of it, called optimal f , are optimized approaches. In both cases, the objective is to maximize the geometric growth rate of the
account while minimizing the risk of ruin, or a catastrophic loss of equity. Most optimized
approaches like this are extremely aggressive, and large drawdowns must be accepted
as a matter of course. In addition, and much more seriously, the theoretical assumptions
behind these models are important and they rarely hold up in short-term trading. For
instance, most optimized methods assume that each trade is independent of any other
trade, but many trading systems experience strings of wins and losses while the market
is locked in one regime (trending or trading range), and trade outcomes may show some
degree of serial dependence. Furthermore, many of these optimized approaches require
inputs like the largest trading loss, which must be based on historical data, and they are
all dependent on the assumption that future results will look like the past. If you experience a larger loss in the future and you are using an aggressive, optimized position-sizing
methodology, you could be in trouble. If you are going to use any of these approaches
in actual trading, make sure you understand the assumptions and the risks involved in
violating any of those assumptions.
Many traders find that the risks under an optimized position-sizing scheme are too
great to bear. Another possibility could be to set aside a fixed percentage of your trading
capital, and apply aggressive sizing rules to that portion while trading the remainder
more conservatively. If you decide to do this, you should carefully consider whether the
incremental gains offset the additional effort required to carry out this plan.
Fixed Fractional Approaches My approach to position sizing is simple and robust.
It is not an optimized method, nor is it meant to be. Rather, it is designed to do a few
specific things:

r Define the risk from losing trades.
r Limit the risk from a much larger-than-expected losing trade.
r Limit the risk from a series of losing trades.
r Limit the total risk from a set of highly correlated positions.
r Limit the total amount of equity placed at risk at any one time.
r Allow easy scaling as the account balance changes.
Notice that the focus of this process is on limiting risk, not maximizing returns. This
is how you stay in the game. Professional traders know that, if you are trading with an
edge, the most important thing is to manage the downside so that no one risk can take
you out of business. Profits, to a great extent, will take care of themselves; the first and
most important job of any trader is to correctly manage the risk.
The rules are very simple: the risk for every trade is set at a consistent percentage
of the account equity. I consider anything under 1 percent to be very conservative, and
anything 3 percent or over to be extremely aggressive. When you are thinking about this
risk number, it is important to consider the impact of a string of four or five losing trades
in a row, or of a single loss five times your anticipated maximum loss. If you are risking

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c09

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:52

Printer: Hamilton Printing

266

TRADING STRATEGIES

3 percent on a trade and have a disastrous situation where you have a 5× loss, you just
lost 15 percent of your equity. In reality, a loss this much larger than expected should be
extremely rare, but, even in this extreme case, the account would not be destroyed. If,
however, you had been risking 10 percent of the account, you would be down 50 percent
and in serious trouble.
Drawdown usually refers to the amount an equity curve, whether for a trader, system, or fund, has retreated from its peak. Drawdowns are a fact of life; there is always
some natural fluctuation in an equity curve. Later in this chapter, we examine many of
the traditional measures of risk and find them wanting on one level or another. It is easy
to make an argument that drawdown is one of the best and one of the truest measures of
risk, but, like many other elements of trading performance, future drawdowns must be
extrapolated from history. If something changes in the future, the disconnect between
historical performance and walk-forward projection can cause traders and managers to
dramatically underestimate risk.

Recovering from Drawdowns
One of the mathematical realities traders face is the asymmetry between drawdowns and
the percentage returns needed to recover. For some people, this is not always intuitive at
ﬁrst glance—for any given percent drawdown, it takes a much larger percentage return
to recover. For any drawdown of D%, the return needed to bring the account back to
breakeven may be calculated from this formula:
Return needed for recovery =

D%
(1 − D%)

For small drawdowns, the return needed to recover is only very slightly larger. For
instance, a 5 percent drawdown requires a 5.3 percent return to recover, but a trader in
a 20 percent drawdown needs to make 25 percent just to break even. For larger drawdowns, the hole gets deeper very quickly—you would have to double your money, with
a 100 percent return, to get back to even from a 50 percent drawdown. To put these
numbers in perspective, very few traders make 25 percent a year with any regularity, and
the chances of doubling your money, without excessive leverage and risks, are very, very
small. An eﬀective risk management strategy will focus on minimizing drawdowns, while
acknowledging them as a natural and normal part of trading.
