 2.  Know when not to have an opinion. 
 3.  Develop, test, and systemize timeless and universal principles. 
 4.  Balance risks in ways that keep the big upside while reducing the downside. 
 Doing these things significantly improved my returns relative to my risks, and the same principles apply in other aspects of life. Most importantly, this experience led me to build Bridgewater as an idea meritocracy—not an autocracy in which I lead and others follow, and not a democracy in which everyone’s vote is equal—but a meritocracy that encourages thoughtful disagreements and explores and weighs people’s opinions in proportion to their merits. 
 Bringing these opposing opinions into the open and exploring them taught me a lot about how people think. I came to see that people’s greatest weaknesses are the flip sides of their greatest strengths. For example, some people are prone to take on too much risk while others are too risk averse; some are too focused on the details while others are too big-picture. Most are too much one way and not enough another. Typically, by doing what comes naturally to us, we fail to account for our weaknesses, which leads us to crash. What happens after we crash is most important. Successful people change in ways that allow them to continue to take advantage of their strengths while compensating for their weaknesses and unsuccessful people don’t. Later in the book I will describe specific strategies for change, but the important thing to note here is that beneficial change begins when you can acknowledge and even embrace your weaknesses. 
 Over the years that followed, I found that most of the extraordinarily successful people I’ve met had similar big painful failures that taught them the lessons that ultimately helped them succeed. Looking back on getting fired from Apple in 1985, Steve Jobs said, “It was awful-tasting medicine, but I guess the patient needed it. Sometimes life hits you in the head with a brick. Don’t lose faith. I’m convinced that the only thing that kept me going was that I loved what I did.” 
 I saw that to do exceptionally well you have to push your limits and that, if you push your limits, you will crash and it will hurt a lot. You will think you have failed—but that won’t be true unless you give up. Believe it or not, your pain will fade and you will have many other opportunities ahead of you, though you might not see them at the time. The most important thing you can do is to gather the lessons these failures provide and gain humility and radical open-mindedness in order to increase your chances of success. Then you press on. 
 My final lesson was perhaps the most important one, because it has applied again and again throughout my life. At first, it seemed to me that I faced an all-or-nothing choice: I could either take on a lot of risk in pursuit of high returns (and occasionally find myself ruined) or I could lower my risk and settle for lower returns. But I needed to have both low risk and high returns, and by setting out on a mission to discover how I could, I learned to go slowly when faced with the choice between two things that you need that are seemingly at odds. That way you can figure out how to have as much of both as possible. There is almost always a good path that you just haven’t discovered yet, so look for it until you find it rather than settle for the choice that is then apparent to you. 
 As difficult as this was, I eventually found a way to have my cake and eat it too. I call it the “Holy Grail of Investing,” and it’s the secret behind Bridgewater’s success.

Principles 

 CHAPTER 4 
 MY ROAD OF TRIALS: 
 1983–1994 
 C oming out of my crash, I was so broke I couldn’t muster enough money to pay for an airplane ticket to Texas to visit a prospective client, even though the fees I’d earn were many times the cost of the fare—so I didn’t make that trip. Still, I gradually added clients, revenue, and a new team. With time, my upswings increased in magnitude and my downswings were both tolerable and educational. I never thought of what I was doing as building (or rebuilding) a company; I was just getting the things I needed to play my game. 
 Computers were among the most valuable things I acquired, because of how they helped me think. Without them, Bridgewater would not have been nearly as successful as it turned out to be. 
 The first microcomputers (what would later be known as personal computers) had come on the market during the late 1970s, and I had been using them as econometricians did, applying statistics and computing power to economic data to analyze the workings of the economic machine. As I wrote in a December 1981 article, I believed (and still believe) that “theoretically . . . if there was a computer that could hold all of the world’s facts and if it was perfectly programmed to mathematically express all of the relationships between all of the world’s parts, the future could be perfectly foretold.” 
 But I was a long way from doing that. Though my early systems provided valuable insights into where prices would eventually reach equilibrium, they hadn’t helped me develop robust trading strategies; they just showed me that a particular bet would eventually pay off. For example, I’d run through my analysis and end up with a view that the price of some commodity should be, say, 75 cents or so. If it was currently 60 cents, I’d know I wanted to buy it, but I wouldn’t be able to predict that the price would drop to 50 cents before climbing back to 75, and I wouldn’t know when to buy and sell. Rarely, but still too often, the system would be dead wrong and I would lose a lot. 
 “He who lives by the crystal ball is destined to eat ground glass” is a saying I quoted a lot in those days. Between 1979 and 1982, I had eaten enough glass to realize that what was most important wasn’t knowing the future—it was knowing how to react appropriately to the information available at each point in time. In order to do that, I would have to have a vast store of economic and market data to draw on—and as it happened, I did. 
 From very early on, whenever I took a position in the markets, I wrote down the criteria I used to make my decision. Then, when I closed out a trade, I could reflect on how well these criteria had worked. It occurred to me that if I wrote those criteria into formulas (now more fashionably called algorithms) and then ran historical data through them, I could test how well my rules would have worked in the past. Here’s how it worked in practice: I would start out with my intuitions as I always did, but I would express them logically, as decision-making criteria, and capture them in a systematic way, creating a mental map of what I would do in each particular situation. Then I would run historical data through the systems to see how my decision would have performed in the past and, depending upon the results, modify the decision rules appropriately. 
 We tested the systems going as far back as we could, typically more than a century, in every country for which we had data, which gave me great perspective on how the economic/market machine worked through time and how to bet on it. Doing this helped educate me and led me to refine my criteria so they were timeless and universal. Once I vetted those relationships, I could run data through the systems as it flowed at us in real time and the computer could work just as my brain worked in processing it and making decisions. 
 The result was Bridgewater’s original interest rate, stock, currencies, and precious metals systems, which we then combined into one system for managing our portfolio of bets. Our system was like an EKG on the economy’s vital signs; as they changed, we changed our positions. However, rather than blindly following the computer’s recommendations, I would have the computer work in parallel with my own analysis and then compare the two. When the computer’s decision was different from mine, I would examine why. Most of the time, it was because I had overlooked something. In those cases, the computer taught me. But sometimes I would think about some new criteria my system would’ve missed, so I would then teach the computer. We helped each other. It didn’t take long before the computer, with its tremendous processing power, was much more effective than me. This was great, because it was like having a chess grandmaster helping me plot my moves, except this player operated according to a set of criteria that I understood and believed were logical, so there was no reason for us to ever fundamentally disagree. 
 The computer was much better than my brain in “thinking” about many things at once, and it could do it more precisely, more rapidly, and less emotionally. And, because it had such a great memory, it could do a better job of compounding my knowledge and the knowledge of the people I worked with as Bridgewater grew. Rather than argue about our conclusions, my partners and I would argue about our different decision-making criteria. Then we resolved our disagreements by testing the criteria objectively. The rapidly expanding power of computers during that era was like a constant stream of gifts from the gods to us. I remember when RadioShack came out with an inexpensive handheld chess computer; we sent one to each of our clients with the message, “A Systemized Approach from Bridgewater.” That little computer chess game could kick my ass on level two out of its nine levels. It was fun to put it up against each of my clients so they could see how hard it was to beat computerized decision making. 
 Of course, we always had the freedom to override the system, which we did less than 2 percent of the time—mostly to take money off the table during extraordinary events that weren’t programmed, like the World Trade Center going down on 9/11. While the computer was much better than our brains in many ways, it didn’t have the imagination, understanding, and logic that we did. That’s why our brains working with the computer made such a great partnership. 
 These decision-making systems were much better than the forecasting systems I’d been using before, mostly because they incorporated our ongoing reactions to developments, allowing us to deal with a wider range of possibilities. They could also include timing rules. In a January 1987 piece called “Making Money vs. Making Forecasts,” I explained that: 
 Truth be known, forecasts aren’t worth very much, and most people who make them don’t make money in the markets. . . . This is because nothing is certain and when one overlays the probabilities of all of the various things that affect the future in order to make a forecast, one gets a wide array of possibilities with varying probabilities, not one highly probable outcome. . . . We believe that market movements reflect economic movements. Economic movements are reflected in economic statistics. By studying the relationships between economic statistics and market movements, we’ve developed precise rules for identifying important shifts in the economic/market environment and in turn our positions. In other words, rather than forecasting changes in the economic environment and shifting positions in anticipation of them, we pick up these changes as they’re occurring and move our money around to keep in those markets which perform best in that environment. 
 Over the last three decades of building these systems we have incorporated many more types of rules that direct every aspect of our trading. Now, as real-time data is released, our computers parse information from over 100 million datasets and give detailed instructions to other computers in ways that make logical sense to me. If I didn’t have these systems, I’d probably be broke or dead from the stress of trying so hard. We certainly wouldn’t have done as well in the markets as we have. As you will see later, I am now developing similar systems to help us make management decisions. I believe one of the most valuable things you can do to improve your decision making is to think through your principles for making decisions, write them out in both words and computer algorithms, back-test them if possible, and use them on a real-time basis to run in parallel with your brain’s decision making. 
 But I’m getting ahead of myself. Let’s go back to 1983. 
 RESURRECTING BRIDGEWATER 
 By late 1983, Bridgewater had six employees. Up until then, I hadn’t done any marketing; the business we got came from word of mouth and from people reading my daily telexes and seeing my public appearances. But clearly there was a growing demand for our research, and I realized we could sell it to supplement our consulting and trading income. So I hired a seventh employee, a former door-to-door Bible salesman named Rob Fried, and we hit the road, lugging around a projector and a huge stack of slides, hawking a $3,000-per-month research package with my daily telexes, weekly conference calls, biweekly and quarterly research reports, and quarterly meetings. Over the next year, Rob brought in a number of institutions and institutional investment managers, including General Electric, Keystone Custodian Funds, the World Bank, Brandywine, Loomis Sayles, Provident Capital Management, the Singer Company, Loews Corporation, GTE Corporation, and Wellington Management. 
 At that point, our business consisted of three main areas: consulting for fees, managing companies’ risks for incentive fees, and selling the research packages. We worked with all sorts of corporate, financial, and government institutions that had market exposures—banks, diversified international businesses, commodities producers, food producers, public utilities, and more. For example, we would build a plan to help a multinational company deal with the currency exposure it faced from operating in different countries. 
 My approach was to immerse myself in a business until I got to a point where I felt that the strategies I was handing off were the ones I would use were I running the company myself. I would break each company down into distinct logical components and then come up with a plan for managing each part, using a variety of financial tools, especially derivative instruments. The most important components to separate were the profits coming from the core business and those that were speculative profits and losses coming from price changes. We would do this to show them what a “risk-neutral” position would look like, which is to say, the properly hedged position one would take if one didn’t have a view of the markets. I would advise them to deviate from this position only when they wanted to speculate, which they should only do in measured ways and with full knowledge of the effects it could have on their core business. This approach was eye-opening for most of the firms we worked with. It gave them clarity and control, and yielded them better results. Sometimes they wanted us to speculate for them, which we would do for a share of the profits. 
 This approach to establishing a “risk-neutral” benchmark position and deviating from it with measured bets was the genesis of the style of investment management we would later call “alpha overlay,” in which passive (“beta”) and active (“alpha”) exposures are separated. The return of a market (such as the stock market) itself is called its beta. Alpha is the return that comes from betting against others. For example, some people outperform the stock market and others underperform it; they are said to have positive or negative alpha. With alpha overlay, we were offering a way of making bets independent of underlying market performance. Approaching the market in this way taught me that one of the keys to being a successful investor is to only take bets you are highly confident in and to diversify them well. 
 One of our clients in the mid-1980s was Alan Bond, an audacious entrepreneur who was one of the richest people in Australia. A self-made man, he was famous for being the first non-American to win the America’s Cup yacht race in its then 132-year history. Like Bunker Hunt, he eventually bet badly and was forced to declare bankruptcy. I advised him and his team on their way up and stayed on through his downfall, so I watched the tragedy unfold from up close. His was a classic case of confusing business with speculation and only hedging when it was too late. 
 Bond borrowed U.S. dollars to buy assets like breweries in Australia. He did that because U.S. interest rates were lower than they were in Australia. Though he didn’t realize it, he was speculating that the U.S. dollar, in which he would have to pay back his loans, would not rise. When the U.S. dollar did rise against the Australian dollar in the mid-1980s and his Australian-dollar beer-sales earnings weren’t enough to pay his debts, his team called me for advice. I calculated what Bond Corp’s position would be if they hedged on currencies and saw that doing so would lock in losses that would ruin them, so I advised them to wait. When the Australian dollar rallied, I advised them to put the hedges in place, but they didn’t because they believed the currency problem had gone away. Before long, the Australian dollar plunged to new lows and they called me in for an emergency meeting. There wasn’t much they could do without locking in ruinous losses, so they again did nothing, and this time the Australian dollar didn’t rally. Seeing one of the richest and most accomplished men on the planet lose everything made a huge impression on me. 
 We also did one-off consulting projects related to the markets. In 1985, I worked with Paul Tudor Jones, a good friend and a great trader, to design a U.S. dollar futures contract (a tradable index tracking the price of the U.S. dollar against a basket of foreign currencies) that traded (and still trades) on the New York Cotton Exchange. I also worked with the New York Futures Exchange to help design and market their CRB futures contract (a tradable index that tracks the price of a basket of commodities). 
 Unlike most people who work in the markets, I never had any desire to build investment products, especially conventional ones, just because they would sell well. All I wanted was to trade the markets and build relationships, doing for our clients exactly what I would do if I were in their shoes. But I also loved building brand-new things, especially if they were great and revolutionary. By the mid-1980s, a couple of things were clear to me: First, we were making good calls in the interest-rate and currency markets, and the institutional investment managers who were buying our research were using it to make money. Second, we were successfully managing companies’ interest-rate and currency exposures. With those two things going as well as they were, I figured we could become successful institutional investment managers ourselves. So I made the pitch to the people who ran the World Bank’s pension fund, most importantly Hilda Ochoa, who was its chief investment officer at the time. Despite the fact that we had no assets under management and no track record, she gave us a $5 million U.S. bond account to manage. 
 That was a huge turning point for us, as it was the start of Bridgewater as we know it today. The strategy we used for the World Bank shifted between holding cash and holding twenty-year U.S. Treasury bonds, because these positions would give us leveraged bets on the direction of interest rates. When our systems indicated that the pressures on interest rates would cause them to fall, we would hold twenty-year Treasury bonds, and when the system pointed to rates rising, we would stay in cash. We did very well, and before long other large institutional investors gave us money to manage as well. Mobil Oil and Singer were our next two accounts and others followed in rapid succession. We went on to become the top-performing U.S. bond manager in the world. 
 VENTURING BEHIND THE “CLOSED DOOR” OF CHINA 
 Part of what was great about consulting was that it gave me opportunities to travel. The more unusual a place, the more interesting I found it. This curiosity drew me to Beijing in 1984. The only images I’d seen of China when I was growing up were of masses of people waving Mao’s Little Red Book, so having an opportunity to go behind what was still a mostly “closed door” was alluring. I got the invitation because I had a small office in Hong Kong whose director was an advisor to CITIC, the “window company” that was the only business in China allowed to deal with the outside world. Beijing was filled with wonderful and incredibly hospitable people who introduced us to the tradition of drinking shots of Moutai while shouting Ganbei! (Bottoms up!) and generally showed us a great time. This first trip, which I made with my wife and a few other people, began an incredibly rewarding thirty-plus-year journey that has had a profound impact on my family and me. 
 There were no financial markets in China at the time; eventually a small group put together by seven Chinese companies (including CITIC) known as the Securities Executive Education Council began to develop them. They started in 1989, just before the Tiananmen Square incident, which set them back because such market developments were still seen as too capitalist. They operated out of a small hotel room and hardly had any financing. I can still picture the big garbage bin under the metal stairway going up to their office. I really respected the risks these young people were taking by doing this at such an unsettled time, so I made a small donation to give them a hand and was excited to share my knowledge with them. From nothing, these people built China’s markets and the government’s securities regulatory arm. 
 In 1994, I set up a company called Bridgewater China Partners. By then, I was convinced that China was poised to become the greatest economy in the world in the twenty-first century, but hardly anyone was investing in China yet; good deals could still be struck. I could bring money to the table by introducing my institutional investment clients to opportunities, and I could provide know-how by introducing Chinese companies to American ones. In exchange, we would get a stake in these companies. Essentially, I was setting up the first U.S.-based private equity firm in China. 
 I launched the company by bringing a small group of institutional investor clients, who together managed $70 billion in assets, to China for a visit. When we got back, we agreed to move forward by setting up a jointly owned merchant bank in Beijing. While I knew that entering a territory where few had been before would require a lot of experimentation and learning, I soon realized I had sorely underestimated the complexity of the task we had set for ourselves and the amount of time it would take. I found myself constantly on the phone at three in the morning, trying to make sense of the shaky accounting and questionable controls at the companies we were interested in—with all my Bridgewater responsibilities awaiting me when the sun came up. 
 After about a year of this, I could see that running both Bridgewater and Bridgewater China Partners wasn’t going to be possible, so I closed its doors. Nobody made or lost any money, because I hadn’t been comfortable enough with what I was seeing to make any investments. I’m sure that if I had devoted all my time to it, we would have had great success, but then Bridgewater would not be what it is today. Despite passing up this great opportunity, I don’t regret my choice. I learned that if you work hard and creatively, you can have just about anything you want, but not everything you want. Maturity is the ability to reject good alternatives in order to pursue even better ones. 
 While I stepped away from that opportunity, China remained an important part of my own and my family’s lives. We loved it, especially the people. In 1995, my wife, Barbara, our eleven-year-old son, Matt, and I decided together that Matt would spend a year in Beijing, attending an all-Chinese school and living with our friend Madame Gu, who had stayed with us in America during the Tiananmen Square days and whom Matt had visited in China with us when he was three. Standards of living in China were very different from what Matt was accustomed to in Connecticut. For example, the apartment Madame Gu and her husband lived in had hot water for showers only twice a week, and the school Matt attended didn’t have heat until well into the winter, so the students wore their coats in the classrooms. Matt didn’t speak Chinese and none of his classmates spoke English. 
 All of this was not just a huge adventure for Matt; it was completely unprecedented and required special permission from the Chinese government. I was excited for Matt because I knew he would see a different world and broaden his mind. Barbara needed a little convincing and a couple of visits to a child psychologist for reassurance, but she had lived all around the world herself and knew how it had benefited her, so she was ultimately receptive to the idea, even if she was less excited about being separated from her son. Matt’s difficult but life-changing journey profoundly affected his values and goals. Because he fell in love with China (he says that he became part Chinese that year) and because he learned the value of empathy relative to the value of material wealth, he started a charity called China Care to help Chinese special-needs orphans when he was just sixteen. He ran it for twelve years (and, to a much lesser degree, still does), while shifting his efforts to reconceive what computing can be in the emerging world, which he is executing through his company Endless. I in turn learned a lot from Matt, especially about the joys of philanthropy, and we both learned the deep pleasures of great personal relationships. Over the years, I (and in turn Bridgewater) have also built meaningful relationships with many wonderful people in China, and we have helped its financial institutions grow from fledgling organizations to sophisticated giants. 
 China wasn’t the only country whose people and governments Bridgewater would become involved with. Through their representatives, Singapore’s, Abu Dhabi’s, and Australia’s government investment funds, and Russian and European policymakers, came knocking on our door. The experiences I have had, the perspectives I gained, and the help I was able to provide all added up to a package of rewards as large as any of the others that I got out of my career. 
 My contact with Singapore’s people and institutions also thrilled me. There was and still is no leader I admire more than Lee Kuan Yew, who transformed Singapore from a mosquito-infested backwater to a model economy. That says a lot, as I have gotten to know and admire several world leaders. One of my most thrilling moments was a dinner I had with him at my house in New York, shortly before his death in 2015. Lee requested the dinner to discuss the state of the world economy. I invited former Fed chairman Paul Volcker (another hero of mine), former Treasury secretary Bob Rubin (whose breadth of experiences gave great perspective), and Charlie Rose (one of the most curious and insightful people I know). Besides answering his questions, we probed Lee on world affairs and world leaders. Since he had personally known virtually all of the world’s leaders over the last fifty years, we asked Lee about the qualities that distinguished the great ones from the bad ones and what he thought of those who were leading at the time. He rated Angela Merkel as the best leader in the West and considered Vladimir Putin one of the best leaders worldwide. He explained that leaders must be judged within the context of the circumstances they encounter and then went on to share his view of how difficult it is to lead Russia and why he thought Putin was doing it well. He also reflected on his unique relationship with Deng Xiaoping, whom he regarded as the best leader of all. 
 I love getting to know interesting people from interesting places and seeing the world through their eyes. This is true whether they are rich or poor. Seeing life through the eyes of the indigenous people I got to know in Papua New Guinea was as illuminating for me as gaining the perspectives of the political and economic leaders, world-changing entrepreneurs, and cutting-edge scientists I’ve spent time with. I’ll never forget the blind holy man I met in a mosque in Syria, who explained the Quran and his connection to God to me. Encounters like these have taught me that human greatness and terribleness are not correlated with wealth or other conventional measures of success. I’ve also learned that judging people before really seeing things through their eyes stands in the way of understanding their circumstances—and that isn’t smart. I urge you to be curious enough to want to understand how the people who see things differently from you came to see them that way. You will find that interesting and invaluable, and the richer perspective you gain will help you decide what you should do. 
 MY FAMILY AND MY EXTENDED FAMILY 
