The Snowball
Warren Buffett and the Business of Life
Alice Schroeder
BANTAM BOOKS

To David

It is the winter of Warren’s ninth year. Outside in the yard, he and his little sister, Bertie, are playing in the
snow.
Warren is catching snowflakes. One at a time at first. Then he is scooping them up by handfuls. He starts to
pack them into a ball. As the snowball grows bigger, he places it on the ground. Slowly it begins to roll. He
gives it a push, and it picks up more snow. He pushes the snowball across the lawn, piling snow on snow.
Soon he reaches the edge of the yard. After a moment of hesitation, he heads off, rolling the snowball
through the neighborhood.
And from there, Warren continues onward, casting his eye on a whole world full of snow.

PART ONE
The Bubble

1
The Less Flattering Version
Omaha • June 2003

Warren Buffett rocks back in his chair, long legs crossed at the knee behind his father Howard’s plain
wooden desk. His expensive Zegna suit jacket bunches around his shoulders like an untailored version bought
off the rack. The jacket stays on all day, every day, no matter how casually the other fifteen employees at
Berkshire Hathaway headquarters are dressed. His predictable white shirt sits low on the neck, its undersize
collar bulging away from his tie, looking left over from his days as a young businessman, as if he had
forgotten to check his neck size for the last forty years.
His hands lace behind his head through strands of whitening hair. One particularly large and messy fingercombed chunk takes off over his skull like a ski jump, lofting upward at the knoll of his right ear. His shaggy
right eyebrow wanders toward it above the tortoiseshell glasses. At various times this eyebrow gives him a
skeptical, knowing, or beguiling look. Right now he wears a subtle smile, which lends the wayward eyebrow a
captivating air. Nonetheless, his pale-blue eyes are focused and intent.
He sits surrounded by icons and mementos of fifty years. In the hallways outside his office, Nebraska
Cornhuskers football photographs, his paycheck from an appearance on a soap opera, the offer letter (never
accepted) to buy a hedge fund called Long-Term Capital Management, and Coca-Cola memorabilia
everywhere. On the coffee table inside the office, a classic Coca-Cola bottle. A baseball glove encased in
Lucite. Over the sofa, a certificate that he completed Dale Carnegie’s public-speaking course in January
1952. The Wells Fargo stagecoach, westbound atop a bookcase. A Pulitzer Prize, won in 1973 by the Sun
Newspapers of Omaha, which his investment partnership owned. Scattered about the room are books and
newspapers. Photographs of his family and friends cover the credenza and a side table, and sit under the
hutch beside his desk in place of a computer. A large portrait of his father hangs above Buffett’s head on the
wall behind his desk. It faces every visitor who enters the room.
Although a late-spring Omaha morning beckons outside the windows, the brown wooden shutters are closed
to block the view. The television beaming toward his desk is tuned to CNBC. The sound is muted, but the
crawl at the bottom of the screen feeds him news all day long. Over the years, to his pleasure, the news has
often been about him.
Only a few people, however, actually know him well. I have been acquainted with him for six years,
originally as a financial analyst covering Berkshire Hathaway stock. Over time our relationship has turned
friendly, and now I will get to know him better still. We are sitting in Warren’s office because he is not going
to write a book. The unruly eyebrows punctuate his words as he says repeatedly, “You’ll do a better job than
I would, Alice. I’m glad you’re writing this book, not me.” Why he would say that is something that will
eventually become clear. In the meantime, we start with the matter closest to his heart.
“Where did it come from, Warren? Caring so much about making money?”
His eyes go distant for a few seconds, thoughts traveling inward: flip flip flip through the mental files.
Warren begins to tell his story: “Balzac said that behind every great fortune lies a crime.1 That’s not true at
Berkshire.”
He leaps out of his chair to bring home the thought, crossing the room in a couple of strides. Landing on a
mustardy-gold brocade armchair, he leans forward, more like a teenager bragging about his first romance
than a seventy-two-year-old financier. How to interpret the story, who else to interview, what to write: The

book is up to me. He talks at length about human nature and memory’s frailty, then says, “Whenever my
version is different from somebody else’s, Alice, use the less flattering version.”
Among the many lessons, some of the best come simply from observing him. Here is the first: Humility
disarms.
In the end, there won’t be too many reasons to choose the less flattering version—but when I do, human
nature, not memory’s frailty, is usually why. One of those occasions happened at Sun Valley in 1999.

2
Sun Valley
Idaho • July 1999

Warren Buffett stepped out of his car and pulled his suitcase from the trunk. He walked through the
chain-link gate onto the airport’s tarmac, where a gleaming white Gulfstream IV jet—the size of a regional
commercial airliner and the largest private aircraft in the world in 1999—waited for him and his family. One
of the pilots grabbed the suitcase from him to stow in the cargo hold. Every new pilot who flew with Buffett
was shocked to see him carrying his own luggage from a car he drove himself. Now, as he climbed the
boarding stairs, he said hello to the flight attendant—somebody new—and headed to a seat next to a window,
which he would not glance out of at any time during the flight. His mood was buoyant; he had been
anticipating this trip for weeks.
His son Peter and daughter-in-law Jennifer, his daughter Susan and her boyfriend, and two of his
grandchildren all settled into their own café au lait leather club chairs set around the forty-five-foot-long
cabin. They swiveled their seats away from the curved wall panels to give themselves more space as the flight
attendant brought drinks from the galley, which was stocked with the family’s favorite snacks and beverages.
A pile of magazines lay nearby on the sofa: Vanity Fair, the New Yorker, Fortune, Yachting, the Robb
Report, the Atlantic Monthly, the Economist, Vogue, Yoga Journal. She brought Buffett an armload of
newspapers instead, along with a basket of potato chips and a Cherry Coke that matched his red Nebraska
sweater. He complimented her, chatted for a few minutes to ease her nervousness at flying for the first time
with her boss, and told her that she could let the copilot know that they were ready to take off. Then he
buried his head in a newspaper as the plane rolled down the runway and ascended to forty thousand feet. For
the next two hours, six people hummed around him, watching videos, talking, and making phone calls, while
the flight attendant set out linens and bud vases filled with orchids on the bird’s-eye maple dining tables
before returning to the galley to prepare lunch. Buffett never moved. He sat reading, hidden behind his
newspapers, as if he were alone in his study at home.
They were flying in a $30 million airborne palace called a “fractional” jet. As many as eight owners shared it,
but it served as part of a fleet, so all the owners could fly at once if they wished. The pilots in the cockpit, the
crew that maintained it, the schedulers who got it to the gate on six hours’ notice, and the flight attendant
who served their lunch all worked for NetJets, which belonged to Warren Buffett’s company, Berkshire
Hathaway.
Sometime later, the G-IV crossed the Snake River Plain and approached the Sawtooth Mountains, a vast
Cretaceous upheaval of dark and ancient granite mounds baking in the summer sun. It sailed through the
bright clear air into the Wood River Valley, descending to eight thousand feet, where it started to buck on the
mountain wave of turbulence thrown into the sky by the brown foothills beneath. Buffett read on,
unperturbed, as the plane rocked and his family jerked about in their seats. Brush dotted higher altitudes of a
second ridge of hills and rows of pines began their march up the ridges between ravines on the leeward side.

The family grinned with anticipation. As the aircraft descended through the narrowing slot between the rising
mountain peaks ahead, the midday sun cast the plane’s lengthening shadow over the old mining town of
Hailey, Idaho.
A few seconds later, the wheels touched down on the Friedman Memorial Airport runway. By the time the
Buffetts had bounded down the stairs onto the tarmac, squinting in the July sunshine, two SUVs had driven
through the gate and pulled up alongside the jet, driven by men and women from Hertz. They all wore the
company’s gold-and-black shirts. Instead of Hertz, however, the logo said “Allen & Co.”
The grandchildren bounced on their heels as the pilots unloaded the luggage, tennis rackets, and Buffett’s
red-and-white Coca-Cola golf bag into the SUVs. Then he and the others shook hands with the pilots, said
good-bye to the flight attendant, and climbed into the SUVs. Bypassing Sun Valley Aviation—a pocket-size
trailer at the runway’s southern end—they swung through the chain-link gate onto the road that led to the
peaks beyond. About two minutes had elapsed since the plane’s wheels first touched the runway.
Right on schedule, eight minutes later, another jet followed theirs, headed to its own runway parking spot.
Throughout the golden afternoon, jet after jet cruised into Idaho from the south and east or swung around the
peaks from the west and descended into Hailey: workhorse Cessna Citations; glamorous, close-quartered
Learjets; speedy Hawkers; luxurious Falcons; but mostly the awe-inspiring G-IVs. As the afternoon waned,
dozens of huge, gleaming white aircraft lined the runway like a shop window full of tycoons’ toys.
The Buffetts followed the trail blazed by earlier SUVs a few miles onward from the airport to the tiny town of
Ketchum on the edge of the Sawtooth National Forest, near the turnoff to the Elkhorn Pass. A few miles
later, they rounded Dollar Mountain, where a green oasis appeared, nestled among the brown slopes. Here
amid the lacy pines and shimmering aspens lay Sun Valley, the mountains’ most fabled resort, where Ernest
Hemingway began writing For Whom the Bell Tolls, where Olympic skiers and skaters had long made their
second home.
The tide of families they were joining this Tuesday afternoon all had some connection to Allen & Co., a
boutique investment bank that specialized in the media and communications industries. Allen & Co. had put
together some of the biggest mergers in Hollywood, and for more than a decade had been hosting an annual
series of discussions and seminars mingled with outdoor recreation at Sun Valley for its clients and friends.
Herbert Allen, the firm’s CEO, invited only people he liked, or those with whom he was at least willing to do
business.
Thus the conference was always filled with faces both famous and rich: Hollywood producers and stars like
Candice Bergen, Tom Hanks, Ron Howard, and Sydney Pollack; entertainment moguls like Barry Diller,
Rupert Murdoch, Robert Iger, and Michael Eisner; socially pedigreed journalists like Tom Brokaw, Diane
Sawyer, and Charlie Rose; and technology titans like Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, and Andy Grove. A pack of
reporters lay in wait for them every year outside the Sun Valley Lodge.
The reporters had traveled a day earlier to the Newark, New Jersey, airport or some similar embarkation
point to board a commercial flight to Salt Lake City, then raced to Concourse E’s bullpen to sit amid a crush
of people waiting for flights to places like Casper, Wyoming, and Sioux City, Iowa, until it was time to cram
themselves into a prop plane for the one-hour bronco ride to Sun Valley. On arrival their plane was directed
to the opposite end of the airport next to the tennis-court-size terminal, where they witnessed a crew of
tanned young Allen & Co. employees dressed in pastel “SV99” polo shirts and white shorts welcoming the
handful of Allen & Co. guests who were arriving early on commercial flights. These were instantly
recognizable among the other passengers: men in Western boots and Paul Stuart shirts with jeans, women
wearing goatskin-suede jackets and marble-size turquoise beads. The Allen staff had memorized the
newcomers’ faces from photographs supplied in advance. They hugged people they had gotten to know in
years past as if they were old friends, whisked away all the guests’ bags, and led their charges off to the SUVs
lined up steps away in the parking lot.
The reporters went to the rental-car desk, then drove to the Lodge, by now acutely conscious of their lowly

status. For the next few days, many areas of Sun Valley would be marked as “private,” blocked from prying
eyes by closed doors, omnipresent security, hanging flower baskets, and large potted plants. The reporters
would lurk around the fringes, excluded from the interesting things going on inside, noses pressed against the
bushes.1 Ever since Disney’s Michael Eisner and Capital Cities/ABC’s Tom Murphy had dreamed up a deal
to merge their companies at Sun Valley ’95 (the way the conference was often referred to—as if it had
engulfed the entire resort, which, in a way, it had), the press coverage had grown until it took on the
artificially giddy atmosphere of a business version of Cannes. The mergers that splintered off from Sun
Valley, however, were only occasional calves from an iceberg. Sun Valley was about more than making
deals, though the deals garnered most of the press. Every year the rumors sizzled that this company or that
was working on a deal at the mysterious conclave in the Idaho mountains. Thus, as the SUVs rolled one by
one into the porte cochere, the reporters peered through the front windows to see who was inside. When
someone newsworthy arrived, they chased their prey into the lodge, brandishing cameras and microphones.
The press quickly recognized Warren Buffett as he stepped out of his SUV. “The DNA of the conference had
him built into it,” said his friend Don Keough, chairman of Allen & Co.2 Most of the press people liked
Buffett, who went out of his way not to be disliked by anyone. He also intrigued them. His public image was
that of a simple man, and he seemed genuine. Yet he lived a complicated life. He owned five homes but
occupied only two of them. Somehow he had wound up having, in effect, two wives. He spoke in homely
aphorisms with a kindly twinkle in his eye and had a notably loyal group of friends, yet along the way he had
earned a reputation as a tough, even icy dealmaker. He seemed to shun publicity yet managed to attract more
of it than almost any other businessman on earth.3 He jetted around the country in a G-IV, often attended
celebrity events, and had many famous friends, yet said that he preferred Omaha, hamburgers, and thrift. He
spoke of his success as being based on a few simple investing ideas and tap-dancing to work with enthusiasm
every day, but if that was so, why had nobody else been able to replicate it?
Buffett, as always, gave the photographers a willing wave and a grandfatherly smile as he walked by. They
captured him on film, then began peering at the next car.
The Buffetts drove around to their French-country-style condominium, one of the coveted Wildflower group
next to the pool and tennis courts, where Herbert Allen housed his VIPs. Inside, the usual loot awaited them:
a pile of Allen & Co. SV99 logo jackets, baseball caps, zip fleeces, polo shirts—every year a different
color—and a zippered notebook. Despite his fortune of more than $30 billion—enough to buy a thousand of
those G-IVs parked out at the airport—Buffett liked few things more than getting a free golf shirt from a
friend. He took the time to look carefully through this year’s swag. Of even more interest to him, however,
was the personal note that Herbert Allen sent to each guest—and the perfectly organized conference
notebook that explained what Sun Valley had in store for him this year.
Timed to the second, organized to the hilt, crisp as Herbert Allen’s French cuffs, Buffett’s schedule was laid
out hour by hour, day by day. The notebook spelled out the conference speakers and topics—until now a
closely guarded secret—and the luncheons and dinners that he would attend. Unlike the other guests, Buffett
knew much of this in advance, but he still wanted to see what the notebook had to say.
Herbert Allen, the so-called “Lord of Sun Valley” and the conference’s quiet choreographer, set the tone of
casual luxury that pervaded the event. People always cited him for high principles, brilliance, good advice,
and generosity. “You’d like to die with the respect of somebody like Herbert Allen,” a guest gushed. Afraid
of being disinvited to the conference, those who voiced any criticism rarely went beyond vague hints that
Herbert was “unusual,” restless, impatient, and possessed of an oversize personality. Standing in the shadow
of his tall, wiry frame, one had to strain to keep up with the words that crackled forth like machine-gun fire.
He barked questions, then cut off respondents mid-sentence, lest they waste a second of his time. He
specialized in saying the unsayable. “Ultimately Wall Street will be eliminated,” he once told a reporter,
although he ran a Wall Street bank. He referred to his competitors as “hot-dog vendors.”4
Allen kept his firm small, and his bankers staked their own money on their deals. This unconventional
approach made the firm a partner rather than a mere servant to its clients, who were the elite of Hollywood
and the media world. Thus, when he played host, his guests felt privileged, rather than like captives pitched

by salesmen at every turn. Allen & Co. arranged a detailed social agenda every year built around each
guest’s personal network of relationships—which the firm understood—and the new people that Allen’s
majordomos felt each should meet. Unspoken hierarchies dictated the distances of the guests’ condominiums
from the Inn (where meetings were held), which meals the guests were invited to attend, and with whom they
would be seated.
Buffett’s friend Tom Murphy referred to this kind of event as “elephant-bumping.” “Anytime a bunch of big
shots get together,” says Buffett, “you can get people to come, because it reassures them if they’re at an
elephant-bumping that they’re an elephant too.”5
Sun Valley was always very reassuring, because unlike most elephant bumps, one could not buy one’s way
in. The result was a sort of faux democracy of the elite. Part of the thrill of coming was to see who was not
invited, and, more thrilling still, who was disinvited. Yet within their stratum, people did develop genuine
relationships. Allen & Co. fostered conviviality through lavish entertainment, beginning on the first evening,
when the guests donned Western gear, climbed into old-fashioned horse-drawn wagons, and followed
cowboys up a winding trail past a natural stone spire onto Trail Creek Cabin meadow. There, Herbert Allen
or one of his two sons greeted the guests as the sun began to set. Cowboys entertained the children with rope
tricks near a large white tent bedecked with urns of scarlet petunias and blue sage, while the Sun Valley old
guard reunited and welcomed new guests as they stood side by side in line, plate in hand, for a buffet of
steaks and salmon. The Buffetts usually ended the evening sitting with friends around the bonfire beneath the
star-dappled western sky.
The frolicking continued on Wednesday afternoon with an optional and very mild white-water paddle down
the Salmon River. On this trip relationships blossomed, for Allen & Co. orchestrated who sat where on the
bus to the embarkation point as well as on the rafts. The river guides steered through the mountain valley in
silence, lest they interrupt conversations and disturb budding alliances. Spotters hired from the local
population and ambulances lined the route in case someone tumbled into the freezing water. The guests were
handed warm towels as soon as they put down their paddles and stepped out of the rafts, then served plates
of barbecue.
Those not rafting could be found fly-fishing, horseback riding, shooting trap and skeet, mountain biking,
playing bridge, learning to knit, studying nature photography, playing Frisbee with the ubiquitous canine
conference guests, ice-skating on the outdoor rink, playing tennis on perfect clay courts, lounging at the pool,
or golfing on immaculate greens, where they rode in carts stuffed full of Allen & Co. sunscreen, snacks, and
bug spray.6 All the entertainment flowed quietly, seamlessly, whatever was needed appearing unasked,
supplied by a seemingly inexhaustible staff of almost-invisible yet ever-present Allenites in SV99 polo shirts.
It was the babysitters, however, a hundred-some good-looking, mostly blond, deeply tanned teenagers in
these same polo shirts and matching Allen & Co. backpacks, who were Herbert Allen’s secret weapon. As
the parents and grandparents played, the sitters saw to it that each Joshua and Brittany was accompanied by
his or her own playmate for whatever activity they chose—a tennis clinic, soccer, bicycling, kickball, a
wagon ride, a horse show, ice-skating, relay races, rafting, fishing, an art project, or pizza and ice cream.
Each babysitter was personally selected to ensure that every child always had such a wonderful time that
they would beg to come back year after year—while at the same time delighting their parents with occasional
glimpses of the very, very attractive young person who was allowing them to spend days of guilt-free time
with other adults.
Buffett had always been one of the most appreciative of Allen’s beneficiaries. He loved Sun Valley as a
family vacation, for left to his own devices at a mountain resort with his grandchildren, he would have been
at a complete loss for what to do. He had no interest in outdoor activities other than golf. He never went
skeet shooting or mountain biking, thought of water as “a prison of sorts,” and would rather go around
handcuffed than ride on a raft. Instead, he slipped comfortably into the center of the elephant herd. He
played a little golf and bridge, including a standing golf game with Jack Valenti, president of the Motion
Picture Association of America, for a dollar bet, and a bridge game with Meredith Brokaw, and otherwise
spent his time socializing with people like Playboy CEO Christie Hefner and computer hardware CEO
Michael Dell.
