
Open market intervention is usually preceded by several less-blunt forms of official
intervention. The idea from the government’s point of view is to get as much bang for the
buck as possible before committing real money. Remember: Central banks have limited
firepower in relation to the overall market, so they have to pick their spots well. Sometimes,
the government’s objective is simply to slow a market move to restore financial market
stability, and less drastic forms of intervention are not yet necessary. Some of the more subtle
forms of intervention are
Verbal intervention or jawboning: These are efforts by finance ministry or central bank
officials to publicly suggest that current market directions are undesirable. Basically, it
amounts to trying to talk up or talk down a particular currency’s value. For example, if the
Japanese MOF is intent on preventing further JPY strength to protect its export sector, but
the USD/JPY rate keeps moving lower, senior MOF officials may indicate that “excessive
exchange rate movements are undesirable.” This message is a warning for currency
traders to reduce their USD selling/JPY buying or risk the potential consequences. If the
market ignores the warning, the MOF may take it up a notch and indicate that it is “closely
monitoring exchange rates,” which is language typically used before actual open market
intervention.

Checking rates: This is the central bank’s open market desk ringing in on the direct line
to major currency banks’ trading desks. The traders don’t know if it’s going to be a real
intervention or not, but they still react instinctively based on previously indicated
preferences. Even rumors of a central bank checking rates are enough to trigger a
significant market reaction.
In terms of actual open market intervention, there are several different forms it can take, all
depending on which and how many central banks are participating. The more the merrier; better
still, there’s strength in numbers.
Unilateral intervention: This is intervention by a single central bank to buy or sell its
own currency. Unilateral intervention is generally the least effective form of intervention,
because the government is perceived (usually correctly) to be acting alone and without the
support of other major governments. Markets will typically revert to the earlier direction
after the intervention has run its course to test the central bank’s resolve and to see if it’s
intent on stopping the move or simply slowing it. The MOF/BOJ intervention in fall 2010
and the SNB interventions during the 2009–2010 European debt crisis were all unilateral
interventions and had little success stemming the tide of JPY and CHF strength.
Joint intervention: This is when two central banks intervene together to shift the
direction of their shared currency pair. For example, if the ECB and the SNB are
concerned about Swiss-franc strength versus the euro, they may decide to intervene jointly
to buy EUR/CHF. This is a clear sign to markets that the two governments are prepared to
work together to alter the direction of that pair’s exchange rate.
Concerted intervention: This is when multiple central banks join together to intervene in
the market simultaneously, also referred to as coordinated intervention. This is the most
powerful and effective type of intervention, because it suggests unity of purpose by
multiple governments. Concerted intervention is not done lightly by major central banks
— and markets don’t take it lightly either. It’s the equivalent of a sledgehammer to the
head. Concerted intervention frequently results in major long-term trend changes.

In terms of the impact of intervention, different governments are given different degrees of
respect by the market. Due to the frequency of past interventions and constant threats of it, the
Japanese tend to get the least respect. The BOE, the SNB, and the ECB are treated with
considerably more respect by markets, with the ECB being the linchpin of credibility for the
Eurozone. Finally, when the U.S. Treasury (via the Fed) intervenes, it’s considered a major
event, and the market usually respects the intervention.

There is a difference between a central bank intervening for its own account and a central
bank intervening on behalf of another foreign central bank. For example, during the
MOF/BOJ intervention campaign in 2003 and 2004, there were several instances where the

U.S. Fed bought USD/JPY during the New York trading day. The first reaction was that the
U.S. Treasury was joining in and supporting the intervention by the MOF/BOJ, and this
amplified the effect of the intervention. But the U.S. Treasury later denied that it had ordered
the intervention. What happened was that the BOJ asked the New York Fed to intervene on its
behalf during the New York trading session. Central banks have standing agreements to act as
each other’s representatives in their local markets. So even though the New York Fed bought
dollars, it bought them for the BOJ.
Does intervention work? That is a question that frequently comes up when central banks get
involved. The simple answer is an unequivocal “Yes, but . . . .” Intervention is most effective
when it’s backed by monetary policy moving in the same direction, such as expected higher
interest rates to support a weak currency or easier monetary policy to weaken a strong one. Even
then, interest rate changes are no guarantee that the intervention will be successful.
In the short run, the intervention may seem fruitless and counterproductive. This is especially the
case with unilateral intervention. The market typically rejects the unilateral intervention and
reverts to pushing the market in the direction opposed by the intervention. This situation can go on
for weeks and months or — in the SNB’s case in 2010 — years. When it’s a joint or concerted
intervention, the results are usually more immediate and successful.

Financial stability
The Great Financial Crisis of 2008–2009 triggered a massive global recession, the likes of which
not seen since the Great Depression of the 1930s. As a result, major governments’ finances were
thrown into disarray, as tax revenues plunged and spending was maintained or increased through
fiscal stimulus. Suddenly the creditworthiness and financial stability of major national
governments was being questioned by global markets.

A currency’s perceived value is intrinsically linked to the faith investors have in the
financial stability of the nation(s) standing behind it. If investors fear a sovereign debt
default, meaning government bonds won’t be paid back, they’re likely to sell both those
bonds and the country’s currency. The result can be a market frenzy in which government
bond prices crash, sending yields soaring and increasing the government’s borrowing costs,
effectively forcing the government out of global capital markets and leading to a default.
The Eurozone debt crisis of 2009–2010 is the most obvious recent example, where bond investors
fled Greek and Irish government debt, raising borrowing costs to unaffordable levels and forcing
those governments to seek a bailout from wealthier Eurozone members. From the start of the Greek
debt crisis in November 2009 until a temporary bailout mechanism was established in May 2010,
the euro weakened against the USD by more than 20 percent, and fell even more against other
currencies.

And the fallout from the GFC is not confined to government debt. Major global banks lost
gazillions in the crisis, and many remain extremely fragile and on government life support. In the
case of European banks in particular, they hold around half of outstanding Eurozone government
debt, meaning sovereign defaults or restructurings (a euphemism meaning investors don’t get back
the full amount or payments are delayed) have the potential to cause additional massive losses to
the banking sector, imperiling the Eurozone economy even further.

Debts, deficits, and growth
In the aftermath of the GFC, highly indebted European countries are certainly not alone in having
investors question their financial stability. Debt levels in the United States and Japan are routinely
cited as potential negatives, weighing on sentiment for those currencies from time to time. For the
USD, its standing as the global reserve currency of choice is increasingly being called into
question. And then there are the outliers, like Hungary, Iceland, and Dubai, small economies
overall, but credit fears over their financial stability have a way of reverberating throughout
global markets and sending risk sentiment (which I discuss later in this chapter) into a tailspin.
As part of your analysis of individual currencies, you need to be aware of the financial stability of
the key currency countries. The metrics to keep in mind are
Debt to GDP ratio. A measure of the total amount of government debt relative to the size
of the economy. Debt/GDP ratios over 85 to 90 percent of GDP tend to put countries
under the credit-risk microscope.
Deficits as a percent of GDP. Current and projected deficits add to the total amount of
government debt, which can increase the debt/GDP ratio, potentially destabilizing a
country’s credit outlook.
Growth rates (GDP). Low or negative growth can undermine a nation’s GDP relative to
its debt service obligations, increasing the burdens of debt service and raising the risk of
default. The imposition of austerity measures (budget cuts and tax increases) in the most
beleaguered Eurozone countries threatens to lock them in a cycle of underperformance,
and may actually increase the potential for default.

Gauging credit risk
Just as with monetary policy and interest rate developments, financial stability evolves over a long
time period. But there are day-to-day developments that impact the markets’ view of individual
countries’ financial stability.

How can you monitor the current state of the markets’ views of a nation’s creditworthiness?

Keep an eye on the following credit risk measures through markets’ news reports and
economic commentaries:
Credit ratings. Although often late to the game in the GFC, the sovereign debt ratings
issued by Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s (S&P), and Fitch still carry a lot of weight. A
ratings downgrade can make government debt issues ineligible for certain institutional
investors, forcing them to sell those government bonds. Prior to a ratings change (they can
be upgrades as well as downgrades), the credit rating agencies will typically issue an
announcement that a country’s debt ratings are under review and offer a bias to that
review, such as “Portugal sovereign debt placed on review; outlook negative.” Such
announcements can have a significant impact on the currency involved.
Yield spreads. These are the difference between the yields (interest rates) of one
government’s bonds relative to an ostensibly safer country’s bonds. In the Eurozone debt
crisis of 2009[nd]2010, for example, markets fixated on the spread between yields of
peripheral countries like Greece and Portugal and those of stalwart Germany. A widening
spread indicates increasing credit concerns, as the bonds of the weak country are sold,
sending yields higher, and bonds of the safe country are bought, sending those yields
lower, widening the spread. Yield spreads fluctuate on a daily and intra-day basis, with
widening spreads indicating deteriorating credit risk and narrowing spreads indicating
greater relief.
Credit default swaps (CDS). These derivatives are basically an insurance policy in the
event of a default, where the buyer pays a premium and the seller is obligated to make
good on the bond in the event of a default. CDS are an active speculative counterpart to
the underlying bonds themselves, and may often lead bond market moves. Rising CDS
indicate increasing credit risk and falling CDS rates, expressed in basis points (bps),
signal lesser concern.
Debt auction results. Governments borrow money through regularly scheduled auctions
or issuances, where the government offers its debt for sale to global investors. The extent
of demand and the price investors are willing pay (the yield) are the key measures here.
Demand is gauged according to the bid/cover ratio, meaning how much is bid, or sought,
relative to the amount being offered. The higher the bid/cover ratio, the greater the demand
and supposed security. A failed auction, one where the government is not able to sell, or
borrow, the full amount it seeks is “not a good thing,” as Martha Stewart might say. But
some investors are usually willing to buy anything if the price is right, and that’s where the
yield comes in. If investors demand a higher yield (bid a lower price) relative to current
rates, it’s an indication of concern. For U.S. Treasury debt, there’s yet another indicator,
supposedly attesting to the international appetite for U.S. debt, with implications for the
value of the USD. The amount bought by indirect bidders is viewed as a proxy for foreign
central bank and reserve managers’ demand. A low turnout by indirect bidders could be
interpreted as a vote of no confidence for U.S. debt and/or the USD by other major
governments. The bid/cover ratio, yield results, and amount of indirect bids measures are

all interpreted relative to prior auction results for similar issuances.

Geopolitical Risks and Events
Geopolitics is nothing more than a fancy word used to describe what’s going on in the world at
large. As it’s applied to the currency markets, geopolitics tends to focus on political,
military/security, or natural disruptions to the global economy or individual regions or nations.
Because currency markets are the conduits for international capital flows, they’re usually the first
to react to international events, as global investors shift assets in response to geopolitical
developments.

Currency markets have no national or patriotic allegiances when it comes to favoring one
currency over another. The forex market simply calculates the likely economic fallout from an
international event and its ultimate currency impact. A recent example is the popular
uprisings in the Middle East and North Africa in early 2011. Egypt is a relatively small
economy, meaning that the turmoil there did not threaten the global economic outlook, and
forex and other financial markets were not seriously affected. But as the unrest spread to
Libya, a major oil producer, oil prices spiked on supply disruptions, and concerns grew that
other oil producers could be affected. Stock markets started to wobble, and the USD
weakened as oil and gold soared. You have to interpret each international event
dispassionately, with an eye on the short- and long-term economic impact to determine its
significance for individual currencies.
The United States tends to wield more influence on the world’s stage because it’s the largest
national economy and the primary military superpower. In addition, the U.S. dollar is the largest
global reserve currency and the de facto currency in many developing economies. Finally, with
increasing globalization of trade and markets, the U.S. dollar frequently functions as a global risk
barometer (see the next section for more on risk). For these reasons, the U.S. dollar tends to
experience the greatest reaction in times of global turmoil or uncertainty, and the market tends to
think in USD-positive and USD-negative terms, viewing all other currencies in contrast to the U.S.
dollar. When geopolitical events are looking problematic, the USD tends to suffer. If the risks or
tensions come down, the dollar may go up.
Elections in individual countries, including by-elections and legislative referenda, also fall under
the geopolitical risk umbrella, especially when the outcome may lead to a change in government or
economic policies. By-elections (ad hoc elections to fill individual legislative seats made vacant
by death or resignation, for example) are typically seen as interim votes of confidence on the
governing party. Depending on how near the next general election is, and on other economic
factors, by-elections may have a greater effect on political sentiment.

As important as geopolitical issues are to the market’s overall assessment of a currency’s
value, they tend to have relatively short-run implications and must be interpreted in light of
other prevailing economic fundamentals. For instance, if the USD is weakening based on a
weak economic outlook, for example, and there’s a disruption to oil supplies from political
unrest or a natural disaster, sending oil prices higher, it’s just another reason to sell USD. In
contrast, if the USD is strengthening based on a more positive economic trajectory and higher
rate expectations, a spike in oil prices may see the usual inverse relationship break down,
and both oil and the USD move higher.

Gauging risk sentiment
In recent years, the concept of risk sentiment has taken hold as a way of expressing overall
conditions across financial markets, including forex. Risk sentiment refers to investor behavior
and whether investors are actively seeking returns by embracing riskier assets (risk seeking or
risk appetite), or whether they’re seeking the safety of supposed more secure assets (risk averse
or risk aversion). These two behavioral modes are frequently referred to as risk-on and risk-off,
or risk-positive and risk-negative.
For currency traders, the risk environment can be a critical factor in driving currency rate
movements. Part of the reason has to do with the interest rates of various major currencies. Hedge
funds, commodity trading advisors (CTAs), and other leveraged speculators (see Chapter 3 for
more on these guys) borrow funds (the leverage) on a short-term basis at the lowest cost available,
meaning currencies with the lowest interest rates are used as funding currencies. In a risk-on
environment, they then sell those currencies and use the proceeds to buy risk assets with greater
price appreciation potential. In a risk-off environment, they’re compelled to sell their risk assets
and buy back those funding currencies that they previously sold.

Risk on or risk off?
So what determines whether risk is on or off? In a word, volatility. Volatility refers to the size and
speed of price movements over a short timeframe, meaning hours or days. But volatility is the
symptom and not the cause of those price changes. News and events are what dictate market
reactions. In the simplest sense, when news and economic data are positive and everyone’s feeling
good about the outlook, risk is on and risk assets tend to appreciate (see the following section for
what constitutes risk assets). When the news or data turns negative or outright catastrophic in the
case of the GFC, investors turn more cautious and may exit risk trades, potentially triggering
widespread selling that may force prices lower and force other investors to bail out as well,
amplifying the sell-off.
I have little doubt that much of the increase in the risk-on/risk-off trading dynamic in recent years

is the result of algorithmic, or model-based, trading, which has taken on increased prominence in
all markets. If the computer is told that an X percent change in one asset or indicator means it
should exit an existing position, it will literally not “think” twice about selling out.

Gauges of risk sentiment
To follow the evolution of risk sentiment, it helps to have a good handle on the current state of
market affairs and expectations (see Chapter 10 for how to get up to speed on these). For more
empirical indications of risk sentiment, pay attention to the following:
VIX index. This is the options volatility on the S&P 500 U.S. stock index, frequently
referred to as the fear index. A rising VIX indicates increased risk aversion (stocks are
being sold), and a falling VIX signals the outlook is calming.
Government bond yields. Major government bonds, such as U.S. Treasuries, German
bunds, UK Gilts, or Japanese JGBs, are considered safe assets (for now at least). Rising
yields typically mean those bonds are being sold and investors are embracing risk. But
sometimes those bonds are being sold on credit concerns, which is risk-negative. Falling
yields suggest risk aversion, as investors are fleeing risk assets and buying the safety of
government bonds.
Emerging-market stock performance. Investors have become increasingly international
in their perspective and buying shares in Shanghai or Rio is no longer considered exotic.
Such emerging market economies have led the way out of the GFC, and their stock markets
can be the canary in the coal mine—prices down, risk-off; prices up, risk-on.

Risky versus safe assets
The low interest rate environment of recent years has forced investors and speculators alike
to chase returns by investing in so-called risk assets that offer higher potential returns. The
clearest example of risk assets are stocks and commodities: A more positive outlook (riskon) may see stocks gain as corporate profits increase, and commodities may benefit on
stronger demand for raw materials and natural resources, like oil. In forex, the risk-on
currencies are those linked to commodities (AUD, CAD, and NZD, in particular) and major
alternatives to the USD, like EUR and GBP. A risk-on environment may also see carry trades
bought, where higher yielding currencies such as those just mentioned are bought and lower
yielding currencies like the JPY, USD and CHF are sold (funding currencies). For example, a
positive risk environment may see AUD/JPY move higher.
On the other side of the risk equation (risk-off) are the supposedly safe assets, such as U.S.
Treasury bonds, the USD, CHF, and JPY. When bad news and events hit markets (think the Great
Financial Crisis or Eurozone debt bailouts), investors typically flee risk assets, selling stocks and
commodities and buying the safety of government bonds and safer currencies like CHF, JPY, and

the USD. Price moves in a risk-off environment can be extremely volatile because it’s a one-two
punch where traders exit (sell) risk-on positions and also buy safer, risk-off assets.

Pay attention to the news when potentially disruptive events threaten the economic outlook,
and be aware of the risk-on/risk-off dynamic. Depending on the nature of events, especially
whether they’re short-term like a natural disaster, or more enduring like a debt crisis in
Europe, they can offer potential opportunities to re-enter a longer-term trend from lower
price levels.
