
182

TRADING VEHICLES

back and unwind your position. You’ve already earned the bulk of potential profit,
so why expose yourself to continued risk? It’s cheaper to pay another commission,
book your profits, and look for another writing opportunity.
Becoming a naked writer requires iron discipline. The size of your writes and the
number of positions must be strictly determined by your money management rules.
If you sell a naked call and the stock rallies above its exercise price, it exposes you to
the risk of ruin. You must decide in advance at what level you will cut and run, taking a relatively small loss. A naked seller cannot afford to sit and hope when a stock
moves against him.

Writer’s Choice
Time is the enemy of options buyers. Every buyer has lived through this sad sequence: they buy a call, the stock rises, but their option fades to zero, and they lose
money. Buyers lose when the underlying security takes longer than expected to get
to the level at which they can collect on their bet. Most options become worthless
by their expiration date.
What if we reverse this process and write rather than buy options? The first time
you write an option, and do it correctly, you’ll experience the delicious sensation of
time working in your favor. The option that you wrote loses some of its time value
each day, making the premium you’ve collected safer. When the market goes nowhere, you still make money, as time value keeps evaporating, making it more likely
that you’ll keep the premium.
If living well is the best revenge, then taking a factor that kills most options
buyers—time—and making it work for you is a gratifying experience.
Since each option represents a hope, it’s better to sell empty hopes which are
unlikely to be fulfilled. Take three steps before writing a call or a put:
1. Analyze the security against which you want to write options.
Use Triple Screen to decide whether a stock, future, or an index is trending or
non-trending. Use weekly and daily charts, trend-following indicators, and oscillators to identify trends, detect reversals, and set up price targets. Avoid writing
when earnings are about to be announced—do not hold open positions during
those potentially stormy days.
2. Select the type of option to write.
If your analysis is bearish, consider writing calls, but if bullish, consider writing
puts. When the trend is up, sell the hope that it will turn down, and when it’s
down, sell the hope it’ll turn up. Do not write options when markets are flat and
premiums low—a breakout from a trading range can hurt you.
3. Estimate how far, with a generous safety margin, the stock would have to run in
order to change its trend. Write an option beyond that level.
Write an option with a strike price the market is unlikely to reach before the
option expiration. An objective tool that shows the degree of safety of your
planned position is an indicator called Delta, which we’ll discuss below.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

44. OPTIONS

183

Time Decayâ•…

Options lose value with each passing day, but their rate of decay isn’t
steady. Options drop faster as the expiration date draws closer. Like a boulder rolling
downhill, time decay becomes vertical at the final cliff.
Time decay is bad for option buyers, but very good for option writers.You collect
your premium the day you sell a call. The deeper it falls below the price at which you
wrote it, the safer your premium. Time decay is a friend of the option writer but an
enemy of the option buyer.
With that in mind, the sweet spot for an option writer is approximately two to
three months from option expiration. That’s when time decay starts gathering speed.
It accelerates in the last few weeks of the option’s life. When you write options close
to the expiration, you benefit from faster time decay. You can get more money for
options with longer lives, but don’t be greedy. The goal of a writer is not to make a
killing on any single trade but to grind out steady income.

Delta is a tool that shows the probability of the underlying security reaching your
option’s exercise price by its expiration date. It’s one of several options tools, collectively called the “Greeks” (each is named after a letter of the Greek alphabet).You
can find Delta for any stock, index, or ETF on many financial websites, especially
those of brokerages that offer options services.
A cautious option writer should aim to sell calls or puts whose Delta isn’t much
above 0.10, meaning there is only a 10% chance of the exercise price getting hit before the expiration date. Remember, as an option writer you don’t want the underlying security to reach that price: you want to sell empty hopes. If 10% risk seems
high, keep in mind that Delta is derived without any reference to market analysis. If
your decision is based on good technical analysis, your risk will be lower than what
Delta indicates.
The temptation to sell naked options closer to the money and get fatter premiums
is dangerous. The Delta is likely to be high, meaning that a slight counter-trend move
can push your position underwater. If you’re going to write options, treat it like
writing accident insurance policies. To make steady profits and sleep well at night,
sell your auto insurance policies to ladies who only drive to supermarkets rather than
to motorcycle daredevils.

Limiting Risk
A big options trader shared with me his technique of â•›“slicing the bid-ask spread.”
He puts in a low bid or a high ask and then starts giving up a penny at a time until
somebody bites. For example, he recently saw an option he wanted to write (i.e.,
sell).The bid was $1.18 and the ask $1.30, but he had no intention of selling at $1.18
and paying that huge spread. Instead, he put in his order to sell a large number of
contracts at $1.29, a penny cheaper than the ask. No response. A few minutes later
he lowered his ask to $1.28—and suddenly a buyer materialized, snapped up his
contracts, and then the bid-ask spread went back to $1.18/$1.30. My client finds
there are large traders watching from the sidelines, not showing their hand, but willing to trade within the spread. He gets them to bite by giving up a penny at a time.

184

TRADING VEHICLES

Option writers can get hurt in one of three ways. Some overtrade, creating positions that are too large for their accounts. Assuming too much risk makes them nervous and unable to hold positions through any wiggles. Option writers also get hurt
when they fail to run fast enough when an option moves against them. Finally, option
writers can get blown out if they don’t have a reserve against a major adverse move.
The longer you trade, the greater the risk of a catastrophic event.
A writer can grow careless selling naked options and pocketing profits. A smug
feeling of self-satisfaction can blind him to reality.You must protect all trades, including naked options. Several suggestions:
■■

■■

■■

Set your profit-taking zone—consider buying back your naked options.
The option you write is a wasting asset. When the underlying security moves far
from the exercise price but there is still time left to the expiration, the price of
the option you sold may fall near its rock bottom and lose value in tiny dribs and
drabs. The loser who bought that option still has a bit of a chance that the market
may reverse in his favor. He continues to hold that option like a lottery ticket—
and once in a rare while his ticket may win.
As a writer, why hold an open position that has already given you most of its potential profit?You have little to gain, while remaining exposed to risk. After the option you sold loses half of its value, consider buying it back to close your profitable
trade. By the time an option loses 80% of its value, you should be out of that trade.
Use a mental stop-loss on the option you sold.
It is better to use mental stops here because many pros go fishing for stops of
thinly traded options. Using mental stops requires iron discipline—another reason why option writing isn’t a beginners’ game.
Set your mental stops both on the underlying security and the option itself.
For example, you may sell a naked April 80 call on a stock trading at 70 and place
your mental stop at 75. Get out of your naked option position before it gets into
the money. Also, set a stop on your option: if it doubles in price, buy it back to
cut the loss. If you sold an option for $1.50, buy it back if it rises to $3. It may
hurt, but it’ll be nowhere near the “unlimited loss” that makes people afraid to
write options.
Open an insurance account.
You may write a put and the market crashes the next day, or you write a call and
suddenly there is a takeover.You hope this never happens—but trade long enough
and eventually everything will happen! That’s why you need insurance. Nobody
will write it for you, so you’ll have to self-insure.
Open a money market account, and every time you close out a profitable naked
writing position, throw 10 percent of your profit into that account. Do not use
it for trading—let your insurance account grow with each new profit, ready to
cover a catastrophic loss or to be taken out in cash when you stop writing options.
In a recent consultation with a professional option writer, I recommended that he
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

44. OPTIONS

185

send 10% of his profit above a certain threshold to the bank that holds the mortgage on his country house, using that prepayment as his insurance fund.

Can Option Buying Be Intelligent?
Professionals may buy puts on a rare occasion when they expect a severe drop. When
a long-term uptrend begins to turn, it can create massive turbulence near the top,
similar to an ocean liner changing its course. When volatility goes through the roof,
even well-heeled traders have trouble setting stops on shorts. Buying puts allows you
to sidestep this problem.
Prices tend to fall twice as fast as they rise. Greed, the dominant emotion of uptrends, is a happy and lasting feeling. Fear, the dominant emotion of downtrends, is
sharper and more violent. Professionals are more likely to buy puts because of shorter
exposure to time decay. Uptrends are better traded with stocks or futures.
A trader who expects a downswing must decide what put to buy. The best choice
is counterintuitive and quite different from what most people get.
Estimate how low you expect a stock to collapse. A put is worth buying only if
you expect a crash.
■■ Avoid puts with more than two months of life. Buying puts makes sense only
when you expect a waterfall decline. If you anticipate a drawn-out downtrend,
better sell short the underlying security.
■■ Look for cheap puts whose price reflects no hope. Move your finger down the
column: the lower the strike, the cheaper the put. At first, each time you drop to
the next strike price, a put is 25% or even 35% cheaper than at the previous level.
Eventually you come to the strike level at which you would save only a tiny fraction of a put’s price. This shows that all hope has been squeezed out of that put,
and it is priced like a cheap lottery ticket. That’s the one you want!
■■

Buying a very cheap, far-out-of-the-money put is counterintuitive. It is so far out
of the money and has so little life left in it that it’s likely to expire worthless. You
can’t place a stop on it, and if you’re wrong, the entire premium will go up in smoke.
Why not buy a put closer to the money?
The only time to buy a put is when you’re shooting for an exceptional gain from a
major reversal. In an ordinary downtrend it’s better to short stocks. With cheap farout-of-the-money puts you aim for a tenfold gain or better. Returns like these allow
you to be wrong on a string of such trades, yet come out ahead in the end. Catching
one major reversal will make up for several losses and leave you very profitable.
Why don’t more people use this tactic? First, it requires a great deal of patience,
as opportunities are very infrequent. The entertainment value is very low. Most people can’t stomach the idea of being wrong three, four, or five times in a row, even if
they are likely to make money in the end. That’s why so few traders play this game.
I wrote this chapter to sharpen your focus on some of the key options ideas. If interested in options, study Lawrence MacMillan’s book Options as a Strategic Investment.

186

TRADING VEHICLES

■■45. CFDs
A contract for difference (CFD) is a bet on the future value of a currency, an
index, or a stock. If you buy a CFD and the price of the underlying vehicle rises,
you’ll collect the difference from the company that sold you the contract, but if it
falls, you’ll pay the difference. CFDs are derivatives that allow speculators to bet on
rallies or declines. They are similar to spread betting, which is legal in the United
Kingdom and Ireland, but not in the United States.
At the time of this writing, CFDs are available in Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom. They are prohibited in the United States, due to restrictions by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
CFDs were invented in the early 1990s by Brian Keelan and Jon Wood, both of
UBS Warburg in London. Institutional traders began using them to hedge stock exposure and to avoid taxes. In the late 1990s, several firms began marketing CFDs to
retail traders, touting their leverage and the exemption from UK taxes. Several provider firms expanded their offerings from the London Stock Exchange to global
stocks, commodities, bonds, and currencies. Index CFDs, based on the major global
indexes such as Dow Jones, S&P 500, FTSE, and DAX, quickly became the most
popular vehicles of the group.
CFDs are contracts between individual traders and providers, who may offer different deal terms. Each CFD is created by opening a trade with a provider, based on
some underlying instrument. Be prepared to pay large bid-ask spreads, commissions,
and overnight financing. Trades are mostly short-term, although positions can be
taken overnight. Financing charges and profits or losses are credited or debited daily.
CFDs are traded on margin.
Among the pluses of CFDs are the tiny minimum sizes of those contracts, making them accessible to small traders. The absence of the expiration dates means
there is no time decay. While financing is charged on long positions, it is paid out
on short positions.
There are several serious misgivings about the CFDs. Commissions tend to be
high relative to contract sizes. Bid-ask spreads are controlled by CFD issuers, who
also control prices of contracts, which may deviate from prices of the underlying
securities. In other words, a retail customer plays against a professional team that can
move the goal posts during the game.
A client from New Zealand wrote: “Regarding CFDs and spread betting, it is
worth understanding that with CFDs you are not just trying to beat the market but
the casino too. CFD providers can set whatever prices they like for an instrument, as
it is their instrument. The fact that sometimes it emulates what happens in the stock
market does not mean it is the same as trading in the stock market.”
CFDs are heavily marketed to new and inexperienced traders, extolling their potential gains, while glossing over risks. The Australian financial regulator ASIC considers trading CFDs riskier than gambling on horses or in casinos. CFDs are banned
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

46. FUTURES

187

in the United States where regulators haven’t forgotten the bucket shops that flourished at the turn of the twentieth century.
The stance of the SEC in this matter reminds me of another federal agency, the
Food and Drug Administration, which kept Thalidomide, a drug for pregnant women,
out of the United States. As a result, after the full scale of its horrible side effects
became known, the U.S. population was spared an epidemic of deformed babies that
was caused by that drug in Europe.

■■46. Futures
A future is a contract for delivery of a specific quantity of a commodity by a certain
date at an agreed-upon price. Futures contracts differ from options by being binding
on both the buyer and the seller. In options, the buyer has the right but not an obligation to take delivery. If you buy a call or a put, you can walk away if you like, but in
futures, you have no such luxury. If the market goes against you, you have to get out
of your trade at a loss or add to your margin. Futures are stricter than options, but
their responses to market volatility are much smoother, making them easier to trade.
Another advantage of futures is that there are only a few dozen of them, making
them easier to track. Futures are not nearly as correlated with each other as stocks.
While stocks tend to move as a group, many futures move in unrelated trends, offering more trading choices.
Commodities are the irreducible building blocks of the economy. Wheat is a commodity, while bread isn’t because it includes multiple components. Old-timers used to
joke that a commodity was something that hurt when you dropped it on your foot—
gold, sugar, wheat, a barrel full of crude oil. In recent decades, many financial instruments began to trade like commodities—stock indexes, bonds, and currencies.
Futures include financial instruments along with traditional commodities.
The person who buys a stock becomes a part owner of a company, but when you
buy a futures contract, you don’t own anything. You enter into a binding contract
for a future purchase of merchandise, be it a carload of wheat or a sheaf of Treasury
bonds. The person who sells you that contract assumes the obligation to deliver.
The money you pay for a stock goes to the seller, but in futures your margin money
stays at the clearinghouse as a security, to ensure you’ll accept delivery when your
contract comes due. That’s why they used to call margins “honest money.” â•›While in
stocks you pay interest for margin borrowing, in futures you can collect interest on
your margin funds.
Each futures contract has a definite size and a settlement date. Most traders close
out their contracts early, settling profits and losses in cash. Still, the existence of a delivery date forces people to act, providing a reality check. A person may sit on a losing
stock for years, deluding himself that it’s only a paper loss. In futures, reality, in the
form of the settlement date, always intrudes on a daydreamer.
Most futures have daily limits beyond which prices are not allowed to go. Limits
are designed to interrupt hysterical moves and give people time to rethink their

188

TRADING VEHICLES

positions. A string of limit days can be very stressful when a losing trader is stuck and
unable to get out while his account is being ground down. The globalization of the
futures markets has created many emergency exits, allowing you to unwind a trade
elsewhere. Just like when boarding a plane, a careful trader learns to identify those
emergency exits before he needs them.
In stocks, most people buy and very few sell short. In futures, just like in options,
the size of long and short positions is always equal because if someone buys a contract for future delivery, someone else has to sell it to him, i.e., go short. If you want
to trade futures, it pays to be comfortable shorting.
The survival rate for new futures traders is low—nine out of ten newcomers are
said to bust out in the first few months. It is important to understand that the danger is not in futures but in a gross lack of risk-management skills among beginners.
Futures offer some of the best profit opportunities to serious traders but are deadly
for amateurs. You must develop excellent money-management skills (described in
Chapters 49–51) before venturing into futures.

Futures and Cash Trades
To compare a futures trade with a cash trade, let’s assume the following: it is February, gold is trading at $1,500 an ounce, and your analysis indicates that it’s likely to
rise to $1,575 within weeks. With $150,000, you can buy a 100-oz gold bar from
a dealer and store it in a safe. If your analysis is correct, in a few weeks your gold
will be worth $157,500. You can sell it and take $7,500 profit, or 5% before commissions—nice. Now let’s see what happens if you trade futures based on the same
analysis.
Since it is February, April is the next delivery month for gold. One futures contract covers 100 oz of gold, with a value of $150,000. The margin to trade this
contract is only $7,500. In other words, you can control $150,000 worth of gold
with a $7,500 deposit. If your analysis is correct and gold rallies $75 per ounce,
you’ll make roughly the same profit as when you bought 100 oz of gold for cash;
only now your return will be 100% on your investment instead of 5%, since your
margin is only $7,500.
Many people, after seeing such numbers, feel a surge of greed and buy multiple
contracts. A trader with $150,000 in his account has enough margin for 20 contracts. If he can double his money on a single contract, he can double it on 20. If he
repeats it two or three times, he’ll quickly become a millionaire.
Wonderful—but there is a catch.
Markets seldom move in a straight line. Your analysis may well be correct, and
gold may rise from $1,500 to $1,575 within a few weeks, but it’s perfectly possible that it may dip to $1,450 along the way. That $50 dip would create a $5,000
paper loss if you bought 100 oz of gold for cash—unpleasant but not a tragedy. For
a futures trader who bought multiple contracts, each on a $7,500 margin, that $50
decline would mean a wipeout. His broker would call demanding more margin, and
if he has no reserves, the broker will sell him out at a loss.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

46. FUTURES

189

Inexperienced traders keep buying too many contracts and keep getting kicked
out by the first wiggle of their market. Their analysis may be correct—gold may rise
to its target price—but the beginner is doomed because he commits too much of his
equity and has very thin reserves. Futures don’t kill traders—poor money management kills futures traders.
Futures can be very attractive for traders with strong money-management skills.
High rates of return demand ice-cold discipline. A beginner is better off with slowermoving stocks. Once you’ve matured as a trader, you can take a closer look at futures. Also, read some introductory books. Winning in the Futures Market by George
Angell is a good primer, to be followed by The Futures Game by Teweles and Jones.
