
132 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

confirmatory evidence is a necessary condition of a proposition's truth but
not a sufficient condition. 29 Popper's point was that the absence of necessary evidence is sufficient to establish the falsity of a hypothesis, but the
presence of necessary evidence is not enough to establish its truth. Having four legs is a necessary condition of a creature being a dog, but the
presence of four legs is not sufficient to establish that a creature is a dog.
However, the observation that the creature does not have four legs is sufficient to falsify the contention it is a dog. Popper's logic of falsification can
be seen as a protection against the confirmation bias that infects informal
inference (see Chapter 2).
One final example may help clarify the power of falsifying evidence
and the weakness of confirmatory evidence. It is the famous problem of
the black swan posed by philosopher John Stuart Mill (1806-1873). Suppose we wish to ascertain the truth of the proposition: 'All swans are
white.' Mill said, and Popper concurred, that no matter how many white
swans have been observed-that is, no matter how voluminous the confirmatory evidence-the proposition's truth is never proven. A black swan
may lurk just around the next corner. This is the limitation of induction
that so upset Hume. However, by merely observing a single non-white
swan, one may declare with certitude that the proposition is false. The
conditional syllogism below shows that the falsity of the proposition All
swans are white is based on the valid deductive form falsification of the
consequent.
Premise 1: !fit is true that all swans are white, then allfuture observations of swans will be white.
Premise 2: A nonwhite swan is observed.
Valid Conclusion: The proposition that all swans are white is false.
The general form of argument used to test a hypothesis under Popper's method of falsification is:
Premise 1: If the hypothesis is true, thenfuture observations are predicted to have property X.
Premise 2: An observation occurs that lacks property X.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, hypothesis is false.
As will be seen in Chapters 4 and 5, this is the logic used to test statistical hypotheses.

l'he .-rovisional and Cumulative Nature of' Scientilic I{nowledge.

One implication of Popper's method of falsification is that all existing sci-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

133

entific knowledge is provisional. Whatever theory is currently accepted as
correct is always a target for empirical challenge and the possibility of its
being replaced by a more correct theory always exits. Today Einstein's
Theory of Relativity is taken as correct. Though its predictions have withstood countless tests, tomorrow a new test may show it to be false or incomplete. Thus, science is a never-ending cycle of conjecture, prediction,
testing, falsification, and new conjecture. It is in this way that the body of
scientific knowledge continually evolves toward an ever more accurate
representation of objective reality.
In most instances when older theories are replaced, it is not because
they are proven false so much as they are shown to be incomplete. When
Newton's laws of motion were replaced by Einstein's theories, Newtonian
physics was still mostly correct. Within the limited domain of everyday experience, where bodies travel at normal speeds (approximately less than
90 percent of the speed of light), Newton's laws still held true. However,
Einstein's theory was correct in a wider domain, which not only included
the motions of everyday objects, but also objects traveling up to and including the speed of light. In other words, Einstein's theory, which built
upon Newton's, was more general and thus subsumed it.
The net result of building upon prior successful ideas (those whose
predictions have been confirmed) and pruning away wrong ideas (those
whose predictions have been falsified) is a body of knowledge that continually improves. This cannot be said of any other intellectual discipline,
where new styles are introduced but where newer is not necessarily
better. The fact that a scientist in any field of science knows more today
than even the best one living just a generation ago is beyond debate.
However, whether gangsta rap is better or worse than Mozart could be
argued endlessly.

l'he Restriction of Science to l'cstable Statements. Another
implication of Popper's method is that science must restrict itself to
testable hypotheses-propositions that generate predictions about observations not yet made. To say that a hypothesis has been tested and has
survived or has been tested and falsified means that predictions deduced
from it have either been confirmed or contradicted by new observations.
The comparison of predictions with new observations is the crucial mechanism that fosters the continual improvement of scientific knowledge. For
this reason, propositions that do not generate testable predictions must
be excluded from the domain of scientific discourse.
The term prediction, in the context of hypothesis testing, warrants
some clarification, because TA is essentially an enterprise dedicated to
prediction. When we speak of prediction as it pertains to testing a hypothesis, it does not necessarily mean foretelling the future though the pre-

134 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

dicted observations may indeed lie in the future. Rather, the term prediction refers to the fact that the observations' outcomes are not yet known.
Predictions made in historical sciences, such as geology, refer to
events that have already taken place perhaps eons ago. For example, geology's dominant theory, plate tectonics, may predict that specific geologic
formations that were created millions of years ago would be observed if
an investigation of some specific location were to be carried out tomorrow. In finance, the efficient market's hypothesis predicts that if a TA rule
were to be back tested, its profits, after adjustment for risk, would not exceed the risk adjusted return of the market index.
Once the prediction has been deduced from the hypothesis, the operations necessary to produce the new observations are carried out. They
may involve a visit to the location of the predicted geologic formation or
the back test of the TA rule. Then it becomes a matter of comparing prediction with observation. Measuring the degree of agreement between observation and prediction and making the decision about whether the
hypothesis is left intact or falsified is what statistical analysis is all about.
What is important from the standpoint of science is that the hypothesis is able to make predictions about observations whose outcomes are
not yet known. This is what allows a hypothesis to be tested. Observations
whose outcomes are known cannot serve this purpose because it is always possible to fashion an explanation, after-the-fact that is consistent
with said observations. Therefore, activities that are unable or unwilling
to make testable predictions, thus opening them to the possibility of falsification, do not qualify as scientific.
'I'he Demat'cation I-roblem: Distinguishing Science I".'om .-seudoscience. An important consequence of Popper's method was that it

solved a key problem in the philosophy of science-defining the boundary
between science and nonscience. The domain of science is confined to
propositions (conjectures, hypotheses, claims, theories, and so forth) that
make predictions that are open to refutation with empirical evidence.
Popper referred to such propositions as falsifiable and meaningful. Propositions that cannot be challenged in this manner are unfalsifiable or meaningless. In other words they do not say anything of substance, something
that sets up a testable expectation.
Unfalsifiable propositions may appear to assert something, but, in
fact, they do not. They cannot be challenged because they do not say, with
any degree of specificity, what can be expected to happen. In effect, they
are not informative. Hence, the falsifiability of a proposition is related to
its information content. Falsifiable propositions are informative because
they make specific predictions. They may prove to be wrong, but at least
they say something of substance. A proposition that cannot generate falsi-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

135

fiable predictions essentially says any outcome can happen. For example,
a weather forecast that says, It will be cloudy or sunny, wet or dry,
windy or calm, and cold or hot, allows for all possible outcomes. It cannot be falsified. The only thing good that can be said about it is that its
lack of information is completely obvious.
The problem is that pseudoscientists and pseudoforecasters are
clever about the way they word their predictions so as to obscure their
lack of information and nonfalsifiability. Consider the astrologer's forecast
"You will meet a tall dark stranger, and your life will be changed." This
statement is impossible to refute no matter what the outcome. Should you
ever go back for a refund, you will be given one of two answers: (1) be patient-you will meet the stranger soon, or (2) you already did meet a dark
stranger and you life is indeed different, but you are oblivious to the
change. These answers cannot be challenged because the prediction was
vague. It neither stated when your life would change or in what measurable (verifiable) manner. This is a far cry from the prediction, "Before 7:00
P.M. next Wednesday you will see a man wearing one red shoe, walking
east on 42nd Street whistling 'Satin Doll.'" By 7 P.M. next Wednesday, the
evidence will be in and you will have had the opportunity to evaluate the
prediction as true or false. Even if the prediction turns out to be false, it
was at least falsifiable allowing you to decide if future visits to the astrologer are worthwhile.
The infomercial pitchmen that inhabit late-night television are masters of the meaningless claim. "Wearing our copper bracelet will improve your golf game." What does improve mean? How is it to be
measured and when? As with the astrologer's forecast, the claim's
vagueness makes it impossible to deduce a testable (falsifiable) prediction. However, it is quite easy to imagine after-the-fact anecdotal evidence that is seemingly confirmatory. "Holy cow, I feel so much more
relaxed wearing my copper bracelet. I used get all tensed up before teeing off. Now my drives seem straighter. Last week I almost had a hole in
one, and I don't curse nearly as much as I used to. My wife even says I
look more handsome in my golf outfit, and I think my hair has stopped
falling out." Although meaningless claims invite confirmatory anecdotes,
they are protected from objective falsifying evidence. The claimant
never gets nailed and the claim gains support from seemingly confirmational anecdotal reports.
In contrast, the statement, "Wearing a copper bracelet will increase
the length of your drives by 25 yards," is informative and meaningful because it generates a testable prediction. You hit 100 golf balls not wearing
the copper bracelet and determine their average distance. The next day,
do the same thing while wearing a copper bracelet and get their average
distance. Repeat this alternating series of experiments for 10 days. If the

136 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

drives on copper-bracelet days are less than 25 yards better, evidence refuting the claim would be in hand.
Limitations of Popper's Method. As important as Popper's method
of falsification is to modem science, it has been criticized on a number of
grounds. Critics assert that Popper's contention that hypotheses can be
definitively falsified overstates matters. Although the observation of a
black swan can neatly and logically falsify the universal generalization
that all swans are White, the hypotheses of real science are far more complex30 and probabilistic (nonuniversal). They are complex in the sense
that a newly proposed hypothesis rests on numerous auxiliary hypotheses
that are assumed to be true. Thus, if a prediction deduced from the new
hypothesis is later falsified, it is not clear whether the new hypothesis was
in error or one of the many auxiliary hypotheses was incorrect. This proved
to be the case when the solar system's eighth planet, Neptune, was discovered. The aberrant path of Uranus was not due to flaws in Newton's laws
but in the auxiliary hypothesis that the solar system contained only seven
planets. However, when the theory did fail early in the twentieth century,
it was indeed because of imperfections in Newton's laws. Doing real science is tricky business. TA is a long way from facing these problems because we are still at the at the point of scratching the data for reliable
predictive rules.
Moreover, because many of the hypotheses of science are probabilistic, as would be the case in TA, an observation that contradicts the hypothesis can never be taken as certain evidence of falsity. The aberrant
observation may be a chance occurrence. It is here that statistical analysis
enters the picture. As will be pointed out in Chapters 4 and 5, the decision
to reject a hypothesis on the basis of observed evidence runs a certain
probability of being wrong. Statistics helps us quantify this probability.
Despite these and other limitations that go beyond our concerns here,
Popper's contributions to the development of the scientific method have
been enormous.

The Information Content of Scientific Hypotheses
To recap, a hypothesis is informative if it can make testable predictions.
This opens it to the possibility of being found false. Thus, the falsifiability
of a hypothesis and its information content are related.
Within the domain of scientifically meaningful hypotheses, there are
degrees of information content and falsifiability. Some hypotheses are
more information rich and hence more falsifiable than others.
When Popper referred to a bold conjecture he was speaking of a
highly informative hypothesis from which many falsifiable predictions

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

137

could be deduced. The scientist's job, therefore, is to continually attempt
to refute an existing hypothesis and to replace it with an even more informative one. This spurs the improvement of scientific knowledge.
An information-rich hypothesis makes many precise (narrow ranged)
predictions about a broad range of phenomena. Each prediction presents
an opportunity to show the hypothesis is false. In other words, the more
informative a hypothesis the more opportunities it presents for falsification. In contrast, low information, timid hypotheses make fewer or lessprecise predictions. Consequently they are more difficult to falsify. For
example, a TA rule that claims high profitability on any instrument in any
time frame makes a bold and information-rich claim that that could be falsified by showing that it is unprofitable on one market in one time frame.
In contrast, a method that only claims to be marginally profitable on S&P
futures on the one-week bar time scale is timid, has low information content, and is hard to falsify. The only opportunity to refute it would be limited to back test of the S&P 500 on a weekly showing that was not at all
profitable.
Some TA methods that are seemingly informative are not. Elliott Wave
Principle is a case in point. On the surface, it bravely proclaims that all
price movement in all markets over all time scales can be described by a
single unifying principle. This proposition is seemingly confirmed by the
ability of EWP practitioners to produce a wave count for any prior segment of price data. In fact, EWP is timid to the point of being meaningless
because it makes no falsifiable predictions of future price motion. 31
A second case in point, one more pleasing to the TA community, is the
Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH). In this context, the term efficiency
refers to the speed with which prices reflect all known and knowable information that is relevant to the future returns of an asset. In an efficient
market, relevant information is presumed to be reflected in price almost
instantaneously. EMH comes in three flavors. In descending order of boldness, information content, and falsifiability they are: EMH strong, EMH
semistrong, and EMH weak.
EMH strong asserts that financial markets are efficient with respect to
all information, even private inside information. This version predicts that
all investment strategies, be they based on an inside tip from the president
about an impending takeover, or based on public information of a fundamental or technical nature, will be useless in earning market-beating (ex:cess) returns. This most audacious version of EMH is also seemingly the
most informative and falsifiable because any evidence of abnormal profits
from any investment strategy whatsoever, irrespective of the type of information or form of analysis used, would be sufficient to refute EMH strong.
However, because information that is known privately can never be confirmed, this version is not testable in a practical sense.

138 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

