 Okunev, John, and Derek White (2000), “Do Momentum Based Strategies Still Work in Foreign Currency Markets?” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Markets 38(2), 425–447. 
 O’Neil, William J. (2009), How to Make Money in Stocks: A Winning System in Good Times and Bad Times , New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 Park, Cheol-Ho, and Scott H. Irwin (2007), “What Do We Know About the Profitability of Technical Analysis?” Journal of Economic Surveys 21(4), 786–826. 
 Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh (2003), “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Political Economy 111(3), 642–685. 
 Perold, André (2007), “Perspectives: Fundamentally Flawed Indexing,” Financial Analysts Journal 63(6), 31–37. 
 Pirrong, Craig (2005), “Momentum in Futures Markets,” working paper. 
 Rapach, David, Jack K. Strauss, and Guofu Zhou (2013), “International Stock Market Return Predictability: What Is the Role of the United States?” Journal of Finance 68(4). 
 Rhea, Robert (1932), The Dow Theory , New York: Barron’s. 
 Ricciardi, Victor, and Helen K. Simon (2000), “What Is Behavioral Finance?” Business, Education, and Technology Journal 2(2), 1–9. 
 Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (1998), “International Momentum Strategies,” Journal of Finance 53(1), 267–284. 
 Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (1999), “Local Return Factors and Turnover in Emerging Stock Markets,” Journal of Finance 54(4), 1439–1464. 
 Sagi, Jacob, and Mark Seasholes (2007), “Firm-Specific Attributes and the Cross-Section of Momentum,” Journal of Financial Economics 84(2), 389–434. 
 Samuelson, Paul A. (1974), “Challenge to Judgment,” Journal of Portfolio Management 1(1), 17–19. 
 Schwager, Jack D. (2008), The New Market Wizards: Conversations with America’s Top Traders , Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
 Schwager, Jack D. (2012), Market Wizards: Interviews with Top Traders , Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
 Schwert, G. William (2002), “Anomalies and Market Efficiency,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9277. 
 Seamans, George (1939), The Seven Pillars of Stock Market Success , Brightwaters, NY: Windsor Books. 
 Sewell, Martin (2011), History of the Efficient Market Hypothesis , UCL Department of Computer Science. 
 Sharpe, William F. (1994), “The Sharpe Ratio,” Journal of Portfolio Management 21(10), 49–58. 
 Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman (1985), “The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance 40(3), 777–790. 
 Shiller, Robert J. (1981), “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent Changes in Dividends?” American Economic Review 71(3), 421–436. 
 Shiller, Robert J. (1992), Market Volatility , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Shiller, Robert J. (2003), “From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(1), 83–100. 
 Shiller, Robert J. (2006), Irrational Exuberance , 2d ed., New York: Crown Books. 
 Shleifer, Andrei (2000), Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance , New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Shumway, Tyler, and Vincent A. Warther (1999), “The Delisting Bias in CRSP’s NASDAQ Data and Its implications for Interpretation of the Size Effect,” Journal of Finance 54(6), 2361–2379. 
 Siegel, Jeremy (2014), Stocks for the Long Run: The Definitive Guide to Financial Market Returns and Long-Term Investment Strategies , New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 Soros, George (2003), The Alchemy of Finance , Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 Tang, Ke, and Wei Xiong (2012), “Index Investment and Financialization of Commodities,” Financial Analysts Journal 68(6), 54–74. 
 Tanous, Peter J. (1999), Investment Gurus: A Road Map to Wealth from the World’s Best Investment Managers , New York: Prentice Hall Direct. 
 Tetlock, Philip E. (2005), Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Thaler, Richard T. (1994), The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies of Economic Life , Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Thorp, Edward O., and Sheen T. Kassouf (1967), Beat the Market: A Scientific Stock Market System , New York: Random House. 
 Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman (1974), “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,” Science 185, 1124–1131. 
 Wason, P. C. (1960), “On the Failure to Eliminate Hypotheses in a Conceptual Task,” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 12(3), 129–140. 
 Weatherall, James Owen (2013), The Physics of Wall Street: A Brief History of Predicting the Unpredictable , New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing. 
 Weber, Joachim, Steffen Meyer, Benjamin Loas, and Andreas Hackenthal (2014), “Which Investment Behaviors Really Matter for Individual Investors?” working paper. 
 Welch, Ivo (2000), “Herding Among Security Analysts,” Journal of Financial Economics 58(3), 369–396. 
 West, John, and Ryan Larson (2014), “Slugging It Out in the Equity Arena,” Fundamentals , April issue, Research Affiliates, LLC. 
 Wyckoff, Richard D. (1924), How I Trade in Stocks and Bonds: Being Some Methods Evolved and Adapted During My Thirty-Three Years’ Experience in Wall Street , New York: Magazine of Wall Street. 
 Xiao, Zhijie (2014), “Right Tail Information in Financial Markets,” Econometric Theory 30(1), 94–126. 
 Zakamouline, Valeri, and Steen Koekebakker (2009), “Portfolio Performance Evaluation with Generalized Sharpe Ratios: Beyond the Mean and Variance,” Journal of Banking and Finance 33(7), 1242–1254. 
 Zaremba, Adam (2013), “Implications of Financialization for Commodity Investors: The Case of Roll Yields,” working paper. 
 Zhou, Guofu, and Yingzi Zhu (2014), “A Theory of Technical Trading Using Moving Averages,” working paper. 
 Zhu, Yingzi, and Guofu Zhou (2009), “Technical Analysis: An Asset Allocation Perspective on the Use of Moving Averages,” Journal of Financial Economics 92(3), 519–544. 
 Zweig, Jason (2007), Your Money and Your Brain: How the New Science of Neuroeconomics Can Help Make You Rich , New York: Simon & Schuster.

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 1 
 WORLD’S FIRST INDEX FUND 
          Never trust the experts. 
 — John F. Kennedy 
 I NDEX FUNDS ARE WELL KNOWN today. Many think John McQuown and Bill Fouse at Wells Fargo (which became Barclays Global Investors) started the first index fund in 1971 when they invested in every New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) stock for the Samsonite pension fund. However, that is not correct. Let me tell you how it really happened. 1 
 I discovered the real first index fund during a chance meeting I had while working at Smith Barney & Co. in 1976. At that time Smith Barney was a prestigious investment banking and institutional brokerage firm similar to Goldman Sachs, Salomon Brothers, and First Boston. Along with the rest of the Street at that time, Smith Barney wanted more of a retail distribution network, so they had recently acquired Harris Upham, a retail-oriented wirehouse. As is usual after these kinds of acquisitions, Smith Barney let go the redundant operations of Harris Upham. However, Harris Upham had one of the best over-the-counter (OTC) departments in the business, headed up by Bob Topol, who was in charge of all their OTC activity. 
 In those days, there was no electronic marketplace. In order to buy or sell OTC securities, one had to phone around to different brokerage firms and check the bid/offer spreads maintained by each of their market makers. A top-notch OTC market maker could become a terrific profit center for a firm. This was not only because the bid/offer spreads of OTC securities were sometimes large enough to drive a small vehicle through them. The best OTC market makers also profited from their acumen in maintaining large inventories of OTC stocks. They could slant their bids and offers to end up with larger positions in stocks they really liked, and smaller or short positions in those they disliked. Bob was one of the very best stock pickers in the business. Top institutional investors would deal with him in order to find out his view of the stocks they were interested in, as well as to be able to execute their trades in the large, liquid inventories that Bob routinely maintained. 
 Smith Barney was proud to have Bob onboard. They sent him around to all their offices so representatives could learn more about Bob and feel comfortable directing business his way. Soon after the merger, Bob came around to our office to introduce himself and explain what he could do for us. It was not Bob and what Bob did that opened my eyes, but rather it was the story that he told us. 
 Bob arrived about an hour before lunch and gave an impressive presentation explaining some of the finer points of OTC market making. It was obvious to everyone there why Bob was so admired and respected. One of my colleagues complimented Bob on his superior trading ability and his profit-generating capability. Bob thanked him, sat back in his chair, paused a moment, then casually remarked, “Yes, I’ve done well, but would you like to hear about someone who has done better than me? In fact, this person has done better in the market than anyone else I know.” 
 We all quickly sat back down. Bob had our complete attention. As we stared at him inquiringly, Bob continued, “The best investor I know—one who has outperformed all the professional money managers I’m familiar with—is my wife, Dee. Would you like to hear how she does it?” 
 Sasquatch could have walked into the room, and no one would have noticed. Here was Bob, one of the industry’s top traders and market makers, who did business with some of the world’s best money managers, telling us that his wife did better at investing than all of them! Now he was about to tell us how she did it. As they say, you could have heard a pin drop. 
 Ignoring our stunned silence, Bob continued, “Dee has always been very patriotic. So years ago she decided to buy all the stocks with ‘U.S.’ or ‘American’ in their names. She bought U.S. Steel, U.S. Shoe, U.S. Gypsum, U.S. Silica, American Airlines, American Brands, American Can, American Cyanamid, American Electric Power, American Express, American Greetings, American Home Products, American Hospital Supply, American International Group, American Locomotive (this was a while ago), American Motors, American South African, American Telephone & Telegraph, British American Tobacco, North American Aviation, Pan American Airlines … and many smaller companies.” 
 Some of us started smiling. We did not know if Bob was serious or if he was putting us on. However, Bob seemed sincere and continued, “Dee did very well this way. After a number of years, she wanted to buy some additional stocks. Since she admired General Eisenhower and General MacArthur, she decided to buy all the Generals: General Dynamics, General Electric, General Mills, General Motors, General Maritime, General Steel, General Telephone, Dollar General, Mercury General, Media General, Portland General Electric … . Since then, Dee has continued to do better with her portfolio than anyone I know, and that’s the God’s honest truth.” 
 Everyone smiled at Bob and seemed amused as we adjourned for lunch. However, for days, and then weeks, I could not stop thinking about Dee. Dee had access to some astute investment information herself. Not only had she then been married to Bob for almost 30 years then, but Dee’s father had owned an OTC market-making firm. I kept asking myself how Dee could have outperformed the world’s best money managers for so long with such a naïve strategy. Had she just been incredibly lucky? After a few weeks, the answers came to me. 
 WHY IT WORKED 
 First, Dee’s portfolio had relatively little in the way of transaction costs. She bought stocks only once and held onto them forever. Commissions were a lot higher back then, and this was a significant cost saving. In addition, Dee’s permanent portfolio was not subject to ill-timed buy and sell decisions based on emotional responses to market performance. We will see later that this is often a significant drag on investor returns. 
 Lack of portfolio turnover and emotionally based decision making were not the whole story, however. Dee also did not have to pay management fees to anyone. That saved her at least 1% per year, compared to what investors paid who were in mutual funds or other managed investment programs. 
 Finally, Dee’s portfolio was well diversified. This was not true of most investor portfolios at the time. They usually had a bias toward a particular investment style, such as defensive, growth, large cap, and so on. Back then, large-cap “glamour” stocks, such as Avon, Coke, Disney, IBM, Kodak, McDonald’s, Merck, Polaroid, and Xerox, were very popular. These “Nifty-Fifty” sometimes sold at enormous price/earnings (P/E) ratios. For example, in the 1970s, McDonalds’ P/E was 68, Johnson & Johnson’s was 62, and Coca-Cola’s was 48. Extreme P/E ratios like these could be justified only if those companies had growth rates such that the value of, say, Avon stock would now exceed the gross domestic product (GDP) of some countries. The noted economist Kenneth Boulding once said, “Anyone who thinks steady growth can continue indefinitely is either a madman or an economist.” 2 
 Dee’s randomly constructed portfolio did not have a particular bias or investment style. It was like the market itself—equally balanced among small cap, large cap, value, growth, and just about every other factor. In fact, Dee’s portfolio was a more balanced portfolio than the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index, with its large cap and growth stock tilt. Dee had unwittingly created the world’s first index fund, and a good one at that. She did so without the need for brokers, money managers, or anything else, except a dictionary. 
 LESSONS LEARNED 
 The reasons for Dee’s success were a life-changing revelation for me. Here are the lessons I took away from my understanding of why Dee was successful: 
          •    It is important to keep costs as low as possible. This is the easiest way to earn risk-adjusted excess return (alpha). 
          •    One should diversify broadly, and not just by picking stocks with different names having similar characteristics. One should diversify with respect to company size, investment style, industry concentration, and other biases. 
          •    It is not easy to beat the market. Very few investors do. Replicating the market portfolio may be a good thing. 
 Based on these realizations, I decided to quit the brokerage business. It no longer made sense for me to be a stock jockey saddling investors with high costs and overconcentrated portfolios trying to beat similar accounts handled by other stock jockeys to an ever-elusive finish line. 
 I saw there were now two options left for me with respect to professional investment management. The first was to become an efficient marketeer, which sounded similar to being a Mickey Mouseketeer and, to me, was no less silly. I viewed efficient markets like I viewed Ptolemaic astronomy, with both based largely on a priori assumptions. My second option, according to those in academic finance at that time, was to become like Don Quixote, tilting at the windmills of efficient market theory. 
 EFFICIENT MARKETS 
 By the mid-1970s, the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) had made a strong impression on the minds of otherwise sensible people. EMH is the belief that prices of stocks fully reflect all publicly available information about them. This means that no one can expect to beat the market consistently. 
 I had toyed briefly with the EMH idea. I applied and was accepted into the finance PhD program at the University of Chicago, which was the bastion of EMH. However, I never attended due to frightening thoughts I had of being tarred and feathered as a heretic on the University of Chicago quadrangle. 
 The idea behind efficient markets actually got its start in the 1800s when Charles Dow (founder of Dow Jones & Co. and the Wall Street Journal ) commented on the market as an efficient processor of information: “In fact, the market reduces to a bloodless verdict all knowledge bearing on finance, both domestic and foreign. The price movements, therefore, represent everything everybody knows, hopes, believes, and anticipates.” In his 1889 book called The Stock Markets of London, Paris, and New York , George Gibson wrote, “Shares become publicly known in an open market. The value which they acquire may be regarded as the judgment of the best intelligence concerning them.” Followers of EMH later claimed as their own the concept that prices reflect all available public information. 
 A more substantive rationale for EMH appeared in the PhD thesis of Louis Bachelier in 1900. Bachelier compared the behavior of stock market buyers and sellers to the random movement of particles suspended in fluid. Bachelier concluded that stock price movements are random, and it is impossible to make predictions about them. Prior to this, in 1863, Jules Regnault used a randomness model to say that the deviation of stock prices is directly proportional to the square root of time. Bachelier, however, was the first to accurately model stochastic processes. These were called Brownian motion, after the Scottish botanist Robert Brown, who in 1826 first noted the random movements of pollen grains suspended in water. Einstein got the credit for explaining Brownian motion mathematically in 1905, but Bachelier had already done so in his PhD dissertation written five years earlier. Bachelier was also way ahead of his time with respect to his pioneering work on probability theory. 3 
 Bachelier turned his PhD thesis into a book published in 1900 called The Theory of Speculation . It did not attract much attention until the statistician Leonard “Jimmy” Savage rediscovered it while doing research on the history of probability. Savage was so impressed with Bachelier’s pioneering work with respect to speculative markets that he sent postcards about it to a dozen or so economists he knew in the mid-1950s. 
 Paul Samuelson had been working on similar ideas himself. He was delighted to hear from Savage and find out about Bachelier. It allowed Samuelson to put all the pieces together into a unified equilibrium framework based on Bachelier’s work. In 1965, Samuelson published a seminal paper using Bachelier’s ideas about efficient markets and Samuelson’s own proof to support it. 
 Samuelson went on to write the bestselling economics textbook of all time in which he strongly endorsed EMH. Samuelson was the first American to receive the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. This was in 1970, the second year of the award. 
 Although I had looked into EMH, I had also read most of the practical books I could find on investing, such as those by Graham and Dodd (1951), Darvas (1960), Thorp and Kassouf (1967), and Levy (1968). (I will describe the work of Darvas and Levy, who used relative strength momentum-based investing, in more detail in the next chapter.) 
 I was also familiar with some well-respected mutual fund managers, such as John Neff, William Ruane, Walter Schloss, and Max Heine, and I had an exceptional hedge fund manager as a client. All had consistently outperformed Mr. Market. I could not believe that outperformance by such astute investors was due only to chance or luck. The outcomes of these investors seemed clearly at odds with what academics were saying. While academics were extolling the virtues of EMH, practitioners like these were doing something completely different, and they were succeeding. 
 Andrew Lo, one of the first economists to look thoroughly at market pricing anomalies, tells how years ago he did some rigorous research on technical analysis. He identified predictable patterns in stock prices, which, to academics back then, was akin to voodoo. Lo presented his encouraging results to an MIT colleague who responded, “Your data must be wrong.” 4 
 According to the “joint hypothesis,” one can only say if a market is or is not efficient with reference to a model of equilibrium returns. If such a model can predict the market, then either the model is wrong or markets are not efficient. Lo must have done some very good research for his colleague to think up a third alternative, that of erroneous data. In the words of Nietzsche, “convictions are more dangerous enemies of truth than lies.” EMH had become a belief system with many firm adherents, not unlike religion. George Soros (2003), the world’s most successful hedge fund manager, who has earned $39.6 billion in net gains, called EMH “market fundamentalism.” Hallelujah! Throughout the 1970s and 1980s EMH ruled supreme. 
 Warren Buffett wrote in his 1988 Berkshire Hathaway chairman’s letter, “Amazingly, EMH was embraced not only by academics, but also by many investment professionals and corporate managers as well. Observing correctly that the market was frequently efficient, they went on to conclude that it was always efficient. The difference between these propositions is night and day.” 5 
 Other indications also pointed away from perfectly efficient markets and investor rationality. These included premiums on closed-end fund and government-backed mortgage securities that are not arbitraged away, and ubiquitous market bubbles that imply substantial deviations of prices from intrinsic values over extended periods. 
 ALTERNATIVES TO PASSIVE INVESTING 
 Even though I knew that the market was very hard to beat, I came to believe that it was not impossible to do so. For better or worse, I took upon myself the formidable task of trying to identify and exploit true market anomalies and inefficiencies. Don Quixote, move over. 
 In the late 1970s, I had the idea, long before Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), of managing a derivatives-based hedge fund. There were no publicly available data feeds back then, so I hired an electrical engineer to tear apart a quote machine, dump the data into a microprocessor, and then feed that into our office minicomputer. I formed partnerships with market makers on all the option exchange floors, did well initially, and then suffered the same fate as later befell LTCM. This was due to the same reasons of overleverage coupled with highly unusual events. I, however, did not reach the “limits of arbitrage” and require the intervention of the Federal Reserve to keep from destroying the world’s financial system. 6 I tried to learn from that experience and move on, still convinced that there were anomalies out there ready to be exploited. 
 In the early 1980s, I had another promising idea and started commodities pools that used my own Bayesian-based portfolio optimization model to allocate capital to some of the world’s top traders, such as Paul Tudor Jones, Louis Bacon, Richard Dennis, John W. Henry, Al Weiss, Tom Baldwin, and Jim Simons. These traders not only were very successful; their results were also largely uncorrelated to one another due to their different trading approaches and diverse portfolios. Portfolio optimization fit this situation to a tee, and my investment partnerships prospered. 
 As I watched Paul Tudor Jones trade for us, I came to know beyond any doubt that I had been correct in rejecting EMH. I felt fully vindicated in venturing outside the realm of efficient market theory. I did not know, however, if I would ever again find another opportunity that was this rewarding. 
 However, I was motivated to keep looking. Commodity trading has capacity constraints. Some of the best traders end up returning investor funds and trading mostly their own accounts, which is what happened with several of my traders. In addition, the generous commodities risk premium that speculators enjoyed from the 1970s to the 1990s had largely dissipated by the 2000s. Speculator participation had risen sharply, and there were many more speculators around to share in the limited amount of risk premium provided by hedgers. It was time to move on. Little did I know at the time that it would take nearly 20 years before I would find another opportunity to exploit market trends using what is essentially the same principle—systematic price momentum. 
 THE TIDE STARTS TO TURN 
