
Then there are the brokerage firms’ “fundamental”
upgrades and downgrades. Have you noticed how often these


Pulling It All Together—A Checklist 459

“fundamental” changes take place the day after a significant
“chart” breakout or breakdown? Economists, who certainly don’t
consider themselves technical analysts, use charts all the time to
measure the direction of inflation, interest rates, and all sorts of
economic indicators. And they talk about the “trend” of those
charts. Even fundamental tools like the price/earnings ratio have
a technical side to them. Anytime you introduce price into the
equation, you're moving into the realm of technical analysis. Or
when security analysts say the dividend yield of the stock market
is too low, aren’t they saying prices are too high? Isn’t that the
same thing as saying a market is overbought?

Finally, there are the academics who have reinvented
technical analysis under the new name of Behavioral Finance. For
years, the academics espoused the Efficient Market Hypothesis to
prove that technical analysis simply didn’t work. No less an
authority than the Federal Reserve Board has thrown some doubt
on those ideas.

FEDERAL RESERVE
FINALLY APPROVES

During August of 1995, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
published a Staff Report under the title: “Head and Shoulders: Not
Just a Flaky Pattern.” The report was intended to examine the
validity of the head and shoulders pattern in foreign exchange
trading. (The first edition of this book was cited as one of the pri-
mary sources on technical analysis.) The opening sentence in the
introduction reads:

Technical analysis, the prediction of price movements
based on past price movements, has been shown to gen-
erate statistically significant profits despite its incompat-
ibility with most economists’ notions of “efficient mar-
kets.” (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, C.L. Osler and
PH. Kevin Chang, Staff Report No. 4, August 1995.)

A more recent report, published in the fall of 1997 by the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, also addresses the use of tech-


460 Chapter 19

nical analysis and the relative merits of the Efficient Market
Hypothesis. (Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets was again
cited as a primary source of information on technical analysis.)
Under the paragraph titled, “Rethinking the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis,” the author writes:

The success of technical trading rules shown in the pre-
vious section is typical of a number of later studies show-
ing that the simple efficient market hypothesis fails in
important ways to describe how the foreign exchange
market actually functions. While these results did not
surprise market practitioners, they have helped persuade
economists to examine features of the market ... that
might explain the profitability of technical analysis.
(Neely)

CONCLUSION

If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, then market techni-
cians should feel very flattered. Technical analysis is practiced
under many different names, and often by those who may not
realize they’re using it. But it is being practiced. Technical analy-
sis has also evolved. The introduction of intermarket analysis, for
example, has changed the focus away from “single market”
analysis to a more interdependent view of the financial markets.
The idea that all global markets are linked isn’t questioned much
anymore either. That’s why the universal language of technical
analysis makes it especially useful in a world where the financial
markets, here and abroad, have become so intertwined. In a
world where computer technology and lightning-fast communi-
cations require quick responses, the ability to read the market’s
signals is more crucial than ever. And reading market signals is
what technical analysis is all about. Charles Dow introduced
technical analysis at the start of the twentieth century. As the
twentieth century draws to a close, Mr. Dow would be proud of
what he started.


APPENDICES

461




Appendix A: Advanced
Technical Indicators*

This appendix introduces several more advanced technical meth-
ods that can be used by themselves or with other technical stud-
ies. As with any technical approach, it is always recommended
that investors do their own independent testing and research
before actually investing.

DEMAND INDEX (DI)

Most technicians will agree that volume analysis is an important
ingredient in determining a market’s direction. The Demand Index
(DI) is one of the early volume indicators that was developed in
the 1970s by James Sibbett. The formula is quite complex (see end
of this appendix). The Demand Index is the ratio of buying pres-

*This Appendix was prepared by Thomas E. Aspray.

463


464 Appendix A

sure to selling pressure. When the buying pressure is greater than
the selling pressure, the DI is above the zero line, which is posi-
tive. Greater selling pressure means the DI is below zero, which
implies prices will move lower. Most traders also look for diver-
gences between the DI and prices.

Figure A.1 is a weekly chart of T-Bond futures from early
1994 until late 1997. From April to November 1994, the DI was
mostly below the zero line as bonds declined from 104 to the 96
area. While prices made lower lows (line A), the DI formed high-
er lows (line B). This is a classic positive, or bullish divergence,
which suggested that bond prices were bottoming. The diver-
gence was confirmed when the DI moved above the zero line at
point 1. The DI reached its highest level for this rally in late May
1995 at point 2, and then dropped for the next six weeks before

T Bonds Weekly with Di indicator

be.

bev11/93 (US_1053P) US T.BondsG46/00 - 01/2398
eo ‘OVZH88 C=118.260 -2.760 0=121.310 H=122.119 La119.240 V=2053333 \
Wl ul Ac
i ll | 118
i ly if Cc. i al ' fs fil |
! | i i fl Piya 110
i Hh al | |
\ | hy yo
A ! 106.
i i \ fi i
alll ”
diDemand index 0.08 0.06 [ R 4. a fe
ae cI ¥8 _ —

Figure A.1_ The Demand Index (DI), which incorporates price and vol-
ume, is shown here as a histogram. Values above zero are positive; below
zero they are negative. Notice the bullish divergence in late 1994 and the
bearish divergence in late 1995. (Courtesy MetaStock Equis International. )



Advanced Technical Indicators 465

crossing below the zero line at point 3. It stayed negative for five
weeks before it again turned positive. On the next rally the DI
formed a significantly lower high in late November at point 4.
While the DI was lower (line D), the bond contract was almost six
points higher (line C). This negative or bearish divergence warned
of a price peak.

This indicator can also be used with stocks. The weekly
chart of General Motors (Figure A.2) shows the DI plotted as a
line rather than a histogram. This allows for trendlines to more
easily be drawn on the indicator. I have personally found trend-
line analysis of indicators to be quite valuable. Indicator trend-
lines are often broken ahead of price trendlines. This was the
case in late 1995 as the downtrend in the DI (line A) was broken

61.875 1/8/95 -

3]

BEEESSSESLHSTHERILS SS aHouos HRUB |

Uaddd bd ia did | Be]

rT

_
—

ee
ss
——
_——
c
———
mare
—_——

eee
! i mi iy i i

bar oa 7 ety bch" bo

TPT TTT TTT Tt TT

Figure A.2 The Demand Index (solid line) compared to a weekly chart
of GM. Trendline breaks on the DI line often preceded trendline breaks on
the price chart. Notice the negative (bearish) divergence in April 1996.
(Courtesy MetaStock, Equis International.)


466 Appendix A

a week before the corresponding price downtrend (line B). As
this chart indicates, buying just one week earlier could have sig-
nificantly improved the entry price. The DI also warned of a
price high in mid-April 1996. While GM was making a new price
high (line C), the DI had formed lower highs (line D). This warn-
ing signal came well ahead of the serious price decline in June
and July.

HERRICK PAYOFF INDEX (HPI)

This indicator was developed by the late John Herrick as a way of
analyzing commodity futures through changes in the open inter-
est. As discussed in Chapter 7, changes in the open interest can
give traders important clues as to whether a market trend is well
supported or not.

The Herrick Payoff Index uses price, volume, and open inter-
est to determine money flow into or out of a given commodity.
This helps the trader spot divergences between the price action
and the open interest. This is often quite important as buying or
selling panics can often be identified through analysis of the open
interest by the Herrick Payoff Index.

The most basic interpretation of the HPI is whether it is
above or below the zero line. A positive value means that the HPI
is projecting higher prices and that open interest is rising along
with prices. Conversely, negative readings suggest that funds are
flowing out of the commodity being analyzed.

One of the more volatile commodity markets is coffee, fea-
tured in Figure A.3. During March and April of 1997, the HPI had
four crossings of the zero line with the last positive signal in early
April (B) lasting until early June. The HPI dropped below zero in
June, and even though prices were well below the highs, coffee
dropped another 70 cents. Once again the HPI turned positive in
late July very close to the lows. Over the next two months there
were two short term signals and then another longer term sell sig-
nal. This is characteristic of the HPI when used on the daily data
as it will cross above and below the zero line several times before
a longer lasting buy or sell signal is given.


Advanced Technical Indicators 467

Coffee Dally with HPI indicator

02/04/97 (KC_1053P) Coffee-CSCE46/00 01/23/98
Coffee CSCEGNO Dally 01/28/08 C=167.500 42.900 O=166.040 H=167.000 L=186.620 V=t608

| |
i \

m
| i iy

| {
y at
Wa al ho, rr

gee888 8888

I

ii
i \ IK al
nl W

fH |
i i] wrth i 100
Hi rot hy

i oy tl 140
HPT 7.00

A
\ \
i j

40

so. wal er ~ < Py cll, - 4

be} WN b be

"124 11 in Prd ang Tredetion © Orage Piseerch ra. 180,

Figure A.3 The Herrick Payoff Index (HPI) shown as a histogram with
coffee prices. HPI uses price, volume, and open interest in its calculation and
is used in futures markets. Crossings above zero are buys (B); crossings below
are sells (S).

The HPI, like the Demand Index, is most effective when
used on the weekly data, as fewer false signals are evident.
Divergence analysis can also be used to warn the trader of a
change from positive to negative money flow. There are several
good examples on the weekly T-Bond futures charts (Figure A.4)
that covers approximately six years of trading. The HPI stayed
positive from late 1992 until late 1993. The HPI peaked in early
1993 and, when bonds were almost 10 points higher (line A),
the HPI was forming a lower high (line B). This negative diver-
gence warned bond traders of the decline in prices that took
place in 1994. The HPI violated the zero line in late October of
1993, but then turned slightly positive in early 1994 before
plunging back below the zero line. The HPI reached its lowest


468 Appendix A

T Bonds Weekly with HPI indicator
02/15/81 (US_1053P) US T.BondsG46/00 01/23/98
sr yOO-Weeldy O1/23108 C=119 280 -2.760 O=121.310 HeIZZi10 Lo110240 VezosSS35

+25,

Figure A.4 A weekly version of Herrick Payoff Index with Treasury
Bonds. Notice the bearish divergences in 1993 and 1995, and the bullish
divergence in 1994.

level in the first half of 1994 and bottomed well ahead of prices.
As prices were making lower lows (line C), the HPI was forming
higher lows and therefore a positive divergence (line D). The HPI
moved back into positive territory in December 1994 as bonds
were very close to their lows. A negative divergence was formed
in late 1995 (line F), after bonds had rallied over 25 points from
the late 1994 lows. The zero line was crossed several times in
1996 and early 1997 before the HPI moved firmly into positive
territory. These two examples should illustrate why the HPI and
its analysis of open interest can be helpful in analyzing a com-
modity market’s direction.


Advanced Technical Indicators 469

STARC BANDS AND
KELTNER CHANNELS

As discussed in Chapter 9, banding techniques have been used for
many years. Two types that I prefer are based on the Average True
Range. Despite this common factor, these two types of bands are
used in very different ways. Average True Range is the average of
true price ranges over x periods. True Range is the greatest distance
from today’s high to low, yesterday’s close to today’s high, or yes-
terday’s close to today’s low. See Welles Wilder’s New Concepts in
Technical Trading Systems.

Manning Stoller, a well known expert in the commodity
business, developed the Stoller Average Range Channels or starc
bands. In his formula the 15 period Average True Range is doubled
and added to or subtracted from a 6 period moving average (MA).
The upper band is starc+; the lower is starc-. Movement outside of
these bands is uncommon and indicates an extreme situation. In
this manner they can be used as trading filters. When prices are
near or above the starc+ band, it is a high risk time to buy and a low
risk time to sell. Conversely, if prices are at or below the starc— band,
then it is a high risk selling zone and a more favorable point to buy.

' The weekly continuation chart of gold futures (Figure A.5) is
plotted with both the starc+ and starc— bands. In Feb. 1997 at point
1, gold prices slightly overshot the starc- band. Though the price
action was weak, the starc bands indicated that this was not a good
time to sell. By waiting, a better selling opportunity was likely to
occur. Just three weeks later gold was $22 higher and at the starc+
band (point 2). Point 2 was a low risk selling opportunity. In July
(point 3), gold prices dropped well below the starc-band, but
instead of declining further, prices moved sideways for the next 12
weeks. Gold prices then started to move lower from November to
December 1997 and touched the starc- band three times (points 4).
In all instances prices did stabilize or move higher for 1-2 weeks.
These bands work well in all time frames even as short as 5 to 10
minute bar charts. Starc bands can help the trader avoid chasing the
market, which almost always results in a poor entry price.


470 Appendix A

“W MOV_avS Stane? stare Weekly gold
price with
starc bands

Upper line =
starc+

Middle line = 6
week average

Lower line =
starc-

mts Hane as Tape Way tian Hal ihag fep Rot Rov ites Han ffeb iter

Figure A.5_—Starc bands plotted around a 6 week moving average of week-
ly gold prices. Points 1 and 3 show prices bouncing after dipping below the
lower band. Point 2 shows prices falling after rising above the upper band.

The Keltner channels were originally developed by Chester
Keltner in his 1960 book How to Make Money in Commodities.
Linda Raschke, a very successful commodity trader, has reintro-
duced them to technicians. In her modification, the bands are
also based on the average true range (ATR), but the ATR is calculat-
ed over 10 periods. This ATR value is then doubled and added to
a 20 period exponential moving average for the plus band and
subtracted from it for the minus band.

The recommended use of the Keltner channels is much dif-
ferent from the starc bands. When prices close above the plus
band, a positive signal is given as it indicates a breakout in
upward volatility. Conversely, when prices close below the lower
band, it is negative and indicates prices will move lower. In many
respects, this is just a graphical representation of a four week
channel breakout system discussed in Chapter 9.


Advanced Technical Indicators 471

Figure A-6 is a daily chart of March 1998 copper futures.
Prices closed below the minus band in late October 1997 at point
1. This indicated that prices should begin a new downtrend and
copper prices dropped 16 cents in the next two months.

Daily copper prices with Keltner
Channels

Upper line = plus channel

Middle line = 20 day
exponential average

Lower line = minus channel

Figure A.6 Keltner Channels plotted around a 20 day exponentially
smoothed average of daily copper prices. With this indicator, moves below
the lower channel (such as point 1) are interpreted as a sign of weakness.

There were many other closes below the minus band dur-
ing this period. Until prices close above the plus band, the nega-
tive signal will stay in effect. The second chart is March 1998 cof-
fee prices (Figure A.7) and illustrates a positive signal at point 1.
After two consecutive closes above the plus band, prices then
declined to the 20 period EMA. In a rising market the 20 period
EMA should act as support. Several days after the EMA was
touched (point 2), coffee prices began a dramatic 30 cent rise in
just a few weeks.


472 Appendix A

NCOULE.D enaz@ plus ninus ] | Daily coffee chart
| with Keltner Bands
|

[Mov “Tec

Figure A.7_—_ Keltner Channels with a daily coffee chart. Point 1 shows
prices breaking the upper channel which is a sign of strength. Notice that
after that buy signal, prices found support at the 20 day exponential moving
average (middle line) at point 2.

Both of these techniques offer an alternative approach to
either percentage envelopes or standard deviation bands (like
Bollinger Bands). Neither is presented as a stand-alone trading
system but should be considered as additional tools of the
trade.


Advanced Technical Indicators 473

FORMULA FOR DEMAND INDEX

The Demand Index (DI) calculates two values, Buying Pressure
(BP) and Selling Pressure (SP), and then takes a tatio of the two.
DI is BP/SP. There are some slight variations in the formula. Here’s
one version:

If prices rise:

BP = V or Volume
SP = V/P where P is the % change in price

If prices decline:

BP = V/P where P is the % change in price
SP = V or Volume

Because P is a decimal (less than 1), P is modified by mul-
tiplying it by the constant K.

P = P(K)
K=(3xO/VA

Where C is the closing price and VA (Volatility Average) is the 10
day average of a two day price range (highest high — lowest low).

If BP > SP then DI = SP/BP

The Demand Index is included on the MetaStock charting
menu.




Appendix B:
Market Profile*

INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this writing is to illustrate what Market Profile is
and to define its underlying principles. Before the early 1980s,
the only technical tools available were the bar chart and the
point and figure chart. Since then Market Profile®! was intro-
duced to expand the arsenal of technical tools. Market Profile is
essentially a statistical approach to the analysis of price data.? For
those without a statistics background, a familiar example may be
helpful. Consider a group of students taking an exam. Typically,
some score very high (say 90 or higher), some score very low (say

*This appendix was prepared by Dennis C. Hynes.

1The Market Profile® ts a registered trademark of the Chicago Board of Trade
(CBOT), hereafter referred to as Market Profile or the profile. The concept was developed by
J. Peter Steidlmayer, formerly of the CBOT. For further information on the subject, contact
the CBOT or read Mr. Steidlmayer’s latest book: 141 WEST JACKSON—1996.

2Originally introduced for commodity futures prices, the format can be used for
any price data series where continuous transaction activity is available.

475


476 Appendix B

60 or lower), but most scores tend to be clustered around the
average score (say 75). A histogram can be used to depict the fre-
quency distribution of these test scores in a “statistical picture”
(Figure B.1).

How Students Scores were Distributed

oF NW ek OH OD

35 55 60 65 70 75 80 8 90 95 100
Test Scores

Figure B.1

As can be seen, the most frequent score, or modal score,
is 75 (6 students) while the range of scores is defined by the low-
est and highest scores (55 and 95). Note how the scores distrib-
ute evenly around the modal score. For a perfectly symmetric
distribution, the modal score will be equal to the mean, or aver-
age score. Next observe that the distribution is “bell-shaped,”
the telltale sign of a normal distribution. For a perfect normal
distribution, specific standard deviation intervals correlate to
specific numbers of observations. For example, if the test scores
are, in fact, perfectly normally distributed, then 68.3% of these
scores will fall within one (1) standard deviation of the mean.
While actual data is unlikely to form a perfect normal distri-
bution, it is often close enough that these relationships can be
employed.

Prices, like other physical measurements (e.g., school test
grades, population heights, etc.), distribute around a mean price
level as well. What is the Market Profile graphic? Visualize it as
simply, a frequency distribution of prices displayed as a price his-
togram turned on its side (see Figures B.2a and B.2b).


Market Profile

477

Price Histogram

7 Vertical
‘
5
‘
I
2
1
°

wo ws
Pre

wo17 8 2 2 ww

Price Histogram
n Horizontal

Figure B.2a = Traditional.

Figure B.2b Flipped on its side.

The centerpiece of the Market Profile graphic is the (bell-
shaped) normal curve used to display the evolving price distribu-
tion. Once the normal curve assumption is acknowledged, a
modal or average price can be identified, a price dispersion (stan-
dard derivation) can be computed and probability statements can
be made regarding the price distribution. For example, virtually
all values fall within three (3) standard deviations of the average
while about 70% (68.3% to be exact) fall within one (1) standard

Figure B.3— The pro-
file graphic reveals that
market activity is regular-
ly normally distributed.

deviation of the average (see Figure B.3).

Market Profile provides a picture
of what’s happening here and now in the
marketplace. In its pursuit of promoting
trade, the market is either in equilibrium
or moving toward it. The profile’s natur-
al tendency toward symmetry defines, in
a simple way, the degree of balance
(equilibrium) or imbalance (disequilibri-
um) that exists between buyers and sell-
ers. As the market is dynamic, the profile
graphic portrays equilibrium as periods of
market balance—when price distribu-
tions are symmetric, and represents dise-
quilibrium as periods of market imbal-
ance—when price distributions are not
symmetric or are skewed.


478 Appendix B

Market Profile is not a trading system nor does it provide
trade recommendations. The aim of the profile graphic is to allow
the user to witness a market's developing value on price reoccur-
rence over time. As such, Market Profile is a decision support tool
requiring the user to exercise personal judgment in the trading
process.
