
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

When I arrived in New York I made it a point to get a
line on the company's business, actual and prospective.
What I learned strengthened my conviction that the
insiders had been worse than reckless in jacking up the
price at a time when such an advance was not justified
either by the tone of the general market or by the
company's earnings.
The rise, illogical and ill-timed though it was, had
developed some public following and this doubtless
encouraged the insiders to pursue their unwise tactics.
Therefore I sold more stock. The insiders ceased their
folly. So I tested the market again and again, in accordance
with my trading methods, until finally I was short 30,000
shares of the stock of the Tropical Trading Company. By
then the price was $133.
I had been warned that the TT insiders knew the exact
whereabouts of every stock certificate in the Street and the
precise dimensions and identity of the short interest as
well as other facts of tactical importance. They were able
men and shrewd traders. Altogether it was a dangerous
combination to go up against. But facts are facts and the
strongest of all allies are conditions.
Of course, on the way down from $153 to $133 the short
interest had grown and the public that buys on reactions
began to argue as usual: That stock had been considered a
good purchase at $153 and higher. Now 20 points lower, it
was necessarily a much better purchase. Same stock; same
dividend rate; same officers; same business. Great
bargain!
The public's purchases reduced the floating supply and
the insiders, knowing that a lot of room traders were short,
thought the time propitious for a squeezing. The price was
duly run up to $150. I daresay there was plenty of covering
but I stayed pat. Why shouldn't I? The insiders might
know that a short line of 30,000 shares had not been
taken in but why should that frighten me? The reasons
that had impelled me to begin selling at $153 and keep at it
258

XVIII

on the way down to $133, not only still existed but were
stronger than ever. The insiders might desire to force me
to cover but they adduced no convincing arguments.
Fundamental conditions were fighting for me. It was not
difficult to be both fearless and patient. A speculator must
have faith in himself and in his judgment. The late Dickson
G. Watts, ex-President of the New York Cotton Exchange
and famous author of "Speculation as a Fine Art," says that
courage in a speculator is merely confidence to act on the
decision of his mind. With me, I cannot fear to be wrong
because I never think I am wrong until I am proven wrong.
In fact, I am uncomfortable unless I am capitalising my
experience. The course of the market at a given time does
not necessarily prove me wrong. It is the character of the
advance or of the decline that determines for me the
correctness or the fallacy of my market position. I can only
rise by knowledge. If I fall it must be by my own blunders.
There was nothing in the character of the rally from
$133 to $150 to frighten me into covering and presently
the stock, as was to be expected, started down again. It
broke $140 before the inside clique began to give it
support. Their buying was coincident with a flood of bull
rumors about the stock. The company, we heard, was
making perfectly fabulous profits, and the earnings
justified an increase in the regular dividend rate. Also, the
short interest was said to be perfectly huge and the
squeeze of the century was about to be inflicted on the
bear party in general and in particular on a certain
operator who was more than over-extended. I couldn't
begin to tell you all I heard as they ran the price up ten
points.
The manipulation did not seem particularly dangerous
to me but when the price touched $149 I decided that it
was not wise to let the Street accept as true all the bull
statements that were floating around. Of course, there was
nothing that I or any other rank outsider could say that
would carry conviction either to the frightened shorts or to
259

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

those credulous customers of commission houses that
trade on hearsay tips. The most effective retort courteous
is that which the tape alone can print. People will believe
that when they will not believe an affidavit from any living
man, much less one from a chap who is short 30,000
shares. So I used the same tactics that I did at the time of
the Stratton corner in corn, when I sold oats to make the
traders bearish on corn. Experience and memory again.
When the insiders jacked up the price of Tropical
Trading with a view to frightening the shorts I didn't try to
check the rise by selling that stock. I was already short
30,000 shares of it which was as big a percentage of the
floating supply as I thought wise to be short of. I did not
propose to put my head into the noose so obligingly held
open for me—the second rally was really an urgent
invitation. What I did when TT touched $149 was to sell
about 10,000 shares of Equatorial Commercial
Corporation. This company owned a large block of
Tropical Trading.
Equatorial Commercial, which was not as active a stock
as TT, broke badly on my selling, as I had foreseen; and, of
course, my purpose was achieved. When the traders and
the customers of the commission houses who had listened
to the un-contradicted bull dope on TT saw that the rise in
Tropical synchronised with heavy selling and a sharp
break in Equatorial, they naturally concluded that the
strength of TT was merely a smoke-screen—a manipulated
advance obviously designed to facilitate inside liquidation
in Equatorial Commercial, which was largest holder of TT
stock. It must be both long stock and inside stock in
Equatorial, because no outsider would dream of selling so
much short stock at the very moment when Tropical
Trading was so very strong. So they sold Tropical Trading
and checked the rise in that stock, the insiders very
properly not wishing to take all the stock that was pressed
for sale. The moment the insiders took away their support
the price of TT declined. The traders and principal
260

XVIII

commission houses now sold some Equatorial also and I
took in my short line in that at a small profit. I hadn't sold
it to make money out of the operation but to check the rise
in TT.
Time and again the Tropical Trading insiders and their
hard-working publicity man flooded the Street with all
manner of bull items and tried to put up the price. And
every time they did I sold Equatorial Commercial short
and covered it with TT reacted and carried EC with it. It
took the wind out of the manipulators' sails. The price of
TT finally went down to $125 and the short interest really
grew so big that the insiders were enabled to run it up 20
or 25 points. This time it was a legitimate enough drive
against an over-extended short interest; but while I
foresaw the rally I did not cover, not wishing to lose my
position. Before Equatorial Commercial could advance in
sympathy with the rise in TT I sold a raft of it short with
the usual results. This gave the lie to the bull talk in TT
which had got quite boisterous after the latest sensational
rise.
By this time the general market had grown quite weak.
As I told you, it was the conviction that we were in a bear
market that started me selling TT short in the fishingcamp in Florida. I was short of quite a few other stocks but
TT was my pet. Finally, general conditions proved too
much for the inside clique to defy and TT hit the toboggan
slide. It went below $120 for the first time in years; then
below $110; below par; and still I did not cover. One day
when the entire market was extremely weak Tropical
Trading broke $90 and on the demoralisation I covered.
Same old reason! I had the opportunity the big market and
the weakness and the excess of sellers over buyers. I may
tell you, even at the risk of appearing to be monotonously
bragging of my cleverness, that I took in my 30,000 shares
of TT at practically the lowest prices of the movement. But

261

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I wasn't thinking of covering at the bottom. I was intent on
turning my paper profits into cash without losing much of
the profit in the changing.
I stood pat throughout because I knew my position was
sound. I wasn't bucking the trend of the market or going
against basic conditions but the reverse, and that was what
made me so sure of the failure of an over-confident inside
clique. What they tried to do others had tried before and it
had always failed. The frequent rallies, even when I knew
as well as anybody that they were due, could not frighten
me. I knew I'd do much better in the end by staying pat
than by trying to cover to put out a new short line at a
higher price. By sticking to the position that I felt was right
I made over a million dollars. I was not indebted to
hunches or to skilful tape reading or to stubborn courage.
It was a dividend declared by my faith in my judgment and
not by my cleverness or by my vanity. Knowledge is power
and power need not fear lies—not even when the tape
prints them. The retraction follows pretty quickly.
A year later, TT was jacked up again to $150 and hung
around there for a couple of weeks. The entire market was
entitled to a good reaction for it had risen uninterruptedly
and it did not bull any longer. I know because I tested it.
Now, the group to which TT belonged had been suffering
from very poor business and I couldn't see anything to bull
those stocks on anyhow, even if the rest of the market were
due for a rise, which it wasn't. So I began to sell Tropical
Trading. I intended to put out 10,000 shares in all. The
price broke on my selling. I couldn't see that there was any
support whatever. Then suddenly, the character of the
buying changed.
I am not trying to make myself out a wizard when I
assure you that I could tell the moment support came in. It
instantly struck me that if the insiders in that stock, who
never felt a moral obligation to keep the price up, were
now buying the stock in the face of a declining general
market there must be a reason. They were not ignorant
262

XVIII

asses nor philanthropists nor yet bankers concerned with
keeping the price up to sell more securities over the
counter. The price rose notwithstanding my selling and the
selling of others. At $153 I covered my 10,000 shares and
at $156 I actually went long because by that time the tape
told me the line of least resistance was upward. I was
bearish on the general market but I was confronted by a
trading condition in a certain stock and not by a
speculative theory in general. The price went out of sight,
above $200. It was the sensation of the year. I was
flattered by reports spoken and printed that I had been
squeezed out of eight or nine millions of dollars. As a
matter of fact, instead of being short I was long of TT all
the way up. In fact, I held on a little too long and let some
of my paper profits get away. Do you wish to know why I
did? Because I thought the TT insiders would naturally do
what I would have done had I been in their place. But that,
was something I had no business to think because my
business is to trade—that is, to stick to the facts before me
and not to what I think other people ought to do.

263

XIX
I do not know when or by whom the word "manipulation"
was first used in connection with what really are no more
than common merchandising processes applied to the sale
in bulk of securities on the Stock Exchange. Rigging the
market to facilitate cheap purchases of a stock which it is
desired to accumulate is also manipulation. But it is
different. It may not be necessary to stoop to illegal
practices, but it would be difficult to avoid doing what
some would think illegitimate. How are you going to buy a
big block of a stock in a bull market without putting up the
price on yourself? That would be the problem. How can it
be solved? It depends upon so many things that you can't
give a general solution unless you say: possibly by means
of very adroit manipulation. For instance? Well, it would
depend upon conditions. You can't give any closer answer
than that.
265

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I am profoundly interested in all phases of my business,
and of course I learn from the experience of others as well
as from my own. But it is very difficult to learn how to
manipulate stocks to-day from such yarns as are told of an
afternoon in the brokers' offices after the close. Most of the
tricks, devices and expedients of bygone days are obsolete
and futile; or illegal and impracticable. Stock Exchange
rules and conditions have changed, and the story—even
the accurately detailed story of what Daniel Drew or Jacob
Little or Jay Gould could do fifty or seventy-five years ago
is scarcely worth listening to. The manipulator to-day has
no more need to consider what they did and how they did
it than a cadet at West Point need study archery as
practiced by the ancients in order to increase his working
knowledge of ballistics.
On the other hand there is profit in studying the human
factors the ease with which human beings believe what it
pleases them to believe; and how they allow themselves
-indeed, urge themselves -to be influenced by their
cupidity or by the dollar-cost of the average man's
carelessness. Fear and hope remain the same; therefore
the study of the psychology of speculators is as valuable as
it ever was. Weapons change, but strategy remains
strategy, on the New York Stock Exchange as on the
battlefield. I think the clearest summing up of the whole
thing was expressed by Thomas F. Woodlock when he
declared: "The principles of successful stock speculation
are based on the supposition that people will continue in
the future to make the mistakes that they have made in the
past."
In booms, which is when the public is in the market in
the greatest numbers, there is never any need of subtlety,
so there is no sense of wasting time discussing either
manipulation or speculation during such times; it would
be like trying to find the difference in raindrops that are
falling synchronously on the same roof across the street.
The sucker has always tried to get something for nothing,
266

XIX

and the appeal in all booms is always frankly to the
gambling instinct aroused by cupidity and spurred by a
pervasive prosperity. People who look for easy money
invariably pay for the privilege of proving conclusively that
it cannot be found on this sordid earth. At. first, when I
listened to the accounts of old-time deals and devices I
used to think that people were more gullible in the l860's
and '70's than in the 1900's. But I was sure to read in the
newspapers that very day or the next something about the
latest Ponzi or the bust-up of some bucketing broker and
about the millions of sucker money gone to join the silent
majority of vanished savings.
When I first came to New York there was a great fuss
made about wash sales and matched orders, for all that
such practices were forbidden by the Stock Exchange. At
times the washing was too crude to deceive anyone. The
brokers had no hesitation in saying that "the laundry was
active" whenever anybody tried to wash up some stock or
other, and, as I have said before, more than once they had
what were frankly referred to as "bucket-shop drives,"
when a stock was offered down two or three points in a
jiffy just to establish the decline on the tape and wipe up
the myriad shoe-string traders who were long of the stock
in the bucket shops. As for matched orders, they were
always used with some misgivings by reason of the
difficulty of coordinating and synchronising operations by
brokers, all such business being against Stock Exchange
rules. A few years ago a famous operator canceled the
selling but not the buying part of his matched orders, and
the result was that an innocent broker ran up the price
twenty-five points or so in a few minutes, only to see it
break with equal celerity as soon as his buying ceased. The
original intention was to create an appearance of activity.
Bad business, playing with such unreliable weapons. You
see, you can't take your best brokers into your confidence
—not if you want them to remain members of the New
267

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

York Stock Exchange. Then also, the taxes have made all
practices involving fictitious transactions much more
expensive than they used to be in the old times.
The dictionary definition of manipulation includes
corners. Now, a corner might be the result of manipulation
or it might be the result of competitive buying, as, for
instance, the Northern Pacific corner on May 9, 1901,
which certainly was not manipulation. The Stutz corner
was expensive to everybody concerned, both in money and
in prestige. And it was not a deliberately engineered
corner, at that.
As a matter of fact very few of the great corners were
profitable to the engineers of them. Both Commodore
Vanderbilt's Harlem corners paid big, but the old chap
deserved the millions he made out of a lot of short sports,
crooked legislators and aldermen who tried to doublecross him. On the other hand, Jay Gould lost in his
Northwestern corner. Deacon S. V. White made a million
in his Lackawanna corner, but Jim Keene dropped a
million in the Hannibal & St. Joe deal. The financial
success of a corner of course depends upon the marketing
of the accumulated holdings at higher than cost, and the
short interest has to be of some magnitude for that to
happen easily.
I used to wonder why corners were so popular among
the big operators of a half-century ago. They were men of
ability and experience, wide-awake and not prone to
childlike trust in the philanthropy of their fellow traders.
Yet they used to get stung with an astonishing frequency. A
wise old broker told me that all the big operators of the
'60's and '70's had one ambition, and that was to work a
corner. In many cases this was the offspring of vanity; in
others, of the desire for revenge. At all events, to be
pointed out as the man who had successfully cornered this
or the other stock was in reality recognition of brains,
boldness and boodle. It gave the cornerer the right to be
haughty. He accepted the plaudits of his fellows as fully
268

XIX

earned. It was more than the prospective money profit that
prompted the engineers of corners to do their damnedest.
It was the vanity complex asserting itself among coldblooded operators.
Dog certainly ate dog in those days with relish and ease.
I think I told you before that I have managed to escape
being squeezed more than once, not because of the
possession of a mysterious ticker-sense but because I can
generally tell the moment the character of the buying in
the stock makes it imprudent for me to be short of it. This
I do by common-sense tests, which must have been tried
in the old times also. Old Daniel Drew used to squeeze the
boys with some frequency and make them pay high prices
for the Erie "sheers" they had sold short to him. He was
himself squeezed by Commodore Vanderbilt in Erie, and
when old Drew begged for mercy the Commodore grimly
quoted the Great Bear's own deathless distich:
He
that
sells
what
isn't
his'n,
must buy it back or go to pris'n.
Wall Street remembers very little of an operator who for
more than a generation was one of its Titans. His chief
claim to immortality seems to be the phrase "watering
stock."
Addison G. Jerome was the acknowledged king of the
Public Board in the spring of 1863. His market tips, they
tell me, were considered as good as cash in bank. From all
accounts he was a great trader and made millions. He was
liberal to the point of extravagance and had a great
following in the Street until Henry Keep, known as
William the Silent, squeezed him out of all his millions in
the Old Southern corner. Keep, by the way, was the
brother-in-law of Gov. Roswell P. Flower.
In most of the old corners the manipulation consisted
chiefly of not letting the other man know that you were
cornering the stock which he was variously invited to sell
short. It therefore was aimed chiefly at fellow
professionals, for the general public does not take kindly
269

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

to the short side of the account. The reasons that
prompted these wise professionals to put out short lines in
such stocks were pretty much the same as prompts them
to do the same thing to-day. Apart from the selling by
faith-breaking politicians in the Harlem corner of the
Commodore, I gather from the stories I have read that the
professional traders sold the stock because it was too high.
And the reason they thought it was too high was that it
never before had sold so high; and that made it too high to
buy; and if it was too high to buy it was just right to sell.
That sounds pretty modern, doesn't it? They were thinking
of the price, and the Commodore was thinking of the
value! And so, for years afterwards, old-timers tell me that
people used to say, "He went short of Harlem!" whenever
they wished to describe abject poverty.
Many years ago I happened to be speaking to one of Jay
Gould's old brokers. He assured me earnestly that Mr.
Gould not only was a most unusual man—it was of him
that old Daniel Drew shiveringly remarked, "His touch is
Death!" but that he was head and shoulders above all other
manipulators past and present. He must have been a
financial wizard indeed to have done what he did; there
can be no question of that. Even at this distance I can see
that he had an amazing knack for adapting himself to new
conditions, and that is valuable in a trader. He varied his
methods of attack and defense without a pang because he
was more concerned with the manipulation of properties
than with stock speculation. He manipulated for
investment rather than for a market turn. He early saw
that the big money was in owning the railroads instead of
rigging their securities on the floor of the Stock Exchange.
He utilised the stock market of course. But I suspect it
was because that was the quickest and easiest way to quick
and easy money and he needed many millions, just as old
Collis P. Huntington was always hard up because he
always needed twenty or thirty millions more than the
bankers were willing to lend him. Vision without money
270

XIX

means heartaches; with money, it means achievement;
and that means power; and that means money; and that
means achievement; and so on, over and over and over.
Of course manipulation was not confined to the great
figures of those days. There were scores of minor
manipulators. I remember a story an old broker told me
about the manners and morals of the early '60's. He said:
"The earliest recollection I have of Wall Street is of my
first visit to the financial district. My father had some
business to attend to there and for some reason or other
took me with him. We came down Broadway and I
remember turning off at Wall Street. We walked down
Wall and just as we came to Broad or, rather, Nassau
Street, to the corner where the Bankers' Trust Company's
building now stands, I saw a crowd following two men.
The first was walking eastward, trying to look
unconcerned. He was followed by the other, a red-faced
man who was wildly waving his hat with one hand and
shaking the other fist in the air. He was yelling to beat the
band: "Shylock! Shylock! What's the price of money?
Shylock! Shylock!" I could see heads sticking out of
windows. They didn't have skyscrapers in those days, but I
was sure the second- and third-story rubbernecks would
tumble out. My father asked what was the matter, and
somebody answered something I didn't hear. I was too
busy keeping a death clutch on my father's hand so that
the jostling wouldn't separate us. The crowd was growing,
as street crowds do, and I wasn't comfortable. Wild-eyed
men came running down from Nassau Street and up from
Broad as well as east and west on Wall Street. After we
finally got out of the jam my father explained to me that
the man who was shouting "Shylock!" was So-and-So. I
have forgotten the name, but he was the biggest operator
in clique stocks in the city and was understood to have
made and lost more money than any other man in Wall
Street with the exception of Jacob Little. I remember
Jacob Little's name because I thought it was a funny name
271
