
Sticking with High-Probability Trades
What professional traders look for are the “high-probability” trades, or the ones with the most variables aligned in their favor. Here are some
secrets to determining whether a trade is high probability or not.
Let’s say that the EUR/USD is in an uptrend and you see an opportunity to buy the currency pair on a retracement or dip. If you were trading
purely on what you saw in a single chart or setup, you would most likely just dive right in and buy. Unfortunately, that is akin to driving down the road
with blinders on! At minimum, it is important to take a look at the general trend in the market because being unaware of your environment can lead
to unnecessary risks.
Fundamental and technical indicators as well as market sentiment are three factors that can affect every trade. If you can wait for those factors to
line up in your favor, you have a far greater chance of reducing your risk and landing a potential profit. Ask yourself these questions to help decide
whether a trade is worth the risk or not:
1. How deep is the retracement or dip? Imagine that you accidently cut your finger with a knife while chopping vegetables. The deeper
the cut, the longer it will take for your finger to heal. If it is just a shallow slice, then a band-aid will do the trick but if you accidently chopped
off part of your finger, then it is far more complicated and a hospital visit would be necessary. In trading, a very strong retracement or dip is
much more difficult to recover from than a shallow decline. Therefore, buying after a deep correction in an overall uptrend is generally a
lower probability trade than buying after only a small retracement. Just as a deep cut increases the risk of losing a finger, a deep
correction increases the risk of the currency pair breaking its uptrend.
2. Is there a good fundamental reason behind the decline in the currency pair? If the decline in the currency pair was triggered by
a very disappointing economic data such as an abysmal report on consumer spending, then it is a lower probability trade that you may
want to reconsider because short-term fundamentals are not on your side. However, if there is no major reason to explain the dip, then the
coast is clear and there’s a greater chance that the uptrend will resume.
3. Could tomorrow’s news release hurt the trade? When trading the EUR/USD, it is also important to check to see if there is a piece

of Eurozone or U.S. economic data scheduled for release over the next 24 hours that could affect your trade. For example, if German retail
sales are on the calendar and the market believes the data could be strong, it creates the backdrop for a higher probability trade. This
would also be true if there is U.S. economic data on the calendar that the market expects to be weak. However, if there is reason to
believe that the German data will surprise to the downside or U.S. data will surprise to the upside, then it may be better to pass on the
trade.
4. What is the general sentiment in the market? Does it support the trade? Considering the general sentiment in the market, known
as its “risk appetite,” is also very important. For example, if the Dow plunged 300 points, there is a good chance that the Asian markets
will trade lower in the next session because if American traders are nervous, there is a good chance that Asian traders will be as well.
Therefore, it may not be such a good idea to buy the EUR/USD on a dip after a sharp sell-off in stocks because the dip could turn into
further losses if Asian traders join in on the selling. However, if risk appetite is steady and equities ended up, flat, or only slightly lower,
then the coast is clear. If the risk appetite is actually positive with traders optimistic enough to rally stocks, then there is a greater chance
that the rally in the EUR/USD will resume.
5. Which key levels could affect the trade? Key levels on a chart, or technical indicators, are also important. If the dip in the EUR/USD
stopped just above a significant support level like 1.3000, assuming the support level continues to hold, going long EUR/USD would be a
higher probability trade. However, if it broke below the support level, then there is scope for additional losses if support turns into
resistance. In this case, it may be better to pass on the trade.
These five questions are guidelines that can be applied to both trading and investing but they are not rules that are set in stone. Oftentimes the
answers to these questions will conflict and that is when our judgment should be used to determine which factors are more and less important.

If You’re a Short-Term Trader . . .
For short-term traders, there are two additional points that can be considered to create even higher probability trades.
One year when I was at a traders’ conference in Florida, I met a tall middle-aged trader named Dave, who said he was having a difficult time
turning a profit in his forex trading. I asked him to tell me a little about his trading strategy. He responded by saying he likes to look for breakouts. I
pressed for more details and he described his trading day.
Dave is married with two children and works as a full-time accountant during the day—a typical American lifestyle. He comes home from work,
has dinner with his wife and kids, watches TV for about an hour, goes into his home office, turns on the computer, and begins trading. He starts by
drawing trendlines on 5-minute charts to capture the range over the past few hours and then looks for breakouts. What is wrong with this picture?
The problem is that when Dave gets around to trading, it is approximately 8 p.m. East Coast time, which is the beginning of the Asian trading
session. Unfortunately, this is the time when more “fake-outs” than breakouts occur because the beginning of the Asian session is typically one of
the quietest times in the currency market. Most of the major currencies usually trade in very tight ranges between the end of the New York trading
session (around 4 p.m. Eastern Time) and the beginning of the European trading session (around 2 a.m. Eastern Time). This means Dave is
looking for breakouts at the worst time possible. Therefore, when it comes to short-term trading, two other points need to be considered:
1. Is it the right time of day for my trading strategy? It is important to realize that certain times of the day are more suitable to certain
trading strategies. Very often currencies may fluctuate in a range before an important U.S. economic release, but the worst thing to do
would be to try to pick short-term tops and bottoms at that time because of the high risk of a breakout. If a breakout or trend-following
strategy sets up when the European and U.S. markets are both open, then it creates a higher probability trade because there are enough
participants in the market to fuel continuation. If a breakout or trend-following opportunity presents itself at any other time, we need to be a
bit more skeptical about the quality of the trade.
2. Is this the best currency pair to trade? Picking the right currency pair to trade can mean the difference between successful and
unsuccessful trades. In fast and furious news trading (Chapter 9), we only traded the majors, but that may not always be the best option.
For example, there are many cases where U.S. and Canadian economic data are released at the same time. If the Canadian data is very
weak, one would assume that the best currency pair to buy after the news is released is USD/CAD. This is true if the U.S. economic data
is stronger than expected, but if it is weak, then the U.S. dollar and the Canadian dollar could both decline, leading to no major
continuation in USD/CAD. In that case, it may be better to consider expressing the Canadian news trade through another currency pair
such as AUD/CAD or CAD/JPY, which will be less affected by the U.S. economic data. The same is true if you have a good piece of
European data but the market is bullish toward the dollar for one reason or another. Then perhaps buying euros against the pound is the
higher probability trade.
These are judgment calls that short-term traders must make at the time of the trade, and they are important because they can mean the
difference between a successful and an unsuccessful trade. It’s worth the extra minute you’ll take before diving into a trade.

The Key Is Yours
You can never be 100 percent certain about whether a trade will be successful or not, but you can increase the probability of it being successful
by looking for only high-quality trades. This extra effort is important if you value your hard-earned money (and I think you should!). I am a big
believer in high-probability trading and the questions in this chapter are the ones that I ask myself before every single trade.
The point is to have as many stars aligned in your favor as possible on your trades and not to expose it to unnecessary and amateur risks.
Trading will always be risky business, but making sure the fundamentals, technicals, and market sentiment support your trade every time will
give you the highest probability of success. The keys to successful trading are to have an edge, minimize the risks, and not be greedy!

Get It? Got It? Good!
Shallow retracements are a sign of higher probability trades.
A trend is more likely to continue if there is no fundamental reason for the dip.

Seek out trades that are supported by upcoming economic data.
Trades that are in line with the general sentiment in the market are a better choice.
Make sure key levels will not stall the trade.
Short-term traders should know what time of day is suitable for their trading strategy and to pick the right currency pairs.

Chapter Eleven

The Top 10 Mistakes
. . . So You Don’t Make Them
In 2009, George Clooney starred in the Oscar-nominated film Up in the Air, a story about a corporate executioner who spends 322 days out of the
year on the road. His character, Ryan Bingham, is an efficiency expert who knows all the shortcuts to get through security checkpoints swiftly so he
can spend the shortest amount of time waiting for his plane. I may not fly nearly as much as Bingham, but when I do, I like to test cutoff times and
arrive at the airport minutes before my flight boards.
My tendency to wait until the 11th hour before arriving at the airport drives my coworkers, friends, and family nuts. Most people I know get to the
airport one and a half hours before a domestic flight and three hours before an international flight. Yes, these are the Transportation Security
Administration’s recommendations, but they are designed for the casual traveler and not the Ryan Binghams of the world. Like Bingham, I always
check in online, print out my boarding pass, make sure there are no liquids, aerosols, or gels in my carry-on luggage, and know that my frequent
flier elite status allows me to bypass long security lines. For domestic flights, I usually arrive at the airport no more than 45 minutes before boarding
and for international flights no more than 90 minutes. Have I ever missed a flight? Only once when I was headed to Italy for vacation. Did I learn from
my mistake? Nope, because in the 10 years and hundreds of flights since then, I have never missed another flight—and it was not because I started
to arrive at the airport earlier. Should most people do as I do? Probably not. The main reason I wait until the last minute to head to the airport is that
I can squeeze in a few extra hours of sleep or an extra hour of work, and the worst that can happen is I will get bumped onto the next flight. I factor in
the worst-case scenario before every flight and know that it can be handled with a phone call and some patience.
However, not everyone can afford to miss their flight because of connections or appointments. The same goes for trading—not everyone can
afford to make a ton of mistakes. Part of trading is about managing the trade and part of it is about managing ourselves. We all have our own level
of risk tolerance, but having met thousands of successful and unsuccessful forex traders, I can tell you that most forex traders make the same
mistakes. In general, human emotions can kill profits. Some traders become so frustrated that they decide to codify their trading rules, which
basically lets the computer do all of the work and eliminates human intervention. However, computers can’t adjust to changing market environments.
Most of the mistakes that traders make are not new; for those people who are able to avoid them from the very beginning, the path to successful
trading will be smoother. Whether you’re new to forex trading or have made some mistakes already, review this list of Top 10 Mistakes of Forex
Traders and hopefully, it will save you a lot of time and money.
Mistake #1: Trading Out of Boredom or Anger. The trader’s high never goes away. Regardless of whether you have been trading for a
month, a year, or a decade, there is always an initial adrenaline rush when you put on the trade. However, being bored and seeking excitement is
one of the worst reasons to trade. When the markets are quiet and you are looking to put on a position, there is a very good chance that after
scanning through a few charts over a few different time frames that you will convince yourself that the trade is right. Unfortunately, what you are
actually doing is forcing a trade, which can eventually lead to losses. Professional traders wait for a currency pair to set up according to their plan
and do not create a plan based upon the desire to trade.
Being angry is even worse than being bored. Have you ever heard the saying that revenge is never sweet? The most dangerous time for any
trader occurs right after a major loss. The instinct for revenge trading (the desire to get it all back at once) can be far more damaging than the initial
loss, leading many traders to make impulsive, irrational decisions that often lead to complete destruction of the account. It is much better to chip
away at the losses by assuming less and less risk until the losses are recovered. This strategy stands in sharp contrast to what many novice traders
do, which is to create even more risk by trying to revenge trade after a big loss.
Mistake #2: Having Unrealistic Expectations. I will never forget the time that I encountered an overly eager trader at a forex expo who asked
me if my trading returns were better than those of the winners of forex trading contests. I responded by saying, “Considering that the winners make
between 500 and 3,000 percent return in one month, which would equate to a yearly return of 6,000 to 360,000 percent, there is a very good
chance that he is taking a lot of risk, trading irrationally, using a strategy that he would never use if he were trading a significant amount of real
money.” Usually these contests are either for demo trading accounts: minis and micros where the average account size is between $500 and
$2,500. Even the best hedge fund managers in the world are not able to make 1,000 percent return, let alone 360,000 percent return on a
consistent basis. Having unrealistic expectations encourages greater risk taking, which is one of the primary reasons many new traders blow up
their accounts. Seasoned forex traders are happy if they can beat the performance of the S&P 500 and elated if they can consistently generate
double-digit returns every year. The key to being a successful forex trader is to approach it like any other asset class and to expect reasonable and
not sky-high returns.
Mistake #3: Taking Highly Correlated Trades. What many new traders fail to realize is that currencies will often move in the same direction.
For example, on any given day, if the Australian dollar is up against the U.S. dollar, there is a very good chance that the New Zealand dollar
appreciated as well. Many new forex traders will look at their charts and see that the AUD/USD and NZD/USD are breaking out at the same time
and will naively go long both currencies. However, by doing so, the trader is basically doubling up on the same position. This redundant exposure
could be intentional, but for most new traders it probably isn’t, which can be a big mistake because if one comes crashing down, there is a good
chance the other will follow. The reason currencies will move in the same direction is the U.S. dollar. On most days, the U.S. dollar will be either up
against all of the major currencies or down. The magnitude of the moves will be different, which may be a reason that a trader has decided to
spread his risk between the AUD/USD and NZD/USD, but if that is not the intention, then rather than being diversified, the exposure is highly

concentrated, which creates a hidden risk in the positions.
Mistake #4: Failing to Use a Stop. Another question that is asked often at trade shows is the importance of using a stop. I am always shocked
to find out that many forex traders do not believe in using stops. Their argument is that if they do not use a stop, the currency will eventually get back
to their initial entry. This is true until it isn’t. When the trend in currencies is strong, it can move aggressively in one direction with little retracement.
Eventually, it may get back to prior levels, but that could takes days, weeks, months, and sometimes even years. Unfortunately, markets can stay
irrational far longer than most people can stay solvent, which means there may not be enough equity in the account to last until the currency pair
finally gets back to its prior level. It goes without saying that all traders should use a stop. Trading at its core is ultimately an exercise in controlling
the chaotic and often unpredictable markets. If you do not use a stop, you are at the mercy of the market and lose all control of your trade. At that
time, the best thing to think about is whether the trade would still be attractive if you were not already in the position.
Mistake #5: Taking Unnecessary Risks. New Yorkers are notoriously guilty of jaywalking. Even 80-year-old grandmothers will avoid walking to
the end of the street and waiting for the light to change before crossing. However, every time that I have seen an older person jaywalk it is over the
weekend and in the early morning when most of the city is still sleeping. With decades of life experience, grandmothers and grandfathers know that
it is far less risky to jaywalk at a time when the city is deserted in an area that is relatively quiet than during rush hour in Times Square. In fact, they
would probably never jaywalk at that time and in that madness because it is an unnecessary risk. When it comes to trading, holding a position over
the weekend when the finance ministers and central bankers are holding a summit is an example of taking an unnecessary risk. The outcome of
these meetings is oftentimes unpredictable and can trigger a gap open on Sunday evening. Staying on top of upcoming news releases and events
can help new traders avoid exposing the position to unnecessary risks.
Mistake #6: Being Too Patient with Losers and Not Patient Enough with Winners. Inexperienced traders are usually too patient with their
losers and not patient enough with their winners. Cut your losses quickly and let your winners ride is a common piece of advice that traders will
receive. However, is it even more relevant to forex trading because of how strong trends can be. Many traders fall victim to the mistake of nursing
their losers until they become so large that it wipes out their account. Some will even keep their losing trade open and trade around the losses
hoping to recover at least some of it back. Yet these are most likely the same traders who will abandon their trades as soon as it turns a small
profit. Unfortunately, this is not the most efficient way to trade currencies. It is generally smarter to bag a small profit early and leave open a part of
the position in case a large trend emerges.
Mistake #7: Being a “Possum Trader.” If you have ever had a losing trade and decided to shut off your computer or walk away with the hope
that it will turn around if you stopped watching it, then you have fallen victim to what my good friend Rob Booker calls Possum Trading. You leave the
position open, close your eyes, cross your fingers, and hope that the trade will work itself out. Unfortunately, this almost never happens, and more
often than not, the losses become even greater. Trading is a game of survival and closing your eyes hoping that the fire will put itself out is not the
right decision. If it is a small fire, it is smarter to put it out before it even comes close to burning down your house; if it is a large one, it is better to
abandon your home and call in the firefighters. In trading, if the reason for the trade is no longer valid, then get out before the losses grow. Don’t
keep the trade on and turn into a possum.
Mistake #8: Taking on Too Much Leverage. In 2008 when I traveled to Dubai for the very first time and we were driving down Sheikh Zayed
Road, which is the equivalent of Las Vegas Boulevard, I could not help but notice the glamorous buildings and the numerous construction projects
in process. It felt like half of the world’s cranes were in a five mile radius. Gulf News puts it at closer to 20 percent at the time, which is still
tremendous. Yet, considering that at one point the number of construction workers rivaled the number of Dubai citizens, it was clear that property
developers were over-leveraged and a bubble was forming. When the bubble became too large, as it did in the United States, it burst, causing
prices to fall 60 percent from their peak. The subprime turned financial crisis was a tough lesson in over-leveraging. Forex brokers will entice
individual traders with very generous amounts of leverage, but risking anything greater than 5 to 10 percent of your account on any one trade is
financial suicide. Leverage is a wonderful drug when the trade moves in your direction, but it is pure poison when the market is aligned against you.
Mistake #9: Over-Optimizing Your Strategy. Trading robots have become very popular over the past few years, and savvier traders have
even learned to code their own trading strategies and create mini algos. However, the biggest mistake that these traders make is over-optimizing
their strategy. What may work perfectly in one market environment will not work so well in others. Having spent a great deal of time creating
systematic trading products, I have learned that most robots or algos work in either trend or range but rarely in both. So if someone is showing you
backtested results with 1,000 percent returns, you should be highly skeptical because they have probably over-optimized their robot to show you a
perfect trading record that will be difficult to replicate in reality. Markets are dynamic and their drivers change with time; therefore, it is important to
use the appropriate strategies in the right trading environments. For example, applying trend-following or breakout trading strategies in quiet rangebound environments will usually lead to more losers than winners.
Mistake #10: Becoming a Demo Billionaire. Finally, don’t become a demo billionaire. Nothing can replace live trading. According to my
business partner, who loves to play video games with his son, trading a demo is like playing Halo 3 and thinking that you are ready for war. The
moment you hear a shell explode near you in real life, you’d pee your pants. Just because you can make 500 percent return in your demo doesn’t
mean that you will be able to do the same in a live account. Once you start to see losses of $1,000 or $5,000, nervousness will cause you to
question whether you should remain in the trade. One of the unique advantages of the forex market is that brokers provide new traders with different
sized accounts, which allows them to ease into live trading. After making consistent profits on the demo, open up a mini trading account with a
small amount of throwaway money. Make sure you can handle the psychological element of trading real money before you commit greater amounts
of capital.
Regardless of your risk tolerance, or whether you arrive at the airport an hour or three hours in advance of a flight, nobody likes to make a
mistake. Reviewing this list of the Top 10 Mistakes might save you from making one. Just make sure that you have a good reason for getting in and
out of each trade and don’t get emotional!
