momentum in the upward and downward direction, or what is commonly
referred to as overbought and oversold respectively. It is also important to point
out that an RSI level of 50 signiﬁes equal performance of up-periods versus
down-periods. The most common look-back period for RSI is 14. Some prefer
9 or 21, and I’ve seen some go as low as 3 and 5.
RSI is traditionally interpreted as “Sell when overbought and buy when
oversold.” This interpretation can be meaningful primarily in range-bound
markets with areas of predeﬁned support and resistance. It is important for
RSI to conﬁrm the direction of price. If price and RSI fail to conﬁrm each
other near support or resistance or during breaks of these levels, a change in
trend may be near. We can deﬁne conﬁrmation as new highs or new lows in
both instruments at approximately the same time.
If RSI travels above 70 while price fails to break resistance, you may
choose to be bearish in anticipation of a pullback because high levels of
momentum did not lead to price breaking resistance. Alternatively, if price
pierces resistance but RSI does not reach overbought, momentum is not
behind the new highs so you may choose to be bearish.

20

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

The opposite would be true for a bullish view. When RSI travels below
30 and price is holding above support, you might choose to be bullish because
large downside momentum did not force a break of support. Alternatively,
when RSI is above 30 and price pierces support you may choose to be bullish
because momentum to the downside is not strong and the break of support
may only be temporary.
Volume analysis is very complementary to these methods of using RSI.
If volume is light near resistance or support, it suggests market participants
have ﬁnished pushing price in that direction. There will be more discussion
of volume later.
RSI in a trending market is viewed differently. When a market is trending,
all we want to know is if it’s going to continue or reverse. If the overall trend
is down and RSI reaches an overbought reading, the trend may be changing
to an upward direction. The start of a trend change usually appears like
sideways movement. Therefore the rally that occurred in the downtrend to
cause the overbought reading is likely to at least partially correct itself because
the market isn’t fully conﬁdent in a change in trend yet. A trend change can
be conﬁrmed if RSI stays above oversold in the correction and when price
starts to break resistance or set higher highs.
RSI analysis can be more complex than what was just discussed. Another
way to interpret RSI is to identify periods of divergence. Divergence acts as a
warning sign that the trend may be changing. Bearish divergence (an opportunity to sell) occurs when price is making higher highs and RSI is making
lower highs. Bullish divergence (an opportunity to buy) is the opposite, when
price is making lower lows and RSI is making higher lows. The reason bearish
divergence is a warning sign of a change in trend is because price is getting
more expensive, but it is doing so at a slower rate. Market participants are still
pushing price higher but not as fast as they were when price was cheaper.
Finally, it is fairly common for RSI to be biased to the larger trend for
that security and the overall market. During uptrends, the RSI level tends to
become more overbought and less oversold. During downtrends, the RSI line
tends to become more oversold and less overbought. Therefore, in uptrends
you could anticipate the overbought level to be more like 75–80 and oversold
levels to be 35–40. In downtrends you could anticipate overbought levels of
55–60 and oversold levels of 20–25. These levels are a rule of thumb. What
is important is that when you use RSI, you start seeing the transition of RSI
levels in a downtrend to RSI levels in a range to RSI levels in an uptrend.
The violation of these levels is alerting and conﬁrming to a change in the
behavior of trend. Let’s take a look at an example of both divergence and
overbought/oversold bias.

Evidence of the Most Popular Technical Indicators

21

In Figure 1.12 there are seven zones to discuss where price and RSI
movements depict trend direction. In zone 1, price is in a downtrend and
is being coffered lower by a downward-sloping resistance line. Price set
four lower lows while RSI made three higher lows and did not get oversold on the fourth low (and was only .37 below the third low). This tells
us price is reaching the lowest levels in a long time but at a slower and
slower rate. Bullish divergence had presented itself and warned of a potential
bottom.
In zone 2, price breaks above the downward sloping resistance line but
RSI fails at 60, the overbought level for a downtrend. In zone 3, price stays
above the lows of zone 1 and RSI reaches 34, which is closer to oversold in
an uptrend than a downtrend. June, July, and August is starting to look more
and more like a range-bound market, or a double bottom, than a downtrend,
as RSI stays above 30 and below 70.
In zone 4, price breaks the range-bound highs and RSI breaks above 60
and then through 70, conﬁrming the uptrend. All RSI lows between zone 4,
5, and 6 are above the oversold level of 40; in fact they are at least 45, or
showing very bullish momentum. In zone 6, price has a huge thrust to the
upside with RSI exceeding 80. Price continued to higher highs after that, but
RSI did not reach overbought, showing lack of momentum into higher prices.
Price and momentum were diverging, bearishly, warning that price may be
forming a top.
In zone 7, RSI crossed below 45 for the ﬁrst time in a long time while
price broke down through multiple support levels. We can look for one of two
situations to occur that will specify a change in trend from up to sideways.
The ﬁrst is if price continues to decline and RSI reaches 30–35. The second
would be if price moves higher and fails to exceed the prior highs of 17–17.50,
all while RSI does not exceed 60 (the overbought level for a downtrend).

Moving Average Convergence/Divergence
Also known as MACD, moving average convergence/divergence, this indicator
falls in the trending category of studies mostly because it is based on moving
averages. By design, trending studies will experience some lag in their signals,
so they are best when used to conﬁrm signals from other indicators. Something
that is noteworthy about MACD and perhaps contributes to its popularity
is that it weights the most recent data points more, or exponentially calculates
to reduce its lag.
The default settings for this study across all systems are largely the same.
The MACD1 line is the spread between the 12- and 26-period exponential

22

1

Apr

May

Jun

Bullish Divergence
Jul

2

Aug
2010

3

Sep

4

Oct

Nov

5

Dec

Jan

Feb
2011

Bearish Divergence

6

Mar

7

Alcoa, Inc., with Examples of Bullish and Bearish RSI Divergence and Multiple Overbought and Oversold Levels

Bullish Divergence

FIGURE 1.12

20
0

100
80
60
40

10.00

11.00

13.00
12.00

14.00

15.00

16.00

18.00
17.00

Evidence of the Most Popular Technical Indicators

23

moving average. The signal line is the 9-period exponential moving average
of the MACD1 line. I ﬁnd that very few people actually change these periods.
Hopefully this explanation will encourage you to experiment. In Chapter 2,
by Julius de Kempenaer, you’ll see that he prefers the spread between the 10and 30-week moving averages. Interestingly enough, almost everyone seems
to keep the signal at a period of 9.
This produces an indicator that will oscillate between a positive and
negative value. A rule of thumb for many indicators is that when the value of
a line in an indicator turns positive, it is bullish, and when it turns negative, it
is bearish. A second rule of thumb to consider is that when a faster-moving line
(in this case the MACD1 line) crosses above a slower-moving line (signal),
a buy signal has occurred, and when a faster-moving line crosses below a
slower-moving line, a sell signal has occurred. Remember, these are rules of
thumb, not guarantees.
In Figure 1.13 there are two exponential moving averages on the price
chart. The dashed line is a 12-day average and the solid line is a 26-day average.
Below that is the MACD indicator where the MACD1 line is dashed and the
signal line is solid. According to the legends, the EMAVG (12) is 70.315 and
the EMAVG (26) is 68.4248. The 12-day average minus the 26-day average
equals 1.8902, which is equal to the MACD1 line in the bottom panel. If
the shorter-term average is less than the longer-term average, the MACD1
line value will be negative. If the shorter-term average is greater than the
longer-term average, the MACD1 line value will be positive. Therefore, the
MACD1 line is visualizing the crossing of the exponential moving averages
on the price chart.
The other component of the MACD indicator is the signal line. This
line is plotted to trail or smooth the MACD1 line for two reasons. First, it
allows the indicator to generate earlier signals of a potential change in trend.
It provides earlier sell signals when the MACD1 line crosses below the signal
line and earlier buy signals when the MACD1 line crosses above the signal
line. Considering where these crosses occur is important. The MACD1 line
crossing below the signal line while positive is an early sell signal. If the
MACD1 line crosses above the signal line while positive and far from the zero
line, a buy signal has not occurred because the trend is already very bullish.
Second, the signal line conﬁrms a trend change when it turns into a positive
or negative value after the MACD1 line turns.
Last, the slope of the MACD1 and signal line—positive, negative, or
transitioning—can have a bearing on the overall direction of trend. In situations shown in zone 2 of Figure 1.13, you’ll see how this can become
important.

24

BA US

Jun

2008

Sep

MACD (12,26) 1.8902

Dec

2

Mar

Jun
2009

Bullish Divergence

Sig (9) 1.5122

Bullish Divergence

1

Sep

EMAVG (12) on close 70.315

Dec

Mar

EMAVG (26) on close 68.4248

Moving Average Convergence/Divergence Example: Boeing Company

Boeing Co/The - Last Price 71.64 -.16

FIGURE 1.13

3

Jun
2010

Sep

Dec

4

Mar
2011

-8.00

-6.00

-4.00

-2.00

1.8902
0.00

4.00

6.00

30

40

50

60

71.64
66.4210

80

Evidence of the Most Popular Technical Indicators

25

In Figure 1.13, four zones have been highlighted to provide an example
of how the indicator works. In zone 1, price is in a downtrend as deﬁned by
the resistance of the downward-sloping trend line and the 12-day exponential
moving average. As price reaches lower lows in March 2009, MACD makes
higher lows. This can be considered bullish divergence, as we discussed in the
RSI example. I ﬁnd that fewer people consider divergence on MACD, but
I have come across some who do. In this instance, the divergence between
MACD and price means the rolling spread between the two moving averages
of price has become smaller despite price going lower. In other words, the
moving averages are closer to a bullish cross than at the last low in price, and
now price is even lower.
In the transition from zone 1 into zone 2, price broke above the trend line
and both moving averages. In the center of zone 2, the MACD1 line turned
positive. If you were using just the moving averages on price, you may have
been concerned because price dipped below them and then they bearishly
crossed. Deeper interpretation of the MACD can help in situations like this.
The MACD1 line did not cross the signal line and it hovered at, and to just
below, the zero line. Most important, it stayed above the signal line and the
signal line maintained a bullish direction, or a positive slope. At the end of
zone 2, the signal line turned positive.
In zone 3, price had its ﬁrst bearish signal in the uptrend, which is
represented by the MACD1 line crossing below the signal line. From zone 3
to the end of the chart a range-bound market formed where deﬁned support
and resistance is present, at about $58 and $74 respectively.
In zone 4, the moving averages on price turned ﬂat or sideways and the
MACD1 and signal line took a dive, coming very close to the baseline (or
zero). At this point we can still consider the trend as up. For it to continue,
we will need to see price close above prior highs of $74.22, and the MACD
lines to be pointing higher (positive slope). If price breaks below $58.78, the
MACD lines will likely have turned negative already and a downtrend will be
present.

Bollinger Bands
In basic theory, the Bollinger Bands study attempts to point out overbought
or oversold markets. It does so by calculating a moving average of price
and measuring two standard deviations above and below it. The traditional
application will measure two standard deviations above and below a 20-period
moving average. Therefore, in general terms, price should be inside of these
bands about 95 percent of the time.

26

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

The generally accepted signals are to sell if price closes above the upper
band (+2sd) and buy if price closes below the lower band (–2sd). In doing
so, a market participant expects price to revert to the mean, which is where
he or she would exit the trade.
Because of the chosen method of calculating this study, the distance
between the bands will vary. Narrower bands signify a low-volatility market,
or a smaller average dispersion of data points. Wider bands signify a more
volatile market, or a larger average dispersion of data points. Knowing which
scenario to trade and how to do it is important.
From my experiences, wider bands offer better opportunities than narrow
bands for a mean reversion trade. Narrow bands are more useful for determining the future direction of trend. In Figure 1.14, there are two shaded zones,
zone 1 and zone 2. There is also a derivative of the Bollinger Band in the
lower panel called bandwidth. The bandwidth is a measure of how far apart
the upper and lower deviation bands have been. The horizontal line drawn
on the bandwidth is an average of the bandwidth over that timeframe. This
tells us if the security is experiencing high or low volatility on a relative basis.
A regression line or average line with standard deviations could be applied as
well.
Zone 1 is an ideal situation for a mean reversion trade. The arrow points
to a bar and is labeled “Sell” where price closed above the upper band. Notice
the bar before it opened above it but did not close above it. The level of the
close is most important in this scenario, and in many other indicators. The
day after the sell bar, price actually crept slightly higher, but then reverted
to the mean, providing a gain of $0.67. This was an ideal situation to sell
because the bandwidth was well above the average and price traded above the
upper band the day.
There is also a “Buy” signal in zone 1. This signal wasn’t as ideal as the sell
signal because the bands were at average distance. You may notice when the
bandwidth is average to wide, price tends to ride the band for just a couple
of periods. So the ﬁrst break or test of the band is likely followed by another.
If you were going to buy at that point on the chart, you waited through four
periods of sideways movement for price to revert higher. If you were long, it
was encouraging to see that price never closed below the close of the buy bar.
Then price reverted to the mean for a gain of $0.91.
Zone 2 is an application I see or hear less of than the one shown in
zone 1. The concept of low volatility suggests a pause in the prior direction
of trend. Essentially, investors are done chasing price higher or lower and
price begins moving sideways. Price doesn’t move sideways forever. Therefore
the identiﬁcation of narrow bands over a period of time combined with a

27

Sep 30

Oct 15

BollW (MSFT) 8.1725

Oct 29

Sell

Nov 15
2010

1

Nov 30

Buy

Bollinger Bands: Microsoft Corporation

Microsoft Corp - Last Price 25.5128 + .2682

FIGURE 1.14

Dec 15

Dec 31

Sell?

Jan 14

Buy?

Jan 31
Feb 14
2011

2

Buy?

Feb 28

6.00
4.00

8.1725

14.00
12.00
10.00

23.00

24.00

25.00

25.5128
25.1797

26.00

26.2524

27.00

27.3252

28.00

29.00

30.00

28

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

breakthrough of those bands suggests a new direction of trend, not a mean
reversion trade. That trade will likely come again a little later after volatility,
or a greater-than-average bandwidth, returns.
In zone 2, there is an arrow pointing to a bar marked “Sell?” At that point
in time, the bandwidth was very narrow. Since price was in an uptrend and
volatility declined, suggesting a pause or potential reversal in trend, it is not
advisable to sell because the proﬁt opportunity is much less than the zone 1
examples because the moving average is closer to the deviation bands. The
next arrow in zone 2 says “Buy?” The same logic can be applied here. The
bands are narrow, there is low volatility to proﬁt from, and we’re uncertain if
price is forming a topping or continuation pattern.
Toward the end of zone 2 is a second “Buy?” point. Once you see price
setting lower lows and the bandwidth rising above average, a new trend is
likely beginning, in this instance to the downside. In this scenario you could
attempt to sell the riding of the lower band to proﬁt from the continually
expanding volatility. The “riding of the bands” mentioned earlier tends to
occur for longer timeframes when bands go from narrow to expanding. You
could also wait for a few volatile bars where price gaps below the two-standarddeviation band while bandwidth expands and consider a mean reversion trade
like zone 1.

Stochastics
Stochastics (STO) is a momentum study similar to RSI. It oscillates between
0 and 100 and has overbought and oversold levels that are typically set at 80
and 20. The indicator has one line that calculates the actual stochastic and
then three additional lines that smooth the stochastic repeatedly. These lines
are called %K, %D, %DS, and %DSS respectively. For some undisclosed
reason, the calculations of this study on multiple charting applications differ
from one another. According to the Bloomberg Professional Service, the %D
and %DS, or the once- and double-smoothed stochastic, tend to be the go-to
series of the indicator, so we will focus our discussion on these.
The goal of the study is to tell a market participant if price is closing closer
to the highs or lows over time. As you can imagine, in an uptrend we would
expect price to be closing closer to the highs, and in a downtrend closer to
the lows. Therefore, the turning down of the stochastic while overbought and
crossing back into the neutral zone (below 80) is a bearish signal. The turning
up of the stochastic while oversold and crossing back into the neutral zone
(above 20) is a bullish signal. Divergence, as discussed with RSI and MACD,

Evidence of the Most Popular Technical Indicators

29

can most certainly be applied to the stochastic indicator and is something
Cynthia Kase delves into further in Chapter 4.
Figure 1.15 displays the previously discussed signals. Zone 1 is a classic
signal of bearish divergence. The %D and %DS lines stayed overbought for
quite some time and ﬁnally began diverging from rising price. When the %D
and %DS lines both exited overbought territory, or crossed below 80, is also
when the bearish divergence was conﬁrmed.
Zone 2 just barely had a buy signal from the stochastic lines as the %D
reached 17 and the %DS reached 20. It is ideal to question signals like this
until a clearer, more opportunistic situation appears, like the bullish divergence
that occurred right after it.
Zone 3 had a few signals going on. Price broke above a downward-sloping
trend line and the highs of the prior consolidation. You may have noticed
that this is a candle chart, which allows us to apply candle pattern theory,
an important part of interpreting market actions. During the three trading
days after the break above the prior consolidation highs, three doji candles
appeared. (A doji candle represents market participant indecision and balance
between supply and demand. The buyers balance out the sellers and vice
versa. It signals a pause in the prior trend.)
The ﬁrst candle in zone 3 gapped higher at the open and closed lower on
the day, engulﬁng the prior doji candle, or forming a bearish engulﬁng pattern.
This pattern is a trend-reversal signal because the current day’s trading activity
completely reversed throughout the course of the day and turned yesterday’s
indecision to bearish by closing lower. Therefore, the bullish trend line break
and the highs above the prior consolidation highs were being reconsidered.
The second candle in zone 3 caused a bearish cross of the stochastic lines
and shortly thereafter they crossed below 80, providing a sell signal. If candle
pattern analysis is of interest to you, I would strongly suggest you review the
recommended readings at the end of this chapter.
In zone 4, price formed a long-legged doji and then reversed to the upside.
In zone 5, we received a sell signal from a possible position taken from zone
4. Zone 6 is another example of a standard buy signal.

Directional Movement Indicator
The directional movement indicator (DMI) falls into the category of a trending
study. The calculation is somewhat in-depth, so I’ve come to explain it as
follows. In an uptrend, we should expect price to make higher highs and
higher lows. In a downtrend, we should expect price to make lower lows and
lower highs. The mapping of this relationship over time is more or less the

30

Apr 15

Apr 30

Bearish
Divergence

1

Bearish
Divergence

Stochastics on the S&P 500

Mar 31

FIGURE 1.15

May 14

Bullish
Divergence
May 28
Jun 15
2010

Bullish
2 Divergence
3

Jun 30

4

Jul 15

Jul 30

Aug 16

5

Aug 31

6

0

26.3519
19.0659

40

60

80

100

1050

1080.29

1100

1150

1200

1250

Evidence of the Most Popular Technical Indicators

31

goal of the +DMI and –DMI lines, which represent up movement and down
movement, respectively. In theory, if the +DMI is greater than the –DMI,
it is bullish. If the –DMI is greater than the +DMI, it is bearish. We can’t
jump to these conclusions, however, until we consider the average directional
movement (ADX).
Derived from the +DMI and –DMI lines, the ADX line suggests that
the market is trending in the direction of the greater DMI line if it is above
25. If it is below 25, it suggests that the trend is weak or range bound. If the
