
21 506455-ch15.indd 246

9/24/09 10:38:30 PM

Chapter 15: Performing “Top-Down” Fundamental Analysis

247

It’s not a recession until NBER says so
How do you know if the economy is in a recession or worse? The old rule of thumb was if your
neighbor was out of a job, the economy was in
a recession, and if you were out of work, it was
a depression. Fundamental analysts, though,
need a better indication.
And that’s where the National Bureau of
Economic Research, or NBER, comes in. The
NBER is a private and nonprofit organization,
founded in 1920, that researches the health
of the economy. One of the NBER’s roles is
to officially pronounce when a recession
begins and ends. You can see when every U.S.

business expansion and contraction started
here: http://wwwdev.nber.org/
cycles/cyclesmain.html.
While the NBER is extremely helpful, it has its
limits. One of the biggest criticisms is that the
NBER doesn’t officially pronounce the beginning of a recession until the economy has been
contracting for some time. For instance, the
NBER didn’t determine that December 2007 was
the peak in economic activity until November
2008. Gee, thanks guys. And that’s why, as a fundamental analyst, you can’t rely solely on the
NBER to signal when tough times are coming.

Using government statistics to track
the economy’s movements
When it comes to economic statistics, sadly, there isn’t a single number or even
source that will give you everything you need to know. Until an economist starts
Economic Indicators ‘R Us, it’s up to you, as a fundamental analyst, to know
which economic data are important and where to get them. Below is a checklist
of some of the important measures of economic activity, or economic indicators,
you’ll want to be aware of.
✓ Gross domestic product, or GDP: GDP is arguably the most popular measure of a country’s economy. GDP measures how much action an economy
has going on by tallying up the amount of consumption, investment, government spending and difference between exports and imports within a
nation’s borders. The GDP of the U.S. is available from the U.S. Department
of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis at www.bea.gov.
✓ Inflation: Have your grandparents ever told you how they were able to
buy a carton of milk for a penny? The reason that carton of milk now
costs $1 or more is inflation, or rising prices. Inflation is critical to fundamental analysis since it is connected to interest rates. For instance, if
inflation starts rising uncontrollably, the Federal Reserve may need to
increase short-term interest rates to slow down demand, which could
hurt the value of companies.
Key measures of inflation include the Consumer Price Index, Producer
Price Index, and wages. Those measures track how much prices of

21 506455-ch15.indd 247

9/24/09 10:38:30 PM

248 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
consumer goods, industrial goods, and employee wages are rising.
Deflation occurs when prices fall. Each of these measures is available from
the U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics at stats.bls.gov.
✓ Interest rates: You’ll want to keep at least one eye on interest rates at all
times while performing your fundamental analysis. The Federal Reserve
lets you see where short-term interest rates are, based on the intended federal funds rate, at www.federalreserve.gov/fomc/fundsrate.htm.
✓ Regional economic activity: Sometimes it can be useful to see which
parts of the country are doing better — or worse — than others. That
type of regional economic activity is provided by the Federal Reserve in
its Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions, commonly
known as the Beige Book. You may access these reports here: www.
federalreserve.gov/FOMC/BeigeBook/2009/.

Getting a Jump on the Future Using
Leading Economic Indicators
While fundamental analysts may appreciate the value of economic indicators,
there’s a major problem. Nearly all economic indicators are backward-looking,
meaning that they reflect what has happened, rather than what is likely to
happen in the future. Successful fundamental analysis is all about accurately
forecasting what might happen to a company’s profits and revenue over the
next years to decades. You’ll want to pay close attention to leading economic
indicators, or those that are more revealing about how the economy might
look in the future.

Paying attention to the Conference
Board Leading Economic Index
Trying to figure out what’s wrong with the economy is kind of like determining why a baby is sick. You might know the baby isn’t well, judging by a
103-degree fever, but it’s not like you can ask what hurts and get a coherent
answer.
Similarly, determining what ails the economy, or trickier yet, what might
make it sick in the future, is equally problematic. The economy may show
signs of illness, with weakness in many of the indicators discussed above, but
it can be difficult to pinpoint the source of the issues.
Don’t feel bad if you’re not very good at predicting when the economy is falling apart or when it’s improving. Even leading economists routinely make bad
forecasts about the economy’s direction.

21 506455-ch15.indd 248

9/24/09 10:38:30 PM

Chapter 15: Performing “Top-Down” Fundamental Analysis

249

The Conference Board Leading Economic Index attempts to give everyone a
way to see what’s hurting the economy and whether or not things are getting
better or worse. The indicator gets a forward-looking read on the economy
by examining the following 10 factors:
✓ Real money supply: The number of dollars in the economic system ready
to be lent and spent. Money supply is kind of like the lubrication of the
economy. Money supply serves the same role as motor oil in a car engine.
✓ Interest-rate spread: This measures how costly it is to borrow money.
When consumers and businesses can borrow at an affordable rate, economic activity tends to pick up.
✓ Consumer expectations: When consumers are worried about their jobs and
financial futures, they cut their spending. That slows down the economy.
✓ Manufacturers’ new orders for nondefense capital goods: If companies
are feeling better about the future, they may purchase new equipment
and plan to expand.
✓ Manufacturers’ new orders for consumer goods and materials:
Companies ramping up production need to buy more ingredients to feed
into their factories.
✓ Average weekly initial claims for unemployment: Companies slash
jobs when they don’t see economic activity getting better. Plus, more
people out of work means fewer consumers to buy goods and services.
✓ Building permits: Companies must get permits to construct new properties, so a slowdown in permits indicates a less bullish view of the future.
✓ Average weekly manufacturing hours: Large manufacturers may ask
workers to cut back their hours if they need to trim costs or have
employees work overtime if they expect a boom in demand.
✓ Stock prices: Investors will generally start buying stocks if they expect
the economy to recover within six months or so. Watching the stock
market’s moves is such a valuable, early predictor of economic cycles.
I’ll discuss it more fully below.
✓ Index of supplier deliveries: One of the first things companies do when
they expect things to get better is place orders with their vendors.
The Conference Board makes its Leading Economic Index available for free, as a
press release, here: http://www.conference-board.org/economics/bci.

21 506455-ch15.indd 249

9/24/09 10:38:30 PM

250 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Using the stock market as your
economic early warning system
If you’re looking for an early tip-off to when the economy is either headed
for the toilet or about to improve, it’s tough to beat the stock market. Since
investors are always looking to the future, traditionally, the stock market
will signal roughly three to six months ahead of time, in what direction the
economy will head.
Again, the stock market demonstrated its predictive power in 2007. The
Standard & Poor’s 500 set its bull-market peak on October 2007, and started
sliding dramatically from that point. Investors who noticed the stock market
topped in October 2007 were tipped off that the economy was struggling more
than a year before the NBER made the formal announcement.
If you’re interested in finding out more about using the stock market indexes
to help you see where the economy is headed, check out Chapter 19, where I
go over the techniques used by technical analysts.

21 506455-ch15.indd 250

9/24/09 10:38:30 PM

Part IV

Getting Advanced
with Fundamental
Analysis

22 506455-pp04.indd 251

9/24/09 10:40:06 PM

A

In this part . . .

fter you study more companies, you’ll get more proficient and start looking for ways to take fundamental
analysis to the next level. This part covers some of the more
advanced aspects of fundamental analysis worth taking a
look at once you’re comfortable with the basics. I show you
how important it is to understand a company’s industry and
how to spot trends developing in a company’s business.
Because often the way to be a good investor is by sidestepping financial land mines, I show you how to spot companies
with danger signs that are worth noting.

22 506455-pp04.indd 252

9/24/09 10:40:06 PM

Chapter 16

Digging into an Industry’s
Fundamentals
In This Chapter
▶ Understanding how a company’s value may be affected by the industry it’s in
▶ Getting in sync with the unique characteristics of different industries
▶ Comparing one company’s fundamentals with its industry’s to gain better insight
▶ Realizing how important the concept of market share is in powering a company’s profit

I

f you want to know what your kids are up to at school, just look at their
friends and you’ll get a pretty good idea. It’s also common for employees
at a company to adopt similar behavior, called corporate culture.
As strange as it might sound, you can learn quite a bit about companies, too,
by examining what other companies they’re lumped in with. Oftentimes, companies in the same line of work, or industry, have similar financial characteristics and idiosyncrasies. The industry a company is in can also contribute to
its stock price performance.
Understanding what kind of company a company keeps is an important piece
of the fundamental analysis puzzle. While you may understand an individual
company by reviewing its financial statements, it’s vital to understand the
environment that company operates in and the industry dynamics at work.
You’ll discover the ins and outs of industry analysis in this chapter. Not only
will you see how a company’s industry can influence its value, but you’ll also
see how a company’s fortunes may rise and fall along with the business cycle.
Another key aspect of industry analysis is determining how well a company is
doing relative to its peers. And the crucial topic of market share is discussed,
as it shows how smaller companies can benefit if they can successfully steal
away business from their larger and more entrenched rivals.

23 506455-ch16.indd 253

9/24/09 10:39:39 PM

254 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Realizing How a Company’s Industry
Can Influence Its Value
The rise and fall of companies and industries follows a pretty standard script.
Generally, things kick off when entrepreneurs get frustrated with the products that don’t seem to fit some kind of need they might have. By tinkering
on the kitchen table or in the garage, these entrepreneurs may create a prototype of a product and often literally sell them out of the back of their cars.
Before you know it, this little company grows and, for whatever reason, the
product might get so popular it threatens the survival of the companies that
sold the undesirable products in the first place. Entire industries are born, and
sometimes destroyed, by this constant upheaval in our economic system.
You want to be aware when a company you’re investing in might be threatened
by a game-changing company or new technology. Almost overnight, all the revenue and earnings on the financial statements might not be meaningful if the
business model, or way the company makes its money, is turned upside down.
The constant assault against established industries is part of our capitalist
system. Remember air travel threatened railroads, personal computers
threatened large mainframe systems used in business, and the Internet is an
attack on traditional media. The battle for companies, and entire industries,
to remain relevant in light of new ways of doing things is something you need
to account for in your fundamental analysis.

The rise and fall of industries
One of the biggest threats to fundamental analysis is the constant danger someone will come
along with a groundbreaking new business that
threatens the old way of making money in the
industry. One of the classic examples of this is
what has happened in photography. Eastman
Kodak became a blue chip company, thanks to
its dominance of photography, which relied on
costly chemical processing and film. Rivals that
tried to take on Eastman Kodak had difficulty
competing.

giant consumer electronics firms elbowed
their way into the photography business with
digital technology. At first, the photo quality of digital cameras was very poor. But that
quickly changed and by 2008, 65% of U.S.
households had at least one digital camera.
Chemical camera sales became just a sliver of
the market. Suddenly Kodak faced dozens of
new competitors, such as Sony and Casio, it
had never faced before.

But in the early 1990s, Kodak saw its industry
get turned virtually upside down. Suddenly,

23 506455-ch16.indd 254

9/24/09 10:39:39 PM

Chapter 16: Digging into an Industry’s Fundamentals

255

What’s in an industry?
If you tell someone in Los Angeles you’re in “the industry” they might assume
you’re in the movie business and try to get you to look at their script. In
Detroit, people in the Motor City industry are involved in making cars.
But when it comes to fundamental analysis, the term industry has a pretty
precise meaning. At its most basic level, a company’s industry is the line of
work it’s in. But that’s not a scientific enough definition for fundamental
analysts; they’re pretty precise folks, if you haven’t noticed already.
Instead of just saying, for instance, Ford is in the auto industry, fundamental
analysts break things down into more detail. Most fundamental analysts use
a classification standard called the Global Industry Classification Standard,
or GICS, to put companies into their places. GICS puts every industry into
a sector, industry group, industry and sub-industry. GICS was co-created by
Standard & Poor’s and MSCI Barra, two companies that specialize in creating
ways to classify companies.
If you’ve ever seen Russian nesting dolls, or matryoshka dolls, you already
know exactly how GICS works. The sector is the largest classification, inside
of which fit the industry group, industry and sub-industry. Just as you open
the largest Russian nesting doll and find a smaller one and so forth, the same
goes with GICS. Once you see what sector a company is in, you can then see
which industry group, industry and sub-industry it’s in. All these classifications fit neatly inside of each other.
Ford is a good example of how all this GICS stuff works. The company falls into
the Consumer Discretionary sector, which contains all sorts of industry groups
that make big-ticket items consumers buy, such as consumer durables. Digging
further, you find Ford goes into the Automobiles & Components industry
group, which contains the auto components and automaking industries. Next,
Ford fits into the Automobiles industry, which includes two sub-industries:
automobile manufacturers and motorcycle manufacturers. And Ford makes
cars and trucks, so it goes into the Automobile Manufacturers sub-industry.
The GICS system is pretty comprehensive. Table 16-1 shows you how many
sectors, industry groups, industries and sub-industries there are.

Table 16-1

Breaking Down The GICS

Classification type

Number of types

Sectors

10

Industry groups

24
(continued)

23 506455-ch16.indd 255

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

256 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Table 16-1 (continued)
Classification type

Number of types

Industries

68

Sub-industries

154

Source: Standard & Poor’s, http://www2.standardandpoors.com/spf/pdf/index/SP_
Global_Sector_Indices_Factsheet.pdf?vregion=us&vlang=en

Just as scientists periodically change their classifications to make room for
new developments regarding heavenly bodies, the same goes for industries.
I’m still shocked scientists stripped away the planet title from Pluto in 2006.
The GICS changes a little over time, too. Sometimes industries, for instance, are
added, deleted or merged to reflect changes in the economy. Sometimes individual companies, too, are moved from different industries or sub-industries.
It’s probably easiest to see how all these GICS sectors, industry groups,
industries and sub-industries fit together by looking at a table. There are literally thousands of sub-industries, but Table 16-2 gives you a very small summary of what the basic structure of the GICS looks like.

Table 16-2

A Small Piece of the GICS Puzzle

Sector

Industry group

Industry

Sub-industry

Energy

Energy

Energy equipment
and services

Oil and gas
drilling

Oil, gas, and
consumable fuels

Integrated oil
and gas

Chemicals

Commodity
chemicals

Containers
and packaging

Metal and glass
containers

Capital goods

Aerospace and
defense

Aerospace and
defense

Transportation

Road and rail

Railroads

Automobiles and
components

Automobiles

Automobile
manufacturers

Materials

Industrials

Consumer
discretionary

Materials

Motorcycle
manufacturers

23 506455-ch16.indd 256

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

Chapter 16: Digging into an Industry’s Fundamentals
Sector

Industry group

Industry

Sub-industry

Consumer staples

Food, beverage
& tobacco

Beverages

Brewers

Health care

Health care
equipment &
services

Health care
equipment &
supplies

Health care
equipment

Pharmaceuticals,
biotechnology &
life sciences

Biotechnology

Biotechnology

Banks

Commercial
banks

Diversified banks

Insurance

Insurance

Insurance
brokers

Information
technology

Software &
services

Software

Application
software

Telecommunication
services

Telecommunication
services

Diversified telecommunication
services

Wireless telecommunication
services

Utilities

Utilities

Financials

Electric utilities

257

Electric
utilities

Source: Standard & Poor’s, http://www2.standardandpoors.com/portal/site/sp/en/
us/page.topic/indices_gics/2,3,1,7,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.html

Following the ups and downs of industries
Just as the economy expands and contracts along with the business cycle
as discussed in Chapter 15, industries also have their ups and downs. Some
sectors, for instance, tend to see their business rise and fall along with the
economy. These are called cyclical companies, and includes industries such
as the automakers. Then there are sectors that tend to be noncyclical, meaning that their performance tend to not be all that connected to the economy’s
shape. The health care industry is a good example of a sector that’s usually
noncyclical.
Some fundamental analysts use industry analysis to clue into what point of the
business cycle the economy is in. By paying attention to which industries (or
sectors) are posting the best results, or the strongest stock prices, you can get
a hint as to where the economy is head.
You can see how different sectors and stocks tend to outperform during the
different parts of the business cycle in Table 16-3.

23 506455-ch16.indd 257

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

258 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Table 16-3

Using Sectors to Monitor the Economy

During this point in the business
cycle . . .

. . . This Sector Starts to Outperform

Early expansion

Consumer discretionary

Early peak

Materials

Late peak

Industrials

Late expansion

Energy

Early contraction

Health care

Early trough

Consumer staples

Late trough

Utilities and financials

Late contraction

Information technology

Source: Standard & Poor’s

You can review the different phases of the business cycle in Chapter 15.

How to Track How Sectors Are Doing
If you want to find out how an individual company or its stock is doing, it’s
relatively simple. A company’s financial statements, as described in Chapter 4,
can be dug out pretty easily. And you can get stock quotes on just about any
company from your brokerage firm or from financial Web sites.
But what if you want to know which sector is leading the economy or stock
market? That’s what I’ll show you next.

Keeping tabs on a sectors’ fundamentals
If you wanted to tally up how companies in a sector are doing, you could, in
theory, do it by hand. You could get a list of all the companies in a sector and
open each company’s financial statements and add everything up. But, man,
that would be a great deal of work you can avoid.
It’s much easier to get fundamental data on sectors from companies that track
these types of things very closely. S&P is one of the companies with massive
databases dedicated to tracking all the earnings reported by companies and
compiling them into a resource you, as a fundamental analyst, may use. All
the earnings for the companies in all 10 sectors are compiled and provided to
you here: http://www2.standardandpoors.com/portal/site/sp/en/
us/page.topic/indices_500/2,3,2,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,6,0,0,0,0,0.
html.

23 506455-ch16.indd 258

9/24/09 10:39:40 PM

Chapter 16: Digging into an Industry’s Fundamentals

259

You’ll be amazed at how quickly you can process the sector data from hundreds of companies using the S&P’s data. For instance, you can not only see
how quickly earnings in the 10 sectors rose or fell in the past couple of years,
but you can also monitor how rapidly analysts expect the sectors’ earnings
to rise or fall in the future. S&P also provides data showing the average priceto-earnings ratio of companies in the sector. You can review how to interpret
the P-E ratio in Chapter 8. Some of the sector data you can obtain from S&P
looks like what you see in Table 16-4:

Table 16-4

Digging into The Sectors’ Fundamentals

S&P Sector

Change in
earnings (2008)

P-E for 2008

Consumer
discretionary

-60.3%

25.5

Consumer staples

10%

11.9

Energy

10%
