
As those same spreads widen, now euros are borrowed and paid back in
British pounds. This is a buy euro/British pound situation. As spreads narrow, sell euro/British pound because business will be conducted instead in
British pound/U.S. dollar, the premier currency pair that will earn more

246

Inside the Currency Market

British pounds for the UK. euro/British pound in this instance is the funding
pair, and performed as expected when these pairs were introduced in the latter part of the 1990s. It was meant to facilitate ﬁnance across borders when
cost became too high in the premier currency pairs.
In terms of U.K. trading, euro/British pound will always move counter to
British pound/U.S. dollar. If gilt prices and the stock market rise, euro/British
pound will always fall. Conversely, if gilt prices fall along with the stock market, euro/British pound will always rise. Euro/British pound as conﬁgured is
a yield seeker, so it looks for its yields opposite a British pound/U.S. dollar
gilt follower. Euro/British pound is not connected to the bond price nor is it
measured in terms of economic performance, but it can be viewed in its price
term as a measure of economic performance.
A high euro/British pound price in London trading warns that economic performance is not healthy so one can note its price in terms of British
pound/U.S. dollar as an overall indicator. Since both move counter to each
other, one pair is always a short while the other pair is always a long. If for
whatever reason both move together, this represents market uncertainty and a
market gift, because one pair will be sold or bought to normalize the market.
The proﬁt potential can be enormous when market gifts are offered in this
manner. In U.S. dollar terms, euro/British pound pays almost $2 per pip,
better than British pound/U.S. dollar at $1 per pip.
Yet British pound/euro will react quite differently because it becomes tied
to gilts and the FTSE while the euro side attaches perfectly to bund Yields
and the DAX. If the DAX is up in Frankfurt and the FTSE is up in London,
British pound/euro is a clear long, and a clear short if both are down.
The recommendation is to trade pairs during London trading that are
euro, British pound, Japanese yen, or U.S. dollar related and arrange the
pairs based on gilt and yield movements. It is not recommended to trade for
example Australian dollar/Canadian dollar or any unrelated pair attached to
the gilt yield conﬁguration.
In U.S. trading, British pound of euro/British pound follows the Treasury
bond price up and down while the euro seeks Treasury Yields and follows
yields up and down.
Japanese Yen

As the three-hour time frame ends to trade JGB futures in London trading, the connection for Japanese yen will switch to Nikkei 225 futures and
Globex will be the measure of direction. Japanese yen in the second part of

Stock and Bond Markets

247

the currency-pair equation will connect to the Nikkei for the remainder of
London trading.
The British pound/Japanese yen will then connect as the British pound
to the gilt price and Japanese yen to the Nikkei 225. As yield spreads narrow,
buy British pound/Japanese yen and sell when spreads widen. Spreads narrow
when the FTSE is down and the Nikkei is up. Spreads widen when the FTSE
is up and the Nikkei falls.
U.S. Dollar

The U.S. dollar as the second side of the currency-pair equation can be measured by the S&P 500, and again Globex is the measure. British pound/U.S.
dollar will be tied to gilts and the U.S. dollar to the S&P 500.
British Pound/Canadian Dollar

Canadian interest rates are currently1.00 percent and Great Britain is 0.50
percent. This present equation is slightly misaligned if this was a trade to
go long. Since the Canadian market is a yield seeker and the British pound
is tied to gilt performance, the only method to go long this pair in the last
two hours of London trading is if the FTSE is down and the Canadian stock
market is down. Spreads would then compress and allow proﬁts on the long,
but this trade must be held only for the last two hours of London trade
because the British pound conﬁguration will change once London trading
closes. The opposite effect also holds. If spreads widen, it’s a clear short, particularly when the gilt is tied to performance that sends gilt yields down and
the Canadian market seeks yields as the TMX rises. Stated differently, why
would anyone borrow British pounds at 0.50 percent and pay it back at 1.00
percent? The overall trend is down in this conﬁguration and up as Canadian
dollar/British pound.
British Pound/Swiss Franc

This is an unusual pair, because both are tied to respective bond economic
performance. The British pound present interest rate is 0.50 percent and Swiss
franc is 0.25 percent. Swiss franc in Swiss markets rise when the Domestic
Bond Index, the SBI, rises. If the SBI is up and the gilt price is up along with

248

Inside the Currency Market

the FTSE, go long the British pound/Swiss franc and go short when both fall.
In U.S. markets, the Swiss franc will rise and fall with Treasury bond prices,
while the British pound will rise and fall with bond yields. All three markets
will eventually trade together during a trading day. New York markets will
dominate direction. Due to present interest-rate conﬁgurations, the overall
trend is buy British pound/Swiss franc and sell Swiss franc/British pound.
British Pound

As London trading closes, British pound will no longer tie to the gilt price.
British pound will then seek yields in Frankfurt, New York, and Canadian
trade. Frankfurt has one hour of trade remaining, so the Canadian and New
York markets become the best trade opportunities for British pound.
In Canadian markets, British pound/Canadian dollar would work well.
As the TMX rises on the Toronto Exchange and Canadian bonds fall, yields
will rise. This is a long British pound/Canadian dollar, provided London is
closed and the gilt connection is broken. If London is open and the FTSE
and TMX are up, British pound/Canadian dollar is an easy long trade.
For U.S. markets, as the New York market is up, yields will rise and bond
prices will fall. This sends British pound/U.S. dollar up, and down when New
York markets are down with yields as the bond price rises.
Japanese Nikkei 225 and TOPIX Indices

As can be expected, the Japanese are quite different in their methodology and
calculation of their stock indices, the TOPIX and Nikkei 225, because both
are light years apart and have various meanings.
The world reports and focuses on the Nikkei 225 because it is calculated in yen while the Tokyo Stock Price Index (TOPIX indices), are factored
in point terms. TOPIX indices are calculated by the Tokyo Stock Exchange
while the Nikkei is calculated by Nihon-Keizai Shimbun, a popularly read
newspaper in Japan distributed by Nikkei Digital Media. TOPIX indices are
free-ﬂoat adjusted with a market capitalization weight while the Nikkei is an
average-price weight where higher-priced stocks impact the index.
The Nikkei is comprised of 225 top Japanese companies while TOPIX
indices are multi-faceted indices that comprise the TOPIX, 30, 70, 100, 500,
and 1000 and include economic sectors such as the TOPIX Transportation
index, Bank index, Energy, and Electric appliances to name a few of the many

Stock and Bond Markets

249

that exist. The Nikkei comprises 225 companies, while total TOPIX companies include 1700 traded on the TSE. The BOJ and Japanese Government
focus on TOPIX to gauge economic conditions, while the Nikkei is never
considered. This means the Nikkei 225 is a market measure while the TOPIX
is an economic measure for policymakers. The Nikkei 225 in yen traded outside Japan for about 20 years while Nikkei 225-U.S. dollar terms was introduced in 2004. Both trade on the CME.
The TSE opens at 9:00 a.m. and closes at 3:00 p.m. Tokyo time. Futures
trading on the TSE holds the same hours, except evening trading in JGBs from
3:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. From 11:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., the exchange is closed
for lunch, but consideration is under way to extend lunch for one hour.
Tokyo openings represent a one-hour trade difference between Sydney
and Tokyo so pairs such as Australian dollar/Japanese yen should be evaluated. Wellington, New Zealand, represents a four-hour difference, so New
Zealand dollar/Japanese yen should also be evaluated before or during Tokyo
trade. The three-hour JGB extended opening allows JGBs to be carried over
and traded for the ﬁrst three hours of London trade. This allows Japanese yen
to be priced in London and Frankfurt markets.
The overall trend for the Nikkei has been down since 2005 due to
horrid economic circumstances. Consider a few examples from the TSE
2010 Fact Book.
Currently, stock dividends are taxed at 10 percent with a scheduled 10 percent
increase in 2012. Capital gains are currently taxed at 10 percent with a
10 percent increase scheduled in 2012. Three percent of the 10 percent tax is
an inhabitant tax that is standard across all prefectures. JGBs have a separate
and equally abusive tax. That explains why the majority of Japanese trading
occurs from offshore accounts outside of Japan. Overall the Japanese economy
has been in an economic slump since the Asian crisis in the late 1990s and has
not experienced good times since.
If any seasonal trend exists year to year, April is always a down month
while May experiences ups. It’s not unusual to see 80, 100, even 150 point
days for the Nikkei 225.
The JGB Futures 5- and 10-year contract and the 5- and 10-year options
contract is the only instrument to gauge the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen relationship because the Japanese lack an actively traded bond market.
The Nikkei Index was ﬁrst calculated in 1950. All stocks represent the
full spectrum of the Japanese economy and are equally weighted in the index.
Today’s criteria is a 50-yen par value. To calculate: divide the sum of stock prices
of Nikkei 225 stocks by a divisor. Round two digits after the decimal point to
calculate the average. The divisor in September 2010 was currently 24.869 and

250

Inside the Currency Market

is regularly published by Nikkei. The divisor is the trigger, the guide that holds
the index steady in light of stock splits, additions, or subtractions of stocks.
Trade Strategy

In the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen arrangement, the Japanese yen is a yield
seeker while Japanese yen/U.S. dollar sees Japanese yen as a bond follower.
This is a tricky arrangement for the Japanese. With U.S. dollar/Japanese yen,
as the Nikkei rises, bond futures will fall, and bond yields will rise along with
the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen. Japanese yen/U.S. dollar works opposite. As the
Nikkei falls, bonds rise, yields fall, and the Japanese yen/U.S. dollar rises.
The preferred arrangement for the Japanese is Japanese yen/U.S. dollar in
Japanese trading, yet that means stock market falls hinder their companies as
well as overall economic conditions. It’s a precarious situation for the Japanese
and made more precarious by a call rate of 0.10 and a falling U.S. dollar.
One can understand the move for the Japanese to establish overseas for their
fortunes. Fundamentally, both pairs should be evaluated in terms of bonds
and yields. Yet a tracker is the Nikkei 225 in yen and Nikkei 225 in US dollar
terms. One should rise as the other falls. Both trade on the CME.
The British pound/Japanese yen will perform best as a buy when Japanese
bond future prices rise and gilt prices fall as the spread narrows, and sold
when the spread widens.
This scenario holds for Australian dollar/Japanese yen and New Zealand
dollar/Japanese yen. If New Zealand markets are down and the Nikkei 225
rises, yield spreads will narrow, so buy New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen
and sell when the reverse occurs because spreads will widen. The same scenario holds for Australian dollar/Japanese yen. Yet refrain from pairs such
as Canadian dollar/Japanese yen, Australian dollar/Canadian dollar, and
Australian dollar/Swiss franc during Japanese trading as no need exists to
trade these pairs due to limited cross-border trade. These pairs should be
traded during their respective markets or in New York trading hours.
Deutsche Boerse DAX, STOXX, Bunds, and the Euro

What is known as the Xetra Dax 30 that trades on the Deutsche Boerse,
formerly known as the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, is comprised of DAX as
an index to measure stock prices and Xetra is the electronic trading system

Stock and Bond Markets

251

employed by market professionals to report DAX movements. DAX is actually a family of indices such as the MDAX—comprised of 50 medium sized
German and foreign companies, TEC DAX—comprised of 30 of Germany’s
largest tech companies, and SDAX—comprised of 50 German small-cap
companies, to name a few.
The Deutsche Boerse actually calculates approximately 2700 indices
daily, the vast majority comprise DAX indices for other global markets such
as volatility indices, strategy indices, short stock indices, and real estate
indices. Domestically, DAX indices comprise 18 economic sectors and nine subsectors that include ﬁnancials, utilities, and consumer goods to name a few.
This methodology is the same as the Japanese format. The format allows an
economic assessment to be rendered sector by sector by government ofﬁcials
and market professionals.
Yet the world reports and focuses on the DAX 30 because it was the
ﬁrst to form in the index family in 1988. It’s the index closely aligned to the
German bund price and yield, and approximately 50,000 ﬁnancial products
are tied to the index (Boerse Reports). But the HDAX can be viewed as a
more informative indicator to measure economic performance, a benchmark,
because it comprises 110 companies contained in DAX, MDAX, and TEC
DAX. Ninety-ﬁve percent of total market capitalization comprises HDAX
(Boerse).
The Dax 30 is a free-ﬂoat index calculated every second using a Laspeyres
formula with a 1987 base value of 1000. Prices are quoted in euros and
reported on the Deutsche Boerse web site in close to real time, so a trading decision can be evaluated quickly. Approximately 134,154 domestic
and 54,055 foreign equities trade on the Boerse. The 2009 annual report
states approximately 10,000 to 15,000 equity trades occur per month, for a
167,270,994 yearly total with a total turnover of 2,222,071 and 90 percent
handled through Xetra.
Xetra is the premier electronic trading platform for the Deutsche Boerse,
where a vast majority of trades are handled from many European exchanges
such as derivatives, futures, and options traded on Eurex, Scoach Schweiz
derivatives and ﬂoor transactions on the Boerse. Consider the 2009 annual
report that states 341,000 certiﬁcates and warrants, 3,000 retail funds, 547
index funds, 10,000 securities, 26,000 ﬁxed income, and 380,000 trade-able
instruments trade through Xetra. Total 2009 trading volume equaled euro
1,163.3 billion, with 167.3 million transactions conducted without failure.
All trades are conducted with precision and efﬁciency. This exchange is well
managed in all aspects of its operations.

252

Inside the Currency Market

A 2010 study was under way to improve the speed of Xetra. Currently,
Xetra handles a million quotes a second in under one millisecond per quote.
It is a fast-moving and sophisticated market.
The Deutsche Boerse opens for trading at 9:03 a.m. and closes at 5:45 p.m.
Frankfurt time, 3:00 a.m. to noon New York time with a one-hour difference during U.S. daylight savings. This time is referenced to the close
of Xetra. Floor trading continues until 8:00 p.m. Frankfurt, 2:00 p.m.
New York. This time would coincide with the close of futures trading on
the CME.
London has been trading for one hour when the DAX opens, and closes
one hour before Frankfurt while Australia, New Zealand, and Tokyo are
closed. The caveat is this methodology follows New York EST. The last twoand-a-half hours of Frankfurt trading coincide with the ﬁrst two-and-a-half
hours of New York and Toronto Stock Exchange trading. Euro/Canadian
dollar is an important consideration during this period. All will follow
U.S. dollar up or down in London and Frankfurt trading, so the S&P 500
will be the measure for U.S. dollar.
See Exhibit 8.6, the ﬁve-year DAX 30 chart and notice April down
months with a trend that develops in August and trends to the end of the
year. This period begins the yearly euro/U.S. dollar top during the NovemberDecember period.
The DAX index is a market capitalization, free-ﬂoat index calculated
every second using a Laspeyres chain-linked methodology. To calculate:
Index t = K T ×
where

∑ p × ff × q × C × Base
∑p ×q
i,t

i,T

i,T

i,o

i,o

i,t

ci,t  adjustment factor of company I at time t,
ffi,T  free-ﬂoat factor of share class I at time T,
n  number of shares in the index,
pi,o  closing price of share I on the trading day before ﬁrst inclusion
in the index,
pi,t  price of share I at time t,
qi,o  number of shares of company I on trading day before index
inclusion,
qi,T  number of shares of company I at time T,
t  calculation time of index, and
K T  index-speciﬁc chaining factor valid as of chaining date T where
T  day of last chaining.

253

Stock and Bond Markets
EXHIBIT 8.6 Five-Year Dax 30 Chart

Source: Bloomberg Finance, LP.

Weightings:
⎛
⎞
⎜
⎟
ff i,T × q i,T
pi,t × ⎜ K T × n
× 100 × c i,t ⎟
∑
n
i =1
⎜
⎟
q i,o
pi,t × Fi
∑
∑
⎜⎝
⎟⎠
i =1
i =1
Index t =
×
Base
=
× Base
n
q i,o
A
pi,o × n
× 100
∑
i =1
∑ q i,o
n

i =1

n

∑ p × q × 100
i,o

whereby: A = i =1

i,o

n

∑q
i =1

i,o

254

Inside the Currency Market

and
Fi =

K T × ff i,T × q i,T × 100 × c i,t
n

∑ qi,o
i1

In simple terms, using Fi, multiply the current price by Fi weighting factor, take the sum of these products and divide by base value A, which remains
constant until a modiﬁcation of the index.
German Bunds

There are two methods to track German bunds. Eurex links spot and futures
markets through electronic trading of bunds and iBoxx indices. iBoxx indices
comprise two benchmarks for the euro and British pound bond markets,
iBoxx and iBoxx consolidated. Both were the ﬁrst indices developed to track
the European bond market. iBoxx trades gilts and bunds while iBoxx consolidated determines spreads to measure yield curves. Yield-curves data are based
on actual and updated market bid/ask spreads.
The benchmark German bund is the 10-year, and is employed as a comparison to other nations’ yield curves to determine direction for the euro
and other ﬁnancial instruments. Yet it’s not an imperative for the 10-year to
be employed for trading decisions. German and other bonds can be viewed
on Eurex, accessible directly from the Deutsche Boerse web site. Here bund
prices, turnover, and volume can be viewed almost in real time.
Euro Trade Strategy

German bund yields follow the DAX in up markets and down in falling
markets while the bund price moves in opposite directions. To trade the euro/
U.S. dollar, follow German bund yields.
As the DAX is up along with bund yields, the euro/U.S. dollar will go up, a buy
the euro/U.S. dollar. Sell the euro/U.S. dollar when the DAX is down along with
bund yields. The U.S. dollar side follows the German bund price up and down.
While this statement may be correct and can be employed as an evaluative tool, the S&P 500 is the better measure because it can determine overall
DAX and U.S. dollar movements until the New York Stock Exchange opens.
The euro will always outpace the U.S. dollar side due to buying and selling
of the euro either in the spot market or through other ﬁnancial instruments
connected to the euro such as futures and options. A number of measures
exist to ensure euro direction.

Stock and Bond Markets

255

The STOXX 50 is an index comprised of 50 of the biggest Blue Chip
European companies. The DAX will move in the same direction as the
STOXX 50. The SDAX is a measure of short DAX positions in the DAX 30.
It’s correlated 99.89 percent with the DAX 30 (Deutsche Boerse). All indices
can be viewed directly on the Deutsche Boerse web site.
The Germans measure the DAX and other equity indices based on
further DAX indices termed DAX Plus that are known as strategy indices.
As free-ﬂoat indices such as the DAX 30, it doesn’t measure risk. The current
Deutsche Boerse newsletter outlines one such risk strategy.
The DAX Plus Maximum Sharpe Ratio is a measure of excess return to
risk calculated using standard deviation. Sharpe Ratios are deﬁned as
S(X)  (Rb  Rt)/ Standard deviation of X
where
X  investment,
Rb  average rate of return of X,
Rt  best rate of return of a risk-free asset, and
standard deviation X  standard deviation of Rb.
Since standard deviation is the square root of the variance that measures risk,
measure the variance of DAX 30 using the DAX Plus minimum variance.
A high variance means volatility will increase which is measured against the
DAX Plus Risk Trigger index. This methodology says as volatility rises, equity
prices will fall and vice versa. This is a sell euro/U.S. dollar as volatility rises.
In simple terms, Sharpe Ratios using standard deviation, say, as a stock’s
return varies from the average return, the more volatile is the stock or the
ﬁnancial instrument as the measure. Sharpe Ratios were used to measure two
portfolios against each other.
During Frankfurt trading, British pound/U.S. dollar is locked into the
gilt price while Australian dollar/U.S. dollar and New Zealand dollar/U.S.
dollar will follow bund yields up and down along with the DAX 30 and the
euro/U.S. dollar.
Euro/Japanese yen, Australian dollar/Japanese yen, and New Zealand
dollar/Japanese yen will always be questionable due to the Japanese side of
the equation. Measure Japanese yen based on the Nikkei 225.
For euro/Japanese yen, sell when spreads widen between the Nikkei 225
and the DAX 30 and buy when spreads narrow. If the DAX is down and
the Nikkei rises, buy euro/Japanese yen because yield spreads narrowed. If the
DAX is up and the Nikkei falls, sell euro/Japanese yen because yield spreads
widened and the cost to borrow is too high.

256

Inside the Currency Market

It appears Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar lack a connection to
European markets, yet this is not the case and will be addressed in the next
chapter. For now, the Nikkei 225 is the measure against Australian dollar/
Japanese yen and New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen, and know that Australian
dollar and New Zealand dollar trade in London and Frankfurt to seek yields.
The purpose of Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar is to earn reserves
for their economy when trading outside their own markets.
So again measure the euro/U.S. dollar to the DAX and S&P. Both markets move in the same fashion, rising stock markets means rising yields and
falling bond prices. A rising DAX is euro/U.S. dollar -supported in Frankfurt
markets and may mark trends. Both stock markets can be measured against
the euro/U.S. dollar to determine a support or resistance level.
If both markets are up, go long the euro/U.S. dollar and go short if both
markets are down. If the DAX is up and the S&P is down, it is still euro/U.S.
dollar-supported because the euro is the home nation. If the DAX is down
and the S&P is up, watch the euro/U.S. dollar for direction heading into
New York markets. Normally the S&P provides overall direction. The same
scenario would work for the British pound/U.S. dollar as it closely follows
the euro/U.S. dollar.
As the DAX formally closes, the euro will ﬁnd direction in U.S. markets
by following yields in rising U.S. stock markets as the Treasury bond falls. So
euro/U.S. dollar is a buy in rising markets and a sell in falling markets.
Euro/Canadian Dollar
