
c14.indd 288

11/2/07 1:43:32 PM

Going to the Dance

289

price is now at $55.33. At this point, the stock starts to fall and when it
reaches $55.33, the trailing stop turns into a market sell and you exit
your trade for a $5.33 profit.
Contingent

We would not necessarily consider these orders as a hard requirement, but they sure do make trading life easier. A contingent order
is any order that will execute when a specified condition is met. For
example, let’s say that you wanted to buy a stock based on volume
rather than price. If the volume of the stock reaches 1 million shares,
you want to buy the stock because that would be an indication of
rising interest. A contingent order would let you create a market
buy order that only executes if and when the daily volume crosses
1 million shares.
Another example would be a sell collar. Suppose you own a stock
and you want to sell it for a minor loss if it drops or sell it for a profit if
it reaches your price target. You cannot place two active sell orders on
one position so you would create a collar. This type of contingent order
is called a one-cancels-other (OCO) order. Both of the sell orders would
be active, but as soon as either one is executed, the other instantly cancels. That prevents you from executing two sell orders for one position,
which would otherwise leave you in a short position.

7. Research
While we tend to focus more on the technical analysis as traders,
we don’t suggest that you give up doing any fundamental research.
There are many aspects of the underlying company, sector, industry, or economy that are worth exploring as you prepare for and
manage your trades and investments. Fundamental research also is
increasingly important as your time horizon lengthens. Of course,
a day trader probably wouldn’t do any fundamental analysis, but a
long-term investor needs to understand the company data more than
today’s trading data. We’ve compiled a list of standard research that
you might look for from your broker.
• Earnings data. Earnings data is one of the highest profile news
events that is released by a company. Your broker should provide
you with the earnings date, estimates, and all reports and filings

c14.indd 289

11/2/07 1:43:32 PM

290

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

related to earnings. This should be fully accessible through
your broker’s web site when you log in to your account. Many
traders pay particular attention to the date that earnings are
announced because trading volatility can increase dramatically
shortly before and after an earnings announcement.
• News. Most brokers will provide news from at least two or
three separate news feeds. A useful feature of any news feed
is the ability to filter for keywords. If you own IBM stock,
it is especially helpful to enter the keyword IBM into the filter and see only those headlines that affect your company.
Likewise, you may be targeting the energy sector in which
case you might filter for keywords such as energy, OPEC, or oil
futures.
• Company profile. You should ensure that your broker provides
you with the full company profile information including market cap, shares outstanding, short interest, price-to-earnings
ratio (P/E), ex-dividend date, and beta. You should also be
able to check key ownership by corporate officers and major
shareholders. Along with the ownership, it is helpful to see
what the insider buying and selling activity looks like. Keep in
mind, though, that insider transactions are not real time, they
are reported monthly.
The accounting reports are a standard part of the company
profile. These include the balance sheets, income statements,
cash flow statements and Securities and Exchange Commission
or other regulatory body filings. Once again, keep in mind that
the trader should watch price and volume first, because there
is often a divergence between the company fundamentals and
the price, especially over the short term.
• Education and training. We consider this to be part of the
research because it is part and parcel with empowering you
as the trader or investor. Your broker should not be afraid to
enable you to be a more informed client. Many brokers provide online tutorials for their products and services to help
you navigate through the choices. The best brokers are those
who actually offer education and training classes where you
can attend and direct questions to the trainers. If your broker
offers these classes, don’t underestimate the value that you’ll
receive from taking your knowledge up a notch.

c14.indd 290

11/2/07 1:43:32 PM

Going to the Dance

291

8. Banking
If you want to integrate your trading and investing with your banking,
then consider a broker who offers various banking features through
your brokerage account. While there can be many advantages from
bringing your brokerage and banking accounts together, the biggest
drawback for many people is the loss of a local, personal banker. To
accommodate that concern, you could maintain a backup savings or
checking account at a neighborhood bank with a small portion of
your portfolio. Consider the following list when looking for a broker
who could take care of your banking requirements.
• Checking and ATM. Checking and ATM access are right at the
top of the list in the banking checklist. The key details to look
for here are the fees associated with various transactions. In
order to stay competitive, many brokers are offering unlimited
ATM withdrawals from any ATM. As we mentioned earlier, the
broker will credit your account for ATM fees incurred when
withdrawing funds from an off-network ATM. On the checking
side, consider how many checks you write each month and be
sure your broker will not charge you for exceeding a monthly
check limit.
• Loans. Home, car, and boat loans are the current product focus
for many brokers. It only makes sense. They’re holding your
investments, so they’ve already evaluated your financial situation. As a rule, clients who have trading and investing accounts
tend to be a bit more financially established than the average
Joe on the street that walks into the neighborhood bank for a
car loan. The brokers know that there is a steady revenue stream
that comes from issuing high-quality loans so they’re going to
be courting you when you’re looking to borrow money. The
shopping list here is the same that you would use for a bank
loan. Interest rate and loan terms are what it’s all about.
• Bill pay. The bill-paying feature is a convenience that many of
us choose to not live without anymore. You can pay your bills
online through a recurring schedule and not have to worry
about stamps, envelopes, and missing payment deadlines. If
you haven’t used bill pay yet, then look into this when you’re
checking into brokers.

c14.indd 291

11/2/07 1:43:33 PM

292

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

• Wiring and fund transfers. Most people rarely use their broker
for wiring funds, but when you need that service, you’ll be
thankful for a broker who makes the process easy for you.
Check into the fees charged for wiring and how your broker
processes the wires. Make sure you understand the cutoff time
for sending a wire out. Your broker should also be clear to help
you with funds tracking when a wire is sent or received.
More often, when you have multiple accounts with one
broker, you’ll want to be able to transfer funds quickly between
accounts. Your broker should allow you to do this online and
provide transfer confirmation immediately. This feature is an
integral part of cash management that will enable you to earn
the greatest return on your deposited cash. Move funds into
checking or trading accounts as you need them, but keep the
cash in high-yield cash accounts when the funds are idle.
• Credit cards. We’re not sure this is a hard requirement for selecting a broker since getting a credit card these days is about as
easy as falling off a chair. Nevertheless, many brokers offer a
branded credit card or, alternately, a debit card tied to your
brokerage account.

9. Reports and Records
Most people don’t think very much about how good their broker is
with reports and records until tax day rolls around. Then you find
yourself scrambling for your cost basis, transaction history, or trade
confirmation and wonder how you’ll ever find the information. Brokers generally provide the information through online access or
archive retrieval. The former is usually offered for free or for a nominal fee. The latter requires more handling by the broker and, therefore, you can expect to pay for the service as you request documents.
Our suggestion is that you focus on the online reports and records
and find a broker who will provide this information without cost.
• Transaction history. When did that check that you wrote to the
charity clear? What was the date of deposit for the gift check
you received for your birthday? How many times did you pay
the builder by check? These are the kinds of questions that
you want answers to and you want the answers now. Having

c14.indd 292

11/2/07 1:43:33 PM

Going to the Dance

293

online access to your account transaction history is a fact of
life these days and your broker should accommodate this easily. An added benefit is the ability to search or sort through the
transactions. For example, you might want to find all check
deposits between July and October. Or you want to reorder
the history list so that all of the checks come first, followed by
deposits, and so on.
• Trading activity. As a trader, you’ll need the ability to know
exactly what you traded and when. Look for a broker that
lets you search through your trading activity for opening and
closing prices, date of trade, how many shares were filled at
each price level, time of trade, and other information that you
would see on your trade confirmation. You’ll also want to see
a record of orders so that you know which orders filled and
which orders expired or were canceled. At the end of the
trading year, all of this information should be available in a
consolidated report to help you with your tax reporting.
• Gain/loss. The gain/loss report is a great way to track your progress on both your trades and investments. The data for this
report should be captured automatically for any trades that
you place through your broker. As you open a new position,
the opening price (or average opening price for multiple fills)
is compared against the current market price to let you know
your position profit or loss. The report also tallies up all open
positions to give you a cumulative profit or loss for the account.
If you transfer open positions in to your broker, provide them
with the cost basis for your transfer positions and the gain/loss
report should be able to track the ongoing performance.
• Account records. This is one report that is usually not available
online but that’s okay because you should rarely have a need
for it. The account records include copies of such items as your
account applications, powers of attorney, options approval,
and written authorizations or instructions. These records are
usually required for litigation or estate settlement, for example. While your broker should make these available to you,
expect to pay a retrieval and processing fee for each document
requested.
• Data downloading. There are a number of good third-party software packages on the market now that let you manage your
own records and reports. Search for a broker that will let you

c14.indd 293

11/2/07 1:43:33 PM

294

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

download your transactions periodically into your own computer. Once you have your hands on the data, you can create
your own tax reports or gain/loss reports. We know many traders who include these reports as a part of their trading plan
and diary to track their growth and progress. You’ll appreciate
not having to connect to your broker every time you want to
see where you stand.

10. Security
Security considerations for selecting a broker generally fall into two
categories: fund security and account security. Fund security refers
to the safety of your assets held by the broker. This is a function of
the health of the brokerage firm overall. Account security deals with
issues related to fraud. A breach of either one can be a nightmare
for you, so be sure you understand what protection your broker has
in place.
Fund Security

You may have seen the sticker in the corner of the window when you
walked into your broker’s office. Chances are your broker is a
member of one or more of the regulating or insuring bodies. Of
course, these organizations will differ among various countries, so
we’ll discuss the primary bodies within the United States and you
can look for the counterpart if you’re doing business outside of the
United States.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) maintains the
stability and public confidence in the U.S. financial system by insuring deposits and examining and supervising financial institutions.
Savings, checking, and other deposit accounts, when combined, are
generally insured to $100,000 per depositor in each bank the FDIC
insures. Deposits held in different categories of ownership—such as
single or joint accounts—may be separately insured. Also, the FDIC
generally provides separate coverage for retirement accounts, such
as individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and Keoghs, insured up to
$250,000.
Investors and traders should look for the Securities Investor
Protection Corporation (SIPC). When a brokerage firm is closed

c14.indd 294

11/2/07 1:43:34 PM

Going to the Dance

295

due to bankruptcy or other financial difficulties and customer assets
are missing, the SIPC steps in as quickly as possible and, within certain limits, works to return customers’ cash, stock and other securities. Without SIPC, investors at financially troubled brokerage firms
might lose their securities or money forever or wait for years while
their assets are tied up in court. SIPC has limits of $500,000 per investor with a maximum of $100,000 cash.
One of the self-regulatory organizations (SROs) that oversees the
brokerage industry is the National Association of Securities Dealers
(NASD). The NASD reviews the activities of nearly 5,100 brokerage
firms, about 171,000 branch offices, and more than 663,000 registered brokers. They oversee and regulate trading in equities, corporate bonds, securities futures, and options. The NASD operates the
largest securities dispute resolution forum in the world, processing
over 4,600 arbitrations and nearly 1,000 mediations a year.
The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) also has a regulatory body
that provides oversight to broker and trading activity. NYSE member
organizations hold 98 million customer accounts or 84 percent of
the total public customer accounts handled by broker-dealers. Total
assets of NYSE member organizations are over $4 trillion.
Account Security

Account security is not as great a problem as many people perceive
it to be. However, that doesn’t mean that the opportunity for fraud
and account security breaches doesn’t exist. Perhaps the greatest risk
occurs when traders go to their local coffee shop and log on to their
account through a wireless network. Entering your account password
in such a setting could put your password into the wrong hands. To
address this concern, see if your broker has a secure password key
for online access. This simple key generates a random number password, which changes every minute or so. Even if a hacker should get
your password in the coffee shop, it would be useless in seconds.
Another useful service offered by many brokers is an account
alert system. This will send alerts to your e-mail, cell phone, or personal digital assistant when any transactions or changes occur within
your account. Obviously, if an unauthorized individual should gain
access to your account, you would be notified when they attempted
to do anything.

c14.indd 295

11/2/07 1:43:34 PM

296

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

You Are in Control
In this fickle game of courting brokers, there’s something that you
need to keep in mind: You’re the one in control. Brokers want your
business and when they get it, they don’t want to lose you. Dating
prospective traders and investors is an expensive proposition for
brokers and they want to find clients as cost and time efficiently as
possible. Don’t assume that the broker holds all the cards and that
you must meekly accept whatever service and pay whatever fees are
imposed upon you. Define your requirements, do your shopping,
and you’ll find that Mr. Right Broker is out there for you.

c14.indd 296

11/2/07 1:43:34 PM

V

P O I N T

TAKE ACTION
Act for Results

c15.indd 297

11/2/07 1:44:14 PM

c15.indd 298

11/2/07 1:44:15 PM

15

C H A P T E R

The Trade and Beyond
WEA LT H H A S A PUR POSE

I

t was in Las Vegas, Nevada, where we were invited to present our
Five Points for Trading Success at the Traders Expo held in the Paris
Resort Hotel. With standing room only, the room was electrified.
The venue had quickly filled to capacity and there was simply no
more room left for us to take any more traders who had come to see
us that day. We were disappointed that so many had to be turned
away but, at the same time, we couldn’t help but be excited because,
it was then that we knew we had something special to offer. The presentation went well and the crowd responded with many questions
and comments, letting us know that we struck a chord. As we were
wrapping up our equipment, a lady approached us and introduced
herself, thanked us for a great presentation, and asked us if we’d
consider writing a book. We listened carefully to her proposal, but
as soon as she left the room, we looked at each other, laughed, and
said, “Sure, like we have time to write a book.”
About six months later, we still had the book idea on our minds,
so we contacted our friend from Vegas. We chatted a bit about how
this project would come together, and after a number of conversations, we agreed to commit our presentation to paper. We knew
that there would be challenges in being able to meet our chapter
deadlines, so we devised a plan to write as we traveled. There is no
denying that the seminar circuit can be as exciting as it is grueling,
and with a schedule as aggressive as ours, there were times when we
didn’t even know where we were going until we looked at our travel
299

c15.indd 299

11/2/07 1:44:15 PM

300

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

itineraries. So as we visited each country, we made it a point to write
along the way. Chapter 1 started in Atlanta, Chapter 2 in Orlando,
then on to Frankfurt, Switzerland, London, and Spain. Next stop,
Stuttgart, then Stockholm, followed by Chicago before returning
back home. As we wrote our final chapters, we found ourselves in
Dubai, Hong Kong, and then Taiwan. We finally wound up in Paris
in a wonderful little coffee shop off the beaten path to write the last
pages of our manuscript. What started out as an almost impossible
feat for us wound up becoming one of the most rewarding experiences of our lives. Not quite knowing how we were going to do it, we
did manage to complete these 15 chapters in less than three months.
With this being our last chapter, we thought it was important for us
to tell you some of the reasons why we do what we do and encourage
you to take action toward your goals and passions.

What Is Your Purpose?
We have done our best to deliver what we believe is a plan that can
help you create true wealth for yourself. Our goal was to take complicated market strategies and break them down into simple ideas that
would be easy to understand and implement. While each chapter
has been filled with the “how-to” instructions for creating wealth by
using sound trading strategies and risk management principles, we
thought it was most important for us to explain some of the “whys”
for creating wealth.
We are individuals who believe that our lives have a purpose.
Many people think that the reason we do what we do is to show
investors how to make money and, although there is some truth to
that, our roots go much deeper. In the beginning chapters we talked
about greed as an emotion and how it was something that needed to
be controlled. As one of the driving forces behind price movement
in the market, there is no denying that greed can take on a life of its
own. We know that there are many thousands of people who believe
that if they were rich the world would think of them as being greedy
and with that belief comes guilt. As a result of this guilt, we have met
traders who have self-destructed, thinking that it’s better for them
not to be rich. Instead, they settle for average wages and a life filled
with just getting by. Then there are some who believe they don’t have
the capacity or deserve to be wealthy. These people do what they can
to avoid taking any action that might result in success.

c15.indd 300

11/2/07 1:44:15 PM

The Trade and Beyond

301

There is something you need to know about The Market Guys.
Neither of us come from money, and we have both experienced
many challenges along the way that have taught us valuable lessons
about life. As children we learned from our parents that life is sweet
and the challenges we face make it even sweeter. However, the most
important thing we have both learned from our parents is that faith
is everything—faith in our ability to achieve; faith in people who
want to do what’s right; faith in our Creator, who has given us the
opportunity to touch the lives of others who are less fortunate; and
faith in knowing that we all have a purpose in life. It’s this faith that
brings us, two regular guys who have a passion for teaching and
a sweet tooth for life, to a place where we realize that it’s not a series
of lucky breaks that has brought us to success but rather our purpose
in life that has brought us to you.
Take a good look around and you will see millions of regular
people working hard to make a living but have somehow forgotten to make a life. It’s sad to see so many people just wandering
through the years without even a simple plan for retirement. They
almost seem okay with just getting by, month to month, paycheck to
paycheck, with no regard for their future. Some are happy with the
status quo while others are striving to break out, waiting for the time
when they can make a difference. We’re sure you’ve heard variations
of the 80/20 rule, where 20 percent of the people are doers, who
make things happen, and 80 percent are the followers who let things
happen. If you think about it, the world needs both doers and followers. The followers are the backbone of society, the driving force
behind most world economies, and if it weren’t for them, the leaders
wouldn’t have anyone to lead. The “20-percenters” are movers and
shakers who are not afraid to take on some risk in their lives. These
are the people who were able to become good leaders because at
one time in their lives they were good followers.
But what really separates these two very distinct groups of people?
Actually, very little separates them. A 20-percenter might be the fiveyear-old boy who runs a little bit harder on the football field to score
the goal, or the middle-school girl who studies just a little bit longer
each day to make the grade. Twenty-percenters could also be the parents who add an hour to their lunch in order to make the school play
during the day. These little extra efforts pay high dividends in the
world of the doers. And those extra hours for lunch, when invested
correctly, leave a lasting impression on the life of a child who sees
