
every stock has to have a high relative strength when it tops. How do you avoid sometimes
buying the highs, if you are restricting yourself to high relative strength stocks?
I am usually able to avoid that because in my first step of screening the charts, I generally rale out
stocks that are overextended from their base. Very often the stocks with the highest relative
strength continue to outperform the market for months and months. For example, Microsoft had a
relative strength of 97 when it was at $50 a share. It eventually moved to $161.
Are you implying that the higher the relative strength the better?
Yes, I would rather go with a relative strength of 99 than 95. However, once the relative strength
starts falling off, I usually get out of the stock.
So you are not only paying attention to the relative strength value itself, but also the trend of
the relative strength.
Right. If the relative strength starts breaking an uptrend, then I would be very cautious, even if it is
still well above 80.
Am I going in the right order, EPS to relative strength, in terms of how you filter down your
initial stock list?
I would probably place relative strength first, then EPS. Many times the relative strength takes off
before that big earnings report comes out.
Do you also use the relative strength of the industry as a filter in your stock selection?
Yes. Investor's Daily ranks industry groups between 0 and 200.1 usually want the industry group to
be in the top 50.
To continue the screening process, after checking the stock's relative strength, the EPS, and
the industry relative strength, what is your next step?
I check the number of shares outstanding. I am looking for stocks with less than thirty million
shares and preferably only five to ten million shares. Stocks with more than thirty million shares
are more mature; they have already split a few times. It is a case of supply and demand: Because
you have more supply, it takes a lot more money to move those stocks.
What else do you look at?
You want some institutional ownership, because they really power a stock higher, but you don't
want too much sponsorship. I would say 1 percent to 20 percent mutual fund sponsorship is the
ideal range.
Are there any other important elements that go into the stock selection process?
Yes. There should be something new that attracts people to that stock. For example, Reebok had
shoes that were hot. Compaq had a fantastic portable computer. Microsoft was a leader in the
software field.
Doesn't that rule out most companies that have been around for a while?
Yes. You don't want to be playing General Electric because there is usually nothing really hot or
brand new going on. Occasionally, there are exceptions. For example, General Motors has gone
virtually sideways for the last five years, and it looks like they are trying to turn their situation
around.
With General Motors, might the "new" be the recent shift to high styling?
Yes, but in most cases, you are going to find the new in emerging entrepreneurial growth
companies.
I would imagine if you go through 7,000 stocks, there must be quite a large number that meet
your criteria.
On average, there are probably only about seventy stocks that meet the criteria, because it is tough
to meet all the conditions. Then I cut those seventy down to about seven.
How do you cut down from seventy to seven?
I pick those stocks that have all the characteristics plus a great-looking base pattern. I also look at
how the stock has done in the past. For example, has the stock doubled before? A lot of the stocks I
120

buy have already doubled and tripled before I buy them.
You actually prefer to buy a stock that has already doubled as opposed to a stock that is in a
long base?
Yes, because that shows me there is something very unusual going on, and if the situation is that
good, a doubling may just be the beginning. It is probably going to double again. To sum it up, I am
looking for the strongest stocks in the market, in terms of both earnings and the technical picture.
Since you use an extremely rigorous selection process, do you have a high percentage of
winners in your stock picks?
No, only about 50/50, because I cut the losers very quickly. The maximum loss I allow is 7 percent,
and usually I am out of a losing stock a lot quicker. I make my money on the few stocks a year that
double and triple in price. The profits in those trades easily make up for all the small losers.
How long do you typically hold a stock?
I usually hold my big winners for about six to twelve months, stocks that aren't that strong about
three months, and my losers less than two weeks.
Do you pick an objective on the stocks you buy?
No. I usually wait until the stock runs up, builds another base, and then breaks down. That is when
I liquidate.
Do you think people should only use market orders?
In a dull market that is just trading back and forth, you could put in a limit order. But if you really
think the stock is going to make a big move—and that should be the only reason you are buying the
stock to begin with—then there is no reason to haggle over an eighth of a point. Just buy the stock.
The same thing applies to the downside; if you think the stock is going to drop, just sell it.
I learned the lesson about market orders in 1982 when I was trying to buy Textone, which was
trading at $15, for $14%. The next day it jumped llh points, and I couldn't bring myself to buy the
stock at $16k when I could have bought it at $15 a day earlier. That stock eventually went to $45.
One element of your trading style is buying a stock when it makes a new high. Wouldn't the
fundamental screening conditions you use have been in place well before that point?
In some cases, they might have been. But I am trying to buy a stock when you have the most
chance of making money. When a stock is coming off the low end of a base back to the high end,
there will be a lot of people who bought it near the highs and sat with a loss for months. Some of
those people are going to be happy to get out at even, and that creates a lot of overhead resistance.
So, a stock which is at new highs has much more of an open running field?
Right, because no one ahead of you is at a loss and wants to get out at the first opportunity.
Everybody has a profit; everybody is happy.
But the downside of that is if you wait for a breakout to new highs, a lot of times the market
will pull back into the trading range. How do you avoid getting whipsawed in those
situations?
You can tell a lot by the volume. If the volume doubles one day and the stock moves to a new high,
it is telling you a lot of people are interested in the stock and buying it.
So volume becomes very important as a filtering process to avoid getting whipsawed.
Yes. If the stock moves to new high ground, but the volume is only up 10 percent, I would be wary.
Do you buy it the first day the stock breaks out to new highs, or do you wait for it to
consolidate for a few days?
I want to buy it as soon as it goes to new highs.
If you buy a stock at new highs and it then pulls back into the range, at what point do you
decide it was a false breakout? For example, assume a stock that has been trading between
$16 and $20 goes to $21 and you buy it. What do you do if two days later the stock is back to
$19?
If it reenters its base, I have a rule to cut at least 50 percent of the position.
121

If it reenters its base at all? Do you mean even if it is just below the top end of the base, or do
you require some minimum penetration?
No, if it just reenters the base. In some cases, it will break out and come back to the top of the base,
but not reenter. That's fine, and I will stay with the stock. But if the top of the base was $20 and it
breaks back to $193A, I want to sell at least half of the position because the stock didn't keep on
moving. Frequently, when a stock drops back into its base, it goes all the way back down to the
lower end of the base. In the example, if it goes from $21 down to $19X it will often go all the way
back down to $16. Therefore, you want to cut your losses quickly.
From a technical perspective, is the price going back into the base a bearish indicator?
Yes. Stocks should be at a profit the first day you buy them. In fact, having a profit on the first day
is one of the best indicators that you are going to make money on the trade.
Do you use the table in Investor's Daily that lists the stocks with the greatest percentage
increase in volume relative to the past fifty-day average volume levels?
Yes, I use it to help spot stocks that are just about ready to take off.
Are you using it to verify stocks you have already picked out?
Yes. After I have done my weekly screen to select the stocks I am interested in buying, I sometimes
wait for the stock to hit that column as a timing signal.
Can you elaborate on using volume as a trading tool?
When a stock that has been moving up starts consolidating, you want to see volume dry up. You
should see a downtrend in volume. Then when volume starts picking up again, it usually means the
stock is ready to blast off.
So, in the consolidation phase, decreasing volume is good. If you continue to see very high
volume, do you start thinking potential top?
Yes, because that shows that a lot of people are getting out of the stock. You want an increase in
volume when the stock breaks out, but you want a decrease in volume as the stock consolidates.
Any other volume signals you look for?
When the market, or a stock, is bottoming, you want to see increased volume combined with an
absence of further price progress on the downside. For example, if the Dow declines from 2,200 to
2,100, trades down to 2,085 the next day, and then closes higher on increased volume, it
demonstrates support. It suggests that there are a lot of buyers coming in.
The screens you have described in selecting stocks are essentially O'Neil's CANSLIM
methodology. [See the O'Neil chapter for definition.] Did you add any of your own elements
to his approach?
Yes, I learned that most of our greatest winning recommendations started off with prices under
thirty times earnings. О'Nell says the P/E [price/earnings] ratio is not important. I think it is, in that
your success ratio is a lot higher on lower P/E ratio stocks.
But I guess not too low P/E ratios?
When I'm talking about lower P/E ratio stocks, I mean stocks that have a P/E ratio that is between
even and up to two times the S&P 500 P/E ratio. So if the S&P 500 is at fifteen times earnings, you
should try to buy stocks with P/E ratios between 15 and 30. Once you start going much beyond
double the S&P 500 P/E ratio level, your timing has to be more exact. You are bound to make a
few more mistakes on higher P/E ratio stocks.
Do you therefore avoid high P/E ratio stocks?
Yes, in many cases I do. The most profitable situation is when you find a stock with a strong
earnings trend that is trading at a P/E ratio in line with the broad market ratio.
If you avoid high P/E ratio stocks, wouldn't that have prevented you from catching the whole
biomedical group move?
That was a little different because of the fact that the whole group was trading at high P/E ratios.
Does that imply that there should be an exception made for a new industry?
122

Yes, you don't want to be absolutely rigid with these rules.
Has the basic market behavior stayed the same in the 1980s versus the 1970s and the 1960s?
Yes, the same types of stocks work time after time. It hasn't changed at all. We can take one of the
greatest winning stocks from 1960 and line it up with one of the best stocks in 1980 and they are
going to have exactly the same characteristics.
Do you have any thoughts on the subject of short selling?
I need more time to study it and more experience. However, to pick a short, I think you need to flip
all these characteristics we were talking about. Instead of a good growth record, you should look
for a poor five-year growth record and quarterly earnings that are decelerating. The stock should be
losing relative strength, breaking uptrends, and starting to hit new lows.
Do you think that short selling may be a critical element for superior performance if we go
into a long bear market?
Yes, I think it would help. But, Bill O'Neil will tell you that shorting is about three times as hard as
buying stocks. Bill says he has made substantial money in only two of the past nine bear markets.
He thinks the best thing you can do in a bear market is just sit it out.
How do you recognize a bear market before it's too late?
By how well my individual stocks are doing. If, during the bull phase, the leaders start losing, it
indicates that a bear market is developing. If I have five or six stocks in a row that get stopped out,
a caution flag goes up.
What else do you look for to signal a bear market?
Divergence between the Dow and the daily advance/decline line [a graph of the cumulative net
difference between the number of New York Stock Exchange stocks advancing each day versus the
number declining]. The advance/decline tends to top out a few months before the Dow does.
Did that happen in 1987?
The advance/decline topped out during the first quarter of 1987, well before the stock market peak
in August.
Were you looking for a top because of that?
Not at that point, because a lot of the individual stocks were still doing very well. The big clue that
the market was really topping was after the Dow came off its high at 2,746, there was a very feeble,
low-volume rally, and then the market got hit for another 90-point loss. At that juncture, I decided
it was time to move out of the market.
Because the rally was on low volume?
Yes, and the fact that there were very few stocks that participated in the rally; the advance/decline
line did not move as high as it did on the previous rally. Also, in late August, the discount rate was
raised for the first time in three years. I think that really stabbed the market.
You haven't been in the business that long. Do you have the confidence that you will be able
to trade successfully almost every year for a long time?
Yes, because I have established a very defined set of principles that will provide the foundation for
successful trading for years to come. Also, I plan to never stop learning.
Do you feel you are getting better as a trader?
Yes. If you try to learn from every single trade that you make, you are only going to get better and
better as time goes on.
Why are you so much more successful than the typical stock investor?
Because I am doing something that I love to do and find fascinating. After eight or nine hours at
work, I go home and spend more time on the markets. I have the charts delivered to me on
Saturdays, and I go through them for three or four hours on Sunday. I think if you love what you
are doing, you are going to be a lot more successful.
A lot of people who invest use their spare time to study the market and still have only
mediocre, or even losing, results.
123

That is probably because they have not found a disciplined system for picking stocks. They read an
article and say, "That sounds like a good stock, I'll buy it." Or they buy a stock because their broker
recommends it.
What advice would you give the novice trader?
The single most important advice I can give anybody is: Learn from your mistakes. That is the only
way to become a successful trader.
Any final comments?
The greatest thing about the market is that it is always fun to be looking for that next big winner—
trying to find the stock with all the characteristics that are going to make it have a big move. The
feeling isn't any different now than when I was only trading 500 shares. There is still the same
satisfaction of knowing you found a stock before it made its big move.
You make it sound like a game.
It is. To me it is like a giant treasure hunt. Somewhere in here [he pats the weekly chart book] there
is going to be a big winner, and I am trying to find it.
The conventional wisdom about how to make money in stocks is summarized by the semi-facetious
advice: Buy low and sell high. David Ryan would disagree. His philosophy can be summarized as:
Buy high and sell higher. In fact, Ryan usually will not consider buying any stock selling for less
than $10.
Ryan's success is basically due to using aprecise methodology and applying great discipline to
follow it. As Ryan has clearly demonstrated, a trading methodology doesn't have to be original to
be extremely successful. Ryan readily acknowledges that most of his approach has been learned
directly from the writings and teachings of William O'Neil. With the help of hard work and indepth study, he has been able to apply O'Neil's trading philosophy with great effectiveness.
When traders deviate from their own rules, they invariably tend to lose. Ryan is no exception.
During mid-1983 to mid-1984, he witnessed a period of extremely poor performance. He let his
previous trading success go to his head by repeatedly breaking one of his own cardinal rules: Never
buy an overextended stock [a stock that is trading far above its most recent price base]. The 19831984 experience made a lasting impression on Ryan, and he has not repeated that mistake.
Maintaining a trader's diary is an essential element of Ryan's approach. Every time he buys a stock,
Ryan annotates the chart with his reasons for buying the stock. Whenever he liquidates or adds to
an existing position, a new chart is included with updated comments. This approach has helped
Ryan reinforce in his mind the key characteristics of winning stocks. Perhaps, more important,
reviewing his past entries has helped him avoid repeating similar trading mistakes.
Ryan's basic approach, like William O'Neil's approach, is to buy value and strength. He also
believes in focusing on the very best stocks as opposed to diversifying his portfolio. One important
observation Ryan made, which many other traders may find helpful, is that his best trades are
usually winners right from the start. Thus, he has little reservation about getting out of a losing
trade quickly. The maximum he will risk on any trade is a 7 percent price decline. A rigid stop-loss
rule is an essential ingredient to the trading approach of many successful traders.

124

Marty Schwartz-Champion Trader
I interviewed Marty Schwartz at his office after trading hours. I found him to be very opinionated
and intense about the subject of trading. This intensity occasionally spills over into anger when a
raw nerve is hit (such as program trading). In fact, Schwartz readily admits that he finds anger a
useful trait in trading. None of this "going with the market flow" philosophy for Schwartz. In his
view, the marketplace is an arena and other traders are the adversaries.
I was also struck by Schwartz's dedication to his daily work routine. He was doing his market
analysis when I arrived and continued to run through his calculations during our interview. When I
left that evening, his analysis was still unfinished. Although he appeared very tired, I had no doubt
that he would finish his work that evening. Schwartz has followed his daily work routine
religiously during the past nine years.
Schwartz spent a decade losing money on his trading before he found his stride as a remarkably
successful professional trader. During his earlier years, he was a well-paid securities analyst, who,
as he describes it, was always broke because of market losses. Eventually, he changed his trading
methodology, in the process of transforming himself from a repeated loser to an amazingly
consistent winner. Not only has Schwartz scored enormous percentage gains in every year since he
turned full-time trader in 1979, but he has done so without ever losing more than 3 percent of his
equity on a month-end to month-end basis.
Schwartz trades independently from an office at home. He is proud of the fact that he has no
employees. Solitary traders of this type, no matter how successful, are usually unknown to the
public. Schwartz, however, has attained a degree of fame through repeated entries in the U.S.
Trading Championships, run by Norm Zadeh, a Stanford University professor. His performance in
these contests has been nothing short of astounding. In nine of the ten four-month trading
championships he entered (typically with a starting stake of $400,000), he made more money than
all the other contestants combined. His average return in these nine contests was 210 percent—
nonannualized! (In the one remaining four-month contest he witnessed a near breakeven result.) In
his single entry in a one-year contest, he scored a 781 percent return. Schwartz's entry into these
contests is his way of telling the world that he is the best trader around. In terms of risk/reward
ratios, he may well be.
Please start by telling me about your early days.
How far back do you want me to go?
From whenever you think is appropriate.
Well it is very relevant to go back to my childhood, quite frankly. Should I lay down on the couch?
I grew up in New Haven in a family of modest means. I was very hard working. When I was seven
or eight I would go out with a snow shovel and come back with $10 after a snowstorm.
Even now, I still put in about twelve hours a day. I feel uncomfortable not doing the work; that's
why I am doing it now as you are sitting here. I calculate a lot of mathematical ratios and
oscillators, and I post my own charts. My attitude is that I always want to be better prepared than
someone I'm competing against. The way I prepare myself is by doing my work each night.
As I grew up, I realized that education was my ticket, probably because it was strongly emphasized
in my family. I studied hard and was an honor student in high school.
I was accepted to Amherst College, which was one of the great experiences of my life. When I
went to freshman orientation they said, "Look to your left and right and realize that half of you are
going to be in the top half of the class and half of you are going to be in the bottom half." Most of
those who matriculated there, including myself, were in the top 5 percent of their high school class.
Perceiving that I wasn't going to be at the top of everything was a difficult first realization.
It was the first time in my life I had to struggle. I even had to get a tutor for calculus because I just
wasn't getting the concept. But when I finally got it, when the light bulb clicked on, it was like
looking at a magnificent painting. I really experienced the joy of learning and working hard there.
Before, studying was only a means to an end; now, I found that learning itself was a real joy.
Amherst had a profound influence on me.
After graduating in 1967,1 was accepted to the Columbia Business School. At the time, the
125
