WAY OF THE

TURTLE
CURTIS M. FAITH

McGraw-Hill
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Milan New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto

Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of
America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
0-07-150946-1
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-148664-X.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the
benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such
designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales
promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use;
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you
fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO
GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors
do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or
that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be
liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or
for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be
liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from
the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such
damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim
or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/007148664X

To
Richard Dennis, who made it all possible,
and to
Juliet Mantiply, my ﬁrst muse;
may our paths cross again some day.

This page intentionally left blank

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

lthough I have learned from almost everyone I have interacted
with over the years, there are a few people I want to thank especially for their contributions to Way of the Turtle.
First and foremost, I am greatly indebted to Richard Dennis, who
had the balls to propose and execute the Turtle idea. I am also grateful for his conﬁdence in me and my abilities when I was only 19 years
of age. Richard is one of the modern era’s truly great traders. He is also
one of the most courageous. He is a thoughtful, honest, and genuine
person. I am honored to have learned from him.
Second, I want to thank Rotchy Barker, who was my ﬁrst trading
mentor. He took me into his home and taught me for no other reason
than that he believed in me. Rotchy is the genuine article: a very generous and honest man and an excellent trader. I learned much of value
from Rotchy, not the least of which is that all successful people owe
their success to the help of others. I hope my own life honors that spirit.
Third, I want to thank George Arndt for having the crazy notion that
17-year-old kids could program computers long before that was a wellknown idea. But most of all, he gets credit for instilling in me his passion for trading and for persuading me to apply for the position with
Richard Dennis.

A

• v •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

vi • Acknowledgments

These three men helped set me down the path that became the Turtle legend and provided the basis for this book. Many others have
helped me in the writing of this book.
Dalia Al-Othman, my dulce de leche and dear friend, helped me
get my prose in decent shape for submission to my editor. She was also
there helping me along and encouraging me whenever I was discouraged. Thank you, Dalia.
Jeanne Glasser, my editor, was terriﬁc fun to work with. She is largely
responsible for the readability of this manuscript. The story ﬂows and
the words come together because of Jeanne. The book would not have
been ﬁnished without her persistent guidance and nudging. Thank
you, Jeanne.
Tim Arnold is my longtime friend and business associate; and the
guy who now runs Trading Blox, LLC, the trading software company
I founded a few years back. Writing this book has taken away from the
time I normally would have committed to that business. Tim patiently
ﬁlled in the gaps I created by being dedicated to writing this book over
the last six months. Without Tim’s help it would have been impossible
to write it. Thank you, Tim.
There are few people in the world who do as much thinking about
trading and as much sharing of their knowledge as Mark Johnson, who
runs MGJ Capital Management, LLC. Mark has contributed an amazing number of postings to online discussion groups and forums over
the last several years that have made me think. Many of the changes in
my own thinking started with a seed planted by Mark, a seed that made
me challenge what I had been doing. Mark ﬁrst gave me the idea
behind RAR% and much of what became R-cubed. Mark created the
basis for the ATR channel breakout system when he published his
PGO system a few years back. Mark also spent time reviewing this manuscript and gave me important and detailed feedback, including point-

Acknowledgments • vii

ing out assumptions I had made that might not be obvious to new readers. The book is much better because of his suggestions. Thank you,
Mark.
Tom Rollinger came to me several years back and asked me to teach
him how to trade. I was impressed with his single-minded pursuit of
the goal of being a great trader. His determination was the impetus that
got me to return to trading after a 15-year hiatus. I would not be writing this book had he not come to me. Thank you, Tom.
I would also like to thank everyone who took the time to read early
copies of the manuscript and give me honest feedback: Brett Steenbarger,
a trader and author who runs a trading blog at http://traderfeed
.blogspot.com; Mike Taylor, who runs the blog at http://taylortree.com;
David Bromley, who runs the trading education company Modus Trading (http://www.modustrading.com); John Knott; Anthony Garner; and
Jennifer Scoﬁeld.
Finally, I want to thank Van Tharp and Melita Hunt for recommending me to McGraw-Hill as a potential new author. And Van for
taking the time out of his very busy schedule to read my book on short
notice, for his candid feedback, and for writing a very nice foreword.
This means a lot to me. Thank you, Van and Melita.

This page intentionally left blank

For more information about this title, click here

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments v
Foreword xi
Preface xvii
Introduction xix

one Risk Junkies 1
two Taming the Turtle Mind 13
three The First $2 Million is the Toughest 29
four Think Like a Turtle 47
five Trading with an Edge 63
six Falling Off the Edge 75
seven By What Measure? 85
eight Risk and Money Management 109
nine Turtle-Style Building Blocks 123
ten Turtle-Style Trading: Step by Step 131
eleven Lies, Damn Lies, and Backtests 151
twelve On Solid Ground 179
thirteen Bulletproof Systems 207
fourteen Mastering Your Demons 223
• ix •

x • Contents

Epilogue 235

bonus chapter Original Turtle Trading Rules 245
Bibliography 275
Index 279

FOREWORD

had just ﬁnished writing the second edition of my book Trade Your
Way to Financial Freedom when my editor asked me who I’d recommend as a new author for McGraw-Hill. The ﬁrst person who
popped into my mind was Curtis Faith. Curtis had been the most successful of the Turtles.
After the initial training period, Curtis was the only trader who had
totally captured the biggest trend during that time period. He traded
the largest account for Richard Dennis, making over $31 million for
Dennis while he was a Turtle, reported Stanley Angrist in the Wall
Street Journal. Also, Curtis, much like me, has followed a road less traveled since he ended his Turtle career, and that path suggests that he is
in tune with himself instead of with Main Street or Wall Street.
Who better to write a book for McGraw-Hill than someone like that?
I didn’t think anything more about it until I was asked to supply a quote
about a new book called Way of the Turtle. Lo and behold, it was
Curtis’s book. I read about seventy pages of the unedited galleys and
immediately decided that the book needed a foreword and that I really
wanted to write it. Why? In my opinion, this is one of the ﬁve best trading books ever written, and I will recommend that all my clients become
familiar with its contents.

I

• xi •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

xii • Foreword

I almost became one of the ﬁrst Turtles, and so I have always followed the success of the Turtles with particular interest. In September
1983 I began my business of coaching traders. It was a part-time
endeavor since I still was working as a research psychologist. Nevertheless, by 1983 I considered myself a pretty good trading coach. I had
developed a test for determining a person’s trading ability that was a
good predictor of success; I called it the Investment Psychology Inventory. Lots of traders had taken it, saying that they agreed with my assessment of their strengths and weaknesses.
It was at about that time that I saw a full-page ad from Richard
Dennis in a major newspaper. He was going to select ten or so traders,
train them in his methods, and then give each of them a million
dollars of his money to trade. The offer was so good that I expected
that thousands of people would apply. As a result, I thought it was a
great opportunity for me to help them with the Investment Psychology
Inventory. They’d be screening thousands of people, and I could help.
As a result, I contacted the ofﬁces at C&D Commodities in Chicago
and sent them a copy of the test. Both Dale Dellutri (C&D’s business
manager) and Richard Dennis took the tests, but that was as far as it got.
However, they sent me a copy of their screening test, which consisted of sixty-three true/false questions and eleven short answer questions. The questions were somewhat like the following:
T/F The majority of traders are always wrong. (The word always
makes that one tough to answer.)
Name a risky thing you have done and why.
I was curious about the test and sent it in with my answers. To my
surprise, I got an invitation to interview for a Turtle position in
Chicago, where I was asked many questions, such as, “If markets are

Foreword • xiii

random, how can anyone make money trading?” I’m not sure how I
answered that one, but it probably wasn’t the way I would answer it
now. I was told that ten people would be selected from the forty applicants to train under Richard Dennis and Bill Eckhardt. We then would
sign a contract for ﬁve years that could be terminated at any time for
lack of performance.
I was not selected to be among the ﬁnal ten, and I can understand
why. I was terribly conﬂicted over the position. I had gotten involved
only because I wanted to help C&D Commodities with the testing. I
lived in southern California, and the last thing I wanted to do was move
to Chicago for ﬁve years. I was sure I would have to leave my wife and
son in California if I did that, although that’s just speculation. I loved
what I was doing—developing a new business as a trading coach—and
although becoming a Turtle might have been very valuable in launching that career, I didn’t want to give up my coaching. Lastly, I didn’t
want to go to Chicago for the last two weeks of the year (Christmas and
New Year’s) for the training. I think that conﬂict showed up pretty
clearly in the interview, and I was not selected.
Nevertheless, I had some regret at not being selected, especially
when I learned of the success of the Turtles. As a result, I’ve always
been fascinated to know what they learned. Over the years, I’ve talked
extensively with several of them and learned the essence of how they
traded. I teach a more general form of their position sizing algorithm
in my systems class and in my book The Deﬁnitive Guide to Expectancy
and Position Sizing. I’ve never thought that the systems they used are
anything special. In my opinion, their success was due entirely to their
psychology and their position sizing. The Turtles were held to secrecy
for a period of ten years, and that kind of veil makes the mystery of what
they did even more intriguing. Most people believe that they must have
had some magic secret and that no one is going to reveal it, ever.

xiv • Foreword

Why do I believe that Way of the Turtles is one of the ﬁve best trading books ever written?
First, it paints a very clear picture of what is necessary for trading
success. Curtis says in very concise terms that it’s not about the trading
system; it’s about the trader’s ability to execute the trading system. Curtis earned $78,000 in the initial training period, which was almost three
times as much as the others earned, yet they all had been taught to do
the same thing. Why had ten people who all were taught a certain set
of rules, including ﬁxed position sizing rules, produced different
results? Curtis said that some of the other Turtles thought that Richard
had given him special information, but Curtis and I know that the
answer is that trading psychology produced the difference in the results.
When I was trained in psychology in the late 1960s, the emphasis
was on behaviorism. The psychology curriculum was designed to
develop rules to answer the question: If you stimulate someone in a particular way, how will that person respond? In my opinion, that
approach was rubbish, and I was delighted when researchers started to
study the psychology of risk. The eventual conclusion of that research
is that human beings take many shortcuts in their decision making and
that makes them very inefﬁcient decision makers. Since that time, an
entire ﬁeld of behavioral economics has developed out of that research.
The second truly fascinating aspect of Way of the Turtle is that it
probably has the most lucid description of how some of the principles
of behavioral ﬁnance apply to and inﬂuence trading that I’ve ever read.
Curtis even goes into a lengthy discussion of support and resistance
and why they exist because of inefﬁciencies in our decision making. It
is must-read material.
The third aspect of Way of the Turtle that I really like is its emphasis on game theory and the way it uses game theory to explain how a
trader should think. For example, the idea is to concentrate on present

Foreword • xv

trading, forgetting the past and the future. Why? Because you know
from your historical testing that you probably will be wrong most of the
time but that your gains will be much larger than your losses. This will
result in a positive expectation. Curtis tells the readers why they must
understand and have conﬁdence in the expectation of their systems.
It’s that conﬁdence that will make them long-term winners.
Other excellent topics include:
• How the Turtles were trained and what they actually learned.
• The real “secrets” of the Turtles (I’ve already given you lots of clues).
• An excellent discussion of the problems involved with system
development and why people make mistakes in system
development because they don’t understand the basic statistical
principles involved in sampling theory.
• A superb discussion of why most systems fail to perform
adequately. Even though most good systems are dropped for
psychological reasons, there are many bad systems out there that
look good at ﬁrst glance. If you want to know why they look
good and how to spot them, you must read this book.
• Finally, there is an interesting discussion of robust measures of
systems. If you understand this material, you will have gone a
long way toward being able to design a proﬁtable long-term
system for yourself that will work.
Put all of this together with a number of stories about Curtis’s experiences as a Turtle, plus his amazing ability to synthesize his experiences as a trader and get to the essence of what is important, and you
have a book that is a must-read for all traders or anyone who has considered putting his or her money into the markets.

xvi • Foreword

The Turtle program began as a bet between Richard Dennis and Bill
Eckhardt over whether trading can be taught. Richard was willing to
stake his own money on the idea that trading can be taught. In Way of
the Turtle, Curtis gives his opinion about the outcome of that bet (it
might not be what you think), but when you read his opinion, I’d like
you to think about one more thing: Forty people were interviewed from
over a thousand applicants, and only a portion of those forty were
selected. Combine that with what Curtis says about sampling and I
think you have the real answer to the question of whether anyone can
learn to trade.
Van K. Tharp, Ph.D.
Trading Coach
President, The Van Tharp Institute

P R E FA C E

little more than 20 years ago, I was part of a grand experiment
that has become legendary among traders and investors. Known
simply as the Turtles, the experiment started as a bet between two
famous traders who were also friends: Richard Dennis and William
Eckhardt.
This is my story of that time and what I have learned since then. I
hope that eventually one of the other Turtles will write a more comprehensive account of that period. This is not that kind of book. At age
19, I was too much of an outsider to be in a position now to discuss our
collective experience. I was also too young to appreciate much of the
social interaction that occurred within the group as we worked together
and competed for survival as Turtles.
What follows is a portrayal of what I experienced and learned as a
Turtle. Way of the Turtle lays bare the entire experiment, explaining
exactly what we were taught and how we traded. The book details some
of our biggest trades and the rules behind their timing, delivering
insights into what it takes to make millions in the markets. For me, Way
of the Turtle is a story of trading and of life, speciﬁcally, how looking at
life the way a great trader does can bring you more joy, a greater range
of experience, and far less regret.

A

• xvii •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

xviii • Preface

The chapters that follow will examine this perspective as well as the
following topics:
• How the Turtles made money: What it was at the core of the
Turtle trading approach that allowed me to earn more than 100
percent returns for the four-plus years of the Turtle program
• Why some Turtles made more money than others: How the
approach allowed some to be successful while others with the
exact same knowledge lost money
• How the Turtle Way applies to stocks and Forex: How to look
beyond the rules as we implemented them to ﬁnd core
strategies that work for any tradable market
• How you can apply the Turtle Way to your own trades and in
your own life

INTRODUCTION

The Day I Met the Prince of the Pits
n your lifetime you can expect to experience only a handful of deﬁning moments. I had two in one day at the age of 19: seeing the Art
Deco building that is home to the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
for the ﬁrst time and meeting Richard Dennis, the legendary commodities trader.
The CBOT is the most famous vista in Chicago. From even a mile
away, you can see the building at 141 West Jackson Boulevard crowned
by a lone statue of Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture. At fortyﬁve stories high, framed by other skyscrapers, the building stands tall
among its brethren and is a ﬁtting home for the Exchange. Inside are
the pits where traders stand shoulder to shoulder buying and selling
millions of dollars’ worth of grains, meats, and currencies every few seconds amid shouts and elaborate signaling. Organized pandemonium
of this sort leaves the thousands of outsiders who visit the pits every year
in awe. For traders, it is Mecca.
As I stepped into the elevator at 141 Jackson, my palms began to
sweat. I was 19 years old and about to have an interview with Richard

I

• xix •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

xx • Introduction

Dennis, one of the world’s most famous commodities speculators. Even
before the Turtle experiment became widely known, Dennis had
earned a place in trading lore. He was branded the Prince of the Pits;
that moniker acknowledged his feat in turning a few thousand dollars
into several hundred million by his mid-thirties.
I later learned how lucky I was to be on that elevator. Over 1,000
people had applied for the position for which I was interviewing, and
only 40 applicants had been granted an audience with Dennis. Only
13—less than 1 in 100—ultimately were chosen, with another 10
selected for a follow-on program the next year.
Long before Donald Trump’s The Apprentice and other reality television contests aired, Dennis created his own competition, prompted by
a debate between him and his good friend—and an equally successful
trader—William (Bill) Eckhardt about whether great traders are made
or born. Dennis believed he could transform almost anyone into a winning trader; Eckhardt believed it was a matter of nature, not nurture.
Dennis put his money where his mouth was, and the two made a wager.
To settle the bet, they took out large ads in the Wall Street Journal,
Barron’s, and the New York Times announcing that Dennis was accepting applications from people interested in becoming his trainees. The
ad further stated that he would teach this group his trading methods
and give each trainee a million-dollar trading account.
At the time, I didn’t understand the signiﬁcance of the ad. In placing
it and proceeding with the bet, Dennis had made a bold statement. He
believed that he understood the reasons for his own success so well that
he could teach others to trade just as well—even if they were total
strangers who never had traded before. He was so conﬁdent in that assertion that he was willing to risk millions of his own cash to prove it.
Dennis’s trainees—of whom I was one—came to be known as the
Turtles after their success became a trading legend. Over four and a
