
Lessons Learned

just about covered his tricked-out sport-utility vehicle that he had or-
dered the day before. At this point, I told him, “As soon you hang up the
phone, cash out, write a check and pay for your new truck.” Then, no
matter what happens to you in the markets, at least you have nice truck
to ride around in. He took my advice and paid cash for his truck.

Follow-up: Ironically, Joe suffered a severe loss in the markets in the fol-
lowing few weeks but is really enjoying his SUV.

The moral: Take something out.

NURSING POSITIONS

Longer term, Bill was a successful trader but had recently entered some
bad trades. We were talking one day about all the setups there were. I as-
sumed that he must be printing money as we were both looking at the
same stocks and they were all moving nicely. When I inquired about his
position size, he replied that he did not take these new positions because
he was too busy “nursing all his bad positions.”

The moral? Because he was focused on positions that were not working,
he missed all the opportunity of the new stocks that were setting up. To
quote Livermore, “The chap who is compelled to lug a corpse a year or
two always loses more than the original cost of the deceased; he is sure
to find himself tied up with it when some really good things come his

”

WHO MAKES A BETTER TRADER:
AN MBA OR A RECEPTIONIST?
Many years ago, I worked on a base where they used to test rocket en-

gines. The base was so large that it had its own fitness facility. One day, I
walked into the gym with a long face.

The receptionist: “What’s wrong?”
Me: “I’m in a bunch of bad stocks.”

The receptionist: (with a perky little smile and a high-pitched bouncy
voice): “Well, sell them and buy a bunch of good stocks.”

Her statement infuriated me. After all, I had recently completed my MBA
and had been studying the market for a few years. I thought, “What the
hell does a receptionist know about trading?”

175



176

Chapter 13

Follow-Up: Evidently, she knew a lot more about trading than I did at
that time. Taking this simple advice would have saved me about
$30,000—a lot of money for a kid fresh out of school!

The moral: Trading is not rocket science.

THE GENIUS

Mike, an accomplished long-term trader, has recently begun swing trad-
ing. He calls me a few times a week. Almost always, it’s the same con-
versation:

Mike: “I’m up 4 points on XYZ, what should I do? “

Me: “Sell half and move your stop on your remaining shares to
breakeven.”

Mike: “Man, that’s great advice. You're a genius!”

The moral: Simple money management is not rocket science.

NEVER-WRONG MAN

Never-Wrong Man never loses money trading. Even when he’s following
a mechanical system, he “forgets” to take the losing trades. There’s al-
ways an excuse. “I got busy and forgot to check my signals.” Or “the
broker screwed my order up, so while I thought I was losing money, in
reality the trade didn’t go through.” When he does take what would turn
out to be a losing trade, there’s always another excuse. For instance, “you
know, I can’t explain it, but I just decided to sell the stock afterhours, five
minutes before the bad news came out.”

I used to be intimidated by Never-Wrong Man. I would think, “Geez,
what’s wrong with me? Why do I make mistakes? Take bad trades? Get
stopped out? Why can’t I be more like Never-Wrong Man?” I later real-
ized that no one is immune to losses in this game, not even Never Wrong
Man. You win some, you lose some and hopefully, by being consistent
and controlling losses, you make money overall.

The moral: Big Foot, The Loch Ness Monster and Never-Wrong Man al-
legedly exist, yet their existence has yet to be proved.

ANTHILL

Bob entered a swing trade and failed to place a protective stop. Within
hours, he was down over 20 points. The next day, he got an incredible



Lessons Learned

break, the stock came all the way back plus some. Bob was smug about
his trade as cashed out for a 2-point gain.

The moral: Mark Boucher refers to a strategy like Bob’s as an “Anthill”
strategy: Ants can build a significant mound with tiny little bits and
pieces but all it takes is one big footprint to smash it down.

METHOD MAN

Method Man is a setup junkie. He reads everything he can get his hands
on regarding trading. The problem is, he runs out and tries to apply con-
cepts with his hard-earned money literally minutes after reading about
them. He doesn’t take the time to do the proper research, to prove that
the setup has worked historically and through real-time observation.
Method Man occasionally gets lucky but never has consistent longer-term
performance.

The moral: Find something that works and stick to it.

SHOW-AND-PULL

I once checked out a chat room full of daytraders just to see what it was
all about. There were a few smaller “wannabes” in the room, but for the
most part, it was made up of larger, well-capitalized traders. One of the
newer traders entered a small position in a thinly traded stock. The stock
looked impressive and fit all the criteria for a good setup. After mention-
ing the stock to the group and the fact he was long 100 shares, one of the
larger traders in the group decided to have a little fun. He said, “Hey, ev-
eryone, pull up XYZ on your Level II quote screens...now watch this...”
He then put out a 10,000-share offer on the stock. He laughed as the
smaller began to squirm and beg him to take it down. A few seconds
later, he removed the offer. ;

Now here’s a guy that was screwing around just to get a few laughs.
However, this could have had a material impact on the stock. What if
other traders would have been scared out of their position based on this
bogus offer? A chain reaction could have knocked the small trader out of
a perfectly good position.

The moral: All it takes is one jerk to screw up a perfectly good trade.

177



178

Chapter 13

GET YOURSELF A PUNCHING BAG

Steve, a daytrader, always had a chip on his shoulder. He was constantly
mad at the market makers for “screwing him.” In fact, on some days,
Steve would send me numerous emails complaining about the above. He
would even go through the painstaking process of providing time and
sales information and other information to support his claims. He be-
came so obsessed he began watching stocks that he had no intention of
trading just so he could prove his point. I couldn’t image where an active
daytrader was finding so much time intraday. I knew he had to be miss-
ing numerous opportunities while expending all that negative energy.
Finally, after getting tired of reading all his emails, I decided to take ac-
tion. I explained to him that he was wasting far too much energy on
things he couldn’t control. Further, I admitted that I, too, occasionally got
mad at brokers, market makers and the market in general but instead of
obsessing over it, I go to the back of my office and beat on my punching
bag. After a few minutes of this, I return to my screens focused and re-
freshed. Next!

The moral: Get yourself a punching bag.

RETIRE ON A SAILBOAT

John, a friend of mine, became incredibly bullish on a certain stock.
Starting with $5,000, he began buying options on the stock. Turns out,
John’s analysis was right. The options soon became worth many thou-
sands of dollars. As the options neared expiration, he sold them and par-
layed the money into more further out-of-the-money options. He began
to repeat this process over and over. This strategy was so successful that
he quit his day job. As he approached the million-dollar mark, I sug-
gested that he lock in his profits and place them into a secure fixed-in-
come investment. He explained to me that when he reached four million
he was going to buy a sailboat and retire.

Follow-Up: Unfortunately, the stock began to implode soon after he
reached a million dollars. His entire account was wiped out over the next
few weeks.

The moral: Don’t expect the market to fulfill your dreams. To quote
Livermore: “There isn’t a man on Wall Street who has not lost money try-
ing to make the market pay for an automobile or a bracelet or a motor
boat or a painting.”



Lessons Learned

THE BEAR HAS EYES

In the late ‘90s during one of the greatest bull markets in history, Bear
Man, one of the best daytraders in the world, was constantly faxing,
emailing and calling me to talk about how the bull market was coming
to an end. He’d support his claims with articles and newsletters along
with market statistics and historical comparisons. His research was often
thorough and quite convincing

The conversations were almost always the same. After about 10 minutes
of listening to his bearish arguments:

Me: “Okay, I know you are bearish. So what are you trading?”

BM: “I’m long, ABC, CDE and EFG.”

Me: “Why no shorts?”

BM: “Because the market is going up.”

The moral: Bear Man never confuses being right with making money.
This is why he is one of the greatest traders in the world.

OH, I DON’T LIKE TO TAKE A LOSS

After just a few months of trading, Mike had become a very successful
trader. In fact, he was so successful that he was on the verge of shutting
down his successful law practice so he could focus on trading. Impressed
(and somewhat envious) with his immediate success, I inquired about his
methods. He told me that he buys the hottest stocks on the momentum
lists. When I asked about his risk control, he stated, “Oh, I don’t like to
take a loss . . . they’ll come back.”

Follow-Up: I can’t say for sure that Mike has been wiped out, but I do
know that his law practice has been dissolved and he appears to have
vanished off the face of the earth. I hope the best for Mike but fear the

worst.

The moral: Use a stop.

IMPRESS YOUR FRIENDS

John was lucky enough to pick a hot Genomic stock as his first trade.
The stock shot up from 20 to 70 in a few days. When I asked him how he
was going to exit, he replied “I’m going to wait until it hits 300 so I can

176



180

Chapter 13

tell my friends I was in it at 20.” A few days later, the stock imploded
and was trading below his entry.

The moral: If you want to really impress your friends, throw a party and
spring for the beer.

BALANCE

Sharon achieved the success that many aspiring traders dream of. In a
short period of time she amassed a small fortune through her trading.
This was not done through pure luck alone. She studied the markets
morning, noon and night. She did not take trading casually, it was her
life. In fact, she worked so hard that it was beginning to cause problems
with her home life. She finally had to decide between trading and her
family. She realized that if she chose trading, eventually the tremendous
psychological burden from her family would hurt her performance. She
chose her family and placed most of her profits with a professional
money manager with a long-term track record.

The moral: Work hard but balance your life.

I’M THE KING OF THE WORLD

In late February of 2000, I was having my best year ever in my private
trading. I was up several hundred percent in nearly all of my accounts.
Further, my ego was being fed by the readers of my TradingMarkets.com
stock column. They were sending me emails praising my stock-picking
abilities. On top of all this, my wife was scheduled to deliver my first
child in a few weeks. I felt bulletproof and invincible, kind of like Leo-
nardo DiCaprio’s character on the front of the Titanic. Jeff Cooper warned
me that it wasn’t a good idea to trade around major life events. He sug-
gested that I bank profits and take a break for a while. Unfortunately, I
didn’t heed his advice. I continued to trade actively. In fact, I was even
placing trades from the delivery room in-between my wife’s contractions.
Ironically, my daughter, Isabelle Florence, was born minutes after the
Nasdaq closed above 5,000 for the first time in history. As I held her up
to the CNBC screen for my bragging pictures, I remember thinking that,
at the rate I was going, I would have her college paid for within the next
few weeks. ] was invincible.



Lessons Learned 181

Follow-Up: My accounts peaked the same day my daughter was born.
Although I was able to stay in the black, I gave up a significant portion
of the profits over the next month or so.

The moral: The “king of the world” eventually went down on the Titanic.
Keep your ego in check and don’t trade around major life events.





SECTION SEVEN

PUTTING THE
PIECES TOGETHER

ep oaecscseeae 8@ @ © @ e@ © © wo eG 8 eae ew ow ew 8B ao wb oo ow oa ono ow eo





CHAPTER 14

NIGHTLY PREPARATION

ogqaseea0e%w8e#eeeeekedetesaes8 @ Bo eae

If people only knew how hard I worked to gain my mastery,
it wouldn’t seem so wonderful at all.

—Michelangelo Buonarroti

As I stated in Trader’s Psychology, money is the ultimate motivator. As
such, it attracts some of the brightest minds in the world. I can assure you
those on the other sides of your trades are prepared. And they are all too
happy to take your money away from you if you are not. The following is
how I prepare for the next trading day. It’s a lot of work, but for me it’s like
being on a treasure hunt.

POSTMORTEM

Right after the market closes, I take a few minutes to review and recon-
cile the day’s trades and plot my equity. I then find a quiet place and
spend 5-10 minutes mentally reviewing the day’s actions. As mentioned
in Trader’s Psychology, it is at this time I think about what trades were
taken and why, what went right, what went wrong, what could I have
done better and so on and so forth. [ then make the appropriate notes in
my trading journal.

185


186

Chapter 14

ANALYZE A SMALL DATABASE

I keep a small database of 400-600 stocks that I download shortly after
the close. The database contains the bellwether and popular stocks such
as Intel and Microsoft, the 30 Dow Jones Industrial Average stocks, many
tech issues from the Nasdaq 100, a few cyclicals such as oils and oil ser-
vice and representative stocks from a variety of sectors. The above makes
up the core database and it rarely changes. The remainder of the data-
base is made up of momentum stocks and the current “glamour” stocks.
I cull these out as they drop below certain levels (usually $10 per share)
or lose momentum. New stocks for the database are found by going
through momentum lists, such as the TradingMarkets.com Proprietary
Momentum (and Implosion) lists, TradingMarkets.com StockScanner,
talking with other traders, stocks mentioned on CNBC and any other
stocks I find in my nightly analysis. This database grows and shrinks as
various sectors heat up and cool off.

My charting software allows me to “click” through each and every chart
in this database. On average, I spend between 2-3 seconds on each chart.
Even though I have scanning software to scan for most of the patterns
listed in this manual (more on this below), I still like to look through the
charts because it gives me a feel for what’s going on in the markets.
Sometimes I can pick up on “themes” that cannot be found via com-
puter-based scans or through overall sector analysis. For instance, J
might notice some “hidden” aspects, such as pockets of strength in other-
wise down sectors, or “old tech,” or under-performing “new tech.”

In going through the charts, I'll also stop and analyze any chart that
made a large move for the day. I then ask myself, could I have predicted
this ahead of time? Is it one of my patterns? Is it possibly a new pattern?

The exercise of actually going through all of these charts (vs. relying
solely on the computer scans) not only unearths potential for the next
trading day, it also makes me a better chart reader. It’s no different than a
musician practicing.

ANALYZE SPECIALIZED DATABASES

Depending on market conditions, I often keep separate small databases
for specific sectors. For instance, in late 1999/early 2000, the Genomic
stocks were on fire. Therefore, during such periods, I'll keep a completely
separate database of only these stocks. This helps to me to focus on the
hottest stocks in the hottest sectors. Obviously, these databases change



Nightly Preparation

with the times. They range from the complete sector such as telecommu-
nications down to a specific niche within that sector (e.g., fiber optics).

ANALYZE IPOS

I also keep a small database of the Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) that
went public over the last three months. These can be found through
Internet sources such as TradingMarkets.com and IPO.com. Often these
newer stocks offer great swing-trade setups as the euphoria over the
promise outweighs the reality. As nimble swing traders, we can often
capture a piece of these moves before that reality sets in.

SECTOR ANALYSIS

After completing my analysis of the above databases, I then look through
the main sector charts such as the semiconductors, banks, biotech, oil ser-
vice, major drugs, gold and silver, broker/dealer, telecommunications,
etc. I look for setups in these sectors, bigger-picture patterns and momen-
tum in general.

OVERALL MARKET ANALYSIS

I then look at what the overall indices are doing. This analysis was cov-
ered in detail under Chapter 10, Market Timing for Swing Trading.

STUDY FUTURES MARKETS

I download and analyze about 30 active futures markets. Even if you
don’t intend on trading futures, it’s a good idea to know what's going on
here because markets don’t exist in a vacuum. For my stock swing trad-
ing, I pay careful attention to what’s going on in the index futures and
the bond market. I’ll also analyze what’s going on in the currency mar-
kets and commodities in general (e.g., crude oil).

ANALYZE SCANS

All of the above takes between one-and-a-half and two hours. During
this time, I have scans running on my main database of over 5,000 active
stocks. These scans give me pullbacks, Double Top Knockouts, Bow Ties
and most of the other patterns and concepts outlined in this manual.

187



a
188 Chapter 14

I also look at of the stocks produced by TradingMarkets.com indicators.
Not only does this provide me with potential setups, but it also may give
me themes that I might not have picked up on through my own analysis
and scans. Further, it also often provides me with stocks that may be
worth watching for setups over the next few days.

FINAL PREP

I then take all of the above analysis and put together my game plan. I
make a list of the stocks I want to watch for the following day. I also
check to see if they are optionable, make specific notes about where |
should enter and where my protective stops should be placed. I plug the
stocks into my quote screen and set alarms near the trigger points.
Finally, I check the after hours index futures for any late-breaking news
that could throw a wrench in any of my analysis.

When I arrive at my office the next morning, I have a game plan in front
of me and my screens are ready to go. There’s no last-minute stress or
scrambling involved with not being prepared. I sip my coffee and wait
for the opening.

Q&A

Q. You mentioned only spending 2-3 seconds per chart while tooling
through your small database of up to 600 stocks. What can be gath-
ered in such a small amount of time?

A. A time of 2-3 seconds is only an average. If I don’t like a chart, I might
only spend a fraction of a second on it. On others, I might spend a
minute or longer or make a note to come back to it later.

Q. How do you know to only spend a “fraction of a second on a chart”?

A. After a while you begin to memorize the charts. For instance, I know
that XYZ has been trading in a low-level base for months. When I get
to this chart, unless the chart is showing some signs of life, I think, oh,
that’s XYZ, I see it’s still in the toilet. Next!

Q. Why not rely solely on the scans?

A. Most people are looking for the easy way out. And the scans do a
wonderful job of reducing the workload and finding setups. However,



Nightly Preparation

looking at charts gives you a much better picture of what's going on
under the surface.

Why look at so many charts?

I’m a technician. And, technicians predict the markets through the use
of charts. The more charts I look at, the better I get.

By looking at so many charts, obviously you must see lots of stocks
take off or implode (for shorts). By missing these setups, doesn’t this
irritate you?

It used to. Now it just motivates me to see if I could have caught it
ahead of time. This makes me a better chart reader.

You said you set up your quote screen with alarms “near” your en-
tries. Why not at your entries?

When a stock triggers, especially if it’s an obvious setup, it can move
awfully fast. I want to know when it’s getting close to triggering. I
don’t want to know after the fact.

Do you ever enter before the trigger?

If the markets are really in gear, then I might attempt to enter early
and use a tighter-than-normal stop and look to re-enter if stopped out.
Conversely, if the overall environment is mediocre, I might let setups
trigger and wait to see if they follow through or possibly wait for a
second entry.

For your own scans, do you have parameters to reduce the number of
stocks that fit the pattern?

Yes. My goal with my scans is to show me the best setups on the best
stocks. Often, Ill use historical volatility and ADX as filters along with
minimum volume requirements.

Where do you set these parameters?

I normally set the average volume to 100,000 or higher. For the HV, I
normally keep it above 40 but may raise it to as high as 80 depending
on market conditions. ADX, when used, also varies. I'll usually keep it
at 25 or higher, but raise or lower that threshold depending on overall
market conditions.

189



190

Chapter 14

Q.

A.

You mentioned you look at the futures market. The indices and bond
market makes sense, why other commodities?

It all depends on the situation. If crude oil is at 10-year highs and it
looks like it’s going even higher, then that will likely drive interest
rates higher and affect the indices. Markets are interrelated. For in-
stance, in the summer of 2000, someone joked on Bloomberg that if
you predict the stock market, the euro and the crude oil market, then
you can trade bonds.
