
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

RISK MANAGEMENT

77

Question 9-14
The Iron Triangle of risk control tells you how many shares you may buy or sell short
by performing which calculation?
A. Subtract your entry from your target price
B. Divide your target price by your stop
C. Add your stop to your target price
D. Divide your total dollar risk by the risk per share
Question 9-15
Which of the following statements regarding the 6% Rule is correct?
A. You may not risk more than 6% of your account equity on any single trade.
B. If you risk 2% per trade and had three losing trades in a month, you have to
reduce your risk on the next three trades.
C. If you risk 2% per trade and take three losses in a row, you may not trade for the
rest of this month.
D. Paper losses on open trades don’t count against the 6% Rule limit.
Question 9-16
In calculating your "available risk," the 6% Rule takes into account all of the following, except:
A. Your paper profits for the month
B. Your total losses for the month
C. Your amounts at risk in open trades
D. What would happen if all your open trades turned negative
Question 9-17
All of the following statements apply to coming back to trading after a severe drawdown, except:
A. Begin by trading a tiny size and increase it in steps after meeting performance
goals.
B. Jump into trading full size—deal with your fears by facing them.
C. Become your own trading manager by focusing on risk management.
D. Lower the 2% Rule to a smaller number.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TEN

Practical Details

I

was in a room where a world-famous technical analyst lectured about gold. He
projected his charts on a screen and pointed out trends and potential reversals. A
trader in the audience raised his hand: “So, at the right edge, would you buy or sell?”
The great expert pondered the screen and uttered: “Well, I’m sure that in two to
three weeks, the answer to that will be very clear.” â•›The trader stared at him incomprehensibly.
In trading, you don’t have the luxury of waiting for a couple of weeks for an answer. You need to decide now, today, what you’ll do at the right edge of the chart:
buy, sell, or stand aside. Standing aside, by the way, is a legitimate choice. If you decide to trade, you need to choose where to enter, set targets, and place stops.
Traders use a wide variety of methods to accomplish these tasks. In this chapter,
we’ll review the methods that are described in The New Trading for a Living.

79

80
Questions

QUESTIONS

Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

â•⁄1
â•⁄2
â•⁄3
â•⁄4
â•⁄5
â•⁄6
â•⁄7
â•⁄8
â•⁄9
10
11
12
Correct
answers

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

Trial 5

PRACTICAL DETAILS

81

Question 10-1
The least advisable method of entering a long position is to buy
A. a breakout above yesterday’s high.
B. a breakout above the channel.
C. a pullback to the value zone.
D. a penetration of the value zone.
Question 10-2
Gold is in an uptrend, confirmed by a rising moving average. Every few weeks there
is a brief panic, as prices stab below their moving average before resuming their uptrend. Three months ago, prices stabbed $2.50 below their EMA, two months ago
$1.50, and last month $4. How deep below the EMA would you consider placing a
buy order?
A. Immediately below the EMA
B. $1 below
C. $3 below
D. $5 below
Question 10-3
When buying in the vicinity of a rising moving average, a reasonable profit target
would be
A. the upper channel line.
B. the lower channel line.
C. the same distance above the EMA as the latest penetration was below.
D. when the moving average turns down.
Question 10-4
Setting profit targets for long-term trades is best done on the basis of
A. moving averages.
B. channels.
C. divergences.
D. support and resistance.
Question 10-5
Which of the following statements about stops is incorrect?
A. They lead to whipsaws.
B. They allow you to calculate reward/risk ratios.
C. They limit the maximum amount of loss.
D. They give you an idea of a maximum loss in a trade.

82

QUESTIONS

Question 10-6
Which of the following methods of placing stops helps avoid getting hit by “market
noise”â•›?
I. Stops outside of the price channel
II. SafeZone stops
III. ATR stops
IV. Stops based on support or resistance
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV
Question 10-7
Which of the following rules apply to placing stops?
I. Don’t place stops at obvious levels.
II. Don’t place stops at round numbers.
III. Move your stops to protect winning trades from turning into losing ones.
IV. Move your stop only in the direction of your trade.
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV
Question 10-8
The high of the daily bar is $23 and the low $21. You buy at $21.50. What is your
buy grade?
A. 25%
B. 50%
C. 75%
D. None of the above
Question 10-9
The high of the daily bar is $29 and the low $26. You sell at $27. What is your sell
grade?
A. 33%
B. 50%
C. 66%
D. 75%
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PRACTICAL DETAILS

83

Question 10-10
The trend, defined by the EMA slope, is rising. On the day you buy, the upper channel line is at $32.50 and the lower channel line is at $26.50.You go long at $29 and
sell several days later at $31. What is your trade grade?
A. 25%
B. 33%
C. 50%
D. 66%
Question 10-11
Which of the following statements about scanning is incorrect?
A. A scan may cover a thousand stocks.
B. A scan finds stocks that fit a pattern defined by you.
C. A well-designed scan finds profitable trades.
D. One can scan stock industry groups as well as individual stocks.
Question 10-12
Negative rules for scanning may filter out stocks on the basis of all of the following
criteria, except:
A. Unprofitable
B. Trending down
C. Insufficient volume levels
D. Too cheap or too expensive

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

ELEVEN

Good Record-Keeping

K

eeping good records helps you identify past mistakes and stop repeating them.
Good records make clear what steps brought you profits, so that you can repeat
them going forward.
Good record-keeping ties together psychology, market analysis, and risk management. It is the best tool for developing and maintaining discipline.
To improve your performance, you must learn from your experiences, which is
what good record-keeping allows you to do. It is the most important skill for your
growth as a trader.
Questions

Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

Trial 5

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Correct
answers

85

86

QUESTIONS

Question 11-1
Good record-keeping helps accomplish all of the following, except:
A. Greater discipline
B. Less impulsive trading
C. Stop making mistakes
D. Become your own teacher
Question 11-2
Performing routine morning homework is especially important for what reason?
A. It helps you wake up.
B. It allows you to review news and reports relevant to trading during the day.
C. It allows you to review yesterday’s performance.
D. It allows you to adjust stops.
Question 11-3
What’s the main purpose of taking a daily psychological self-test before the market
opens?
I. To evaluate your mood
II. To evaluate your readiness to trade
III. To see on what days you shouldn’t be trading
IV. To be ready to trade a greater size on the days with a perfect score
A. I and II
B. II and III
C. III and IV
D. I and IV
Question 11-4
A trade plan must include all of the following, except:
A. The strategy you’ll use
B. Your entry, exit, and stop
C. The amount of money you’ll risk
D. The amount of money you plan to make

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

87

Question 11-5
Which statements about using a Trade Apgar are correct?
I. The more questions you ask about your plan, the better you’ll be prepared to
trade.
II. Keep the number of questions about a trade plan down to five.
III. Write down detailed responses to questions and weigh them carefully.
IV. Use only one of three responses: yes, no, and in-between.
A. I and III
B. II and IV
C. I and IV
D. II and III
Question 11-6
Completing a Tradebill prior to entering a trade makes you focus on which of the
following?
I. Entry, exit, and stop
II. Earnings reports and ex-dividend dates
III. The strategy you’ll trade
IV. Amount of risk and position size
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV
Question 11-7
After you enter a trade, your Tradebill should document which of the following?
I. Stop placement, both soft and hard if you use both
II. The level at which you’ll move your stop to breakeven
III. The fact of having made an entry in the trade diary
IV. The amount of targeted profit
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV

88

QUESTIONS

Question 11-8
Which statement about reviewing closed trades is correct?
A. Give your full attention to current trades, don’t dwell in the past.
B. Losses hurt too much at the time you took them, and there is no point revisiting
them.
C. Spend your time planning for the future, not thinking about the past.
D. Learn from past mistakes, so you don’t repeat them.
Question 11-9
The most educational part of a Trade Journal is
A. documenting your strategy.
B. adding entry and exit charts.
C. posting a follow-up chart weeks or months after a trade.
D. documenting entry, exit, and trade grades.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T T W O

Answers
and
Comments

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

Introduction

Answer 0-1: C (I and IV)
Fundamental analysts study economic conditions; technical analysts focus on market
behavior. Both can help you spot good trading opportunities.
Tips are tricky—they almost always come late; plus, the tipper who tells you to
buy will almost never tell you when to sell. Tips can be used only if you run them
through your decision-making system. Using inside information is a criminal offense
in most developed countries.
Answer 0-2: C
The three pillars of successful trading are sound psychology, a good analytic method,
and careful money management. A good trader with a sound analytic method is his
own insider.
Answer 0-3: A
The attitude of benign skepticism is the best. Borrow the ideas that seem to make
sense and then test them in the crucible of your own experience. Begin trading a
small size and gradually increase it as you gain confidence.
Answer 0-4: D
Slippage and commissions slant the “playing field” against most traders; emotional
trading finishes them off. Theft is only a minor factor in well-policed markets.

91

92

ANSWERS

Answer 0-5: D
When the winner receives less than the loser lost, that transaction is called a
“minus-sum game.” Commissions and slippage make trading a prime example of
such a game. Many providers of financial services try to hide this fact.
Answer 0-6: A
You pay commissions on stock trades when you buy and again when you sell.
100 shares of a $20 stock will cost $2,000. You’ll pay a $10 commission (0.5%)
when you buy and again when you sell, for a total of $20 or 1%. If you do this trade
on margin, paying only $1,000 for your shares and borrowing the rest, that commission will be 2% of your capital—and then you’ll have to pay interest on margin debt.
That seemingly small commission multiplied by the number of trades that you
make in a year, can take a serious bite out of your account. This problem is especially
acute for small accounts, and of course, using margin makes it even worse. Lesson:
be very selective in what you trade, weigh each trade plan carefully.
Answer 0-7: B
Your slippage entering this trade was 8 cents for each of the 100 shares you bought,
for a total of $8. It was almost as big as your commission. While trading larger positions reduces the relative cost of commissions per share, there is no such break with
slippage—if you traded 1,000 shares, your slippage would have been $80 or worse.
The remedy is straightforward: use limit orders for entering trades.
Answer 0-8: C
You bought 100 shares at $20.08 and sold at $20.88 for a gross profit of 80 cents per
share or $80 for 100 shares.Your slippage was 8 cents when you bought and 12 cents
when you sold, for a total of 20 cents per share, $20 total. The $20 total slippage is
25% of your $80 profit for the trade.
When it comes to stops, limit orders won’t do. Use “market if touched” orders—
when it’s time to escape, hit the eject button. Some slippage is inevitable, but the
goal is to keep it as low as possible.
Answer 0-9: B
You’ve bought your shares at $20.08 and sold at $20.88 for 80 cents profit per share
or a total gross profit of $80.Your commissions ate up $10 entering and another $10
exiting. There was also that slippage of $8 on the entry and another $12 during the
exit. The total bite came to $40 or 50% of your gross profit—and now Uncle Sam is
licking his lips, waiting to tax you.
You need to focus on reducing the expenses of trading: ask your broker to lower
his commission rate or shop for a more competitive broker, be selective about your
trades, and whenever possible use limit rather than market orders.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

INTRODUCTION

93

■■Rating Yourself
0–3 correct: poor.
Take heart—the questions that you failed to answer are seldom asked. Many in the
financial services industry try to muddle up the facts. Take your time, reread the Introduction in The New Trading for a Living, and retake this test.
4–6 correct: fairly good.
You have grasped the basic ideas. Look up the answers to the questions you’ve missed.
Think about them and retake this test a few days later.
7–9 correct: excellent.
You understand these neglected but very important concepts.You’ll enjoy the chapters on psychology and risk management.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

ONE

Individual
Psychology
Answer 1-1: D
Trading is inherently risky because we deal with the uncertainty of the future. If
there were no risk of loss, there could be no reward. Amateurs have emotional reactions—fear, elation, anger. A professional trader measures each risk in advance and
trades only when the odds are clearly in his favor.
Answer 1-2: A
You must strive to achieve your personal best, to become the best trader you can.
Focusing on money, buying toys, or trying to impress others will only divert your
attention from the top goal—reaching your personal best. A good surgeon doesn’t
count money at the operating table—and neither does an intelligent trader while he
is in a trade.
Answer 1-3: C
Treat your mistakes as learning opportunities: find the causes of your losses, and correct those mistakes going forward.This is an emotionally hard task, but it needs to be
done in order to win. Without such analysis, trying to trade your way out of a hole,
even with a new guru, is doomed to failure.You need to figure out exactly what got
you into a hole in the first place. We’ll return to this topic in the chapter on keeping
a trading diary.

95

96

ANSWERS

Answer 1-4: A
A large account allows you to diversify, trade multiple positions, and spend proportionately less on services. Beginners often discard these advantages by blowing
money simply because it exists in their accounts. We’ll return to the rules on managing trade size in the chapter on money management.
Answer 1-5: D (III and IV)
Commercial trading systems are built and optimized using old data; they self-destruct
when markets change. An intelligent trader who develops his own system can make
needed adjustments; a trader who purchases a system sinks with it. Even systems
with built-in optimization eventually self-destruct because we do not know what
kinds of optimization will work in the future. Following trading signals from any
system requires discipline and evokes essentially the same emotions as independent
trading. There is no substitute for mature judgment.
Answer 1-6: C (I, II, and III)
One of the key signs of a gambling attitude is the inability to stop trading, stay on
the sidelines, and reflect on one’s behavior. Traders who gamble tend to reverse their
positions and feel depressed or elated depending on the outcome of their latest trade.
A losing streak is a common experience; when you hit one, stop trading until you’ve
spent time reevaluating your method. Serious traders learn from their losses, while
gamblers continue with their compulsive trading.
Answer 1-7: C
We trade the way we live. Personal discipline is essential for success. Look for common problems in your trading and everyday life. This trader seems to have serious
issues with responsibility. He needs to face it and get himself organized in everyday
life as well as in trading.
Answer 1-8: D (I and IV)
To win, you don’t have to be more intelligent or knowledgeable than other traders,
but you must be better disciplined. Your feelings influence your trades, including
entries, exits, and risk management. If your mind is clouded by fear or greed, no
system will help. Getting high from trading leads to gambling, accepting bad odds,
and losing.
Answer 1-9: C (I and III)
You may increase your trading size as long as you don’t risk a greater percentage of
your equity—we’ll return to this in the chapter on risk management. A vacation
from trading may not be a bad idea—spend some of the time analyzing what you did
right. On the other hand, becoming sloppy with stops and lazy in research are typical
behaviors of a loser on a lucky streak.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

97

Answer 1-10: D
Losers are addicted to the thrill of the game and hope for a big win. They keep poor
records, just like alcoholics don’t count their drinks. They switch between trading
systems and methods, just like alcoholics switch from drinking in bars to drinking
at home.
Answer 1-11: C
Losers are hooked on the excitement of trading and keep hoping for a big win. They
blame others for their losses and avoid accepting personal responsibility.
Answer 1-12: D
Accepting responsibility for your losses blows away the smoke of illusions and puts
your trading on a new, realistic footing. A better trading system, new trading methods, and a major bull market can help, but personal responsibility comes first.
Answer 1-13: B (II and III)
A trader who has the courage to face his own role in losing can turn around; going
forward, he is likely to cut losses short and avoid overtrading. His discipline will free
him from fear, but it will not lower his rates of commissions and slippage—for that
he needs to carefully shop for a broker and avoid market orders.
Answer 1-14: C
Being calm and disciplined is the cornerstone of successful trading. Writing down
your trade plans and implementing them will put you on the road to success—we’ll
return to this topic in the chapter on trade plans. Bigger capital, knowledgeable
friends, and a history of success in other endeavors are all desirable—but none equals
the importance of disciplined planning. Emotional trading is the enemy of success.
If trading makes you feel giddy or fearful, those feelings will cloud your judgment.
Exit your trades when you feel the grip of emotions.
Answer 1-15: A
A trader’s own impulsivity makes the market appear confusing and illogical. Other
problems, such as a shortage of good information, small capital, or even the market’s
periods of randomness, contribute less to confusion than emotional trading.
Answer 1-16: C
A trade begins when you decide to enter the market, and it ends when you
decide to exit. Those decisions are like the bookends of every trade, and they are
yours alone. You may use technical indicators, fundamental analysis, or even pay
attention to trusted advisors—but only you can decide when a trade begins and
when it ends.

98

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–4 correct: poor.
The red light is flashing—your low level of self-awareness puts you in danger. You
need to learn more about trading psychology in order to have a chance of success.
Many psychological tricks that help us in our daily lives destroy trading accounts. Many
educational systems promote dependence and follow-the-leader mentality. Successful
traders are independent, creative, and realistic. Please reread the relevant chapter and
retake this test before proceeding to the rest of this Study Guide.
5–8 correct: below average.
Getting half the answers right means being in the bottom half and that’s not good
enough for winning.You need to learn more about the individual psychology of trading. Please reread the relevant materials and retake this test.
9–12 correct: fairly good.
You have a working grasp of the essential concepts of trading psychology but need to
fill in the gaps. Study the recommended materials and retake this test in a few days.
Sound psychology and discipline are essential for your success in the markets.
13–16 correct: excellent.
You have mastered the topics in this chapter. Please review those questions where
your answers differed from those provided in this book. Successful traders are very
independent. See whether the discrepancies were due to errors—or to your own,
individual way of thinking.

■■Recommended Reading
Douglas, Mark, The Disciplined Trader (New York: New York Institute of Finance,
1990).
Lefevre, Edwin, Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (1923) (Greenville, SC: Traders
Press, 1985).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TWO

Mass Psychology

Answer 2-1: D
Prices are set by crowd members who place orders to buy or sell, or else stand
aside. Each price tick reflects the latest consensus of value, hammered out by those
orders or the withholding of orders. Ticks coalesce into patterns—the footprints of
bulls and bears on our charts. “Supply and demand curves” are far removed from this
sweaty reality of the market. Prices are connected to fundamental values in the long
run but are governed by crowd psychology from day to day.
Answer 2-2: C
Bulls try to buy as low as possible, and bears try to sell as high as possible. Both know
that they have to hurry before some uncommitted trader steps in and snatches away
their bargain. Professionals aim to identify the dominant group and trade with it.The
goal of a good technical analyst is to discover the balance of power between bulls and
bears—in order to trade in the same direction as the winning group. The danger of
forecasting is that it locks us into a specific mind-set instead of focusing on the current reality of the market.
Answer 2-3: C
Reading newspapers, watching TV, and surfing the net often lead to poorly planned
and impulsive trades. Why trade, whether a large or a small size, when you aren’t
sure what to do at the moment? “When in doubt, stay out” is a sensible rule.
