
I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s

107

were they realized? Also compare strategies of a few years ago to this
year’s strategies and ideas: How has the thinking changed? Buffett also
suggests that it can be very valuable to compare annual reports of the
company you are interested in with reports from similar companies in
the same industry. It is not always easy to find exact duplicates, but even
relative performance comparison can yield insights.

I read annual reports of the company I’m looking at and I read
the annual reports of the competitors. That’s the main source
material.
WARREN BUFFETT, 1993

We like to keep things simple, so the chairman can sit around
and read annual reports.32
CHARLIE MUNGER, 1993

Expand your reading horizons. Be alert for articles in newspapers
and financial magazines about the company you are interested in and
about its industry in general. Read what the company’s executives have
to say and what others say about them. If you notice that the chairman
recently made a speech or presentation, get a copy from the investor
relations department and study it carefully. Make use of the company’s
web pages for up-to-the-minute information. In every way you can
think of, raise your antennae. The more you develop the habit of staying
alert for information, the easier the process will become.
It must be said here, with sadness, that it is possible that the documents you study are filled with inf lated numbers, half-truths, and deliberate obfuscations. We all know the names of the companies charged
with doing this; they are a rogue’s gallery of American businesses, and
some of their leaders are finding themselves with lots of time in prison
to rethink their actions. Sometimes the manipulations are so skillful
that even forensic accountants are fooled; how then can you, an investor
without any special knowledge, fully understand what you are seeing?
The regrettable answer is, you cannot. You can learn how to read
annual reports and balance sheets—and you should—but if they are
based on f lagrant deception and lies, you might not be able to detect it.

108

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

I do not mean to say that you should simply give up. Keep doing
your research, and strive to be alert for signs of trouble. It should not
surprise us that Warren Buffett gives us some valuable tips:33
• “Beware of companies displaying weak accounting.” In particular, he cautions us to watch out for companies that do not expense
stock options. It’s an obvious red f lag that other less obvious maneuvers are also present.
• Another red f lag: “unintelligible footnotes.” If you can’t understand them, he says, don’t assume it’s your shortcoming; it’s a favored tool for hiding something management doesn’t want you
to know.
• “Be suspicious of companies that trumpet earnings projections
and growth expectations.” No one can know the future, and any
CEO who claims to do so is not worthy of your trust.


In conclusion, Buffett wants to work with managers who are straight
shooters, who are candid with their shareholders and their employees.
His unshakable insistence on ethical behavior as a condition of doing
business has taken on added significance since the outbreak of corporate
scandals. However, he would be the first to acknowledge that taking
such a stand will not, in and of itself, insulate investors from losses triggered by fraud.
I must add my own caution: I cannot promise that following the
tenets of the Warren Buffett Way described in this book will protect
you 100 percent. If company officials are f lat-out lying to investors
through fraudulent accounting or other illegal maneuvers and if they’re
good at it, it can be difficult, often impossible, to detect in time. Eventually the perpetrators end up in jail, but by then the damage to shareholders is done; the money is gone. What I can say is this: If you adopt
the careful, thoughtful way of looking at investments that Buffett
teaches us and take the time to do your homework, you will be right
more often than you are wrong, and certainly more often than those
who allow themselves to be pushed and pulled willy-nilly by headlines
and rumor.

7
Investing Guidelines
Financial Tenets

T

he financial tenets by which Buffett values both managerial excellence and economic performance are all grounded in some typically Buffett-like principles. For one thing, he does not take yearly
results too seriously. Instead, he focuses on four- or five-year averages.
Often, he notes, profitable business returns might not coincide with the
time it takes for the planet to circle the sun.
He also has little patience with accounting sleight-of-hand that produces impressive year-end numbers but little real value. Instead, he relies on a few timeless financial principles:
• Focus on return on equity, not earnings per share.
• Calculate “owner earnings” to get a true ref lection of value.
• Look for companies with high profit margins.
• For every dollar retained, has the company created at least a dollar of market value?

RETURN ON EQUITY
Customarily, analysts measure annual company performance by looking
at earnings per share. Did they increase over the preceding year? Are
they high enough to brag about? For his part, Buffett considers earnings
109

110

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

per share a smoke screen. Since most companies retain a portion of their
previous year’s earnings to increase their equity base, he sees no reason
to get excited about record earnings per share. There is nothing spectacular about a company that increases earnings per share by 10 percent
if at the same time it is growing its equity base by 10 percent. That’s no
different, he explains, from putting money in a savings account and letting the interest accumulate and compound.
The test of economic performance, Buffett believes, is whether a
company achieves a high earnings rate on equity capital (“without undue
leverage, accounting gimmickry, etc.”), not whether it has consistent
gains in earnings per share.1 To measure a company’s annual performance, Buffett prefers return on equity—the ratio of operating earnings
to shareholders’ equity.
To use this ratio, though, we need to make several adjustments. First,
all marketable securities should be valued at cost and not at market value,
because values in the stock market as a whole can greatly inf luence the
returns on shareholders’ equity in a particular company. For example, if
the stock market rose dramatically in one year, thereby increasing the net
worth of a company, a truly outstanding operating performance would
be diminished when compared with a larger denominator. Conversely,
falling prices reduce shareholders’ equity, which means that mediocre
operating results appear much better than they really are.
Second, we must also control the effects that unusual items may have
on the numerator of this ratio. Buffett excludes all capital gains and
losses as well as any extraordinary items that may increase or decrease
operating earnings. He is seeking to isolate the specific annual performance of a business. He wants to know how well management accomplishes its task of generating a return on the operations of the business
given the capital it employs. That, he says, is the single best measure of
management’s economic performance.
Furthermore, Buffett believes that a business should achieve good
returns on equity while employing little or no debt. We know that
companies can increase their return on equity by increasing their debtto-equity ratio. Buffett is aware of this, but the idea of adding a couple
of points to Berkshire Hathaway’s return on equity simply by taking on
more debt does not impress him. “Good business or investment decisions,” he says, “will produce quite satisfactory economic results with
no aid from leverage.”2 Furthermore, highly leveraged companies are
vulnerable during economic slowdowns.

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s

111

Buffett does not give us any suggestions as to what debt levels are appropriate or inappropriate for a business. Different companies, depending
on their cash f lows, can manage different levels of debt. What Buffett
does tell us is that a good business should be able to earn a good return on
equity without the aid of leverage. Investors should be wary of companies
that can earn good returns on equity only by employing significant debt.

Coca-Cola
In “Strategy for the 1980s,” his plan for revitalizing the company,
Goizueta pointed out that Coca-Cola would divest any business that no
longer generated acceptable returns on equity. Any new business venture must have sufficient real growth potential to justify an investment.
Coca-Cola was no longer interested in battling for share in a stagnant
market. “Increasing earnings per share and effecting increased return
on equity are still the name of the game,” Goizueta announced.3 His
words were followed by actions. Coca-Cola’s wine business was sold to
Seagram’s in 1983.
Although the company earned a respectable 20 percent return on
equity during the 1970s, Goizueta was not impressed. He demanded
better returns and the company obliged. By 1988, Coca-Cola’s return
on equity had increased to 31.8 percent (see Figure 7.1).

Figure 7.1 The Coca-Cola Company return on equity and pretax margins.

112

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

By any measurement, Goizueta’s Coca-Cola was doubling and
tripling the financial accomplishments of the previous CEO. The results
could be seen in the market value of the company. In 1980, Coca-Cola
had a market value of $4.1 billion. By the end of 1987, even after the
stock market crash in October, the market value had risen to $14.1 billion (see Figure 7.2). In seven years, Coca-Cola’s market value rose at an
average annual rate of 19.3 percent.

The Washington Post Company
When Buffett purchased stock in the Washington Post in 1973, its return on equity was 15.7 percent. This was an average return for most
newspapers and only slightly better than the Standard & Poor’s Industrial Index. But within five years, the Post’s return on equity doubled.
By then, it was twice as high as the S&P Industrials and 50 percent
higher than the average newspaper. Over the next ten years, the Post
Company maintained its supremacy, reaching a high of 36.3 percent return on equity in 1988.
These above-average returns are more impressive when you observe
that the company has, over time, purposely reduced its debt. In 1973,
long-term debt to shareholder’s equity stood at 37.2 percent, the second
highest ratio in the newspaper group. Astonishingly, by 1978, Katherine

Figure 7.2 The Coca-Cola Company market value.

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s

113

Graham had reduced the company’s debt by 70 percent. In 1983, longterm debt to equity was a low 2.7 percent—one-tenth the newspaper
group average—yet the Post generated a return on equity 10 percent
higher than these same companies.

“OWNER EARNINGS”
Investors, Buffett warns, should be aware that accounting earnings per
share represent the starting point for determining the economic value of
a business, not the ending point. “The first point to understand,” he says,
“is that not all earnings are created equal.”4 Companies with high assets
to profits, he points out, tend to report ersatz earnings. Because inf lation
extracts a toll on asset-heavy businesses, the earnings of these businesses
take on a miragelike quality. Hence, accounting earnings are useful to the
analyst only if they approximate the expected cash f low of the company.
But even cash f low, Buffett warns, is not a perfect tool for measuring value; often it misleads investors. Cash f low is an appropriate way
to measure businesses that have large investments in the beginning and
smaller outlays later on, such as real estate, gas fields, and cable companies. On the other hand, companies that require ongoing capital expenditures, such as manufacturers, are not accurately valued using only
cash f low.
A company’s cash f low is customarily defined as net income after
taxes plus depreciation, depletion, amortization, and other noncash
charges. The problem with this definition, Buffett explains, is that it
leaves out a critical economic fact: capital expenditures. How much of
the year’s earnings must the company use for new equipment, plant upgrades, and other improvements to maintain its economic position and
unit volume? According to Buffett, approximately 95 percent of U.S.
businesses require capital expenditures that are roughly equal to their
depreciation rates. You can defer capital expenditures for a year or so, he
says, but if over a long period, you don’t make the necessary improvements, your business will surely decline. These capital expenditures are
as much an expense to a company as are labor and utility costs.
Popularity of cash-f low numbers heightened during the leveraged
buyout period of the 1980s because the exorbitant prices paid for businesses were justified by a company’s cash f low. Buffett believes that
cash-f low numbers “are frequently used by marketers of business and

114

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

securities to justify the unjustifiable and thereby sell what should be unsalable. When earnings look inadequate to service debt of a junk bond
or justify a foolish stock price, how convenient it becomes to focus on
cash f low.”5 But you cannot focus on cash f low, Buffett cautions, unless you are willing to subtract the necessary capital expenditures.
Instead of cash f low, Buffett prefers to use what he calls “owner
earnings”—a company’s net income plus depreciation, depletion, and
amortization, less the amount of capital expenditures and any additional working capital that might be needed. It is not a mathematically
precise measure, Buffett admits, for the simple reason that calculating
future capital expenditures often requires rough estimates. Still, quoting Keynes, he says, “I would rather be vaguely right than precisely
wrong.”

Coca-Cola
In 1973, “owner earnings” (net income plus depreciation minus capital
expenditures) were $152 million. By 1980, owner earnings were $262
million, an 8 percent annual compounded growth rate. Then from 1981
through 1988, owner earnings grew from $262 million to $828 million,
a 17.8 percent average annual compounded growth rate (see Figure 7.3).
The growth in owner earnings is ref lected in the share price of
Coca-Cola. In the ten-year period from 1973 to 1982, the total return
of Coca-Cola grew at a 6.3 percent average annual rate. Over the next
ten years, from 1983 to 1992, the total return grew at an average annual rate of 31.1 percent.

PROFIT MARGINS
Like Philip Fisher, Buffett is aware that great businesses make lousy investments if management cannot convert sales into profits. In his experience, managers of high-cost operations tend to find ways that
continually add to overhead, whereas managers of low-cost operations
are always finding ways to cut expenses.
Buffett has little patience for managers who allow costs to escalate. Frequently these same managers have to initiate a restructuring
program to bring down costs in line with sales. Each time a company

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s

115

Figure 7.3 The Coca-Cola Company net income and “owner earnings.”

announces a cost-cutting program, he knows this company has not figured out what expenses can do to a company’s owners. “The really
good manager,” Buffett says, “does not wake up in the morning and
say, ‘This is the day I’m going to cut costs,’ any more than he wakes up
and decides to practice breathing.”6
Buffett understands the right size staff for any business operation
and believes that for every dollar of sales there is an appropriate level of
expenses. He has singled out Carl Reichardt and Paul Hazen at Wells
Fargo for their relentless attack on unnecessary expenses. They “abhor
having a bigger head count than is needed,” he says, “and ‘Attack costs
as vigorously when profits are at record levels as when they are under
pressure.’ ”7
Buffett himself can be tough when it comes to costs and unnecessary
expenses, and he is very sensitive about Berkshire’s profit margins. Of
course, Berkshire Hathaway is a unique corporation. The corporate staff
at Kiewit Plaza would have difficulty fielding a softball team. Berkshire
Hathaway does not have a legal department, a public or investor relations department. There are no strategic planning departments staffed
with MBA-trained workers plotting mergers and acquisitions. The
company’s aftertax overhead corporate expense runs less than 1 percent
of operating earnings. Compare this, says Buffett, with other companies

116

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

that have similar earnings but 10 percent corporate expenses; shareholders lose 9 percent in the value of their holdings simply because of corporate overhead.

The Pampered Chef
As mentioned, Doris Christopher founded her company with $3,000
borrowed against her family’s life insurance policy and she never took
on further debt. Today her company has over $700 million in sales.
Customers pay for products before delivery so the company is a cashpositive business. Alan Luce, president of Luce & Associates in Orlando,
Florida, a direct selling consulting firm, has estimated pretax profit margins at above 25 percent.

Coca-Cola
In 1980, Coca-Cola’s pretax profit margins were a low 12.9 percent.
Margins had been falling for five straight years and were substantially
below the company’s 1973 margins of 18 percent. In Goizueta’s first
year, pretax margins rose to 13.7 percent; by 1988, when Buffett bought
his Coca-Cola shares, margins had climbed to a record 19 percent.

The Washington Post Company
Six months after the Post Company went public in 1971, Katherine
Graham met with Wall Street security analysts. The first order of business, she told them, was to maximize profits from the company’s existing operations. Profits continued to rise at the television stations and
Newsweek, but profitability at the newspaper was leveling off. The primary reason, she said, was high production costs, namely wages.
After the Post purchased the Times-Herald, profits at the company
had surged. Each time the unions struck the paper (1949, 1958, 1966,
1968, 1969), management had opted to pay their demands rather than
risk a shutdown. During this time, Washington, DC, was still a threenewspaper town. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, increasing wage costs
dampened profits. This problem, Mrs. Graham told the analysts, was
going to be solved.
As union contracts began to expire in the 1970s, Mrs. Graham enlisted labor negotiators who took a hard line with the unions. In 1974,

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s

117

the company defeated a strike by the Newspaper Guild and, after lengthy
negotiations, the printers settled on a new contract.
In the early 1970s, Forbes had written, “The best that could be said
about The Washington Post Company’s performance was it rated a gentleman’s C in profitability.”8 Pretax margins in 1973 were 10.8 percent—well below the company’s historical 15 percent margins earned
in the 1960s. After the successful renegotiation of the union contracts,
the Post’s fortunes improved. By 1978, profit margins had leaped to
19.3 percent—an 80 percent improvement within five years.
Buffett’s bet had paid off. By 1988, the Post’s pretax margin reached
a high of 31.8 percent, which compared favorably with its newspaper
group average of 16.9 percent and the Standard & Poor’s Industrial average of 8.6 percent. Although the company’s margins have declined somewhat in recent years, they remain substantially higher than the industry
average.

THE ONE-DOLLAR PREMISE
Buffett’s goal is to select companies in which each dollar of retained
earnings is translated into at least one dollar of market value. This test
can quickly identify companies whose managers, over time, have been
able to optimally invest their company’s capital. If retained earnings are
invested in the company and produce above-average return, the proof
will be a proportionally greater rise in the company’s market value.
In time, that is. Although the stock market will track business value
reasonably well over long periods, in any one year, prices can gyrate
widely for reasons other than value. The same is true for retained earnings, Buffett explains. If a company uses retained earnings unproductively over an extended period, eventually the market, justifiably, will
price its shares disappointingly. Conversely, if a company has been able
to achieve above-average returns on augmented capital, the increased
stock price will ref lect that success.
Buffett believes that if he has selected a company with favorable longterm economic prospects run by able and shareholder-oriented managers,
the proof will be ref lected in the increased market value of the company.
And he uses a quick test: The increased market value should at the very
least match the amount of retained earnings, dollar for dollar. If the value

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s

119

As we have learned of one accounting scandal after another, it has
become even more critical for investors to delve into these financial
areas. There is no guarantee that through this effort you will fully uncover the truth, but you will have much greater chance of spotting
phony numbers than if you do nothing. As Buffett remarks, “Managers
that always promise to ‘make the numbers’ will at some point make up
the numbers.”10 Your goal is to begin to learn to tell the difference.

8
Investing Guidelines
Value Tenets

A

ll the principles embodied in the tenets described so far lead to
one decision point: buying or not buying shares in a company.
At that point, any investor must weigh two factors: Is this company a good value, and is this a good time to buy it—that is, is the
price favorable?
The stock market establishes price. The investor determines value
after weighing all the known information about a company’s business,
management, and financial traits. Price and value are not necessarily
equal. As Warren Buffett often remarks, “Price is what you pay. Value
is what you get.”
If the stock market were truly efficient, prices would instantaneously adjust to all available information. Of course, we know this
does not occur. Stock prices move above and below company values for
numerous reasons, not all of them logical.
It’s bad to go to bed at night thinking about the price of a
stock. We think about the value and company results; The
stock market is there to serve you, not instruct you.1
WARREN BUFFETT, 2003
