
9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

dividends. If you flip ahead to Chapter 17 you’ll
learn about computer-screening tools, which
will help you pinpoint companies that have
been paying dividends for a long time and have
the financial strength to keep it up.
But if building a computer screen to find solid
dividend payers sounds like too much effort,
don’t worry. I have a very valuable shortcut that
will handle much of the heavy lifting for you.
A great place to identify the predictable dividend
payers is S&P’s Dividend Aristocrats list. To
make this prestigious list, a company must have
boosted its dividends every year for at least 25
consecutive years and be a member of the S&P
500 index. The S&P 500 is a much-followed list
of 500 of the largest U.S. companies. You can
download an Excel spreadsheet containing
all the stocks on the S&P Dividend Aristocrat
list here: http://www2.standard
andpoors.com/portal/site/sp/en/
us/page.topic/indices_dai/2,
3,2,2,0,0,0,0,0,2,3,0,0,0,0,0.
html.

Table 10-4

175

Yes, I know. I can already hear you poking
a potential hole in this list. Yes, it’s true that
during the financial crisis even some companies that increased dividends for decades cut
their dividends. To help protect you further, you
might want to find companies that not only have
a long track record of dividend increases, but
also have solid earnings so they can afford the
payments. S&P has a list for this, too, called the
Dividend Starting Place list. To make this list,
companies must increase their dividend payments for 10 or more years and earn at least
twice what they pay in dividends.
That list is harder to find. But I can tell you that
in mid-2009, the stocks that made the list and
had the highest dividend yields appear in Table
10-4. Remember, though, these aren’t necessarily stocks to buy. Be sure to do your own
homework, applying all the lessons in this book
before deciding to buy a stock or not.

Big Time Yields

Company

Ticker symbol

Dividend yield in mid-2009

Universal

UVV

4.8%

VF

VFC

3.7%

Abbott

ABT

3.5%

FPL Group

FPL

3.3%

Johnson & Johnson

JNJ

3.2%

Source: S&P

16 506455-ch10.indd 175

9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

176 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis

16 506455-ch10.indd 176

9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

Chapter 11

Finding a Right Price for a Stock
Using Discounted Cash Flow
In This Chapter
▶ Delving into what a discounted cash-flow analysis is and what it can tell you

about a stock price
▶ Finding out how to measure a company’s expected future cash flow
▶ Digging into how to use the results of a discounted cash-flow analysis

to size up a stock
▶ Comparing doing a discounted cash-flow analysis by hand with online tools that do it

for you

“I

s this stock cheap?” Those might be the four most commonly uttered
words by the typical investor. Perhaps you even picked up this book
hoping to find out ways to answer that burning question.
Certainly, fundamental analysis can help a great deal when putting a price tag
on a stock. By evaluating everything from a company’s profitability and debt
load to its cash flow, you can get a pretty good window into a company and
help form an educated opinion on its future. Looking into a company’s valuation using common ratios like the price-to-earnings ratio, can help you figure
out how much investors are paying for a stock.
But while all these tricks of fundamental analysis can help you find stocks to
buy or even sell, one of the favorite tools of all might be the discounted cash
flow analysis, or DCF. The DCF analysis brings an almost scientific approach
to putting a price tag on a company. If you can perform a DCF, you’ll be miles
ahead of investors who simply buy an individual company’s stock and hope it
goes up.

17 506455-ch11.indd 177

9/24/09 10:34:59 PM

178 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
How to Stop Guessing How
Much a Company Is Worth
If you’ve ever watched a group of kids playing, you’ll quickly learn some
slightly unpleasant traits of human nature. The room could be filled with
thousands of toys of all kinds. But, almost inevitably, if one child picks up a
toy to play with, it’s not long before the others notice and decide they must
have that same toy. A chorus of “mine” quickly breaks out.
That same playground mentality often reaches Wall Street too. There are thousands of stocks available. But, quite often, just a few hundred stocks will get all
the attention while the rest will get ignored. It’s not unheard of for just a handful of stocks, for whatever reason, to become must-own stocks or story stocks.
These are shares of companies that seem to do everything right. Investors buy
into the company’s promises and push the stock price to lofty valuations, only
for the company to disappoint and the stock to fall back to earth.
It’s very difficult, if not virtually impossible, to know when a stock is over or
undervalued until after the fact. Complicating things further, even if you’re
able to determine a stock is undervalued, other investors probably will too.
And if they do, and buy the stock before you, they will push the price higher,
and the stock will no longer be undervalued.
But don’t let the fact that trying to find undervalued stocks is difficult discourage you completely. If you’re going to try to outsmart other investors
and traders, you’ll need to know how to do a DCF analysis.
Before getting to that, though, it’s helpful to first consider how the value of
a stock can be measured. There are two main ways to look at what a stock is
worth, including the:
✓ Market value: An investment’s market value is what most investors
primarily pay attention to. A stock’s market value is the price investors
have attached to a company. Market value is measured by multiplying
a stock’s price per share by its number of shares outstanding. You can
review Chapter 3 to learn more about how market value is calculated.
The constant tug of war between buyers and sellers pushes a stock up
and down to settle at a price where the demand for the stock equals the
supply of share.
When you sell a stock, remember there’s another investor who has just
bought it from you. That other investor thinks the stock you’re dumping
is selling for a good price. Does this other investor know something you
don’t? Before selling a stock, it’s not a bad idea to remind yourself that
someone else finds it attractive.

17 506455-ch11.indd 178

9/24/09 10:34:59 PM

Chapter 11: Finding a Right Price for a Stock Using Discounted Cash Flow

179

✓ Intrinsic value: A stock’s intrinsic value, sometimes called its fundamental
value, isn’t based on what other investors think it’s worth as is market
value. Instead, a stock’s intrinsic value is based on all the fundamental
data you’re been reading about so far in the book, namely earnings, cash
flow and dividends. A stock’s intrinsic value is based on how much money
the company is expected to earn over its lifetime.
The difference between an investment’s market value and intrinsic value is
best understood with an example. Imagine an inventor is auctioning off a
machine that spits out a gold bar worth $1,000 every year for 10 years. As
you might imagine, some bidders might be so enamored with the machine
they might offer hundreds of thousands of dollars for it. Perhaps the bidders
think they can tinker with the machine to make it spit out two gold bars a year
instead of one. But in its current form, the machine’s intrinsic value is $10,000,
not adjusting for inflation, since that’s the value of its output of 10 gold bars
worth $1,000 apiece.

How minding intrinsic value can help you
One of the best ways to be successful in an auction is knowing what price
you’re willing to pay before even entering a bid. If you ever find yourself in a
heated bidding war over a Pez dispenser on eBay, for instance, you’d better
know how much that dispenser is really worth by consulting a price guide.
Not knowing the value of a collectible can be perilous if you wind up losing
your head and overpaying for it.
The same caution applies to stocks. You might pick up a newspaper and
keep reading about how great a company’s goods or services are. You might
chat with your barber or cousin about a promising company. All these things
might tempt you to be that person bidding up a stock’s price and overpaying.
“Buying dollar bills for $1.10 is not good business,” wrote Warren Buffett in
his 1999 letter to shareholders.
Knowing a stock’s intrinsic value, though, keeps you honest. If you know how
to determine how much cash a company is expected to generate over its
lifetime, you know roughly what its stock is worth and can bid only when it’s
priced right. Going back to the gold-bar machine example, you want to buy
the machine when you can get it for less than $10,000.
Warren Buffett is famous for paying close attention to a stock’s intrinsic
value before buying it. He’s constantly searching for stocks that, for whatever
reason, are trading at or below their intrinsic values. By buying a stock well
below its intrinsic value, he gets a bit of a margin of safety, or a bit of protection if the stock price were to fall further.

17 506455-ch11.indd 179

9/24/09 10:34:59 PM

180 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Getting up to speed for the
discounted cash flow
Now that you know what intrinsic value is, the question is how do you measure it? There are several methods of calculating intrinsic value, but the DCF
analysis is one of the top methods used by fundamental analysts.
In the next section, I’ll show you how to do a discounted cash flow analysis.
But first, it’s important to understand some of the most basic parts of how it
works, including:

A company’s cash flow
Companies brag about their earnings, but it’s cash flow that really matters.
Unlike earnings, which are a measure of profits based on accounting rules,
a company’s cash flow is the amount of cold hard cash it generates. You can
remind yourself of the importance of cash flow in fundamental analysis in
Chapter 7.
But to save you from having to flip back in this book, just know that there are
many ways to define a company’s cash flow. Still, fundamental analysts often
focus on what’s called free cash flow. Generally speaking, a company’s free
cash flow is the amount of cash it throws off from its daily business, minus
any cash it needs to spend on self-improvement, or capital expenditures.
All the information you need to calculate a company’s free cash flow is available
on the statement of cash flows. The formula for free cash flow looks like this:
Free cash flow = Cash from operations – capital expenditures
Being able to calculate a company’s free cash flow is the first step in building
a DCF analysis. The entire analysis is based on the company’s free cash flow.

Understanding the time value of money
The term discounted cash flow analysis might sound strange. When you think
of a discount, you probably think of that sweater that just went on sale at the
mall. But in finance, discount means something different.
A discount in fundamental-analysis-speak is a way to describe the phenomenon that a dollar received in the future isn’t worth as much as a dollar
received today. If someone offered to give you $100, you wouldn’t want to
wait around 100 years for it. You’d want it now.
There are a number of reasons why a future dollar is worth less than a dollar
now, including inflation and risk. Since prices generally rise every year, a dollar
won’t buy as much in the future as it would today, known as its present value.

17 506455-ch11.indd 180

9/24/09 10:35:00 PM

Chapter 11: Finding a Right Price for a Stock Using Discounted Cash Flow

181

Most years, inflation eats into the purchasing power of currency. In addition,
there’s a risk you won’t actually get the dollar in the future. A dollar bill in your
possession now is more valuable than the vague promise you’ll get one in the
future.
This matter of the present value of a dollar is critical to the DCF analysis. For
instance, let’s say you correctly forecasted how much cash a company will generate in its lifetime. Here’s the problem: You don’t actually get all that cash now.
You need to wait many years to collect cash as it’s generated by the company.
Unless you have a time machine and can collect the future dollars, you’ll
have to rely on some good old-fashioned fundamental analysis to tell you
what those dollars in the future are worth today. Sounds pretty Twilight Zone,
I know. But measuring the present value of a company’s future cash flows is
exactly what a DCF analysis does.
There are many ways to measure present value, but we’ll start with the basic
formula to show you how all this works. Trust me; it looks scarier than it is:
Present value = Future value / (1+interest rate) ^ time
The ^ is the way to designate an exponent. Must calculators have a key, yx,
which will allow you to take a number to a power.
It’s easiest to get your head around this whole present-value concept with a
simple example. Imagine you win $1 million in the lottery. Now, imagine the
state makes you an offer. You can either get the whole $1 million in five years,
or the state will pay you $950,000 right now. What’s a better deal?
At first, you might feel like it’s a no-brainer. Why accept just $950,000? You
wouldn’t even be able to call yourself a millionaire.
But guess what? Using the concept of present value, you quickly find out
you’re actually better off taking the $950,000 now. Let’s say interest rates are
3% and expected to remain there for the next five years. Using the presentvalue formula, you calculate that $1 million received in five years is only
worth $862,608 in present value. Here’s what I mean:
Present value ($862,608) = $1,000,000 / (1 + 0.03) ^ 5
In the example above, the future value of the problem is $1 million. That’s
what you’re receiving in the future.
I’ve only subjected you to the torture of the present-value formula to show
you how it can be calculated by hand. Most fundamental analysts, though,
aren’t so masochistic and tend to use financial calculators or spreadsheets to

17 506455-ch11.indd 181

9/24/09 10:35:00 PM

182 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
calculate present value. It’s a very good idea, if you plan on doing DCF analyses,
to invest in either a financial calculator or a copy of Microsoft’s Excel.
Using a financial calculator, such as Hewlett-Packard’s HP 12c, the problem
above is a snap. Simply enter 5, then press the n key for the number of years.
Enter 3, then hit the i key, for the interest rate. Lastly, enter 1,000,000 and
the FV key for future value. When you press the PV key, you’ll get the answer
instantly.
Microsoft’s Excel spreadsheet software can also handle the problem pretty
easily. You would just enter a function that looks like this:
=PV(interest rate, number of periods, number of interim payments,
future value)
Or, in this example:
=PV(0.03,5,0,1000000)

Performing a Discounted
Cash Flow Analysis
Now that you understand what a discounted cash flow analysis is and why it’s
critical to fundamental analysis, it’s time to do one yourself. To perform a discounted cash flow analysis, you’ll need a few pieces of information, including
the company’s:
✓ Current free cash flow: This is how much cash the company generated
during the most recent year.
✓ Number of shares outstanding: This is the number of shares a company
has put into shareholders’ hands. A company’s number of shares outstanding is available from the annual report.
✓ Expected growth rate in the intermediate term: You will need to estimate how rapidly a company’s cash flow is likely to grow over the next
five to 10 years. You can either estimate this yourself or get it from financial Web sites.
✓ Expected perpetual growth rate: Over time, most companies mature
and start to grow at the pace of the economy. Over a company’s very
long term, this more moderate growth rate is assumed to continue into
the future.
✓ Discount rate: This is how much return investors, in exchange for
providing their cash to the company, expect to receive.

17 506455-ch11.indd 182

9/24/09 10:35:00 PM

Chapter 11: Finding a Right Price for a Stock Using Discounted Cash Flow

183

Financial analysts love the ’80s
Ah. The 1980s. You might think of legwarmers
and New Wave music when you think of the
decade of Flashdance and Duran Duran. But
for fundamental analysts, the decade wasn’t all
lost. In 1982, Hewlett-Packard introduced the
HP 12C financial calculator, which revolutionized fundamental analysis. Even to this day, in
the age of laptops, an HP 12C is almost required
equipment for any self-respecting fundamental
analyst. You’ve probably seen the calculators,
which have a retro look to them, kind of resembling something used to launch the Apollo
spacecraft. The 12C is hard to miss with its

industrial style and gold metal band at the top.
Lore has it that fundamental analysts snapped
up the HP 12C, in part, because it’s used horizontally, unlike most calculators that are used
vertically, making it look like a miniature computer. HP still sells the calculator today, making
it the company’s longest-selling calculator. If
you’re curious, you can download and read the
HP 12C’s owner’s manual, which is actually an
excellent primer in business math. It’s available for free at http://h10032.www1.
hp.com/ctg/Manual/c00363319.
pdf.

You’re about to start one of the most math-intensive chapters in this entire book.
Calculating a stock’s intrinsic value using the DCF analysis requires several
formulas and steps. Don’t get frustrated if it seems confusing at first. Just
reread the Chapter and practice, and soon, it’ll make sense. It can also be
helpful to build a spreadsheet, so you can see how all the calculations fit
together. This chapter will calculate the intrinsic value of a well-known consumer products company, Procter & Gamble.

Starting out with free cash flow
Before you can measure all the cash a company is expected to generate in its
lifetime, you need to know how much cash it generated in the just-completed
period. This is the base of the DCF analysis.
Take P&G’s 2008 results, for instance. During fiscal 2008 ended June 30, P&G
generated cash from operations of $15.8 billion and spent $3.0 billion on capital expenditures. Subtract the $3 billion cap ex from the $15.8 billion in cash
from operations and you determine the company had free cash flow of $12.8
billion in 2008.

17 506455-ch11.indd 183

9/24/09 10:35:00 PM

184 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Getting the company’s shares outstanding
A company’s number of shares outstanding tells you how many pieces a
company’s ownership is cut into. The number of shares outstanding is readily available in a company’s annual report, or closely related 10-K, and the
quarterly reports, or the related 10-Qs. At the end of fiscal 2008, P&G had 3.03
billion shares outstanding. You can review what data are in the 10-K and 10-Q
in Chapter 4.

Estimating the company’s
intermediate-term growth
Up to this point, the data you need to do a discounted cash flow analysis
are based in fact. A company’s free cash flow last year, for instance, is in the
financial statements in black and white. The number of shares outstanding is
also a matter of fact.
But in this step, you’ll need to start making some guesses. Clearly, there’s no
way to know for sure how rapidly a company’s cash flow will grow in the next
five years, much less 10. You’ll need to estimate this future growth rate.
There are two main ways to estimate a company’s future growth, including:
✓ Historical trend analysis: A company’s historical growth rate is a good
place to start when trying to see how fast it will grow in the future. If the
company is in a pretty stable business, looking at its historical growth
trends can be a good way to forecast the future. After all, consumers will
generally buy P&G’s toilet paper, detergent and soap in the bad times,
and they probably won’t stock up during the good times. Using a historical trend analysis, explored in more detail in Chapter 17, you can get an
idea of how quickly a company’s cash flow has grown over the years.
✓ Listening to the analysts’ forecasts: The second method of estimating
a growth rate is by considering what analysts say. Most stock analysts’
reports will provide an expected long-term growth rate. Many financial
Web sites also provide an average of the analysts’ earnings growth forecasts, which can be a good proxy for guesses at the company’s future
cash flow growth. P&G was expected to grow by 10% a year over the
next five years, according to MSN Money as of early 2009. I will use 10%
for this example.
The difficulty in estimating expected future growth rates is a big reason
why, as a fundamental analyst, you might stick with companies that sell
products that have stable and steady growth. They are much easier to
forecast growth for.

17 506455-ch11.indd 184

9/24/09 10:35:00 PM

Chapter 11: Finding a Right Price for a Stock Using Discounted Cash Flow

185

Going way out: Forecasting
long-term growth
Companies are like rock stars. Even the great ones slow down over time. Even
outstanding companies eventually succumb to the gravitational pull of capitalism when competitors crowd into their markets and drive down profits
and eat into market share.
It’s unrealistic to expect even a good company to keep growing at a doubledigit pace forever. Generally, fundamental analysts assume a company’s
growth over its lifetime will moderate to the economy’s growth. Over time,
that super-long-term-growth rate is about 3%.

Measuring the discount rate
If you thought estimating a company’s intermediate growth rate was tough,
just wait until you try to estimate the discount rate, sometimes called a company’s cost of capital. The discount rate is what you’ll use to measure the
present value of the company’s future cash flows.
Measuring a company’s discount rate can be an extremely complex calculation that could keep a supercomputer busy for a couple of days or weeks.
I’m going to assume you don’t really want to get into the gory details. If you
do, “Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies” (Wiley) will
delight you and your pet supercomputer.
For our purposes, though, it’s important to get in the ballpark for the discount rate calculation. There are two primary ways to do this, including:
