
155

156 A WINNING SYSTEM
while net income may be up 12%, earnings per share—your main focus as
an investor—may have edged up only 5% or 6%.
You must be able to see through slanted presentations. Don’t let the use
of words like sales and net income divert your attention from the truly vital
facts like current quarterly earnings. To further clarify this point:
You should always compare a company’s earnings per share to the same
quarter a year earlier, not to the prior quarter, to avoid any distortion
resulting from seasonality. In other words, you don’t compare the
December quarter’s earnings per share to the prior September quarter’s
earnings per share. Rather, compare the December quarter to the
December quarter of the previous year for a more accurate evaluation.

Omit a Company’s One-Time Extraordinary Gains
The winning investor should avoid the trap of being influenced by nonrecurring profits. For example, if a computer maker reports earnings for the
last quarter that include nonrecurring profits from activities such as the sale
of real estate, this portion of earnings should be subtracted from the report.
Such earnings represent a one-time event, not the true, ongoing profitability of corporate operations. Ignore the earnings that result from such events.
Is it possible that the earnings of New York’s Citigroup bank may have
been propped up at times during the 1990s by nonrecurring sales of commercial real estate prior to the bank’s later leveraged involvement in the
subprime disaster?

Set a Minimum Level for Current Earnings Increases
Whether you’re a new or an experienced investor, I would advise against
buying any stock that doesn’t show earnings per share up at least 18% or
20% in the most recent quarter versus the same quarter the year before. In
our study of the greatest winning companies, we found that they all had this
in common prior to their big price moves. Many successful investors use
25% or 30% as their minimum earnings parameter.
To be even safer, insist that both of the last two quarters show significant
earnings gains. During bull markets (major market uptrends), I prefer to
concentrate on stocks that show powerful earnings gains of 40% to 500% or
more. You have thousands of stocks to choose from. Why not buy the very
best merchandise available?
To further sharpen your stock selection process, look ahead to the next
quarter or two and check the earnings that were reported for those same

C = Current Big or Accelerating Quarterly Earnings and Sales per Share

quarters the previous year. See if the company will be coming up against
unusually large or small earnings achieved a year ago. When the unusual
year-earlier results are not caused by seasonal factors, this step may help you
anticipate a strong or poor earnings report in the coming months.
Also, be sure to check consensus earnings estimates (projections that
combine the earnings estimates of a large group of analysts) for the next several quarters—and for the next year or two—to make sure the company is
projected to be on a positive track. Some earnings estimate services even
show an estimated annual earnings growth rate for the next five years for
many companies.
Many individuals and even some institutional investors buy stocks whose
earnings were down in the most recently reported quarter because they like
the company and think that its stock price is “cheap.” Usually they accept
the story that earnings will rebound strongly in the near future. In some
cases this may be true, but in many cases it isn’t. Again, the point is that you
have the choice of investing in thousands of companies, many of which are
actually showing strong operating results. You don’t have to accept promises
of earnings that may never occur.
Requiring that current quarterly earnings be up a hefty amount is just
another smart way for the intelligent investor to reduce the risk of mistakes
in stock selection. But you must also understand that in the late stage of a
bull market, some or even many leaders that have had long runs may top out
even though their earnings are up 100%. This usually fools investors and
analysts alike. It pays to know your market history.

Avoid Big Older Companies with Maintainer Management
In fact, many older American corporations have mediocre management that
continually produces second-rate earnings results. I call these people the
“entrenched maintainers” or “caretaker management.” You want to avoid
these companies until someone has the courage to change the top executives. Not coincidentally, they are generally the companies that strain to
pump up their current earnings a still-dull 8% or 10%. True growth companies with outstanding new products or improved management do not have
to inflate their current results.

Look for Accelerating Quarterly Earnings Growth
Our analysis of the most successful stocks also showed that, in almost every
case, earnings growth accelerated sometime in the 10 quarters before a towering price move began. In other words, it’s not just increased earnings and

157

158 A WINNING SYSTEM
the size of the increase that cause a big move. It’s also that the increase represents an improvement from the company’s prior rate of earnings growth.
If a company’s earnings have been up 15% a year and suddenly begin spurting 40% to 50% or more—what Wall Street usually calls “earnings surprises”—this usually creates the conditions for important stock price
improvement.
Other valuable ways to track a stock’s earnings include determining
how many times in recent months analysts have raised their estimates for
the company plus the percentage by which several previous quarterly earnings reports have actually beaten the estimates.

Look for Sales Growth as Well as Earnings Growth
Strong and improving quarterly earnings should always be supported by
sales growth of at least 25% for the latest quarter, or at least an acceleration
in the rate of sales percentage improvement over the last three quarters.
Certain newer issues (initial public offerings) may show sales growth averaging 100% or more in each of the last 8, 10, or 12 quarters. Check all these
stocks out.
Take particular note if the growth of both sales and earnings has accelerated for the last three quarters. You don’t want to get impatient and sell your
stock if it shows this type of acceleration. Stick to your position.
Some professional investors bought Waste Management at $50 in early
1998 because earnings had jumped three quarters in a row from 24% to
75% and 268%. But sales were up only 5%. Several months later, the stock
collapsed to $15 a share.
This demonstrates that companies can inflate earnings for a few quarters
by reducing costs or spending less on advertising, research and development, and other constructive activities. To be sustainable, however, earnings
growth must be supported by higher sales. Such was not the case with Waste
Management.
It also helps improve your batting average if the latest quarter’s after-tax
profit margins for your stock selections are either at or near a new high and
among the very best in the company’s own industry. Yes, you have to do a little homework if you want to really improve your results. No pain, no gain.

Two Quarters of Major Earnings Deceleration
Can Be Trouble for Your Stock
Just as it’s important to recognize when quarterly earnings growth is accelerating, it’s also important to know when earnings begin to decelerate, or

C = Current Big or Accelerating Quarterly Earnings and Sales per Share

slow down significantly. If a company that has been growing at a quarterly
rate of 50% suddenly reports earnings gains of only 15%, that might spell
trouble, and you may want to avoid that company.
Even the best organizations can have a slow quarter every once in a while.
So before turning negative on a company’s earnings, I prefer to see two consecutive quarters of material slowdown. This usually means a decline of
two-thirds or greater from the previous rate—a slowdown from 100% earnings growth to 30%, for example, or from 50% to 15%.

Consult Log-Scale Weekly Graphs
Understanding the principle of earnings acceleration or deceleration is
essential.
Securities analysts who recommend stocks because of the absolute level
of earnings expected for the following year could be looking at the wrong set
of numbers. The fact that a stock earned $5 per share and expects to report
$6 the next year (a “favorable” 20% increase) could be misleading unless
you know the previous trend in the percentage rate of earnings change.
What if earnings were previously up 60%? This partially explains why so few
investors make significant money following the buy and sell recommendations of securities analysts.
Logarithmic-scale graphs are of great value in analyzing stocks because
they clearly show the acceleration or deceleration in the percentage rate of
quarterly earnings increases. One inch anywhere on the price or earnings
scale represents the same percentage change. This is not true of arithmetically scaled charts.
On an arithmetically scaled chart, a 100% price increase from $10 to $20
a share shows the same space change as a 50% increase from $20 to $30 a
share. In contrast, a log-scale graph would show the 100% increase as being
twice as large as the 50% increase.
As a do-it-yourself investor, you can take the latest quarterly earnings per
share along with the prior three quarters’ EPS, and plot them on a logarithmic-scale graph to get a clear picture of earnings acceleration or deceleration. For the best companies, plotting the most recent 12-month earnings
each quarter should put the earnings per share point close to or already at
new highs.

Check Other Stocks in the Group
For additional validation, check the earnings of other companies in your
stock’s industry group. If you can’t find at least one other impressive stock

159

160 A WINNING SYSTEM
displaying strong earnings in the group, chances are you may have selected
the wrong investment.

Where to Find Current Quarterly Earnings Reports
Quarterly corporate earnings statements used to be published in the business sections of most local newspapers and financial publications every day.
But many publications are downsizing their business sections these days,
dropping data right and left. As a result, they no longer adequately cover the
most important thing that investors need to know.
This is not true of Investor’s Business Daily. IBD not only continues to
provide detailed earnings coverage, but goes a step further and separates
all new earnings reports into companies with “up” earnings and those
reporting “down” results, so you can easily see who produced excellent
gains and who didn’t.
Chart services such as Daily Graphs® and Daily Graphs Online also show
earnings reported during the week as well as the most recent earnings figures
for every stock they chart. Once you locate the percentage change in earnings per share when compared to the same year-ago quarter, also compare
the percentage change in EPS on a quarter-by-quarter basis. Looking at the
March quarter and then at the June, September, and December quarters will
tell you if a company’s earnings growth is accelerating or decelerating.
You now have the first critical rule for improving your stock selection:
Current quarterly earnings per share should be up a major percentage—
25% to 50% at a minimum—over the same quarter the previous year. The
best companies might show earnings up 100% to 500% or more!

A mediocre 10% or 12% isn’t enough. When you’re picking winning
stocks, it’s the bottom line that counts.

4

• CHAPTE R •

A = Annual Earnings Increases:
Look for Big Growth

Any company can report a good earnings quarter every once in a while. And as

we’ve seen, strong current quarterly earnings are critical to picking most of
the market’s biggest winners. But they’re not enough.
To make sure the latest results aren’t just a flash in the pan, and the company you’re looking at is of high quality, you must insist on more proof. The
way to do that is by reviewing the company’s annual earnings growth rate.
Look for annual earnings per share that have increased in each of the last
three years. You normally don’t want the second year’s earnings to be down,
even if the results in the following year rebound to the highest level yet. It’s
the combination of strong earnings in the last several quarters plus a record
of solid growth in recent years that creates a superb stock, or at least one
with a higher probability of success during an uptrending general market.

Select Stocks with 25% to 50% and
Higher Annual Earnings Growth Rates
The annual rate of earnings growth for the companies you pick should be
25%, 50%, or even 100% or more. Between 1980 and 2000, the median
annual growth rate of all outstanding stocks in our study at their early
emerging stage was 36%. Three out of four big winners showed at least
some positive annual growth over the three years, and in some cases the five
years, preceding the stocks’ big run-ups.
A typical earnings per share progression for the five years preceding the
stock’s move might be something like $0.70, $1.15, $1.85, $2.65, and $4.00.

161

162 A WINNING SYSTEM
In a few cases, you might accept one down year in five as long as the following year’s earnings move back to new high ground.
It’s possible a company could earn $4.00 a share one year, $5.00 the next,
$6.00 the next, and then $3.00 a share. If the next annual earnings statement
was, say, $4.00 per share versus the prior year’s $3.00, this would not be a
good report despite the 33% increase over the prior year. The only reason it
might seem positive is that the previous year’s earnings ($3.00 a share) were
so depressed that any improvement would look good. The point is, profits
are recovering slowly and are still well below the company’s peak annual
earnings of $6.00 a share.
The consensus among analysts on what earnings will be for the next year
should also be up—the more, the better. But remember: estimates are personal opinions, and opinions may be wrong (too high or too low). Actual
reported earnings are facts.

Look for a Big Return on Equity
You should also be aware of two other measurements of profitability and
growth: return on equity and cash flow per share.
Return on equity, or ROE, is calculated by dividing net income by shareholders’ equity. This shows how efficiently a company uses its money,
thereby helping to separate well-managed firms from those that are poorly
managed. Our studies show that nearly all the greatest growth stocks of the
past 50 years had ROEs of at least 17%. (The really superior growth situations will sport 25% to 50% ROEs.)
To determine cash flow, add back the amount of depreciation the company shows to reflect the amount of cash that is being generated internally.
Some growth stocks can also show annual cash flow per share that is at least
20% greater than actual earnings per share.

Check the Stability of a Company’s
Three-Year Earnings Record
Through our research, we’ve determined another factor that has proved
important in selecting growth stocks: the stability and consistency of annual
earnings growth over the past three years. Our stability measurement,
which is expressed on a scale of 1 to 99, is calculated differently from most
statistics. The lower the figure, the more stable the past earnings record.
The figures are calculated by plotting quarterly earnings for the past three
or five years and fitting a trend line around the plotted points to determine
the degree of deviation from the basic growth trend.

A = Annual Earnings Increases: Look for Big Growth

Growth stocks with steady earnings tend to have a stability figure below 20
or 25. Companies with stability ratings over 30 are more cyclical and a little
less dependable in terms of their growth. All other things being equal, you
may want to look for stocks showing a greater degree of sustainability, consistency, and stability in past earnings growth. Some companies that are
growing 25% per year could have a stability rating of 1, 2, or 3. When the
quarterly earnings for several years are plotted on a log-scale chart, the earnings line should be nearly straight, consistently moving up. In most cases
there will be some acceleration in the rate of increase in recent quarters.
McDonald’s Corp.
EPS Growth Rate

19%

Earnings Stability

4
15 (1.4 x SP)

5-Year P/E Range

12–21

Return on Equity

29%

Cash Flow

$4.85

© William O’Neil + Co., Inc.

P/E Ratio

Sample earnings stability

Earnings stability numbers are customarily shown right after a company’s
annual growth rate, but most analysts and investment services don’t bother
to make the calculation. We show them in many of our institutional products
as well as in Daily Graphs and Daily Graphs Online, which are designed for
individual investors.
If you restrict your stock selections to ventures with proven growth
records, you will avoid the hundreds of investments with erratic histories or
cyclical recoveries in profits. A few such stocks could “top out” as they
approach the peaks of their prior earnings cycle.

What Is a Normal Stock Market Cycle?
History demonstrates most bull (up) markets last two to four years and are followed by a recession or a bear (down) market. Then another bull market starts.
In the beginning phase of a new bull market, growth stocks are usually
the first to lead and make new price highs. These are companies whose
profits have grown quarter to quarter, but whose stocks have been held back
by the poor general market conditions. The combination of a general market decline and a stock’s continued profit growth will have compressed the
price/earnings (P/E) ratio to a point where it is attractive to institutional
investors, for whom P/Es are important.

163

164 A WINNING SYSTEM
Cyclical stocks in basic industries such as steel, chemicals, paper, rubber,
autos, and machinery usually lag in the new bull market’s early phase.
Young growth stocks will typically dominate for at least two bull market
cycles. Then the emphasis may change to cyclicals, turnarounds, or other
newly improved sectors for a short period.
While three out of four big market winners in the past were growth
stocks, one in four was a cyclical or turnaround situation. In 1982, Chrysler
and Ford were two such spirited turnaround plays. Cyclical and turnaround
opportunities led in the market waves of 1953–1955, 1963–1965, and
1974–1975. Cyclicals including paper, aluminum, autos, chemicals, and
plastics returned to the fore in 1987, and home-building stocks, which are
also cyclical, have led in other periods. Examples of turnaround situations
include IBM in 1994 and Apple in 2003.
Yet even when cyclical stocks are in favor, some pretty dramatic young
growth issues are also available. Cyclical stocks in the United States are often
those in older, less-efficient industries. Some of these companies weren’t
competitive until the demand for steel, copper, chemicals, and oil surged as
a result of the rapid buildup of basic industries in China. That’s why cyclicals
were resurrected aggressively after the 2000 bear market ended in 2003.
They are still cyclical stocks, however, and they may not represent America’s true future. In addition, large, old-line companies in America frequently have the added disadvantage of size: they are simply too large to be
able to innovate and continually renew themselves so that they can compete
with nimble foreign rivals and with America’s young new entrepreneurs.
Rallies in cyclical stocks may tend to be more short-lived and prone to falter
at the first hint of a recession or an earnings slowdown. Should you decide to
buy a turnaround stock, look for annual earnings growth of at least 5% to 10%
and two straight quarters of sharp earnings recovery that lift results for the latest 12 months into or very near new high ground. Check the 12-month earnings
line on a stock chart; the sharper the angle of the earnings upswing, the better.
If the profit upswing is so dramatic that it reaches a new high, one quarter of earnings turnaround will sometimes suffice. Cleveland Cliffs, a supplier of iron ore pellets to the steel industry (and now known as Cliffs
Natural Resources), came from a deficit position to dramatically accelerate
quarterly earnings in 2004 by 64% and then by 241%. With that impetus,
the stock rapidly advanced 170% in the next eight months.

How to Weed Out the Losers in a Group
Insisting on three years of earnings growth will help you quickly weed out
80% of the stocks in any industry group. Growth rates for most stocks in
most groups are lackluster or nonexistent—unlike, for example,

A = Annual Earnings Increases: Look for Big Growth

• Xerox, which was growing at a 32% annual rate before its shares soared
700% from March 1963 to June 1966

• Wal-Mart Stores, which consistently created an annual growth rate of
43% before rocketing 11,200% from 1977 to 1990

• Cisco Systems, whose earnings were exploding at a 257% rate in October
1990, and Microsoft, which was growing at a 99% clip in October 1986,
before their enormous advances

• Priceline.com, which from 2004 to 2006 more than doubled its earnings
from 96 cents a share to $2.03, before it tripled in price in the next five
quarters

• Google, which had already expanded its earnings from 55 cents a share in
2002 to $2.51 a share in 2004 before its stock climbed from $200 to $700
by 2007

Keep in mind that an annual growth record doesn’t necessarily make a
company a solid growth stock. In fact, some so-called growth stocks report
substantially slower growth than they did in earlier market periods. Many
growth leaders in one cycle do not repeat in the next cycle.
The stock of a company that has an outstanding three-year growth record
of 30% but whose earnings growth has slowed to 10% or 15% in the last several quarters acts like a fully mature growth stock. Older and larger organizations are usually characterized by slower growth, and many of them should be
avoided. America is continually led and driven by new innovative entrepreneurial companies. They, and not our government, create our new industries.

Insist on Both Annual and Current Quarterly
Earnings Being Excellent
A standout stock needs both a sound growth record in recent years and a
strong current earnings record in the last several quarters. It’s the powerful
combination of these two critical factors, rather than one or the other, that
creates a super stock, or at least one that has a higher chance for true success.
The fastest way to find a company with strong and accelerating current
earnings and solid three-year growth is by checking the proprietary Earnings per Share (EPS) Rating provided for every stock listed in Investor’s
Business Daily’s research stock tables.
The EPS Rating measures a company’s two most recent quarters of
earnings growth against the same quarters the year before and examines
its growth rate over the last three years. The results are then compared
with those of all other publicly traded companies and rated on a scale
from 1 to 99, with 99 being best. An EPS Rating of 99 means a company
