
Chapter 12: Money Management Techniques: When to Hold ’em, When to Fold ’em
✓ Marketability risk: This factor relates to how liquid your investment is.
If you’re restricted from selling your investment when you want to do
so, your target selling point won’t mean much. For most stock traders,
this factor isn’t an issue, but if, for example, you choose to invest in a
small company whose stock isn’t traded on one of the major stock
markets, you risk not being able to close your stock position when the
time is right.
✓ Currency translation risk: Currency translation refers to disparities in
trading stocks of companies in foreign countries. It’s only a factor when
you trade foreign stocks, because you then must be concerned with
fluctuations between the values of your local currency and the currency
in the country where the company is located. Even if the stock increases
in price, you can still lose money based on the currency exchange
rate. If the value of your currency falls against the other currency, your
investment can be worth less when you convert it back.

Investment risks
Investment risks relate directly to how you invest your money and manage
your entry and exit trades. Two critical risks you must manage are
✓ Opportunity risk: This kind of risk involves balancing your trade-offs.
When you trade, you establish a position that ties up money that
otherwise can be used elsewhere. After you choose a stock and buy it,
you lose the opportunity to buy something else that may strike your
fancy, until you trade out of the first position. Essentially, you can miss
other opportunities while your money’s tied up in another position.
✓ Concentration risk: This kind of risk happens when you put too many
eggs in one basket. You may think you’ve found that hot stock that’s
going to make you a millionaire, so you decide to invest a huge portion of
your principal into that stock. By concentrating so much of your money
on one investment, you also concentrate the risks associated with that
investment and with the possibility of losing it all.

Trading risks
Risks that are unique to trading increase simultaneously with increases in
trading volume. Day traders and swing traders often see a greater impact
caused by these risks than do position traders, but everyone needs to be
aware of these issues. See Chapters 16 and 17 for more information about
swing trading and day trading, respectively. Risks associated with trading are

201

202 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
✓ Slippage risk: Hidden costs associated with every transaction are the
focus of this risk factor. Every time you enter or exit a position, your
account balance dwindles by a small amount. Every time you execute a
trade, you subject yourself to the problem of buying at the ask price but
selling at the bid price. The ask price is the lowest price available for the
stock that you want. The bid price is the highest price someone is willing to pay for shares you own. Unfortunately, the bid price is always less
than the ask price. Although you can mitigate bid/ask problems by using
limit orders, doing so subjects you to the risk that your order won’t get
filled. The amounts for each trade may at first seem small, but as your
trading volume increases, so do the amounts you lose to slippage.
✓ Poor execution risk: This problem occurs whenever your broker has
a difficult time filling your order, which can result from any number of
factors, including fast market conditions, poor availability of stock, or
the absence of other buyers and sellers. The result is always the same:
The price you expect is somewhat different than the price you actually
receive. Although you can mitigate this problem to a degree by using
limit orders, you still risk having the stock trade through your limit price
and not getting your order filled at all.
✓ Gap risk: This kind of risk comes into play whenever a break in trading
occurs. Sometimes a stock opens at a price significantly higher or lower
than its previous close, and sometimes a stock trades right through your
exit price. For example, a stock may close at $25 a share today and open
tomorrow morning at $20. If your planned exit price is $24, and you have
a stop order in place, your order is likely to be filled at the opening price
or worse. Price gaps created in this way occur most often at the open.
And although relatively rare, a gap also can occur during the trading day
whenever surprising news is reported or trading halts.

Chapter 13

Using Fundamental and Technical
Analyses for Optimum Strategy
In This Chapter
▶ Seeing the big picture
▶ Identifying the phases of the market
▶ Trading with the dominant trend
▶ Developing strategies for each phase of the market

K

nowing the current state of the economy can help you improve your
trading results. However, knowing the current state of the market is
crucial, because you obviously want to buy stocks in a bull market and sell
them, or short them, in a bear market. Besides the obvious, you also want
a strategy for trading stocks during market transitions and consolidation
phases.
As a result, you need a method for identifying and categorizing the differing
phases of bull and bear markets. We recommend using the six phases in
the list that follows. Doing so enables you to adjust your trading strategies
for each phase of the market, regardless of whether you’re trading stocks,
bonds, indexes, futures, or options. The six phases of the market are
✓ Bullish transition: The market is transitioning from a bear market to a
bull market.
✓ Bull market: A persistent rising trend in the market.
✓ Bullish pullback: A bull market in the midst of a pullback.
✓ Bearish transition: The market is transitioning from a bull market to a
bear market.
✓ Bear market: A persistent downtrend.
✓ Bearish pullback: A bear market in the midst of a consolidation.

204 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
This chapter shows you how to identify these phases of the market using the
techniques of fundamental and technical analyses that we describe throughout this book. Although no single detail or event can enable you to out-andout declare a bull market or bear market, we address many small details that,
when taken together, enable you to make informed conclusions. Likewise,
distinguishing a transition phase from a pullback phase can be difficult. This
chapter helps you methodically analyze the economy, the market, leading
and lagging sectors, and individual stocks, so you can identify the particular
phase a market is in. Furthermore, this chapter describes unified trading
strategies that are built around these market phases.

Seeing the Big Picture
Identifying the current economic climate is the first step toward identifying
the current phase of the markets. Only a tiny fraction of available economic
data is required to develop a snapshot of the economy from which you can
infer the current state of the markets. The conditions that you need to know
(and questions you need to ask) to be able to evaluate and determine the
cycle that the economy currently is in are
✓ Where interest rates are headed. Are they rising, falling, or staying the
same?
✓ What officials of the Federal Reserve System (the Fed) are doing now.
What is the Fed likely to do in the future?
✓ How business is performing, in general. Is industrial production rising or
falling?
✓ Which sectors are leading and which are lagging. Are economically sensitive stocks appreciating or declining in value, or are traders currently
favoring defensive stocks?
This information is crucial for determining the cycle in which the economy
currently is functioning. (For more about economic cycles, see Chapter 5.)
Fortunately, the economic picture doesn’t change quickly, so taking the temperature of the economy, if you will, can be a weekly or monthly exercise.
Ultimately, maintaining a background knowledge of the cycles through which
the economy is passing helps you identify current phases of the markets,
which, in turn, can help you make better trading decisions.

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy

Knowing when the Fed is your friend
Current interest rates and interest-rate trends help determine the current
position of the economy within the business cycle. Low interest rates are
associated with economic troughs and high rates with economic peaks. In a
nutshell, the Fed lowers rates to stimulate economic activity and raises rates
to slow it. But the time lag between the Fed’s activity and any reaction by the
economy often is a long one, making the Fed’s monetary policy an imprecise
indicator. Nevertheless, you can use interest rates to get a rough idea about
the current economic landscape.
Interest rate reductions that the Fed okays generally are good news for the
stock market. The opposite also is true. When the Fed tightens its monetary
policy by raising interest rates, stocks normally react poorly. Either way, stock
markets may not react immediately, and unfortunately, many months can pass
before either the stock market or the economy responds in either direction to
the Fed’s action. Although the old stock market saying, “three steps and a
stumble,” doesn’t always hold true, markets do often head lower after the Fed
raises rates for the third time.
In short, falling interest rates typically lead to a rising economy and to a
market that’s changing from a bear market to a bull market — in other words,
a bullish transition. Ultimately, a bullish transition leads to a new bull market.
Conversely, however, rising interest rates sooner or later lead to a market
that’s changing from a bull market to a bear market — a bearish transition,
and ultimately a bear market. The problem: No consistent timetable exists
that enables you to anticipate when these changes will occur, so you should
use interest rate changes only as a hint that a transition may be coming and
wait for an additional confirmation before you act on a trading strategy.

Keeping an eye on industrial production
In addition to interest rates, industrial production is another indicator that
provides insight into the health of the economy. You can monitor industrial production by keeping track of the Federal Reserve’s monthly report,
“Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization,” at www.federalreserve.
gov/releases/G17/Current/default.htm. Release dates can be found
at www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/default.htm. New economic growth is suggested when industrial production statistics start inching
higher, a sign that usually indicates the market either is entering a bullish
transition or will soon do so. Similarly, robust growth numbers often accompany a bull market phase. Conversely, leveling off or falling industrial production data shows that a bearish transition can be expected. And finally, a bear
market phase often accompanies falling production data.

205

206 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Watching sector rotation
Monitoring leading and lagging economic sectors (see Chapter 5) provides
direct insight into the current state of the stock market, because some industries tend to perform well at the beginning of an economic expansion and
others tend to perform relatively well as the economy cools. Traders often try
to anticipate changes in the economy by watching specific sectors that they
know have tendencies to rise or fall in specific patterns that coincide with one
economic or market cycle. These patterned tendencies are called sector rotation. Although you won’t see picture-perfect sector rotation with every cycle,
you will see enough similarities from cycle to cycle to enable you to gain additional insight into the current phase of the economy and the stock market.
Sectors that perform well during specific economic cycles and market phases
are described in the following sections.

Anticipating a new bull market
Economic conditions that foster a new bull market include low interest rates
and hints that industrial production is beginning to rise. Traders who monitor these economic conditions often respond to them by buying the stocks of
cyclical and technology-based companies. Bullish transition phases usually
begin in this manner.
The stocks of companies whose business is sensitive to the economic cycle
have traditionally been called cyclical stocks. Within the past few decades,
technology-based companies have joined these so-called cyclical companies
as bell-weather economic indicators. The stocks of cyclical and technologybased companies, and the companies themselves, perform best when interest
rates are low. Increased sales of their products drive industrial production
numbers higher. These companies usually lead the market and often rally
before an economic trough, or recession, completely bottoms out.
Unfortunately, traders jump the gun as often as they get it right, so whenever
you see cyclical and tech stocks begin to rally, it pays to be skeptical. Rather
than jump to the conclusion that a sector rally means a bull market is just
around the corner, you need to instead consider that it potentially indicates
only a bullish transition.
Industries known for making up cyclical sectors include
✓ Automobile and automotive component manufacturers
✓ Consumer durable manufacturers that produce products such as
appliances and consumer electronics
✓ Retailers, such as department stores, big-box discounters, and
specialty retailers (excluding food, beverage, pharmaceutical, and other
nondurable retailers)

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy
✓ Media companies, such as movie studios, radio and television companies,
and book publishers
✓ Hotels, restaurants, and entertainment and other leisure companies
Technology-sector industries include
✓ Semiconductor (computer chip) manufacturers and manufacturers of
equipment to produce semiconductors
✓ Computer and computer peripheral device manufacturers
✓ Software and service companies
✓ Telecommunication and Internet service companies
✓ Information technology service companies

Watching the economy rebound
Strength in the industrial sectors is a condition that usually indicates the
markets may be entering a bull market phase. As the economy begins showing
signs of growth, you often see a rally in industrial sectors. Large industrial
companies often need to borrow money to increase production, a factor that
makes them sensitive to interest rate changes. These companies tend to perform best in a low interest rate environment. Rising industrial production that
drives industrial-sector earnings and stock prices higher is no coincidence.
Companies in the industrial sectors include
✓ Building products manufacturers
✓ Construction and engineering firms
✓ Aerospace and defense companies
✓ Electrical equipment manufacturers
✓ Airlines and air freight, transportation, and infrastructure companies
✓ Major manufacturing conglomerates (which are widely diversified
companies such as GE, United Technologies, and Tyco)

Approaching a market top
When the economy is firing on all cylinders, industrial production is robust,
and interest rates are beginning to rise. However, the stock market is trying
to anticipate what happens next and it’s probably nearing its peak. Basic
material stocks, energy stocks, and consumer staple company stocks tend
to do well under these conditions. When you begin seeing strength in the
consumer staples sector, you need to begin searching for confirmation of a
bearish transitional phase.

207

208 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Companies in the basic industry and materials sectors include
✓ Metals and mining companies
✓ Chemical companies
✓ Construction material companies
✓ Forest-product companies, including paper, packaging, and container
companies
The energy sectors include
✓ Oil and natural gas exploration and drilling services
✓ Coal and coal processing
✓ Refineries
Companies in the consumer staple sectors include
✓ Food and beverage companies
✓ Household product companies and other consumer staples companies,
such as personal-care product companies
✓ Tobacco companies
✓ Retailers, specifically food, beverage, drug, and other nondurable goods
retailers

Weathering a bear market
Healthcare and other service-sector stocks often perform better than the
average stock as the economy peaks and as bullish market tendencies fade
to bearish outlooks. The stocks of utility and financial companies also tend
to perform better than average during bear markets, because they’re considered safe havens from the accompanying tide of rising interest rates and flattening industrial production. As these stocks begin showing higher relative
strength, you need to move your indicator from bearish transition to a bear
market phase.
Consumer service sectors include
✓ Healthcare equipment and supplies companies
✓ Healthcare providers
✓ Pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy
The utility sector includes
✓ Electric power generation and distribution companies
✓ Natural gas distribution companies
✓ Water utilities companies
Companies in the financial sectors include
✓ Diversified financial service companies, including banks and brokerage
firms
✓ Commercial banks
✓ Insurance companies
Taking a relatively long point of view as you monitor the markets for sector
rotation is a good idea. By that we mean you’re not interested in the day-byday ups and downs, but rather, you’re trying to evaluate sector performance
during periods of many weeks and even months. Remembering that bull markets tend to lift prices for all stocks is also important. So when you monitor
sector performance, you try to find the sectors that are performing better
than others. In bear markets, stocks that hold their values, for example, will
outperform all stocks that have falling prices.

Finding the dominant trend
You need to own stocks during bull markets, and sell them, or short them
(see Chapter 14), during bear markets. In other words, you want to trade with
the dominant trend. The stock market tends to lead the economy, so using the
market’s performance as your primary reference to find the dominant trend
makes sense. Combining your analysis of the dominant market trend with the
background knowledge you gained from analyzing interest rates, industrial
production data, and sector rotation helps you refine the way you categorize
the current phase of the market. That kind of refinement means your trading performance will improve when you can make trades with the dominant
trend or market phase on your side.

Looking at weekly index charts
You need only a handful of tools to determine the dominant trend or phase of
the market. We use two, the weekly charts of broad market indexes and the
bullish percent index, which is discussed in the next section. Significant changes
in the markets happen slowly, and thus show up better in weekly charts than
they do in daily charts, because insignificant changes are filtered out.

209

210 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
We typically monitor charts of the major indexes such as the S&P 500 (SPX)
or the NASDAQ Composite Index (COMPX). Doing so makes visually identifying
bull markets and bear markets easy. They appear as trends, exactly like the
ones shown on the stock charts in Chapter 10. A bull market appears as a
series of higher highs and higher lows on weekly index charts. A bear market
appears as a series of lower highs and lower lows. These are the dominant
trends.
Pullback patterns, such as the flag, pennant, and other retracement patterns
discussed in Chapter 10, correspond to the bullish pullback and bearish
pullback conditions. And bullish transition and bearish transition phases
may signal a trend reversal, in much the same way that reversal patterns and
trading ranges often lead to a change in direction.
Figure 13-1 shows the phases of a bull market using a weekly chart of the
NASDAQ Composite Index. Figure 13-2 shows the phases of a bear market
using an earlier weekly chart of the NASDAQ Composite Index.

Higher Highs

Figure 13-1:
Weekly
chart of
NASDAQ
Composite
Index
reflects a
bull market.

Bullish Transition
Bull Market

Higher Lows

Pullback

Bullish Pullback

Trend identification tools that we discuss in Chapters 9, 10, and 11 all apply
to these weekly charts. For example, you can easily spot the higher highs and
higher lows in Figure 13-1 that occurred in late 2006. These higher highs and
higher lows correspond to a bull market. You also can easily see the lower
highs and lower lows in Figure 13-2; they accompanied the long-running bear
market.

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy
You also need to be able to identify the Moving Average Convergence
Divergence (MACD) crossover points and divergent patterns on these charts.
We describe MACD in detail in Chapter 11. MACD signals provide you with
additional information to augment the way you categorize current phases of
the market.
Using MACD to indicate bull and bear markets is straightforward.

Lower Highs

Figure 13-2:
Weekly
chart of
NASDAQ
Composite
Index
reflects a
bear market.

Bearish Transition
Bear Market

Lower Lows
Bearish Pullback

✓ A bull market is indicated when the MACD line is greater than the zero
line and greater than the trigger line.
✓ A bear market is indicated when the MACD line is less than the zero line
and less than the trigger line.
However, pullback and transition phases are not as clearly defined:
✓ Either a bullish transition — or a bearish pullback — is indicated when
the MACD line is less than the zero line and it crosses above the trigger
line.
✓ Either a bearish transition — or a bullish pullback — is indicated when
the MACD is greater than the zero line and it crosses below the trigger
line.

211

212 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Use the bullish percent index (BPI), described in the next section, in
conjunction with pattern analysis, as described in Chapter 10, to help
distinguish between the transition and pullback phases.
Using Figure 13-2, you can see where the MACD indicator on the weekly chart
is less than zero and crosses above its trigger line. When the MACD crossed
above its trigger line, it suggested the market may have been trying to turn
from a bear market to a bull market in a bullish transition phase. You can
see two instances in Figure 13-2 where the MACD signaled these bearish
pullbacks or bullish transitions in 2008. Both failed, resulting in a dramatic
continuation of the bear market.
