
A trader who exercises a futures option early does so to capture the interest on the
option’s intrinsic value. This intrinsic value will be credited to his account only if the
option is subject to stock-type settlement. When he abandons the option through
exercise, he receives the variation resulting from settlement of the futures contract. If,
however, futures options are subject to futures-type settlement, as they are on many
non-U.S. exchanges, no cash flow results from the early exercise of an option. With an
80 call trading at 20 and the underlying futures contract trading at 100, if the option is
subject to futures-type settlement when exercised, 20 points will be credited to the
trader’s account from the settlement of the futures contract. But 20 points will
simultaneously be debited from his account when the 20-point value of the option
disappears. Since the cash credits and debits exactly offset each other, no additional
interest earnings can accrue.

In futures markets where the options are subject to futures-type settlement there is
never any economic justification for early exercise, and early exercise can never be an
optimal choice. A trader will always be better off either holding the option or selling it,
rather than exercising it early.

STOCK OPTIONS

Early Exercise of Calls for the Dividends

We can separate a stock option call into its components, as we did with a futures option.
Now we have the additional consideration of dividends:

call value = intrinsic value + interest rate value + volatility value — dividend value

Since the intrinsic value, interest rate, and volatility components can never be less than
zero, these factors always enhance the call’s value. As any one of them rises, the call
value rises. Only the dividend component might affect the option’s value negatively. As
the dividend rises, the call option’s value falls. If the underlying stock pays no dividend,
or no dividend is expected prior to expiration of the option, a call option can never have
a value less than parity (intrinsic value). If, however, the negative effects of the dividend
are greater than the positive effects of interest rates and volatility, it might be possible
for a call, if it is European, to be worth less than parity.

For example, suppose a certain stock is trading at 100 and that the stock will go
ex-dividend two points tomorrow. Suppose also that there is a 90 call available which
will expire in two weeks. When we evaluate the option, we find that it has a theoretical
value of 10 and a delta of 100. This means that the option has essentially the same


244 Chapter 12

characteristics as the stock. If the option is American, and we want to maintain the same
delta position, we have three possible choices:

1. Hold the option
2. Exercise the option
3. Sell the option and buy stock

Which of these choices is best?

Suppose we simply hold the option. Certainly we will maintain our delta position.
But what will happen tomorrow when the stock gives up its dividend? If the stock opens
unchanged, it will open ex-dividend at 98,2 since the two-point dividend will be
deducted from its price. Since the option has a value of parity, it will open not at 10,
the previous day's parity price, but at 8, today’s parity price. In other words, if we hold
the option we can be certain of losing two points on our position.

Can we do any better with the second choice, exercising the option? If we exercise
the option, we will pay the exercise price of 90 for the stock, and we will discard the
10-point value of the option, effectively purchasing the stock at 100. When the stock
goes ex-dividend we will lose two points when it opens two points lower the next day,
but we will also receive the dividend since we now own the stock. We will break even
because the two-point loss on the stock price will be offset by the two-point dividend
we receive. Clearly, we are better off exercising the option than holding it, not because
we will show some additional profit, but because we will avoid a two-point loss. We
must exercise the option to ensure that we break even.

What about the third choice, selling the option and buying stock ourselves? This
seems to be very similar to early exercise. In both cases we are replacing the option with
the stock. If the option is trading at parity, in this case 10, there is no difference between
exercising the option, or selling the option and buying the stock. In each case the cash
flow will be identical and we will own the stock when it goes ex-dividend. But suppose
the 90 call is trading at a price other than 10. Suppose, for example, it is trading at
91, Clearly, this price is not possible in a market where the options are American and
can be exercised at any time. Purchasing a 90 call for 91% is equivalent to purchasing
the stock for 991. If the stock is trading at 100, this means the call is trading at less
than parity. If this were indeed true, all traders would buy the call, sell the stock, and
immediately exercise the call. This would result in a riskless profit of 14 point, the
amount by which the option was below parity. In a market where options are subject
to early exercise, no option ought to be trading at less than parity.

What if the 90 call is trading for more than parity, say 1014? Now if we sell the
option and purchase the stock we will still receive the dividend, since we will own the
stock. But we will end up with an additional 1 point which we would not have

2. On the day a stock gives up its dividend, prices are typically disseminated with the dividend already
deducted from the stock’s price. Hence, a 100-point stock which gives up a 2-point dividend overnight
and opens the next day at 98 would be deemed to have opened unchanged since the 2-point drop in
its price results from the dividend payout, not from any change in investor demand,


Early Exercise of American Options 245

collected through exercise of the call. Therefore, our third choice, selling the call and
buying the stock, is the optimum choice.

Since the only reason a trader would ever consider exercising astock option call
early is to receive the dividend, ifa stock pays no dividend there is no reason to exercise
a call early. If the stock does pay a dividend, the only time a trader ought to consider
early exercise is the day before the stock goes ex-dividend. At no other time in its life is
a stock option call an early exercise candidate.

We noted that in an American (exercise) market an option should never trade at
jess than parity. Is the same true in a European (exercise) market? In our example of
the 90 call and stock at 100, with an expected two-point dividend, the call price will
clearly drop when the stock goes ex-dividend. If the option cannot be turned into stock
through exercise prior to the ex-dividend date, the option is clearly going to lose value.
If it has very little time value, the amount it will lose when the dividend is given up may
make the option worth less than parity. In our example, if the option expires in two
weeks with interest rates at 8% and a volatility of 20%, the European value of the 90
call is approximately 81/4. This is 154 under parity, due to the fact that a call option, no
matter how deeply in-the-money, does not carry with it the right to the dividend. Only
ownership of the stock carries that right.

Early Exercise of Puts for Interest

As we did with a stock option call, we can express a stock option put’s value in terms
of its components:

put value = intrinsic value — interest rate value + volatility value + dividend value

In the case of a put, the only component that affects its value negatively is the interest
rate component. If the negative effects of interest rates are greater than the positive
effects of volatility and dividends, it might be possible for a put, if it is European, to be
worth less than parity. Consider this situation:

Stock price = 100, Time to expiration = 8 weeks, Volatility = 20%
Interest rate = 8.00%, Dividend = 0

With these assumptions, the value of a 110 call is approximately .70. Using the put/call
parity relationship, we can calculate the value of the 110 put:

put value = call value + exercise price — stock price — carrying costs
The carrying costs on the exercise price of 110 are:
110 x 56/365 x 8% = 1.35
The European put value is therefore:
.70 + 110-100 - 1.35 = 9.35

Since the 110 put is only worth 9.35 if we hold it to expiration, but is worth 10 points
if we exercise it today, the option is apparentiy worth more dead (exercised) than alive


246 Chapter 12

(unexercised). When we exercise the 100 put we get to sell stock at 110, and we can
earn interest on this 110-point credit to expiration.

Whereas a stock option call can only be an early exercise candidate on the day prior
to the stock’s ex-dividend date, a stock option put can become an early exercise
candidate anytime the interest which can be earned through the sale of the stock at the
exercise price is sufficiently large. Determining exactly when this happens is a difficult
problem, but if the stock pays a dividend it is most likely to occur on the day after the
stock goes ex-dividend. Since a put is a substitute for a short stock position, one of the
advantages of holding a put is to avoid paying the dividend. Hence, a trader will almost
always want to hold the put through the ex-dividend date. Then, if the interest
considerations are sufficient, the trader will exercise his put.

In an American (early exercise) market no put option can be trading at less than
parity. Otherwise there is an immediate arbitrage opportunity available by purchasing
the stock, purchasing the put, and immediately exercising the put. The profit will be
equal to the amount by which the put is trading at less than parity. This is not necessarily
true in a European (no early exercise} market, where the option must be carried to
expiration. In our example of the 110 put where the theoretical value derived from the
call price was 9.35 (.65 less than parity), the market in the European 110 put might be
914-914. A market maker is willing to sell the option at 914 (14 less than parity) because
he can hedge himself by selling stock, and he will be confident in the knowledge that
he will not be required to buy back the stock until expiration. The interest he earns on
the stock to expiration will more than offset the amount he will lose by selling the put
below parity.

Conditions for Early Exercise

If given the chance, there are clearly reasons why a trader might want to exercise an
American option early. In the case of futures options, when the option is subject to
stock-type settlement, the trader is trying to capture the interest on the option’s intrinsic
value. In the case of stock option calls, he is trying to capture the dividend which the
stock pays. In the case of stock option puts, he is trying to capture the interest on the
proceeds from the sale of the stock at the exercise price. From the foregoing discussion
we can infer two conditions which are necessary before a trader considers exercising an
option early to capture this additional profit:

1. The option must be trading at parity.
2. The option must have a delta close to 100.

If the option is trading at more than parity, the trader will always do better selling
the option and taking a position in the underlying market himself. Determining whether
an option is trading at parity is simply a matter of finding out what the market in that
option is. In the great majority of cases, if an option is deeply enough in-the- money to
be an early exercise candidate, the bid/ask spread is probably so wide that for practical
purposes the option is trading at parity.


Early Exercise af American Options 247

Why should the delta be close to 100? If we exercise an option early, we are trading
in the option for a position in the underlying contract. We therefore want to be
reasonably certain that the option and the underlying contract have the same charac-
teristics. In other words, we want to be certain that the option has no additional
insurance value left, so that when we exercise the option we are not throwing away
this insurance value.

For example, suppose there is an 80 call available with the underlying contract
trading at 100. If we want to take a long position we can purchase either the 80 call or
the underlying contract. If we feel there is no chance that the market can fall below 80
prior to expiration, there is no difference between holding the 80 call or holding the
underlying contract. But suppose we feel that there is some chance that the market
could fall below 80. In that case we will prefer to hold the 80 call. If the market were
to fall below 80, holding the call would limit our potential loss to the option’s premium.
If, however, we hold a long underlying position and the market drops below 80, our
potential loss is unlimited.

Recail that one interpretation of the delta is the probability that the option will finish
in-the-money. A delta close to 100 means that the underlying market has almost no
chance of going through the exercise price, and the option therefore has almost no
chance of going out-of-the-money.

What degree of certainty justifies early exercise? With a delta of 100 one certainly
would consider early exercise. What about 99? 96? 90? With a delta above 95, many
traders will at least consider early exercise. How much interest will be earned, or what
dividend will be collected, through early exercise? With a delta of 95 or lower, the risk
is probably too great to consider early exercise. There is at least a 5% chance that the
underlying market will go through the exercise price. If that happens, a trader will regret
having exercised an option early, regardless of the additional benefits to be gained
through early exercise.

By ensuring that the delta is close to 100, we are also ensuring that we do not throw
away any insurance value that the option might still retain. As an option goes more
deeply into-the-money, its time value (insurance value) begins to disappear. With a delta
of 100, in theory the option has no time value left. However, as the delta declines, the
time value increases. If the delta were significantly less than 100, the option would still
retain a significant amount of time value. If we were to exercise such an option, we
would be throwing away this insurance value.

Since the desirability of early exercise is dependent, at least in part, on the option’s
delta, the accuracy of the delta is important. But there are many factors which affect the
delta, and we might incorrectly assess any one of these factors. If we feel that the correct
volatility is 15%, an option might have a delta of 98. But if we decide to raise our
volatility to 17%, the delta of the option will decline. Under the new conditions its delta
might only be 93. At a 15% volatility a trader might consider early exercise, while at a
17% volatility he might not. For this reason, options in low-volatility markets are
exercised eatly much more often than options in high-volatility markets.


248 Chapter 12

In the same way, an option with three months remaining to expiration might have
a delta of 92, and would therefore not be an early exercise candidate. But if two months
pass, and the price of the underlying contract is unchanged, the delta will rise, and the
new delta might be 99. With three months remaining the option was not an early
exercise candidate, but with one month remaining the option might be early exercise
candidate.

Of course, we ought to ask why we were considering early exercise in the first
place. In many cases, we exercise to earn interest over the life of the option. We can
eal more interest over three months than over one month, so from this point of view
a three-month option is more likely to be an early exercise candidate than a one-month
option. We can see that many factors affect the desirability of early exercise, and these
factors can pull in different directions, with some factors dictating for early exercise and
some dictating against.

Thus far we have only addressed the question of when a trader might find it
desirable to exercise an option early. There should be an additional value associated
with an American option over an identical European option because the American
option carries with it additional rights. Even an out-of-the-money option, which no one
would consider exercising today, might someday go deeply enough into-the-money so
that it could become an early exercise candidate. This possibility should always make
an American option more valuable than a European option.

How much more should a trader be willing to pay for an American option over an
identical European option? The Black-Scholes model makes no attempt to answer this
question since it is a European pricing model. In spite of the fact that Black-Scholes
generated values are likely to show some inaccuracies in an American market, for many
years traders continued to use the model because no model with equal ease of use
existed to evaluate American options. The problem of early exercise was dealt with
through intuition, or through slight adjustments to Black-Scholes generated values. For
example, when a stock is expected to pay a dividend, an American call value can be
approximated by comparing the Black-Scholes value of the call option under two
circumstances:

1. The call expires the day before the stock goes ex-dividend.

2. The call expires on its customary date, but the underlying stock price used to
evaluate the call is the current price less the expected dividend.

Whichever value is greater is the pseudo-American call value.

In the case of options on futures, or of put options on stock, traders used
Black-Scholes generated values, but raised any option with a theoretical value less than
parity to exactly parity.

Models eventually were developed to more accurately evaluate American options.
The most widely used of these are the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, developed by John
Cox, Stephen Ross, and Mark Rubenstein; and the Whaley model, developed by
Giovanni Barone-Adesi and Robert Whaley. Unlike the Black-Scholes model, neither of


Early Exercise of American Options 249

these models is closed form. One can’t simply sit down and add up all the numbers to
get the correct value. Rather, both models are algorithms, or loops, and each time the
user makes a pass through the loop, the closer he comes to the true American value of
the option. While the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model is quite easy to understand, both
intuitively and mathematically, it may require numerous passes through the loop to
generate an acceptable value. On the other hand, the Whaley model is more complex
mathematically, but converges to an acceptable value much more quickly. The Cox-
Ross-Rubenstein model may require 40 or 50 passes through the loop to reach the same
degree of accuracy as the Whaley model achieves with four or five passes through the
loop. In addition to evaluating American options, both models also determine when an
option should be exercised early. We were somewhat vague on this point in our earlier
discussion, stating that the delta of an option should be close to 100 to justify early
exercise. When using a true American model, an option is optimally exercised early
when its theoretical value is exactly parity and its delta is exactly 100.

While the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein and Whaley models in most cases generate similar
values, more and more computer services are using the Whaley model to evaluate
American options because of the speed with which it can achieve results, However, the
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, while slower, is still very widely used because it offers
some advantages which are not available in the Whaley model. For example, the
Whaley model handles the dividend payout of a stock as if it were a continuous interest
payment over the life of the option. In reality dividends are paid all at once, and the
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model more accurately reflects the impact of this one-time pay-
ment on 4 call option on the stock. Unlike the Whaley model, the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein
model can also be used to evaluate some of the recently introduced, exotic options. Such
options are path dependent since their value depends not only on the likely price
distribution of the underlying contract at expiration, but also on the various paths which
the underlying price might take to achieve that distribution. Both these models are
discussed further in Appendix B.

Regardless of the model a trader chooses, the accuracy of model-generated values
will depend at least as much on the inputs into the model as the theoretical accuracy of
the model itself. If a trader evaluates an American option using an incorrect volatility,
or an incorrect interest rate, or an incorrect underlying price, the fact that he derives
his values from an American rather than a European model is likely to make little
difference. Both models will generate incorrect values because the inputs are incorrect.
The American model may produce less error, but that will be small consolation if the
incorrect inputs lead to a large trading loss.

American option values are most important when there is a significant difference
between the carrying cost associated with the option and the carrying cost associated
with the underlying contract. The greater the difference between the two carrying costs,
the greater the value of early exercise. When the underlying contract is a futures
contract and the option on the contract is subject to futures-type settlement, the cost of
carrying either position is, in theory, zero. This is the same as assuming an effective


250 Chapter 12

interest rate of zero. If we use a zero interest rate, there is no difference between
European and American option values.

When the options on a futures contract are subject to stock-type settlement, there
is a small difference between the carrying cost on the option and the carrying cost on
the underlying contract. Although che option is subject to stock-type settlement, the
price of the option is only a small fraction of the price of the underlying contract. The
additional value for early exercise is therefore small, and is only likely to show up in
deeply in-the-money options. Even in this case, the difference between European and
American values is often less than the minimum price increment. In such a market, a
trader is unlikely to profit significantly because he is using an American pricing model
while other traders are using a European pricing model. Practical considerations, such
as the accuracy of the trader’s volatility estimate, his ability to anticipate directional
trends in the underlying market, and his ability to control risk through effective
spreading strategies, will far outweigh any small advantage gained by using an American
rather than a European model.
