the “bot traders,” that are systems that trade at a high frequency. It is now estimated that 70 percent of trades are system-based. We don’t know who will win
the battle, but at this point, the human trader is behind in volume. However, it
is arguable if systems can, in fact, replace the trader. In any case, binary options
will become an area in which systems and alerts will be developed and offered.
It is relevant to explore this area a bit further. Let’s compare the main advantages
and disadvantages of binary option trading on an algorithmic-based system.
The main advantages are:
• An automated approach takes the emotion and manual effort out of
trading. This allows you to focus on improving your approach, rule sets,
and money-management rules.
• A profitable system requires no work until it breaks, or market conditions
demand a change. All systems go through cycles of good and bad. This
is expected, but a time will come when the approach fails to recover and
needs to be reviewed and redesigned.
And the main disadvantages are:
• If the system is not properly developed and tested, losses can happen very
quickly and wipe out your confidence and trading account. This is particularly true for binary options, as binary options are a relatively recent
development.
• Many times it is impossible to take into account every intricate rule you see
while watching the screen.
We can see that it’s useful to carefully review whether the algorithm-based
system one has in mind reflects more of the advantages or disadvantages. Let’s
review the elements in developing such a system.
Developing a Trading System

There are several important steps involved in developing a binary option trading
system: get the highest quality data, develop rules, test those rules, test in real
time, and trade in a real account. This section discusses each step in closer detail.

Get the Data
All systems are developed and optimized against historical data. In every case,
and with every system, data is king. A bad approach with questionable data

Performance Tools and Training for Improving Binary Option Trading

201

could test fantastic but implode in real-time trading because you set parameters based on bad trade data. A great approach tested on bad data could test
fantastic and implode in real trading for the same reason. So, you have to get
the highest quality data possible.

Develop the Rules
There are four basic rules for every trading system:
1. Buy Entry: Where you want to open a new long position.
2. Sell Entry: Where you want to open a new short position.
3. Stop Loss: Where you want to cut your losses and exit the position.
4. Profit Target: Where you want to book your profits.
Every system uses some combination of these basic rules. For binaries,
a sample rule for the EUR/USD may be: when the 21-day moving average
of the underlying EUR/USD spot crosses the 50-day moving average of the
EUR/USD spot—buy an at-the-money call option. (Note: This is only an
example and not a suggested rule.)
The key to remember is that almost any indicator and trading rule that
you currently use can be used within a trading system. The most important
aspect is clarifying exactly what trading rule you want. It has to be quantifiable.

Test the Rules
Testing is a key step in the development of any approach. After you
develop your rules, you need to start testing. Testing is not simply operating the algorithm and generating the results. Rather, it requires patience
and structure.
Caution: Testing can create a false sense of security. You can minimize this
by what is called, in-sample testing and out-of-sample testing.
In simple terms, you split your data into two parts. The first part, the insample data set, is designated for your base testing. You need to experiment
with different combinations and take careful notes on the outcome of each
test. From this work, you should arrive at rules, stop loss, and profit targets
that produce the most consistent results.
Then take this rule set and test it against your out-of-sample data set.
Hopefully, if you have been careful in your rules, note taking, and combination selection, you should achieve similar results for your in-sample and outof-sample testing.

202

Trading Binary Options

Test in Real Time
After you have developed and tested your system against historical data, it’s
time to put it to the real test and run it against real-time data. This is a
critical step for a lot of reasons. First, it gives you peace of mind before you
risk capital and it enhances the probability for account preservation. Second,
back-testing doesn’t provide a test of the real-world transaction environment
in which there may be variations in the spread and in the ability to fill trades.
It’s a good idea to first set up a real-time test with a demo account, as long as
the demo account is receiving real-time live quotes. As you watch the system
trade, ensure the system acts and trades as expected and verify that it’s trading as it did in all your previous testing. It’s also important to determine the
resources the algorithm or system will need to perform well.

Moving to a Live Account
The move to a live account is the biggest leap. However, at this point, you
have developed and tested a set of rules and verified them against a live
market. You are as prepared as you can be to put your approach to the test.
There are two basic methods for bringing the fruits of your labor live:
1. Semi-Automated: Semi-automated systems alert you when new trades are
triggered. While the alerts are automated, the trades are not automatically
placed. While this method carries less risk, there are downsides: (1) it
requires you to be available to execute the trade when triggered, and (2),
it allows your emotion to question the validity of the trade.
2. Fully Automated: Automated systems place trades in your account
automatically and require no intervention on your part. There are risks.
However, if you have taken the time to test the automated system in a demo
account, you should have some added confidence in the execution and results.
In all cases, it is important to remember that you are still ultimately in
control. If the system starts to implode or strays outside your testing boundaries, turn it off and regroup. Tomorrow is another day.
Evolving Your Approach

This is a brief walk-through of the basic steps involved for creating an
automated trading system. There are entire books and a variety of sources
written on the topic. There are also numerous professionals who can help
turn your vision into reality.

Performance Tools and Training for Improving Binary Option Trading

203

As you continue to evolve your approach and system, keep these keys in
mind: back-test, redesign, back-test, and back-test some more. If your system
does not perform on historical data, there is no reason it will perform well on
real-time data.
Once it trades well on historical data, run it long enough to validate that it’s trading correctly on real-time data. Testing against years of
historical data, then testing it in real time for a week is not validation. If
your back-test encompassed 1,000 trades, test in real time until you see
100 trades.
Keep it simple. Extremely complex trading approaches often work
extremely well with past data, but are too brittle for real-time market
conditions.
Most importantly, know the strategy behind your trading system. As
strange as it sounds, many people develop approaches, add bits and pieces,
and eventually lose sight of their underlying strategy.

Using Alerts

Another method for trying to enhance one’s binary option performance
is to use alerts. Alerts can be automatic signals that indicate a buy or sell
opportunity. Binary alerts can also specify which expiration should be used
with the buy or sell alert. For example, momentum trades should be associated with next or expirations of relatively short periods, such as five minutes
and 30 minutes. The challenge for automatic alerts that have emerged in the
global market is that they are usually based on simplistic methods that have
not really been proven.
A better alternative is to select an alert service that is offered by a trading
expert. My newsletter site, www.binarydimensions.com, offers weekly binary
option alerts and analysis on a Monday morning for Friday expiration. A
separate alert service is also offered, as is trading China A50 on the Nadex
exchange. These are weekly, daily, and intraday expirations. The China A50
track and the Shanghai Index offer an opportunity to trade the China market
at night, after 9 p.m. EST. These alerts provide a basis for learning how to
trade laddered binaries as well as gaining insight into predicted directions for
the coming week. The following 100 percent winning binary alert recently
occurred, demonstrating that extraordinary returns per week are possible
with binary options (Table 11.1).

204

Trading Binary Options

Table 11.1 Weekly Binary Alerts with All Winners

Date
Trade
Expired Buy/Sell Contract

Expiration
Bid/Ask Lots Value
Win/Loss Profit/Loss

1/29/16 SELL

USD/JPY > 121.25

10.50

–1

121.107

WIN

10.50

1/29/16 BUY

USD/JPY > 116.25

83.00

+2

121.07

WIN

17.00

1/29/16 BUY

GOLD
(Apr) > 1101.5

59.00

+1

1116.8

WIN

41.00

1/29/16 BUY

CRUDE OIL
(May) > 28.75

81.75

+1

33.662

WIN

18.25

1/29/16 BUY

AUD/USD > 0.7025 40.50

+1

0.70685

WIN

59.50

1/29/16 SELL

USD/CAD > 1.4475 12

–1

1.40114

WIN

12.00

1/29/16 BUY

USD/CAD > 1.3975 82

+1

1.40114

WIN

18.00

Source: www.binarydimensions.com.

Algo Alerts Trading Competitions
An emerging method for improving one’s binary option trading is social trading. In social trading, a trader watches other traders and tries to copy their
trades. An effective learning experience using social trading is trading competitions. This allows a trader to test one’s skills in a trading contest. Some
brokerage firms offer contests, mostly however, as a marketing gimmick to
attract an account. In contrast, the site’s unique opportunity allows traders to
trade real binary option markets of various durations in a virtual account for
prizes. Traders play a variety of challenges (best trader of the day, most consecutive winners, and so forth). Prizes are offered along with education. The
platform is free and advanced educational opportunities are offered as well.
Competitions require a minimal entry fee, such as $10.

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Afterword
My hope with this book is that binary options becomes understood as a powerful tool for trading for beginners and experienced persons. The coming
years will see greater than ever integration of global markets with instant and
often emotional responses augmented by the Internet. As a result, fundamental forces that often took months to evolve and surface have greater salience
than ever. In this context, binary options provide the trader the ability to
navigate these increasingly volatile waters every week.
Good luck trading!

205

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Appendix A:
Test Your Knowledge
It is always a good idea to test your trading knowledge and skills. One of the
reasons this book has been written is to give you a jump-start. Let’s see how
much you have learned. There are 50 questions.
1. A binary option contract provides a fixed payout of:
A. $15
B. $100
C. $50
D. $200
2. A binary option trade cannot be traded before its expiration date.
A. True
B. False
3. If a trader was short a binary contract at a bid of $25, what amount did
the trader have to put up in his or her account?
A. $0
B. $25
C. $75
D. $100
4. During the week, a trader went long the binary contract. The bid was
$15 and the ask was $20. What did he or she or she pay for the contract
(excluding fees)?
A. $10
B. $100 – $10
C. $100 – $15
D. $20
207

208

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge

5. If, in a binary contract, the bid was at $33 and the ask was at $35,
this means:
A. The probability of the contract being in-the-money is 33 percent.
B. The probability of the contract being in-the-money is 35 percent.
C. The probability of the contract being in-the-money is 77 percent.
D. The probability of the contract being in-the-money is not known.
6. If a trader was short a binary contract and the price settled at the binary
strike price, the payoff would be _____________.
A. $0
B. $35
C. $50
D. $100
7. During the week a trader went long the binary contract. The bid was
$10 and the ask was $15. What kind of strategy was being employed?
A. At-the-money
B. In-the-money
C. Deep-in-the-money
D. Deep-out-of-the-money
8. If, in a binary contract, the bid was at $23 and the ask was at $25, this means
A. The probability of the contract winning by the end of the week is
23 percent.
B. The probability of the contract being in-the-money is 25 percent.
C. The probability of winning by middle of the week is 77 percent.
D. The probability of the contract being in-the-money is 75 percent.
9. A nonfarm payroll data release is scheduled for which day?
A. First Friday of the month
B. Second Friday of the month
C. Third Friday of the month
D. Last Friday of the month
10. The economic calendar is listing a key speech by Trichet. Which
currency pair is most likely to be affected?
A. British Pound/Dollar
B. Dollar/Canadian
C. European Central Bank
D. Aussie/Dollar

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge 

209

11. A trader has an account of $15,000 and places five binary option
contracts, costing a total of $1,500. The percentage of leverage is
approximately:
A. 3:1
B. 1:2.5
C. 5:1
D. 1:1
12. A trader completes 10 binary trades with one lot on each trade. The result is
four winners. What needs to be the average loss of each trade to break even?
A. $30
B. $40
C. $22
D. $43
13. The trader sees the spot market for a currency pair at 1.4650 on
Monday morning. He believes the trend is going down. The Nadex
binary option strike that would be cheapest to sell is
A. 1.4500
B. 1.4550
C. 1.4600
D. 1.5750
14. The trader observes a sideways channel in an underlying market. He
believes the price action will feature a breakout of the channel. Which
of the current strategies could be used?
A. Choose a binary contract with a strike price outside the support.
B. Choose a binary contract with a strike price outside the resistance.
C. Choose a binary contract with the strike price in the middle.
15. If a price is in a steady sideways action, which pattern best describes this?
A. Equilateral triangle
B. Channel pattern
C. Parabolic curve
D. Descending triangle
16. Which price action is not associated with the pattern?
A. Channel Pattern—Breakout Trade
B. Equilateral Triangle—Breakout Trade
C. Parabolic Curve—Retracement

210

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge

17. The trader sees that the jobless claims data release will occur later in the
week on Thursday. He is bullish on the economy and therefore wants
to choose which strike price?
A. 155,000
B. 175,000
C. 123,000
D. Can’t answer
18. The trader is interested in a crude oil trade. He believes the problems
in the Middle East will settle down. The spot price is $103.20. Which
strike price should she look at?
A. WTI crude oil 104.50
B. Nymex crude oil 101.00
C. Brent crude oil 104.50
D. WTI crude oil 101.00
19. Two binary option traders are comparing their performance. Joe has 10
trades with seven winners and three losers. Bob has 10 trades with five
winners and five losers. Who is the more profitable trader?
A. Joe
B. Bob
C. Can’t tell from the information
20. The news comes out and oil surges. Bob wants to play this market but
is afraid of trading oil binaries. Which other contract can he trade that
plays best off oil?
A. S&P 500
B. AUD/USD
C. USD/CAD
D. EUR/USD
21. The trader is bearish on the U.S. dollar and wants to put on a binary
trade shorting the dollar. Which of the following orders reflects a
bearish dollar direction?
A. Short USD/CAD
B. Long GBP/USD
C. Short USD/JPY
D. Long EUR/USD

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge 

211

22. The trader is bullish on copper and expects a big data release on copper
supply. He doesn’t, however, want to be directly in copper. Which of
the following moves with copper movements?
A. USD/CHF
B. USD/CAD
C. AUD/USD
D. U.S. 500
23. A trader is short a binary contract; the bid is $33 and the ask is $38.
They put on a short position of one contract. They want to get out with
a profit of 50 percent. What trading price should the ask position be to
achieve this result?
A. $67
B. $19
C. $83.5
D. $15
24. A trader draws weekly support and resistance levels to determine
which binary strike price to choose. They want to go long the position
and notices that the price of binary they are interested in is just
above the 61.8 percent weekly Fib line. As a result, he chooses the
binary contract that is below the 61.8 percent Fib line to improve the
technical conditions to achieve their results. Do you agree with this
decision?
25. Mark wants to trade the nonfarm payroll, but decides not to play the nonfarm payroll directly, so he instead selects the U.S. 500 contract. Which
two of the following contracts is the best to trade on this news event?
A. EUR/USD
B. USD/CHF
C. USD/CAD
D. AUD/USD
26. If a trader wants to trade the Indian stock market, which of the
underlying contracts should she choose?
A. Liffe FTSE 100 Index Futures
B. SGX Nifty Index Futures
C. Kospi 200 Index Futures
D. SGX Nikkei Futures

212

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge

27. A trader went long a binary contract and the price settled right at the
binary strike price. What was the settlement value?
A. $0
B. $100
C. $50
D. $25
28. A trader has a long binary position on and it is Friday morning.
The position has reached $90 and the trader decides to leave it to
expiration. Which of the following reasons makes the most sense for
this decision?
A. The underlying market went into a five-minute parabolic pattern.
B. The underlying market broke above its 50 percent daily Fib line.
C. The trader simply wants to take his profits and not risk a sell off.
29. Mark has a trading performance in which he has a 50 percent win
record for the past 20 trades and an average profit of $50 per win. His
losses average $80. How profitable is he?
A. $500
B. $300
C. $250
D. $0
30. A trader is looking for the two strike prices that are equal in probability
if one was sold and the other was bought. He or she is interested in
a trade that plays the price staying in the range, but wants to choose
the strike prices based on equal probabilities. Which of the following
should they choose?
A. Long the $15 ask and long the $85 ask.
B. Short the $15 ask and short the $85 ask.
C. Short the $85.
31. The European Central Bank is anticipated to increase interest rates
and announce it on Wednesday. Brian, a trader decides to trade it.
He believes there will be no increase in the rate that will surprise the
market. Which of the following describes a straddle position?
A. Buy a binary strike price slightly at-the-money and sell a binary
strike price at-the-money.
B. Buy a binary strike price slightly out-of-the-money and sell a binary
strike price slightly below-the-money.

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge 

213

32. A trader realizes that there is a lot of volatility in the market. Which of
the following indicators could they use to help determine if volatility is
increasing or decreasing?
A. Fibonacci levels
B. Bollinger Bands
C. VIX Index
D. MACD
33. Which of the following technical conditions confirm a bearish direction?
A. Price has risen, gone beyond a 61.8 percent day Fib line, and turned
back down.
B. A descending triangle has been detected.
C. The underlying market is in a parabolic rise.
34. Mary opens an account with $10,000 and puts an order to buy 25
USD/JPY binary options at the ask price of $15. Three of the orders
were filled. How much margin does she have left?
A. $9,975
B. $0
C. $9,250
D. $10,000
35. Two binary strike prices are equally distant from the spot market. One
is above the spot and the other is below the spot. Will they have the
same bid/ask trade price?
A. Never
B. Always
C. Maybe
D. Not enough information to determine
36. Ted wants to trade the hourly binary on one of the markets. Bob likes
to stay with the weekly. Bob tells Ted that the hourly is too risky and
offers a reduced payout. Is Bob correct?
A. Yes
B. No

214

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge

37. What is the main difference between binary option trading on the
Nadex and with OTC firms?
A. Nadex trading prices on bids and asks are the same no matter which
brokerage firm a trader is using to put on the trade.
B. The spread between the bid and ask at Nadex is likely to be narrower
than OTC firms.
C. Nadex does not offer one-touch options.
38. Who is the market maker for Nadex binary contracts?
A. SEC
B. CFTC
C. NASDAQ
D. IG Markets
39. Bob has put on a GBP/USD binary option trade for the week. Mary
has noticed that there is a Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) minutes
report to be released during the week. Bob says that that is just a report
and not important. Do you agree with Bob?
A. Yes
B. No
40. A trader buys a binary option contract at strike price 1.45 and wants
to put a stop position on the binary contract. Which of the following
orders should he use as a stop order?
A. Sell stop 1.40
B. Sell to close 1.40
C. None of the above
41. Andrea is watching TV and hears that the Dow Jones Industrial Average
is hitting new highs. Andrea immediately goes to her platform and puts
on a short binary contract. Which underlying market is she trading?
A. DJIA NYSE
B. Wall Street 30
C. CBOT E-mini Dow Futures
42. A trader looking to be bullish on the U.S. dollar can watch which of
the following instruments?
A. DXY
B. UUP
C. UDN

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge 

215

43. An at-the-money binary option is at $55. It means that it will likely
settle at $100 if it is less than two hours from expiration. Do you agree?
A. Yes
B. No
44. An in-the-money binary option strike price will always be trading at a
price higher than an at-the-money strike price. Do you agree?
A. Yes
B. No
45. A trader has $2,500 cash in his account and decides to put on $2,500
worth of positions. He is allowed to do this.
A. True
B. False
46. Joe put on a short position on a binary contract when the bid
was $75. The bid moves to $85 and the ask moves to $90, after
unexpected news. Joe decides to close his position. What are his
profits, if any?
A. $75
B. $100
C. $15
D. $25
47. Steven put on a long position on a weekly binary for a premium
of $75 on Monday morning. Joe waited and purchased the same
binary option for $75 cost on Wednesday morning. Joe told Steven
he has less risk because he waited to confirm his trade. Do you
agree?
A. Yes
B. No
48. The binary option contract on gold has as its underlying market which
