 IEX had built an exchange to eliminate the possibility of predatory trading—to prevent investors from being treated as prey. In the first two months of its existence, IEX had seen no activity from high-frequency traders except this. It was astonishing, when you stopped to think about it, how aggressively capitalism protected its financial middleman, even when he was totally unnecessary. Almost magically, the banks had generated the need for financial intermediation—to compensate for their own unwillingness to do the job honestly. 
 Brad opened the floor for questions. For the first few minutes, the investors vied with each other to see who could best control his anger and exhibit the sort of measured behavior investors are famous for. 
 “Do you think of HFT differently than you did before you opened?” asked one. 
 That question might have been better answered by Ronan, who had just returned from a tour of the big HFT firms, and now leaned against a wall on the side of the room. Brad had asked Ronan to explain to the investors the technical end of things—how IEX had created its 350-microsecond delay, the magic shoebox, and so on—and to relate the details of his tour. He’d done it. But on the subject of HFT he held himself back. To speak his mind, Ronan needed to feel like himself, which, imprisoned in a gray suit and addressing a semiformal audience, he clearly did not. Put another way: It was just extremely difficult for Ronan to say what he felt without using the word “fuck.” Watching him string together sentences without profanity was like watching someone try to swim across a river without using his arms or his legs. Curiously, he later admitted, he wasn’t worried that the audience would be offended by bad language. “It was because some of them want to be the alpha male cursing in the room,” he said. “When I say ‘fuck,’ they think I’m stealing the show—so when I’m in front of a group I go as straight as I can.” 
 “I hate them a lot less than before we started,” said Brad. “This is not their fault. I think most of them have just rationalized that the market is creating the inefficiencies and they are just capitalizing on them. Really, it’s brilliant what they have done within the bounds of the regulation. They are much less of a villain than I thought. The system has let down the investor.” 
 A forgiving sentiment. But at that moment the investors in the conference room did not seem in a forgiving mood. “It’s still shocking to me to see how the banks are colluding against us,” one of the investors later said. “It shows everyone is a bad actor. And then when you add in that you ask them to route to IEX and they refuse, it’s even worse. Even though I had heard some of it before, I was still incensed. If that was the first time I was hearing it, I think I’d have gone bonkers.” 
 An investor raised his hand and motioned to some numbers Brad had scribbled on a whiteboard to illustrate how a particular bank had enabled dark pool arbitrage. 
 “Who is that?” he asked, and not calmly. 
 An uneasy look crossed Brad’s face. He was now hearing that question more and more. Just that morning, an outraged investor listening to a dry run of his presentation had stopped him to ask: “Which bank is the worst?” “I can’t tell you,” he said, and explained that the agreements the big Wall Street banks signed with IEX forbade IEX from speaking about any bank without its permission. 
 “Do you know how frustrating it is to sit here and hear this and not know who that broker is?” said another investor. 
 It wasn’t easy being Brad Katsuyama—to try to effect some practical change without a great deal of fuss, when the change in question was, when you got right down to it, a radical overhaul of a social order. Brad was not by nature a radical. He was simply in possession of radical truths.      
 “What we want to do is highlight the good brokers,” said Brad. “We need the brokers who are doing the right thing to get rewarded.” That was the only way around the problem. Brad had asked for the banks’ permission to highlight the virtue of the ones that behaved relatively well, and they had granted it. “Speaking about someone in a positive light does not violate the terms of not speaking about someone in a negative light,” he said. 
 The audience considered this. 
 “How many good brokers are there?” asked an investor at length. 
 “Ten,” said Brad. (IEX had dealings with ninety-four.) The ten included the Royal Bank of Canada, Sanford Bernstein, and a bunch of even smaller outfits. “Three are meaningful,” he added. Morgan Stanley, J.P. Morgan, and Goldman Sachs. 
 “Why would any broker behave well?” 
 “The long-term benefit is that when the shit hits the fan, it will quickly become clear who made good decisions and who made bad decisions,” said Brad. 
 He wondered, often, what it would look like if and when the shit in question hit the fan: The stock market at bottom was rigged. The icon of global capitalism was a fraud. How would enterprising politicians and plaintiffs’ lawyers and state attorneys general respond to that news? The thought of it actually didn’t give him all that much pleasure. Really, he just wanted to fix the problem. At some level, he still didn’t understand why Wall Street banks needed to make his task so difficult. 
 “Is there a concern from you that the publicity will create even more hostility?” asked another. He wanted to know if telling the world who the good brokers were would make the bad ones worse. 
 “The bad brokers can’t try harder at being bad,” said Brad. “Some of these brokers are doing everything they can not to do what the client wants them to do.” 
 An investor wanted to return to the scribbled numbers that illustrated how one particular bank had enabled dark pool arbitrage. “So what do these guys say when you show them that? 
 “Some of them say, ‘You’re one hundred percent right,’ ” said Brad. “ ‘This shit happens.’ One even said, ‘We used to sit around all the time talking about how to fuck up other people’s dark pools.’ Some of them say, ‘I have no idea what you’re talking about. We have heuristic data bullshit and other mumbo jumbo to determine our routing.’ ” 
 “That’s a technical term—‘heuristic data bullshit and other mumbo jumbo’?” an investor asked. A few guys laughed. 
 Technology had collided with Wall Street in a peculiar way. It had been used, as it should have been used, to increase efficiency. But it had also been used to introduce a peculiar sort of market inefficiency. This new inefficiency was not like the inefficiencies that financial markets can easily correct. After a big buyer enters the market and drives up the price of Brent crude oil, for example, it’s healthy and good when speculators jump in and drive up the price of North Texas crude, too. It’s healthy and good when traders see the relationship between the price of crude oil and the price of oil company stocks, and drive these stocks higher. It’s even healthy and good when some clever high-frequency trader divines a necessary statistical relationship between the share prices of Chevron and Exxon, and responds when it gets out of whack. It was neither healthy nor good when public stock exchanges introduced order types and speed advantages that high-frequency traders could use to exploit everyone else. This sort of inefficiency didn’t vanish the moment it was spotted and acted upon. It was like a broken slot machine in the casino that pays off every time. It would keep paying off until someone said something about it; but no one who played the slot machine had any interest in pointing out that it was broken. 
 Some large amount of what Wall Street had done with technology had been done simply so that someone inside the financial markets would know something that the outside world did not. The same system that once gave us subprime mortgage collateralized debt obligations no investor could possibly truly understand now gave us stock market trades that occurred at fractions of a penny at unsafe speeds using order types that no investor could possibly truly understand. That is why Brad Katsuyama’s most distinctive trait—his desire to explain things not so he would be understood but so that others would understand—was so seditious. He attacked the newly automated financial system at its core: the money it made from its incomprehensibility. 
 Another investor, silent till that point, now raised his hand. “It seems like there’s a first mover risk for someone to behave the right way,” he said. He was right: Even the banks that were behaving relatively well weren’t behaving all that well. A big Wall Street bank that gave IEX an honest shot to execute its customers’ orders would suffer a collapse in its dark pool trading, and in its profits. The bad banks would pounce on the good bank and argue that, because its dark pool was worse than all the others, it shouldn’t be given the orders in the first place. That, Brad told the investors, had been maybe his biggest concern. Would any big Wall Street bank have the ability to see a few years down the road, and summon the nerve to go first? Then he clicked on a slide. On top it read: December 19, 2013. 
 YOU COULD NEVER say for sure exactly what was going on inside one of the big Wall Street banks, but it was a mistake to think of a bank as a coherent entity. They were fractious, and intensely political. Most everyone might be thinking mainly about his year-end bonus, but that didn’t mean there wasn’t one person who wasn’t, and it certainly didn’t mean that everyone inside a big bank shared the same incentives. A dollar in one guy’s pocket was, in some places, a dollar out of another’s. For instance, the guys in the prop group who traded against the firm’s customers in the dark pool would naturally feel a different concern for those customers than the guy whose job it was to sell them stuff would—if for no other reason than that it is harder to rip off a person when you actually need to see him, face to face. That’s why the banks kept the prop traders on different floors from the salespeople, often in entirely different buildings. It wasn’t simply to please the regulators; all involved would prefer that there be no conversation between the two groups. The customer guy was better at his job—and had deniability—if he remained oblivious to whatever the prop guy was up to. The frantic stupidity of Wall Street’s stock order routers and algorithms was simply an extension into the computer of the willful ignorance of its salespeople. 
 Brad’s job, as he saw it, was to force the argument between the salespeople and the prop people—and to arm the salespeople with a really great argument, which included the distinct possibility that investors in the stock market were about to wake up to what was being done to them, and go to war against the people who were doing it. In most cases, he had no idea if he had succeeded and, as a result, suspected he had not. 
 Right from the start, the view from inside Goldman Sachs had been less cluttered than the view from inside the other big Wall Street banks. Goldman was unlike the other banks; for instance, the first thing the people he met at the other banks usually did was tell him of the hostility all the other banks felt toward IEX, and of the nefariousness of the other banks’ dark pools. Goldman was aloof, and didn’t appear to care what its competitors were saying or thinking about IEX. In their stock market trading and perhaps in other departments as well, Goldman was undergoing some kind of transition. In February 2013, its head of electronic trading, Greg Tusar, had left to work for Getco, the big high-frequency trading firm. The two partners then assigned to figure out Goldman’s role in the global stock markets—Ron Morgan and Brian Levine—were not high-frequency trading types. They didn’t bear a great deal of responsibility for whatever the high-frequency trading types had done before they took over. Morgan worked in New York and was in charge of sales; Levine, responsible for trading, worked in London. Both were apparently worried about what they had found when they stepped into their new positions. Brad knew this because, oddly, Ron Morgan had called him. “He found us by talking to clients about what they wanted,” said Brad. A week after they first met, Morgan invited Brad back to meet with a group of even more senior executives. “That didn’t happen anywhere else,” Brad said. After he left, he was told that the ensuing discussion had reached “the highest levels of the firm.” 
 In taking over, Morgan and Levine had been tasked with answering a big question posed by the people who ran Goldman Sachs: Why was Morgan Stanley growing so fast? Their rival’s market share was booming, while Goldman’s was stagnant. Levine and Morgan did what everyone on Wall Street did when they wanted to find out what was going on inside a rival bank: They invited some of its employees in for job interviews. The Morgan Stanley employees explained to them that the firm was now trading 300 million shares a day—30 percent of the volume of the New York Stock Exchange—through what it called “Speedway.” Speedway was a service Morgan Stanley provided to high-frequency traders. Morgan Stanley built a high-frequency trading infrastructure—co-location at various exchanges, the fastest routes between them, a straight road into the bank’s dark pool and so on—and then turned around and leased their facilities to the smaller HFT firms, which couldn’t afford the up-front cost of building their own systems. Morgan Stanley got credit for, and commissions from, everything the HFT guys did inside Morgan Stanley’s pipes. The Morgan Stanley employees angling for jobs at Goldman Sachs told the Goldman executives that Speedway was now making Morgan Stanley $500 million a year, and that it was growing. This raised the obvious question for Goldman Sachs: Should we create our own Speedway? Should we further embrace high-frequency trading? 
 One of Goldman’s clients handed Ronnie Morgan a list of thirty-three big investors to whom he should speak before making this decision. This client didn’t know if Morgan had spoken to people beyond this list, but he confirmed for himself that Morgan had spoken to each of the thirty-three people individually. At the same time, Morgan and Levine began to ask some obvious questions about Goldman Sachs’s stock market businesses. Could Goldman ever be as fast or as smart as the more nimble high-frequency trading firms? Why, if Goldman only controlled 8 percent of all stock market orders, was it able to trade more than a third of those orders in its own dark pool? Given how little of the flow Goldman saw, what was the likelihood that the best price for an investor’s order came from some other Goldman customer? How did Wall Street dark pools interact with each other and with the exchanges? How stable was this increasingly complex financial market? Was it a good thing that the U.S. stock market model had been exported to other countries and other financial markets? 
 They already knew or could guess most of the answers; for the questions still hanging, the investors pointed them toward an unusually forthright and knowledgeable guy they knew and trusted who was starting a new stock exchange: Brad Katsuyama. 
 What struck Brad about his visit to Goldman Sachs was not only that Levine and Morgan were willing to spend time with him, but that they took the ideas from their conversations to their superiors. Levine seemed particularly concerned about the stock market’s instability. “Unless there are some changes, there’s going to be a massive crash,” he said, “a flash crash times ten.” In conversation and in presentations, he impressed the point upon Goldman’s top executives, and also asked, “Do you really need the only differentiator in the market to be speed? Because that’s what it seems to be.” It wasn’t all that hard for the people who ran Goldman Sachs to see the source of the problem, or to see why no one inside the system cared to point it out. “There’s no upside in it—that’s why no one ever steps out on it,” said Levine. “And everyone’s got career risk. And no one is thinking that far ahead. They are looking at the next paycheck.” 
 A long string of myopic decisions had created new risks in the U.S. stock market. Its complexity was just one manifestation of the problem, but in it, the Goldman partners both felt sure, lay some future calamity. The sensational technical glitches weren’t anomalies but symptoms. And a stock market calamity, Ron Morgan and Brian Levine both thought, would end up being blamed generally on the big Wall Street banks, and specifically on Goldman Sachs. Goldman earned $7 billion a year from its equity business; that business would be put at risk by any crisis. 
 But it was more than that. At forty-eight and forty-three, respectively, Morgan and Levine were, by Wall Street standards, old guys. Morgan had been made a Goldman partner back in 2004, Levine in 2006. Both confided to friends that IEX presented them with a choice, at what might be a pivotal financial historical moment. An investor who knew Ron Morgan said, “Ronnie’s saying to himself, ‘You work for twenty-five years in the business, how often do you have a chance to make a difference?’ ” Brian Levine himself said, “I think it’s a business decision. I also think it’s a moral decision. I think this is the shot we have. And I think Brad is the right guy. It’s the best odds we have to fix the problem.” 
 BEFORE THEY OPENED their market, on October 25, 2013, the thirty-two employees of IEX made private guesses as to how many shares they’d trade their first day and in their first week. The median of the estimates came in at 159,500 shares the first day and 2.5 million shares the first week. The lowest estimate came from Matt Trudeau, the only one of them who had ever built a new stock market from scratch: 2,500 shares for the first day and 100,000 for the week. Of the ninety-four stock brokerage firms in various stages of agreeing to connect to IEX, most of them small outfits, only about fifteen were ready on the first day. “Brokers are telling their clients they’re connected, but we haven’t even gotten their paperwork,” said Brad. When asked how big the exchange might be at the end of the first year, Brad guessed, or perhaps hoped, that it would trade between 40 and 50 million shares a day. 
 To cover their running costs, they needed to trade about 50 million shares a day. If they failed to cover their running costs, there was a question of how long they could last. “It’s binary,” said Don Bollerman. “Either we are a resounding success or we are a complete flop. We’re done in six to twelve months. In twelve months I know whether I need to look for a job.” Brad thought that their bid to create an example of a fair financial market—and maybe change Wall Street’s culture—could take longer and prove messier. He expected their first year to feel more like nineteenth-century trench warfare than a twenty-first-century drone strike. “We’re just collecting data,” he said. “You cannot make a case without data. And you don’t have data unless you have trades.” Even Brad agreed: “It’s over when we run out of money.” 
 On the first day, they traded 568,524 shares. Most of the volume came from regional brokerage firms and Wall Street brokers that had no dark pools—the Royal Bank of Canada and Sanford Bernstein. Their first week, they traded a bit over 12 million shares. Each week after that, they grew slightly, until, in the third week of December, they were trading roughly 50 million shares each week. On Wednesday, December 18, they traded 11,827,232 shares. By then Goldman Sachs had connected to IEX, but its orders were arriving on the new exchange in the same untrusting spirit as those from the other big Wall Street banks: in tiny lot sizes, resting for just a few milliseconds, then leaving. 
 The first different-looking stock market order sent by Goldman to IEX landed on December 19, 2013, at 3:09:42 p.m. 662 milliseconds, 361 microseconds, and 406 nanoseconds. Anyone who had been in IEX’s one-room office when it arrived would have known that something unusual was happening. The computer screens jitterbugged as the information flowed into the market in an entirely new way. One by one, the employees arose from their chairs; a few minutes into the surge, all but Zoran Perkov were on their feet. Then they began to shout. 
 “We’re at fifteen million!” someone yelled, ten minutes into the surge. In the previous 331 minutes they had traded roughly 5 million shares. 
 “Twenty million!” 
 “Fucking Goldman Sachs!” 
 “Thirty million!” 
 The enthusiasm was unpracticed, almost unnatural. It was as if an oil well had gushed up through the floor during a meeting of the chess club. 
 “We just passed AMEX,” shouted John Schwall, referring to the American Stock Exchange. “We’re ahead of AMEX in market share.” 
 “And we gave them a one-hundred-and-twenty-year head start,” said Ronan, playing a little loose with history. Someone had given Ronan a $300 bottle of Champagne. He’d told Schwall that it had cost only forty bucks, because Schwall didn’t want anyone inside IEX accepting gifts of more than forty bucks from anyone outside of it. Now Ronan fished the contraband from under his desk and found some paper cups. 
 Someone else put down a phone and said, “That was J.P. Morgan, asking, ‘What just happened?’ They say they may have to do something.” 
 Don put down his phone. “That was Goldman. They say they aren’t even big. They’re coming big tomorrow.” 
 “Forty million!” 
 At his desk Zoran sat calmly, watching traffic patterns. “Don’t tell anyone, but we’re still bored,” he said. “This is nothing.” 
 Fifty-one minutes after Goldman Sachs had given them their first honest shot at Wall Street customers’ stock market orders, the U.S. stock market closed. Brad walked off the floor and into a small office, enclosed by glass. He thought through what had just happened. “We needed one person to buy in and say, ‘You’re right,’ ” he said. “It means that Goldman Sachs agrees with us.” Then he thought some more. Goldman Sachs wasn’t a single entity; it was a bunch of people who didn’t always agree with each other. Two of these people had been given a new authority, and they had used it to take a different, longer-term approach than anyone imagined Goldman Sachs was capable of. These two people made all the difference. “I got lucky Brian is Brian and Ronnie is Ronnie,” said Brad. “This is because of them. Now the others can’t ignore this. They can’t marginalize it.” Then he blinked. “I could fucking cry now,” he said. 
 He’d just been given a glimpse of the future—he felt certain of it. Goldman Sachs was insisting that the U.S. stock market needed to change, and that IEX was the place to change it. If Goldman Sachs was willing to acknowledge to investors that this new market was the best chance for fairness and stability, the other banks would be pressured to follow. The more orders that flowed onto IEX, the better the experience for investors, and the harder it would be for the banks to evade this new, fair market. At that moment, as Goldman’s orders flowed onto IEX, the stock market felt a bit like a river that wanted to jump its banks. All that had been needed was for one man with a shovel to dig a trench in an existing levee, and the pressure from the water would finish the job—which was why men caught digging into the banks on certain stretches of the Mississippi River were once shot on sight. Brad Katsuyama was the man with the shovel, positioned at the river’s most vulnerable bend. Goldman had arrived, with explosives, to help him. 
 Three weeks later, he stood before a group of investors who, if they acted together, might force change upon Wall Street. To show them that change was possible, he flashed on a big screen the data from what had happened, for fifty-one minutes, on December 19. The data showed, among other things, the power of trust. Goldman had actually sent more orders to IEX the day before, on December 18. So much more had traded on December 19 because, on that day, for just fifty-one minutes, Goldman had entrusted them with most of its orders for ten seconds or more. That trust had been rewarded: The market felt fair; 92 percent of those orders traded at the midpoint—the fair price—compared to 17 percent that traded at the midpoint in Wall Street’s dark pools. (The number on the public exchanges was even lower.) Their average trade size was twice the market average, despite the efforts of other Wall Street banks to undermine them. 
 IEX represented a choice. IEX also made a point: that this market which had become intentionally and overly complicated might be understood. That, to function properly, a free financial market didn’t need to be rigged in someone’s favor. It didn’t need in some sick way the kickbacks, and payment for order flow, and co-location, and all sorts of unfair advantages handed to a small handful of traders. All it needed was for the men in the room and other investors like them to take responsibility for understanding it, and then to seize its controls. “The backbone of the market is investors coming together to trade,” said Brad. 
 When he was finished, an investor raised his hand. “They did it on December nineteenth,” he asked. “And then what?” 
 _____________ 
 * Eric Hunsader, the founder of Nanex, a stock market data company, is a fantastic exception to the general silence on this subject. After the flash crash, it occurred to him to use his data to investigate what had gone wrong, and the search never really ended. “Almost every rock I overturn, something nefarious crawls out from under it,” he said. Hunsader has brilliantly and relentlessly described market dysfunction and pointed out many strange micro-movements in stock prices. When the last history of high-frequency trading is written, Hunsader, like Joe Saluzzi and Sal Arnuk of Themis Trading, deserves a prominent place in it. 
 † “Glitch” belongs in the same category as “liquidity” or, for that matter, “high-frequency trading.” All terms used to obscure rather than to clarify, and to put minds to early rest. 
 ‡ From a book of that name by Charles Perrow. 
 § In March 2013, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, a derivatives regulator, ended its nascent program to give outside researchers access to market data after one of those researchers, Adam Clark-Joseph, of Harvard University, used the data to study the tactics of high-frequency traders. The commission shut down the research after lawyers for the Chicago Mercantile Exchange wrote the regulators a letter arguing that the data Clark-Joseph had collected belonged to the high-frequency traders, and that sharing it was illegal. Before he was booted out of the place, Clark-Joseph showed how HFT firms were able to predict price moves by using small loss-making stock market orders to glean information from other investors. They then used that information to place much bigger orders, the gains from which more than compensated for the losses. 
 ¶ Estimates of commission paid to Wall Street banks for stock market trades in 2013 range from $9.3 billion (Greenwich Associates) to $13 billion (the Tabb Group). 
 ** ING, oddly enough, managed IEX’s then thirty-person 401(k) plan. Seeing this, John Schwall returned to his side career in private investigation. After some digging, he developed the opinion that any money manager who arbitrarily denied his clients access to markets might have violated his fiduciary responsibility. On those grounds, Schwall pulled the company’s 401(k) from ING. 
 †† Sixty percent of the time that this feeding frenzy occurs on a public stock exchange, no trade is recorded. The frenzy comes in response to a trade that has occurred in some dark pool. The dark pools are not required to report their trades in real time; and so, on the official tape, the frenzy appears unprovoked. It isn’t. 
 ‡‡ The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) publishes its own odd ranking of the public and private stock markets, based on how well they avoid breaking the law, presumably inadvertently, by trading outside the National Best Bid and Offer. In its first two months of trading, IEX ranked #1 on FINRA’s list. 
 §§ The reader might question the characterization of such small-time skimming as scalping. But a penny here, a penny there adds up in the most extraordinary ways in the U.S. stock market. At IEX, the Puzzle Masters made a quick-and-dirty calculation of the likely profits made annually by HFT from dark pool arbitrage. They added up all its instances over a fifteen-day period, then came up with a number: The haul for HFT from the U.S. stock market alone came to more than a billion dollars a year. And this was just a single trading strategy. “They’ve been in business for ten weeks and they’ve now found four of these strategies,” said one big investor of IEX. “Who knows how many more they’ll find?” A billion here, a billion there: It adds up.
