
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

What’s Your Game Plan?

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

93

look to show you how to do this—but as the book continues; it’s a step-bystep process.
Fear of Success In Chapter 2 I introduced the fear of success. This
is a fear that a vast majority of traders are probably not aware of. It is the
silent fear and causes more retail traders to actually trade against the trend
rather than with it.
The fear of success is the condition whereby a trader fears the success
he has on his trade will be taken away. As a result, the trader will take his
profit well before it’s time—often for no apparent reason.
In this situation, there should be little fear of failure. After all, there is
a profit on the trade. However, if the mission is to make the most money,
and the game plan is to trade the trends, then getting out of a trend move
early is not a good thing. In the words of the old proverb, a successful
trader should “make hay while the sun is shining.” Traders who get out of
a potential trend trade are not harvesting the hay.

Fear in Action
I know what most are thinking. The old Wall Street truism that “No one
went broke taking a profit” makes my fear of success theory fail to stand
up. Admittedly, you are right if the trade is taken as a single event. If a
profit on a single trade is booked, it is a net addition to the account value.
However I like to add an addendum to that old Wall Street saying, and it
goes like this: “No one went broke taking a profit, but you can go broke
after the next three trades.”
How can that be? Let me explain. Trading successfully is a lot about
staying in synch with the market. It is about staying in rhythm. Staying on
the beat and pulse of the market. A lot of traders have the sell high, buy low
idea down pat—especially when a market trades in a nontrending, defined
range for an extended period. During these markets, traders get used to
selling the high. They get used to buying the low. They are in synch with
the market. In their minds, the ranges are well defined and predictable.
As a result, when the price is at an extreme, they tend to take profit as
they fear that the success—the profit they have in the trade—will be taken
from them.
What we know is that at some point, the market will transition from a
nontrending, range-defined market to a trending market. A trending market
is where the most money is made. However, it is during this transition from
nontrending to trending that the unsuccessful traders fall out of rhythm
with the market. They fail to adjust from the nontrending market to the
trending market that may be breaking to the upside or downside.
For example, assume a market is in a defined nontrending range and
the most recent move is to the downside. The trader has sold at a higher

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

94

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

level and is profiting from the move from the high. When the price reaches
the low end of the range, the trader does what is now familiar—buy at the
low and book the profit. He reasons that no one goes broke taking a profit.
Besides, the trader fears that the price will rebound higher and his profit
will be taken away. This time, however, the price does not rebound but
continues to fall. The market transitions into a downward trend.
The price falls to the next support level. With the price now cheaper,
the trader’s instincts say buy. After all, he is supposed to buy low and sell
high and that is what he will be doing. He buys even though it is now against
the downward trend. The price rebounds a little—but not to the last floor
level—and then the trend continues down. At the next support level, the
trader does not prepare to exit with a loss, but buys again, doubling his
position. Why? Because the price is lower. He is buying a dip. He envisions
the rebound back to the old floor. He ignores the clues of the bearish trend
that the market is clearly giving.
The market rebounds a little, but reverses back down again. Finally, it
reaches a new low, and the market is oversold on the RSI. The trader is
blind to the obvious downward trend. If he were a dancer, he would be so
out of rhythm he would be stepping all over his partner’s feet. Nevertheless,
the trader is sure the market will snap back, so he buys one last time. The
market rebounds a little and then heads down yet again.
The next trade is the liquidation trade. The large loss is booked and the
trader is wondering how he failed to see and trade the trend.
The fact is the trader was short and on the trend—but he had the fear
of success. He worried that the market would continue nontrending in the
range and his profit would be taken from him. As a result, he closed out
the profitable short position well before its time. From there, the brain was
doing what it does: Think logically given the last event. If the last event
was a success, it often gives an even more positive signal. Success is good.
Pavlov’s dog salivates, and the trader buys again, at a cheaper price. The
brain ignores the bearish trend clues because it has not been programmed
to look for them.
Ironically, after a fear of success event like the one described, I find the
fear of failure dissipates in unsuccessful traders. The trader becomes more
cavalier and suddenly forgets about fear. Without fear, risk is forgotten and
the mission statement of “Making the most money with the least amount of
risk” is ignored.
If you are trading now, I challenge you to go back and find the trade
where you lost the most money. Look at the trade(s) just prior. Look at
the chart from that period. See if you did something similar—that is, took a
quick profit. Did the next trade in the same direction of the profitable trade.
Doubled up. Tripled up. Liquidated. All against the trend. Although you did
not realize it, the fear of success was your enemy at the very beginning.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

What’s Your Game Plan?

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

95

No one went broke taking a profit, but you can go broke after the next
three trades. Don’t be one of those traders. Don’t always fear the success
you may have. Instead, when the time is right, look to anticipate a trend,
and above all, don’t ignore the market’s directional clues.

Overcoming Your Fears
Understanding the potential problem is one thing. Solving the problem is
another. So how do you do it? How is fear dispersed? Let’s tackle the fear
of failure first.
In order to conquer fear of failure, you need to be able to tackle the
cause of your fear—the monster. One monster is the fear of losing money
trading. Losing money in trading is the equivalent of failing. The score in
trading is cut and dried—you either make money or lose money. So how
do you make money? By trading and staying on the trends. Can you stay on
the trend with the fear of failure? Not likely. Something will spook you.
From this vicious circle we are actually getting closer to a solution.
What I know is if a trader can stay on a trend, he will make the most money.
Also, fear can potentially be reduced. Why? If the trading is making money,
it is easier to convince him to try and not fear the success.
Alternatively, I can also say that if we keep fear to a minimum, we are
likely to be able to trade and remain on the trend. So fear and trading trends
go hand in hand. That is why it is our game plan.
So how is it done? In the last chapter we discussed the borderline levels as a way to take the least amount of risk. Borderlines, once again, are
those areas, or price levels, where the market is bullish on one side and
bearish on the other. By knowing this and being confident about these levels, a trader can initiate trades at or around these levels, and in the process
clearly define risk.
For example, if a downward-sloping trend line is being approached
from below on a corrective rally, a trader can sell against the line in anticipation of the trend line holding and the market price moving back down.
What is the risk to the trader? The risk is simply that of the price moving above the trend line. If the price moves above the trend line, the bias
turns from bearish to bullish. If this happens, the market did not do what
the trader thought it was supposed to do. In other words, the market’s
bullish conviction is stronger than the trader thought it would be. I have
never seen an individual trader tell the market what to do and have the
market listen. As a result, when the price moves above the trend line and
the bias turns from bearish to bullish, the trader should get out or close out
the trade.
Of course, because the trader initially has a borderline reason to do
the trade, and because the trader defines his risk, the trader is more

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

96

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

confident. What does more confidence do? It lessens the fear. Does trading against borderlines get rid of all the fear of failure? Not all. There is still
the fear that the stop will be triggered. However, traders who define their
risk have done Step One in controlling fear. They know what the maximum
loss will be. Step Two is deciding if the risk of the trade is acceptable. In
other words, can you accept the loss? If the answer is “yes,” fear should
automatically be lessened. Is it likely to be all gone? No. There will always
be some fear, but it should be at a minimum and that is the game plan—the
least amount of risk.
What happens if the trade does what it is supposed to do? What happens to fear? Your fear on profitable trades should become less and less
and less. Why? The worst you are most likely to do is lose profit. You should
not lose money in your account. That’s good! That’s great! As a result, take
your level of fear down. Don’t fear your success. Think that the worst you
can now do is break even. That is a comfort. Disperse your fear.
So what about the fear of success? Earlier in the chapter we talked
about taking profit before its time. I have to be honest with you. Sometimes
it is good to take profit. If you are not anticipating a trend move, then it
might make perfect sense. However, what a trader needs to realize is that
he or she should have a really good reason to take profit.
For example, in Figure 4.1, if you sell the GBPUSD on a break of
the trend line, the market price should continue lower. If the price now

FIGURE 4.1 GBPUSD Price Moves Below Trend Line but Finds Support against
200 Day MA

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

What’s Your Game Plan?

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

97

approaches the key 200 day moving average (dashed line), it is likely that
the market is going to pause at the key moving average.
I could not fault a trader from taking partial profit or even all profit
against the key support level. However, if the price moves through the
key level, the trader should realize that the short should be reestablished. Why? The reason is that the 200 day moving average is another
borderline. Being below the moving average increases the bearishness.
The price is below both the trend line and the moving average. Make
sense?
Now, is selling on the break of the moving average easy to do? Is it easy
to reestablish a short after taking a profit by buying? The answer is no. It
is hard to do that trade especially after buying and taking profit against
a key support level. Human nature says you should be buying the lower
level—buying the dip.
However, what is important to realize is if you cannot reestablish the
short, in this example, by reselling on the break of the 200 day moving
average, don’t do the opposite trade—that is, buy the new low because it is
cheap. This is a mistake made by most retail traders and is the continuation
of the fear of success progression, buying because that is what was done
last. Instead, wait until you are more comfortable with your fears and you
can get in rhythm with the market bias and the trend.

NEVER UNDERESTIMATE A
STRONG FOUNDATION
The one thing I have not explained is how to anticipate a trend. What I
have done is continue to build the foundation for trading success. A strong
foundation of knowledge allows traders to better anticipate the trends, stay
on the trends, and manage the profits of a trend trade.
When we get to the point of the book where I outline how trends can
be anticipated, there will be charts. There will be technical tools we will
introduce to help attack the trends. I will show the specific clues the market
gives traders as well.
Quite frankly, I purposely kept charts and technical tools out of these
earlier chapters because a mission statement and game plan are not meant
to be the playbook. (Plays—I mean charts—come later on.) They are
meant to broadly define the objectives for becoming a successful trader.
I want you to be aware of what you are trying to accomplish and why,
from a broad perspective. From a foundation that includes a mission statement and game plan, you can outline the details of how specifically it can
be done.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

98

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

Surprisingly, most retail currency traders have no concept of a mission
statement or game plan to steer them toward success. In my mind, it is
the development of this foundation that will give you a chance to succeed.
Ignoring it is at your own peril. Think about your mission. Think about your
game plan. They will serve you well.
In the lingo of Mission Impossible, your mission, should you decide to
accept it, is to believe in the mission statement and follow the game plan.
If we have a game plan, we need some rules for the game. The next chapter
will outline the rules for our trading as we progress toward attacking the
currency trends.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 5

Rules for
Attacking the
Trend
You have to learn the rules of the game. And then you
have to play better than anyone else.
—Albert Einstein

aving a game plan implies that a game or sport is being played.
Well, trading is not a sport per se, but it does have characteristics of one. Sports have winners and losers. Trading has winners
and losers. Sports have a game plan. Trading has a game plan. The participants in sports have differing abilities. Traders have differing abilities. In
the same way that athletes can improve their skill through things like practice, traders can improve their trading results through practice. And just
like in sports, there are rules that need to be followed in trading.
I have five rules that traders should follow. They are common sense
rules, but then again, rules are meant to instill some common sense to
games they govern. The difference with the rules in trading currencies and
rules in a game is most rules in a game are meant to prevent an unfair advantage to the rule-breaking player or team. In trading, the rules are meant
to protect the trader from an unfair disadvantage. Traders who break rules
only hurt themselves.
Together with the game plan and mission statements presented earlier,
these five rules will increase the retail currency trader’s success at attacking the trends.

H

99

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

100

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

RULE 1: KEEP IT SIMPLE
(BUT STAY POSITIVE)
Most people know, or think they know, the K.I.S.S. principle. In fact, I will
often poll the audiences at seminars and ask who knows the K.I.S.S. principle and invariably nearly all the hands go up. When I then pick a random
audience participant to share what it is, he will confidently say “Keep It
Simple, Stupid.”
Well, in this case, nothing is that simple. The correct answer in my eyes
was actually given to me by a friend named Joseph I met at a trade show a
few years ago. He and I were talking and he asked me the K.I.S.S. principle
question, and I gave the customary “Keep It Simple, Stupid” response.
Joseph looked at me, and with a grin, replied “No. It stands for ‘Keep
It Simple to be Successful.’ ” I was taken aback by the logical simplicity of
changing “Stupid” to “Successful.” Joseph knew that the slight alteration to
the translation was right up my alley. He understood that I liked to keep
things simple, and he also knew that I look to keep things positive with
my trading approach. The one-word alteration really changes the meaning of the K.I.S.S. principle, and I will never think of it any other way. So
what does it mean to “Keep It Simple to be Successful” for a retail currency
trader? Let’s take a look.

Start by Keeping It Simple
In the last chapter, I spoke of how retail traders like to make things more
complicated than they should. Retail traders tend to use a number of technical tools. They will incorporate oscillators on top of moving averages, use
candlesticks and trend lines, and look for pattern recognition. They will listen to as many people as possible and take their word as gospel. Some will
create their own proprietary indicator. How do I know? I know it because
I have been there and done all that, and in the process complicated my life
as a trader. Although I thought I was doing the right thing, I was actually
making trading more difficult and I could see it in my profit and loss. If
your charts look like Figure 5.1, you are probably overcomplicating your
trading.
It is my feeling that traders who make trading more complicated increase uncertainty, and with increased uncertainty comes more fear. We
know that fear is a trader’s worst enemy. Fear makes traders do things
they normally would not do. Traders who cannot control fear cannot trade
trends or stay on trends, and trends are where traders make the most
money. Traders need to focus on steering clear of fear. If a trader wants
to keep fear to a minimum, he or she should keep trading simple. Don’t

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Rules for Attacking the Trend

Printer: Yet to come

101

FIGURE 5.1 Are You Overcomplicating Your Trading?

make trading complicated. Don’t look to add uncertainty or do things that
elevate fear. It is that simple.
There is another reason why retail traders should keep it simple. That
is, I have found that the currency market likes to keep things simple as
well. So, how do I know the market is simple? To address that, I first need
to define the market.
Who Makes Up the Currency Market? The currency market is the
collection of traders from around the world who determine the current
price for a currency pair. The price is made up of the collective buy-andsell influences at a point in time. The buy-and-sell flows in the market may
include demand from an exporter who wants to remit earnings from overseas back to his home country. It may include demand as a result of an
international merger. It may include an overabundance of buyers of one
currency versus another after a stronger than expected economic statistic
that may make a central bank raise rates sooner rather than later. It may include the demand from a hedge fund or perhaps even a central bank. These
and many other influences go into determining the price of a currency pair.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

102

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

If there are more buyers than sellers for a currency pair, the price will
go higher. If there are more sellers than buyers, the price will go lower.
Again, it is that simple.
Will a retail trader know all the influences that cause a price to go up or
down? No, never. They might know the main influence, which could be the
effects of interest rate policy, economic statistics, or something even more
fundamental like the sovereign debt crisis that sent the EURUSD down in
2010. However, as time goes by, all those influences will be priced into the
market.
Now, will institutional traders (i.e., traders other than retail) know all
the influences that cause a price to go up or down? No, never. They do not
know it all either.
What they may have at times is an advantage because of their size.
As a result, they do have the ability to move the market price in one direction or the other. The fact is they have more zeroes in their account
value than retail traders, and therefore have more influence when they do
enter the market. They will tend to be the ones who give the market the
push needed to move it out of a nontrend into a trend and also can keep it
on the trend at key levels—like when a correction runs into trend line resistance. They can help influence the market to remain below that key trend
line level.
However, the institutional traders can also fight each other at times.
That is, one institutional trader can take on another with one buying and
one selling, and keep the market at bay—in a nontrending range. So any
single institutional trader cannot influence the market for long. There has
to be a consensus of traders to move the market in a trend. That consensus
can and often does include the smart retail trader.
The net effect is that there are a vast number of traders, retail and institutional, from around the globe who collectively make up what I call
the market. They collectively have an auction each minute of every day,
where a price is determined. That price is at one level one second and
can move to another level in the next second. If there are more buyers
than sellers, the price in the auction goes up. If there are more sellers
than buyers, the price in the auction goes down. Because the larger institutional traders have more power, they do have more influence on direction,
but it typically takes a consensus of money into the market to make the
market trend.
The good news for retail traders is the price they see is the same for
them as it is for the institutional traders. There is what is called transparency. Retail traders see the same price; that is, their charts are the same
as those of the largest, most influential traders in the world. That is a comfort to me and should be a comfort to you.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c05

JWBT439-Michalowski

Rules for Attacking the Trend

January 18, 2011

19:10

Printer: Yet to come

103

The other thing that is important to realize is all institutional traders
need to make money trading. They are driven to excel and are paid well to
succeed. They too need to make the most money with the least amount of
risk. In order to succeed, they too need to trade the trends and keep fear
to a minimum. If they trade against the trend, will they make money? No.
They will lose money just as fast as the retail trader. If they take on too
much risk, will they have fear? Yes. Like retail traders, institutional traders
put their pants on one leg at a time. Once again, they are more like retail
traders than most think.
Can you as a retail trader benefit from what institutional traders do?
Absolutely. Remember, most money is made trading the trends. Institutional traders have the influence to start the trend and keep the trends
moving. That is what you, as a retail trader, need to have happen in order to make the most money with the least amount of risk. As a result,
institutional traders are more your friend than your enemy. They give you
the chance to succeed as a trader by trading with the trends and pushing
the trend up or down. All you have to do is follow what they do and trade
with the trend. That is how they make money and that is how you will make
money.
In my mind, the retail trader is playing on a more level field with the
institutional traders than one may think. If you come to that realization and
start to think like them, you will begin to trade trends more effectively. You
will also stop thinking of them as your enemies and instead think of them
as your allies.
What Does the Market See? If the field is more level, the retail currency trader needs ways to uncover the bias from the price that the market
is creating at any one time. That is, the trader needs to uncover if the market has a bullish bias or a bearish bias. This objective should be the same
for all currency traders. In general, if the bias is bullish, the trader should
be long. If bearish, he or she should be short. It is that simple.
To do this, if a trader watches the market price and uses technical
tools that the market uses to determine a trend direction, then the trader
will have the market’s bullish or bearish bias. From there it is all up to the
trader to be long if bullish or short if bearish.
Is it worthwhile to try and predict the market bias by creating a proprietary technical tool or oscillator that works faster, that is, predicts the
bullish or bearish bias early? Many traders, including myself, have tried
to be smarter than the market, to preempt a market bias by trying to be
creative—to be trailblazers.
Early in my career, I had a self-developed tool that looked at a number
of different technical indicators. If I got a score that was bullish, I would
