Candlesticks at Support and Resistance
You may be surprised to discover how often candlestick reversal patterns form
at or near support and resistance areas. And recall from Chapter 5 that long
shadows are common at those areas, whether or not the candlestick line(s)
meets the criteria of a specific reversal pattern. One or more long shadows are
evidence of traders reacting when price tests a support or resistance area.
A daily chart of McDonald’s (MCD) is displayed in Figure 9.18. The
stock has been consolidating for a few months. The horizontal trend lines identify the ceiling and floor of the trading range. The following analysis explains
the events that occurred at the turning points as the trading range developed
between May and July 2007. The numbers that follow correspond to the numbers on the chart:
1. A bearish hanging man (1) formed after two long white candles. Because the candle prior to the hanging man was a long white candle it

JWBK100-Ch09.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

196

Page 196 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

FIGURE 9.18 Candlestick reversal signals at support and
resistance areas
Source: TeleChart 2007®

could also be interpreted as a bearish harami pattern. Price pulled back
for a couple of days before moving higher.
2. After a strong swing up, a bearish hanging man (2) formed on May 18.
Price declined from there back to the May 2 peak (at 1) where it found
support.
3. Two long lower shadows (3) formed on May 29 and 30 as the May 2
peak was tested as new support. The May 30 lower shadow was long
enough for many traders to interpret it as a hammer.
4. Price rallied back up and found resistance at the May high. A long upper
shadow (4) formed there on June 19. It was nearly long enough to be a
shooting star. That shadow showed that there was an intraday breakout
above the May high but the bulls were not able to sustain the breakout.
5. Price declined back to the floor that had been established by the May 2
peak (at 1) and the May 30 bottom (at 3). Notice the long lower shadows (5) that formed as price tested support. That showed the willingness of bulls to step into long positions at the support area.
6. Price did not make it all the way back to the top of the trading range
before turning back down to test the floor again. A bullish piercing
pattern (6) formed on July 11 at support.

JWBK100-Ch09.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 197 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Support and Resistance

197

7. Price made another swing up across the channel. The long upper
shadow (7) on July 13 was an indication of selling near the strong resistance level. The stock gapped up open the next morning, reversed immediately at the ceiling (shaven top), and filled by the end of the
session leaving a morning gap.
Not all reversals at support and resistance levels will include a candlestick
signal, but many do.

JWBK100-Ch09.qxd

2/21/08

11:40 AM

Page 198 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 199 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

10
Chapter

Putting Candlestick
Reversal Patterns
to Work
ow that you have learned about the primary candlestick reversal patterns and some basics of Western charting, it’s time to determine how
you’ll put the reversal signals to work. The candlestick reversal patterns
may be used by traders in several ways, including the following:

N

• Trading opportunities. Traders may initiate trades based solely on the
presence of a candlestick pattern.
• Reinforce another setup. Traders may look for candlestick signals that
form in conjunction with larger price setups, or where price is testing
support or resistance.
• Warning to take profits. Traders may interpret a reversal pattern as a
warning to exit an open position, or at least take a defensive stance.
This chapter will address these uses for the reversal signals, as well as provide
some suggestions for finding patterns and controlling risk to your capital. In-depth
instruction on risk management and trade management is beyond the scope of this
book. Novice traders are strongly advised to pursue additional study of those topics.

Practice Spotting Candlestick Patterns
It takes practice to convert knowledge to skill. Before you can utilize the candlestick patterns, you must be able to recognize them. Schedule some time to

199

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

200

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 200 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

immediately start evaluating charts in order to develop your pattern recognition
skills. You may need to review Chapter 3 a few times first so you feel certain
that you understand the psychology behind each of the primary reversal patterns. A quick reference guide is also provided in Appendix A.

Smart Investor Tip
If you don’t already use a charting service, you’ll need to subscribe to
one that either provides end-of-day or real-time data. TeleChart,
MetaStock, TradeStation, QCharts, and eSignal are a few of the many
ﬁne charting services available. Many vendors offer a 30-day free trial to
allow potential subscribers to explore their platforms. Stockcharts.com
provides limited charting with end-of-day data at no charge; so there is
no reason you can’t start evaluating charts right away.

The goal is to train your eye to quickly spot candlestick reversal patterns.
Evaluate many charts, one after another; the repetition will be helpful. If you
are not sure what stocks to evaluate, select some symbols from the S&P 500 Index component list included in Appendix B. Focus primarily on the turning
points (peaks and bottoms) on a chart and you’ll locate reversal patterns. If a
chart is messy and hard to decipher, just skip past it. When you locate a reversal
pattern, make note of the surrounding chart landscape. Did the pattern form at
a support or resistance area? Did the stochastic oscillator confirm the signal?
Was it an ideal reversal pattern, or was it a nonideal pattern or variation? Was a
strong reversal pattern, such as an engulfing pattern or a hammer, accompanied
by heavy volume? Eventually, it will not only be very easy for you to recognize
the reversal patterns, but you’ll learn to look for supporting Western technical
occurrences that assist you in determining which signals are most likely to follow through. Once you are able to recognize the patterns, you can determine
how you’ll implement them in your trading.
As part of your analysis, don’t forget about the bigger picture. Consult the
charts of the broad market averages: the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the
S&P 500 Index, and the Nasdaq Composite Index. While browsing through
charts, you may notice that between certain dates a lot of bullish patterns
seemed to fail. That may result in your questioning the validity of the signals.
But perhaps that occurred during a time when the broad market was selling off.
Remember that stocks, regardless of how bullish a setup or how good the company fundamentals, may be pulled down during a broad market decline. Conversely, if the market is rallying, even stocks with weak charts and/or poor
fundamentals may get a temporary boost.

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 201 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

201

Reversal Patterns Provide Trading
Opportunities
The candlestick reversal patterns can be utilized for trade setups. Recall that a
setup is an identifiable price formation that presents a potentially profitable
trading opportunity. Among the numerous setups for traders to choose from are
candlestick patterns. A strategy is the method a trader uses to trade a setup.
Some traders may wish to devise a strategy for trading one or more of the candlestick reversal patterns. Bullish reversal patterns can be used to initiate long
positions, and bearish patterns for short positions.
Traders cannot be certain that a candlestick pattern is present until the
close of the trading session. Therefore, if trading a candlestick signal, a position
may be entered very near the end of the session on the signal day, or after the
open of the following session. As indicated in Chapter 3, for some reversal patterns it is best to wait for confirmation before entering a position. Make sure to
carefully review the criteria and psychology of each candlestick pattern you wish
to trade.
Searching for Reversal Patterns

For centuries, the Japanese did not have the aid of computers for chart analysis.
They fared quite well using a trained eye to find the formations on charts that
were drawn by hand. Of course, that was before the days when there were thousands of stocks available to trade.
If you trade a single instrument, such as the S&P e-mini, or a limited
number of stocks, you won’t need to run computerized scans to find reversal
patterns. Patterns can be located simply by evaluating the charts. In fact, it
would be beneficial to recognize and understand all of the reversal patterns presented in Chapter 3 in order to expand the trading opportunities rather than
waiting for just one specific pattern to form.
Some traders may prefer to trade one or more specific candlestick patterns. In that case, they’ll need to flush out the stocks that meet the pattern’s criteria so they can choose good-looking setups from among them. There are
currently about 7,000 stocks traded on the three major U.S. exchanges: the
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the American Stock Exchange (AMEX),
and the Nasdaq. Traders who wish to find a particular reversal pattern among
hundreds or thousands of stocks can save a tremendous amount of time by allowing the computer to do most of the work.
Computerized Screening The ever-increasing power and speed of personal
computers has made searching for candlestick patterns easy. Many of the
mainstream charting programs offer users the capability to code the criteria that

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

202

Page 202 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

identifies the patterns. Users can quickly scan for candlestick patterns among
the thousands of stocks traded on the exchanges.
Coding the Candlestick Patterns Those who wish to trade one or more of the
candlestick reversal signals and scan for them among a large number of stocks
will need to define the criteria for each formation. For instance, TeleChart users
can create Personal Criteria Formulas (PCFs) for the patterns. The PCFs can
then be used to sort or scan for stocks that meet the pattern’s criteria.
Fortunately, the criteria of all the patterns have already been defined by
traders who were generous enough to share that information with others.
TeleChart users can access www.tradeon.com, a free web site, to obtain the formulas for candlesticks. The web site includes the code for all of the candlestick
lines and the reversal patterns discussed in this book (as well as several reversal
and continuation patterns that were not covered). On the home page, click the
down arrow to the right of “Beginners & Misc. Information” and select Candlestick PCF Tutorial (Figure 10.1). On the candlesticks page, use the scroll bar to
the right to search for the candlestick pattern(s) you wish to trade (Figure 10.2).
A PCF must be created in TeleChart for each candlestick pattern. The code can
be highlighted and copied from the tradeon.com web page and pasted directly
into a PCF in TeleChart. For more information on TeleChart, visit the web site
at www.telechart.com.

FIGURE 10.1

Tradeon.com web site

Source: www.tradeon.com

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 203 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

203

FIGURE 10.2 Code for candlesticks is available
free at www.tradeon.com
Source: www.tradeon.com

Traders who do not use TeleChart should contact the vendor of their
charting service to inquire if there are similar online resources where users share
code in that program’s language. Even if you cannot find such a resource, you
can use the code from tradeon.com to extrapolate the criteria for the various
patterns and write it in the language of your charting software. The language for
each charting platform may differ some; however, the coding concepts are usually similar. For example, TradeStation is a powerful charting platform. Their
proprietary EasyLanguage® allows users to designate criteria for screening. For
more information on TradeStation, visit the web site at www.tradestation.com.
Those who wish to utilize the TradeStation platform can get a substantial discount off the monthly fee by opening a brokerage account with them; the software is linked to their brokerage services. If you are a MetaStock user, the code
has been written and is available for purchase as a plug-in. For more information about MetaStock, visit the web site at www.metastock.com.
Filter for Price and Volume Traders can also reduce the number of stocks to
be analyzed by utilizing a price and volume filter. This is a great technique to
use in conjunction with a scan that isolates a specific pattern from among a
large number of stocks. Such a filter can be used to narrow down the stocks in
any scan or list of stocks, not just candlestick scans.
First, determine the price range of stocks you wish to trade. The desired
price range may vary widely from one trader to the next. If you are not sure
what price range to select, consider using a simple model based on account size.
Say Trader A has a trading account of $50,000. For that account size, I don’t
recommend investing more than 20 percent of the account in the stock of one

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

204

11:41 AM

Page 204 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

EAST MEETS WEST

company. Therefore, no more than $10,000 could be used to purchase one
stock and the trader could purchase up to five stocks in this account (or more if
less than $10,000 is committed per stock). Personally, I don’t typically buy a
stock that I cannot afford at least 200 shares of, but at a minimum, I’d recommend figuring for no less than 100 shares (less than 100 shares is referred to as
an odd lot). Divide $10,000 by 100 shares for a maximum price per share of
$100, or divide $10,000 by 200 shares for a maximum of $50 per share. Next,
determine the minimum share price. For instance, many traders elect to trade
stocks that are $5 per share or higher because stocks below $5 may not be marginable. Using these parameters, the price range would be $5 to $50 if you wish
to trade a minimum of 200 shares, or $5 to $100 for a minimum of 100 shares.
Think of the model outlined above as trading within the means of your
account. Most aspiring traders who do not succeed in this business fail due to
poor risk and money management methods. Diversification and position sizing
are two very important factors to consider.
Example

Google (GOOG) is currently trading above $500 per share. Buying
shares of Google could tie up a substantial amount of capital, which
may not be a challenge for a large account, but could be problematic for
a smaller account. Trader A would have to invest his entire account of
$50,000 in Google just to buy 100 shares. That would be an error in
judgment, as the account would be over-allocated to one stock. If
Google got unexpected news one evening and dropped 10 percent the
next day, Trader A’s entire account would be drawn down by 10 percent.
However, if Trader A limited the purchase of one stock to 20 percent of
the account, and the stock fell 10 percent, the trader’s account would be
drawn down by only 2 percent. In addition, implementing a rule for
diversification will keep him focused on stocks that are priced
appropriately for the account size.

Trader B has a larger account of $250,000. Putting 20 percent, or
$50,000, into one stock would mean lot more exposure in one company. Trader
B should break her account down further, for example, into 10 blocks of
$25,000 or 15 blocks of approximately $16,500. That means managing more
trades in order to get the account fully invested—that is a “quality problem”!
There are different schools of thought on the best way to determine position sizing and for diversifying one’s account. The above-referenced model was
presented because it is simple for novice traders to understand and implement.

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 205 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

205

As traders gain experience, they should study various risk management models
to determine which is best suited for their trading style and risk tolerance. Regardless of how you ultimately decide to invest your account, it is paramount
that protection of capital be the top priority. Using stop loss orders to limit loss
is another way to protect your capital.
Once you have determined the price range for the stocks you’ll trade, it is
time to think of the stock’s liquidity. Decide on the minimum average volume
per day you’ll require for a stock to be deemed liquid enough to comfortably
trade. Again, that level may vary from one trader to the next.
Example

With few exceptions, I trade stocks ranked in the 50 to 99 percentile for
average daily volume over the past 90 days. That equates to a minimum
of approximately 125,000 shares per day. I periodically trade stocks
below the 50 percentile, but the majority of my trades are above that
level. Novice traders may elect to start with more heavily traded stocks
to avoid problems with order fills and excessive slippage. For instance,
stocks in the 70 to 99 percentile trade a minimum of about half a
million shares per day.

Combine the two concepts outlined above into one filter and you have
the following price-volume criterion for an account of $50,000: average daily
volume of 125,000 shares or higher (if designating the 50 to 99 percentile) and
stocks that are priced between $5 and $50. By using such a filter, you’ll eliminate all the stocks that don’t fall into your price-volume parameters. Then you
can scan the remaining stocks for the candlestick pattern(s), or other set-ups,
that you wish to trade.
Your charting program may have a feature that allows you to create a
price-volume filter and apply it to any list of stocks. In TeleChart, both the
price and volume filters can be designated by creating a single Easy Scan. The
price-volume Easy Scan can then be laid over any watch list, or over any other
Easy Scan, using TeleChart’s sublist feature.
If you use TeleChart and are not familiar with the scanning and sublisting
processes mentioned in this chapter, contact the vendor for training materials or
feel free to e-mail me for assistance. You can reach me at tina@tinalogan.com or
through my web site at www.tinalogan.com.
If you use a program other than TeleChart, I encourage you to contact the
vendor and inquire if similar filtering techniques are available in their platform.
It is not my intention to steer you toward using TeleChart. Many mainstream

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 206 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

206

EAST MEETS WEST

Example

Figure 10.3 shows the TeleChart watch list window. A scan for bullish
engulfing patterns was run with a price-volume sublist applied. On the
day this scan was run (October 5, 2007), only 168 of over 7,000 stocks
met the criteria of a bullish engulfing pattern. But once the pricevolume sublist was applied, only 33 stocks remained. You can see how
this dramatically reduces the number of stocks to be evaluated.

FIGURE 10.3

TeleChart watch list window

Source: TeleChart 2007®

charting platforms include some type of screening mechanism. You must decide
which charting service is best suited to your trading needs. It is important,
though, if you intend to search for setups among a large number of stocks, that
you understand such tools and features are available with a good charting program. It may help you distinguish one platform from another when determining
where you’ll spend your money.
Limitations of Computerized Scanning Computers can reduce the amount
of work required to isolate stocks that exhibit a certain candlestick pattern. That
does not release the trader from the responsibility of knowing the psychology of
the pattern, as well as an understanding of Western technical analysis.

JWBK100-ch10.qxd

2/21/08

11:41 AM

Page 207 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File

Putting Candlestick Reversal Patterns to Work

207

A computer cannot discern whether one pattern appears to be a more
viable candidate than another. A computer cannot look across the chart landscape and see where areas of support and resistance lie that may help or hinder a
stock’s movement. It cannot spot a divergence, nor can it tell you whether there
is an adequate reward-to-risk ratio to justify a trade. A computer can only narrow down a large list of stocks to a much smaller list of potential trade opportunities. After that, it is up to you to review that list, making a visual inspection of
each chart, and further reducing the number of stocks to only those that merit
the commitment of your funds.
Another challenge with computerized screening is that a nonideal pattern,
or a slight variation of a pattern, may be excluded because it falls short of meeting the requirements designated in the formula. Remember that nonideal patterns and variations can be just as strong as some ideal patterns when considered
in the context of the surrounding price action.

Reward versus Risk
In Chapter 3, reference was made in regard to several of the reversal patterns that,
by the time the signal is apparent, there may not be an adequate reward-to-risk ratio to justify a trade. The reward versus the risk should be considered before entering
a trade, regardless of whether it is a candlestick pattern or some other price setup. If
the potential reward does not outweigh the risk involved by a sufficient amount, a
trader should pass on the trade or wait for a better entry opportunity to set up.
The reward is the potential profit on the trade. It is the gain that a trader
will recognize if a trade moves from the entry price to an exit point he has determined based on analysis of the chart. That exit point is referred to as the target or price objective.
The risk for a trade is the amount of money that will be lost if the trade
does not follow through as anticipated. It is the distance from the entry price to
the point where the trader has determined that the position will be exited because it has failed. The failure point is where the initial protective stop-loss order would be placed.
The reward compared to the risk is often referenced as a ratio. To calculate
the reward-to-risk ratio, simply divide the amount of potential reward by the
amount of potential risk. For example, if the distance to the target is four
points, and the distance to the protective stop is two points, the reward-to-risk
ratio is 2. There is twice as much potential reward as risk. A ratio of 1 means
that the potential risk is as great as the potential gain—that is a poor ratio. The
higher the reward-to-risk ratio, the better the trading opportunity. I suggest always trying to select trade setups that will net at least twice as much potential
gain as loss. And ideally, that ratio will be 3:1 or better on many trades.
