London
7:00
New York 12:00

8:00
17:00
21:00

And those, my friends, are the A to Zs of forex trading!

Chapter Four

Step Right Up
Getting Started in Forex
The way kids approach an amusement park is very similar to the way some adults approach trading. All they want to do is get their tickets, run in,
and explore. They have no plan or strategy, don’t listen to the rules, and can think only of joining the other kids in the excitement.
Traders usually learn about forex from a friend, at a trading conference, or on the Internet. When they first hear about it, they are excited and will
spend a little bit of time getting up to speed on how the market works and maybe even open a practice trading account. However, as they see how
active the forex markets can be and the swings in profit and loss that the moves can provide, overly excited traders will quickly abandon their
practice accounts and dive right into the market with real money. Oftentimes they do not even have a concrete plan other than to make money. What
ends up happening to new traders is the same thing that happens to kids in a funhouse, which is that they will move a few steps forward, run into a
few dead-ends that turn into losses, and walk around in a daze until they find the exit. The difference between a funhouse and trading is that the kids
will always find the exit—some take longer than others but eventually everyone comes out a happy camper. However, in trading, new traders can
exhaust their capital long before they are able to muddle through and find an effective trading strategy.
What separates the professionals from the amateurs is preparation. Professionals such as hedge fund managers or bank traders usually do
hours of research and analysis before placing a trade. This includes knowing exactly how much they are willing to risk on any one trade and when
they plan to take a profit. Most individuals don’t strive to become hedge fund managers but in many ways this type of discipline is even more
important to individual traders. Hedge fund managers may be managing millions or billions of dollars—but most of it is other people’s money.
Individual traders, on the other hand, may only be trading $10,000 or $100,000, but each dollar is their own hard-earned money.

Picking the Right Products
It’s important to start properly; the first step is figuring out exactly which forex product, or instrument, is right for you. Investing or trading currencies
has become so popular that every few years there are new ways to access the market. The oldest market in the world is called the spot market
because transactions are settled “on the spot”; the prices in the spot market determine the price of every other forex instrument including options,
futures, forwards, and exchange-traded funds (or ETFs for short).
With so many different ways to tap the market, the first question that you should ask yourself is what am I looking to do? Invest, trade, or hedge?
Every forex instrument can be used for these three purposes, but some are more suitable than others.
For investors, ETFs, futures, and spot are the most common ways to take a view on currencies. Exchange-traded funds can usually be bought
and sold directly in a stock account with a traditional broker. As with stocks, investors usually buy and hold the ETFs for months. The biggest
advantage of investing through ETFs is that the instrument is actually traded on an exchange such as the NYSE, making it easy to track its value.
The biggest disadvantage, however, is that liquidity dries up once the stock market closes. Also, the pricing is not as favorable as one would
expect from trading the underlying or spot because the execution is not instantaneous, and brokerage fees apply. Yet this is the cost of using an
exchange-traded product; many investors are more than willing to pay up for its safety and simplicity, especially if they intend to hold the currency for
months. Investing in spot is another option. The spot market provides some of the tightest spreads, but because most accounts are defaulted at
high leverage, investors have to specially request lower leverage or consciously allocate only a small portion of their account to the position.
The most popular way for speculators to trade in the forex market is through spot and futures. The spot market is the world’s largest market; it has
the tightest spreads—more than $4 trillion in daily trading volume—and offers true round-the-clock trading. It is also in the spot market that retail
brokers offer leverage as high as 50 to 1 in the United States, which can be an advantage or a disadvantage because leverage magnifies profits
and losses. Exhibit 4.1 shows how leverage can impact the profits and losses of a trader who has put up $2,000 at 50 to 1 leverage and no
leverage. At 50 times leverage, $2,000 margin controls $100,000 worth of currency. If the position moves in the trader’s favor, then higher leverage
is an advantage, but if moves against him, it becomes a disadvantage.

Exhibit 4.1 What Leverage Can Do to Profits and Losses
USD/JPY Rate 50:1 Profit/Loss No Leverage Profit/Loss
86.50
86.00
85.50
85.00
84.50
84.00
83.50

+$1,734.10
+$1,162.79
+$584.79
$100,000
−$591.71
−$1,190.48
−$1,796.41

+$34.68
+$23.25
+$11.69
$2,000
−$11.83
−$23.81
−$35.93

Like ETFs, forex futures are also traded on an exchange where the market is very liquid and regulated. However, the problem with trading

currencies through futures is that the contract sizes are standardized, and unless the investor rolls over the contract every month, it may be subject
to physical delivery. Brokerage fees and commissions also apply. Futures margins and account minimums are generally higher and leverage is
lower than what is offered by retail forex brokers.
The most common ways to hedge forex risk is through forwards, futures, and options. Forwards are usually done directly with a bank, which
means that the amount has to be large enough for a bank to be willing to pick up your phone call and quote you a rate on a customized forward
contract where they agree to buy or sell the currency at a specified price on a future date. Futures, on the other hand, are exchange traded so
anyone can buy or sell them. Futures are popular for companies that are willing to use standardized amounts, but they may not provide a perfect
hedge. Options have limited downside risk and can be bought for a set expiration date. They can be customized for larger transactions and
exchange traded for smaller ones. Options are leveraged contracts that usually require a small upfront payment but are subject to time decay.
Over the past few years, hedging forex risk has become very popular among international portfolio managers. However, individuals who hold
foreign stock may also want to consider hedging against adverse currency moves; the worst thing that can happen is that the European stock you
hold increases 10 percent in value but the euro falls 7 percent in value, erasing nearly all of your equity-related gains.
Trading options, futures, and forex—or any speculative behavior, for that matter—can be risky so make sure you evaluate the instruments
properly.

Finding a Broker
Once you understand the A to Zs of forex trading and have decided which instrument is right for you, it is time to pick a broker.
There are many forex brokers and dealers around the world and there is good chance that someone offers forex trading in your hometown.
However, just because someone offers forex trading and touts tight spreads doesn’t mean they are a reliable broker. When choosing a broker, it
may be helpful to consider the following questions:
How many years has the broker been in business?
Is the broker regulated and, if so, in how many different countries?
Are they sufficiently capitalized? (The CFTC publishes this information on
www.cftc.gov/MarketReports/FinancialDataforFCMs/index.htm.)
How many offices do they have? Is there an office in your country?
Do they provide 24-hour customer and technical support? Can they speak your language?
Do they provide education?
Do they offer Web and mobile trading?
What is the minimum to open an account?
Does their charting package have all of the features that you need?
Do they offer real-time news?
What other value-added services do they offer?

their

web

site

for

U.S.

brokers

at

Before deciding on one broker, open demo accounts with a few of them to test their execution and customer service. Speedy and satisfactory
responses by customer service and patient platform walkthroughs are usually indicative of a broker that cares about their clients.

Deciding What to Trade
Once you have settled on a broker, it is time to think about what to trade. Most experienced forex traders will use a combination of technical and
fundamental analysis. Technical analysis is the art of chart reading and a very popular way to analyze stocks, futures, and commodities. If you are
familiar with chart reading, then currencies can basically be analyzed the same way as stocks. The only difference is that volume is not tracked on
the forex market because it is traded over the counter and therefore volume-based indicators do not apply.
If you are not familiar with technical analysis, then consider fundamental analysis, which involves trading the big themes or stories in the markets
and news releases. For example, you may have an opinion on what the Federal Reserve will do at their monetary policy meeting, and that opinion
can be translated into a trade. The same goes for a consumer spending or employment report. Many stock market traders will position ahead of
these releases, and if the data is good for the stock market, it should also be good for the currency; if the surprise is large enough, the move will
continue. Believe it or not, front-page news can also be traded. Whenever there are elections and the race is close, currencies could fall in value
because of the uncertainty. A similar reaction occurs if a natural disaster or disease hits a country.
The basic rule of thumb in currency trading is that in times of uncertainty, investors always sell first and ask questions later. The best thing to do is
to lean on your strengths and to trade what you know. Many new traders will focus on trading their local currency if it is one of the actively traded
ones because they are on the ground and have an intimate understanding of how the economy is performing.
If you are in it for the long haul and want to be a good trader, it’s important to learn both technical and fundamental analysis. There are many
books dedicated to teaching technical analysis; one of the most thorough is John Murphy’s Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets .
Fundamentals are important to technical traders because they can determine the overall trend in currencies. Technical analysis, on the other hand,
can be used by fundamental traders to identify entry and exit points. Breaking news releases can alter the technical outlook for a currency, while the
break of key levels can explain bizarre movements. At a bare minimum, it is important for technical traders to be aware of upcoming news events
because range trading ahead of an important news release is an unnecessary risk.
The most important tools that forex traders should become familiar with is the charting package that the forex broker offers, the calendar that lays
out upcoming economic reports, and the real-time news applet that provides updates on market movements. These are essential resources that
can help you become more in tune with the market and learn what seasoned traders consider important; the great thing is that they are provided

free by most foreign exchange brokers.

Get It? Got It? Good!
If you’re looking to make a longer term investment, keep it simple with ETFs.
Spot forex, where positions can be entered into and exited easily, is extremely popular for forex trading.
Looking to hedge your risk? Try forwards, futures, and options.
Don’t just settle on the first broker you can find. Survey several brokers to find the best fit and sign up for a demo account or two.
If you’re interested in forex trading for the long haul, learn how to analyze a trade: Fundamental analysis aims to determine overall trends, while technical analysis pinpoints
exact entries and exits.

Chapter Five

Movers and Shakers
What Causes Currencies to Go Up or Down?
Another great ride at the amusement park is the Pirate Ship. Like a pendulum, the ship moves up and down, first swinging so high in the air that
your heart feels like it is flying out of your body and then sinking so fast that your skin feels like it is melting into your face. Thankfully the course of
the ride has been charted by the engineers and set into motion by the ride’s operators. Currencies, on the other hand, rise and fall in value—not by
a predetermined course but by people like us. Of course, it takes a lot of people to move a currency; in fact, it takes millions and sometimes billions
of dollars to move it by only 1 percent. Big movements in currencies are usually driven by big stories in the financial markets and the direction of
interest rates.

The Big Stories
When it comes to the financial markets, staying on top of the big stories is a critical part of becoming a good trader or investor. Newsworthy events
such as the subprime crisis and European sovereign debt crisis can have a major impact on the general sentiment of the market and the demand
for a country’s currency. These are the triggers for the 10 to 15 percent moves in currencies. The events that can have a profound impact on the
value of a currency include but are not limited to the following:
Potential or actual changes in government
Economic crisis
Major announcements by finance ministers and central bankers after G20 meetings
Intervention by central banks
Strikes and riots
Wars and terrorism
Natural disasters
Decisions made by government officials
In the past few years alone, there have been numerous stories on the front pages that have affected the forex market, such as the near stalemate
elections in the United States and Europe, the surprise resignation of Japanese prime ministers (Japan went through four prime ministers between
2006 and 2010), the ousting of U.K. Prime Minister Gordon Brown and Australian Prime Minister Rudd in 2010, the riots in Thailand, and the swine
flu outbreak in Mexico. When a political or social crisis hits a country, currency traders usually sell first and ask questions later because currencies
are political as well as economic assets.
Anything that threatens the stability or effectiveness of the government can have an instant impact on the currency. Political events generally
trigger a stronger reaction in the currencies of emerging market countries, where political institutions are more fragile, but even in the most
developed countries in the world like the United States and the United Kingdom, less serious political problems can still hurt the currency. For
example, something as foolish as the Japanese finance minister getting fired after appearing drunk at a G7 meeting caused the Japanese yen to
sell off sharply against the U.S. dollar for a good few days. If you are one of those people who love reading the front page of newspapers but your
eyes glaze over when you reach the business section, then the prospect of currencies reacting to headline-grabbing events may appeal to you as a
trading opportunity.
Political and social developments will affect many different financial instruments, but intervention by central banks is unique to the forex market.
When a currency becomes excessively strong or weak, the central bank may feel compelled to intervene directly in the foreign exchange market to
change the currency’s course. The reason is that the value of a country’s currency can have a direct impact on the economy and the
competitiveness of local companies. Central banks usually start with verbal intervention, which are threats to intervene and stop the currency from
rising or falling—sometimes it works, but often it doesn’t. Actions speak much louder than words and therefore physical intervention is much more
potent. Central banks physically intervene in the foreign exchange market by buying or selling their currency. The reason intervention is so important
is that, on a given day, a currency pair typically moves 100 pips throughout the day but when central banks intervene, the currency can move
anywhere from 150 to 300 pips in a matter of minutes. As a result, traders take intervention by central banks very seriously because it can shake
out their positions. Sometimes it will even mark the top or bottom for a currency, but usually fundamentals (or the reason for the previous move)
eventually catch up to the currency and it resumes its prior trend.
A good example is the Swiss franc. Between October 2008 and March 2009, the franc appreciated rapidly against the euro, hitting a record high
in the process. This caused a tremendous amount of anxiety for the Swiss National Bank, which was easing monetary policy to support the
country’s recovery. On March 12, 2009, the Swiss National Bank decided to intervene in the currency market by selling Swiss francs and buying

euros. Their physical intervention drove EUR/CHF, which is a currency that moves an average of 70 pips per day, up more than 500 pips in just a
few hours. The power of their intervention effectively kept EUR/CHF from falling any further for the next nine months. However, when the European
sovereign debt crisis started to brew, investors sought safety in the low-yielding Swiss franc once again and bought the currency in size. As a result,
the Swiss franc not only rose above its previous record high against the euro but another 9 percent. The SNB tried to intervene again in May, which
caused EUR/CHF to rally for three days, but eventually fundamentals caught up to the currency and it resumed its slide.

The Direction of Interest Rates
Big stories come and go but interest rates are here to stay. Where interest rates are headed is single-handedly the most important long-term driver
for currencies. Globalization has made it easier for investors to shift money from one country to another in search of a higher yield. Imagine that you
are a Japanese investor who is offered a paltry 0.1 percent yield by your local bank. If possible, would you rather put your money in Australia where
the interest rate is greater than 4 percent? Most likely your answer is yes.
When a central bank changes its key interest rate, it impacts the borrowing costs of individuals, corporations, and even the government. For
businesses, higher rates mean higher borrowing costs, making capital investments less attractive. For individuals, it means higher credit card, car,
and mortgage payments, which are aimed at slowing growth. Low interest rates, on the other hand, reduce borrowing costs for businesses and
corporations, which encourages spending and capital investment and is usually aimed at boosting growth. Over the long run, high rates tend to
moderate economic growth, which is bearish for the economy, but in the short run they tend to be bullish for the currency. When investors move their
funds into countries with the highest interest rate, the value of that currency increases.
A good example is Australia. The Reserve Bank of Australia has stunned markets by raising their overnight lending rate five times between
October 2009 and June 2010 to one of the highest levels in the developed world. Exhibit 5.1 is a daily chart of the AUD/USD currency pair with
circles highlighting the rate announcements. A closer look at the line chart will also show that the rate decisions usually precede a breakout in the
AUD/USD that turns into a multi-day move. The reaction was particularly strong because the Reserve Bank of Australia was raising interest rates at
a time when every other major central bank left rates unchanged. The price action after the decisions shows how monetary policy changes can
trigger big moves that can last for days and even weeks at a time.

Exhibit 5.1 The Impact of Higher Interest Rates on the AUD/USD Currency Pair

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

Aside from monetary policy announcements, comments from central bank officials can also move currencies. Central banks hate volatility,
particularly when it comes to their currency, so they usually like to telegraph potential changes in interest rates and prepare the market for the move
with the aim of reducing volatility when the actual announcement is made. Therefore, comments from the head of the central bank or other members
of the monetary policy committee can have a significant impact on currency. Sometimes the officials will talk about monetary policy directly and
other times they may only express their opinion on the economy. Knowing the potential market impact of their comments, central bank officials are
usually vague unless they intend to telegraph a shift in policy. Therefore, traders have to read between the lines and interpret their message. For
example, approximately a week before the Reserve Bank of Australia raised rates in April, Central Bank Governor Glenn Stevens said that he did
not think rates were at “normal levels” yet. The AUD/USD began to rise and, in the end, we learned that his comments were a direct precursor to the

25bp point hike in April.
Day traders, on the other hand, usually trade on the back of economic data, the sentiment in the market, and technical indicators.

Economic Data
The financial media across the world gets very wound up ahead of major economic reports because they know the outcome of the report can set
the tone for trading. The same pieces of economic data that move the equity market will move the currency market. Aside from the central bank rate
announcement, which can also be traded on an intraday basis, the top three most market-moving economic data for any country are:
Employment reports
Retail sales
Manufacturing and service sector data

Employment Reports. Labor market data is one of the most important and widest reaching measures of the health of an economy. Just think
about it: If you and your neighbor are employed, both of you are more likely to spend, but if your neighbor gets laid off and some of your other
friends are let go as well, there is a good chance that all of you will cut back spending. In most industrialized nations, consumer spending is the
engine for growth. When the job market is strong and companies are hiring, there is more money being shuffled around, translating into greater
spending and ultimately higher growth; that is generally positive for the country’s currency. On the other hand, if companies are cutting jobs left and
right, it is a sign that the economy is slowing down, which can hurt the currency. In the United States, the employment report is called the Non-Farm
Payrolls report; when this piece of economic data is released, it can trigger a very big reaction in the EUR/USD. Typically the EUR/USD fluctuates
within a 100- to 150-pip range on a daily basis but when the Non-Farm Payrolls report is released, the EUR/USD can move 100 pips in one or two
hours.
Retail Sales. While the employment report tells how consumer spending could fare, the retail sales and consumption reports tell us how
consumers actually behaved. The employment report is usually released before the retail sales report, which is why it can have a greater impact on
the market. Strong consumer spending usually means an economy is improving or growing (that’s good for the currency!) whereas weak consumer
spending usually means an economy is declining or slowing down (not so good for the currency). When consumers start to spend less, companies
start to produce less, which can lead to cutbacks on hiring and spending.
Manufacturing and Services Data. The robustness of manufacturing and services sector activity is very important to the economic growth of a
country because manufacturing and services make up the economy. These reports are released before employment reports and can signal
potential layoffs or hiring. The reports are typically known as the Purchasing Managers Index, but in the United States they are referred to as the
Institute for Supply Management Report. These releases track activity on a scale from 0 to 100. A number above 50 indicates expansion and
growth, while a number below 50 is a signal of economic contraction. A stronger expansion usually leads to gains in the currency, while a weaker
expansion usually leads to currency weakness.
Traders have to be particularly careful when trading news because when large surprises emerge, sharp movements can occur, which makes it
extremely important to limit your exposure and manage your risk.
