
Chart 26-9 Lehman Bond Index,

www.pring.com/Market Vane.) 1984-1989, and bond sentiment. (From

1830 _—— fennan eokx

v0

a Say
ha

aso
ULpS+ngneNTUN | ~ “—-— B WEEK M/A 45

LAN af
¥

+30
745

40 WEEK N/A

E Ew © 6

TT

Sentiment Indicators 499

tions do not occur very often, but when they do, there is a high degree of
probability that an important trend reversal is in the wind.

The rationale probably lies in the fact that rising prices (momentum)
attract bulls, whereas falling prices (momentum) attract bears. However,
when sentiment moves to an extreme and prices do not, the degree of opti-
mism or pessimism is misplaced, and the price must adjust accordingly.

Mutual Funds

Data on mutual funds are published monthly by the Investment Company
Institute. The statistics are useful because they monitor the actions of both
the public and the institutions. Technical analysts usually calculate mutual
fund cash as a percentage of assets. In a sense, these data should be treated
as a flow-of-funds indicator, but they are discussed here as a measure of sen-
timent because they also reflect the attitudes of various market participants.

Cash/Assets Ratio

Mutual funds consistently hold a certain amount of their portfolios in the
form of liquid assets in order to accommodate investors wishing to cash in
or redeem their investments. A useful indicator is derived when this cash
position is expressed as a percentage of the total value of mutual funds’ port-
folios (a figure known as total asset value) (see Chart 26-10). The index moves
in the direction opposite to the stock market, because the proportion of cash
held by mutual funds rises as prices fall, and vice versa. There are three rea-
sons for this characteristic. First, as the value of a fund's portfolio falls in a
declining market, the proportion of cash held will automatically rise even
though no new cash is raised. Second, as prices decline, the funds become
‘more cautious in their buying policy, because they see fewer opportunities
for capital gains. Third, the decision is made to hold more cash reserves as
insurance against a rush of redemptions by the public. In a rising market
the opposite effect is felt, as advancing prices automatically reduce the pro-
portion of cash, sales increase, and fund managers are under tremendous
pressure to capitalize on the bull market by being fully invested.

One of the drawbacks of this approach is that mutual fund cash did, by
and large, remain above the 9.5 percent level between 1978 and 1990 and
lost a lot of validity as a timing device during this period. It is true that the
market was in a rising trend, but one of the functions of an indicator of this
nature is to warn of setbacks such as the 1980 and 1981-1982 bear markets,
not to mention the 1987 crash.


1426
1205
1018
861
727
615
520
439
371
34
265
224
189
160
135
97
82
69

14

NOR uses the following IC! catagories
lnaeme = Geeaty

Monthly Data 1275171963 - 3731 3001 tag Sealey ~~

47.6
31.6

20.8

20.1
24

‘S&P 500 GainvAnourn When:

5
6
5
H
F

Standard & Poor’s 500 Stock Index

* 6.9 and Below

Extreme Optimism

Source: Investment Company Ingtivie

is Cash/Assets Ratio

Stock Mutual Fund:

Chart 2
6-10 The S&P Composite, 1966-2001, and mutual funds’ cash/asset ratio. (From Ned Davis Research.)

g

(3490)

Sentiment Indicators —

One way around this problem, originally devised by Norman Fosback of
Market Logic, is to subtract the prevailing level of short-term interest rates
from the cash percentage levels themselves. In this way the incentive for
portfolio managers to hold cash due to high interest rates is neutralized.
This adjustment to the cash/assets ratio is shown in the center panel of
Chart 26-11. It is a definite improvement over the raw data, but unfortu-
nately it too fails to explain the 1987 crash.

A final alternative, devised by Ned Davis Research, compares switch fund
cash and mutual fund manager cash to total mutual fund assets. This series
is also adjusted for interest rates and appears to offer the best results of all.
The buy (B) and sell (S) signals in Chart 26-12 are generated when this
series crosses below the lower dashed line; they remain in force until the

adjusted switched cash crosses above the upper dashed (selling) line.

Margin Debt

Trends in margin debt are probably better classified as flow-of-funds indi-
cators, but because the trend and level are also good indications of investor
confidence (or lack of confidence), they are discussed in this section.

Margin debt is money borrowed from brokers and bankers using securi-
ties as collateral. The credit is normally used for the purchase of equities.
At the beginning of a typical stock market cycle, margin debt is relatively
low; it begins to rise very shortly after the final bottom in equity prices. As
prices rise, margin traders as a group become more confident, taking on
additional debt in order to leverage larger stock positions.

During a primary uptrend, margin debt is a valuable source of new funds
for the stock market. The importance of this factor can be appreciated when
it is noted that margin debt increased almost tenfold between 1974 and
1987. The difference between stock purchased for cash and stock bought
on margin is that margined stock must at some point be sold in order to
pay off the debt. On the other hand, stock purchased outright can theo-
retically be held indefinitely. During stock market declines, margin debt
reverses its positive role and becomes an important source of stock supply.

This occurs for four reasons. First, the sophistication of margin-oriented
investors is relatively superior to that of other market participants. When

this group realizes that the potential for capital gains has greatly diminished,
a trend of margin liquidation begins. Margin debt has flattened or declined
within 3 months of most of the primary stock market peaks since 1932.

Second, primary stock market peaks are invariably preceded by rising
interest rates, which in turn increase the carrying cost of margin debt, there-
fore making it less attractive to maintain.


~ °Binidtu/ AuwawoD Tosuiisana] eam

~——jseraiuy 10) paisrilpy — s1essy puny jenny) JO SbeyUooIeq @ Se YSED aces |

\su@Beuey pun jemnyy snjd (e101 Bulaoyy yuoW-x!S) YSeD PUNZ YOUMS me;
‘, %LO- = 100Z/0E/F
\ h 7
\ ywado ewasK3 c |
irr en fmm :
vA z
Pe Pepe Ss aoe fy ;
“A
| €
|
y s
ysming: WsNWIssey OW9IIKZ yseD onisseoxg 9
%ioL
000t s66t ot Degg Lea hy _ $961 H
i ; ® es
fs Soe As
H t Ape” ee a
t6 pwr AS 26
Ht ak u ont
fet tT Ts of ect
st & s 6st
6st est
161 tet
6ze set
Sut set
ore oxe
S6E soc
vey 1008/0E/* * 296 1/16) 695
69s és deg ier suauit =
oe GE'LEY = $661 /87/7 10! 78
oat how BOO! ssapesy Boo a1QryoIg ant
girl e
" - X@PU] 4901S OOS §,400q BF PsePUeIS
{ (209s So) LOOT IES - 296 1LEIR 810g AIMCO

(-youwasay siang pany wo4.J) ‘OMe: yasse/yseo puny Youms & pur ‘TOOZ-G96T ‘aysodwod deS ZI-9Z HeYD

SSsssssesses22228

te

C)

1

uw t

(%) Bes0ny 7% WOH YOHEACG

oney siessy/yseD peisnipy -

%E'L = LOOz/Ot/y ‘Biniaeu) Auedwon WWsUnserui :29moS ¢
t

is

C)

1

t

{oun peyseg) Bunpoows wvoyy-pz £

(9Ur] PHOS) BereYy ISe28IU] 40) persnipy - OneY HeSSy/yseD spun, jenanyy ,

sa je | ana
* oe)
[ MOU WRUYY IED VITO

Tae pean ¥59
“Nemes wmerpeapsasoy sve
“ tor
NNT RTRRRE SES RET UMW OT
smy0Beie9 (91 BUMORO) MUI $45 YON
a vee vo |

0108 BUF SO"
TORI gO useing |

some.
Tai pues] wary woneAag,

sessyiusea paisnipy

Leos Soy 1o0zrstts - S961IEst BEG AywoN

oney Slessy/ysed palsnipy “sa sjeimsnpu; MOG |

(Yyounasay siaog payy wou) ‘Sones yasse/yseo puny jenyU OMY pu ‘TOOZ-S96T ‘VIA T1-9Z HeYD

503

502


504 Part I: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Third, since 1934 the Federal Reserve Board (the Fed) has been empow-
ered to set and vary margin requirements, which specify the amount that
can be lent by a broker or bank to customers for the purpose of holding
securities. This measure was considered necessary in view of the substantial
expansion of margin debt that occurred in the late 1920s. The liquidation
of this debt pyramid contributed to the severity of the 1929-1932 bear mar-
ket. When stock prices have been rising strongly for a period of time, spec-
ulation develops, often resulting in a sharp rise in margin debt. Sensing that
things could get out of control at this stage, the Fed raises the margin
requirement, which has the effect of reducing the buying power of the gen-
eral public from what it might otherwise have been. Normally, it takes sev-
eral margin-requirement changes to-significantly reduce the buying power
of these speculators. This is because the substantial advance in the price of
stocks—which was initially responsible for the requirements being raised—
normally creates additional collateral at a rate that is initially sufficient to
offset the rise in reserve requirements.

Fourth, the collateral value of the securities used as a basis for the mar-
gin debt falls as stock prices decline. The margin speculator is faced with
the option of putting up more money or selling stock in order to pay off
the debt. At first, the margin call process is reasonably orderly, as most
traders have a sufficient cushion of collateral to protect them from the ini-
tial drop in prices. Alternatively, those who are undermargined often choose
to put up additional collateral or cash. Toward the end of a bear market,
prices fall more rapidly, and this unnerving process, combined with the

unwillingness or inability of margin customers to come up with additional no

collateral, triggers a rush of margin calls. This adds substantially to the sup-
ply of stock that must be sold regardless of price. The self-feeding downward
spiral of forced liquidation continues until margin debt has contracted to
a more manageable level.

Most people think that the level of margin debt is the most important way
to interpret these data. It is true that the higher the level, the greater the
market's vulnerability when the numbers begin to contract. Perhaps a bet-
ter way to express this statistic is to express the level of debtasa percentage .
of outstanding market capitalization. Thus, the true vulnerability of the mar
ket would be represented in a more proportionate way. However, it is the
trend of margin debt that is all-important, because trend reversals signal
whether traders are confident (willing to take on more debt) or pessimistic
(liquidating it). For this reason, margin debt is a useful indicator when
expressed in relation to its 12-month EMA. This is shown in Chart 26-13.
EMA crossovers then offer confirmation of major trend reversals.

Chart 26-13 DJIA, 1966-2001, and margin debt. (From Ned Davis Research.)

Wonthly Data 12/31/1965 - 3/31 2007 Tog Scale)

Dow Jones Industrial Average

12-Month Exponential Smoothing

1

Margin Debt ($ Bill

(3920)

505



506 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Put/Call Ratio

Sentiment indicators based on short-selling data appear to have been dis-
torted in recent years, in part because of the introduction of listed options.
On the other hand, options can themselves be used as a basis for the con- e wena
struction of sentiment indicators. Their performance is far from perfect but “| IS BRSESS Sere * “s |
definitely worth consideration. :

Perhaps the most widely followed option-derived indicator is one that
measures the ratio of the volume of puts to the volume of calls. A put gives
an investor or trader a theoretical option to sella specific security ata pre-
determined price over specified period. In effect the purchaser of a put is
betting that the price of the underlying asset will go down. This is a form
of short sale in which the trader's risk is limited to the cost of the put. (The

2000

Weekly Daia TOTE/1992 - BI0B7Z001 ILog Scaley

risk on a short sale is theoretically unlimited.) ae z
A call, on the other hand, is a bet that the underlying asset will rise in SS r-3
price. It gives a purchaser the option to buy a security at a predetermined ee MS
price over a specified period. | — — is
It is normal for call volume to outstrip that of puts, and so the put/call aa i
ratio invariably trades below the 1.0 or (100) level. This indicator measures

1998

the swings in sentiment between the bulls and the bears. In theory, the lower S
the ratio, the more bullish the crowd and the more likely the market is to
decline, and vice versa. A low ratio means that very few people are buying
puts relative to calls, whereas a high ratio indicates thata larger number of
traders than normal are betting that the market will go down.

The put/call ratio is shown in Chart 26-14 as a 4-week MA of puts divided
by a 4week MA of calls. The 4week MA of the ratio often signals a rally when
it moves above the 69 level and then crosses below it. This approach had a

Combined Put/Call Volume Ratio, 4-Week Smoothing
1997

Includes CBOE, AMEX, Pacitic, and Philadelphia Options Exchanges

1996

}SNIMMISNIMMISN

* ee
a: = :
good track record for the 1993-2000 period, but at the end of 2000 a false 3 8 i z8
signal of strength was given. Its timing of market tops is not as reliable. i 3 3 SS !
S| oo - |
3 ae 7
* EL a8:
3 ai p23
Inverted Yield Momentum e — z |
Historically, whenever the dividend yield on the S&P Composite fell below 3 SS is |
3 percent, this indicated that investors were overpaying for stocks and that 8 = p28
a bear market warning was being offered. In the mid-1990s, the yield began Fl a zi
to slip, and eventually fell to just over 1 percent, well beyond the previous i : :

record around 2.7 percent. This experience completely overturned what
had previously been a good measure of valuation and sentiment. It also

demonstrated the point that the trend of any indicator is often as important as
its level.

Chart 26-14 S&P Composite, 1993-2001, and a put/call ratio. (From Ned Davis Research.)

507



508

The idea is that swings in the dividend yield from a bullish extreme of -
around 3 percent to a bearish one of 5 to 6 percent reflect changes in psy-

chology. If people are willing to accept a paltry 3 percent, they are quite con-
fident, yet if they demand 5 or 6 percent, there is widespread fear because
the high yield reflects investor pessimism and their requirement for a higher
current return to compensate for the perceived escalation in risk. An alter-
native is to plot the yield in the form of a momentum indicator, as in Chart
26-15. In this instance the indicator, a 24-month ROC of the yield, has been
plotted inversely so that it corresponds with price movements. Plotting a fun-
damental indicator such as the dividend yield in an oscillator format more
accurately depicts these major psychological shifts in sentiment.

In Chart 26-15, the vertical lines -show that when the oscillator reverses

from an overbought condition and moves toward its equilibrium point, this":

is normally associated with a bear trend of some kind, When the opposite
takes place, the indicator generally offers timely buy signals. The overbought
and oversold levels are at +20 percent and —20 percent.

Chart 26-15 The S&P Composite, 1957- i ivi i
(From wu pring.com,} posite, 1957-2001, and inverted dividend yield momentum.

100 ia F
S&P Composite fe

~50| 'nverted 24-month S&P yield

504

Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Sentiment Indicators 509

The Market’s Reaction to News

Another extremely important, though imprecise, approach for assessing
market sentiment is to observe the reaction of any market to news events,
especially unexpected ones. This is a helpful exercise, since markets look
ahead and factor all foreseeable events into the price structure. If a news
event that would normally be expected to move the price does not do so,
the likelihood is that all the news, good or bad, is already reflected in the
price.

A classic example developed at the end of 1988 when the insider stock
scandals began to appear, starting with the indictments of David Levine and
Ivan Boesky. Under normal circumstances the market would have been
expected to sell off. But in this instance it stalled for a while and then ral-

lied sharply.

The discount rate was raised in the spring of 1978, This should have been
a signal to sell, but the market rallied on record volume. In this instance,
the fact that new highs quickly outpaced new lows just after a bear market

~ lowshould have been the technical tip-off that the underlying structure was

pretty sound.

Another example developed early in 2001. The Fed lowered the discount
rate, the first in a series of rate cuts. However, within a few days bond prices
were below the level they were trading at on the day of the cut. This was a
terrible response to good news and prices continued to sell off for the next
few months.

Very often excellent news develops and prices refuse to respond, yet the
temptation is overwhelming to hang on until market participants “realize

” how bullish it is.” Invariably though, the price will soon decline. In such sit-
* uations when the price does not respond when it “should,” the best tactic
. is to watch for a suitable stop point and exit the position if it is stopped.

Remember, the more convincing the news and the more muted the
response, beyond the initial few hours of trading after the news is published,
the greater the potential vulnerability, and vice versa.

Countless examples could be cited for many stocks and markets, but the
principle remains that if a price does not respond to news in the expected
way, it is probably in the process of turning. Evaluation of this factor is very
much a judgment call, but it can act as a very useful adjunct to an appraisal
of the other technical indicators.



510
Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Summary

sine indicators are useful supplements to the trend-determinin,
tec niques described in other chapters. They should be used for the sen
pose of assessing the consensus view from whi ‘
ich a iti
a es contrary position can
Since many sentiment indicators are subject to institutional changes, it is
,

mandatory to consider them asa i
man group rather than relyin,
indicators alone. —

Acknowledgments

I should like to thank Tim Hayes and Ned Davis of Ned Davis Research for
providing the bulk of the charts for this chapter. Their innovative work is
probably second to none in the field of sentiment and I am extremel te-
ful for permission to reproduce their excellent work. =

2/

Applying Technical
Analysis to

the Theory of
Contrary Opinion

“The law of an organized, or psychological crowd is

mental unity. The individuals composing the crowd lose

their conscious personality under the influence of emotion and
are ready to act as one, directed by the low crowd intelligence.”
Thomas Templeton Hoyle

Contrary Opinion Defined

Humphrey Neil put together his own ideas and experience and joined them
with the writings of Charles Mackay (Popular Illusions), Gustav Le Bon (The
Crowd), and Gabriel Tarde to form the theory of contrary opinion. Today it
is widely understood that since the “crowd” is wrong at major market turn-
ing points, the only game in town is to be a contrarian! Unfortunately, when-
ever a concept or theory becomes popular, the basic idea is often distorted.
This means that those who have adapted the theory on its face value and
not taken the trouble to study Neil and other writers are probably on shaky
ground. Neil pointed out that the crowd is actually correct for substantial
amounts of time. It is at turning points that the majority get things wrong. It is
this last idea that is really central to Neil's thinking.

511


512 Part Ill: Other Aspects of Market Behavior

Once an opinion is formed, it is imitated by the majority until virtually
everyone agrees that it is valid. As Neil (1980) put it:

When everyone thinks alike, everyone is likely to be wrong. When masses of
people succumb to an idea, they often run off on a tangent because of their
emotions. When people stop to think (emphasis added) things through, they
are very similar in their decisions.

The word think has been deliberately emphasized because the practice of
contrary opinion is very much an art and not a science. To be a true con-
trarian, you need to study, be patient, be creative, and bring to the table
widespread experience. Remember, no two market situations are ever iden-
tical because history may repeat, but it rarely repeats exactly. In effect, it's
not as easy as saying, “Everyone else is bearish; therefore, I am bullish.”

Perhaps the best definition of contrary opinion comes from the late John
Schultz, who, in a timely article in Barron’sjust prior to the 1987 crash, wrote:

The guiding light of investment contrarianism is not that the majority view
—the conventional, or received wisdom—is always wrong. Rather it's that
the majority opinion tends to solidfy into a dogma while its basic premises
begin to lose their original validity and so become progressively more mis-
priced in the marketplace.

Three words must be emphasized because they encapsulate the three pre-
requisties of forming a contrary opinion. First, the original concept solidi-
fies into a dogma. Second, it loses its validity and a new factor or series of
factors comes into play. Finally, the crowd moves to an extreme, as reflected
in a gross overvaluation. What he is saying is that at the start of a trend, a few
far-seeing individuals anticipate an alternative scenario to that being pro-
moted by the majority. Later, as prices rise, others are persuaded that the
scenario is valid. Then, as the trend extends, more people join the camp,
perhaps being persuaded as much by the rising prices as the concept itself.
Eventually the concept or premise becomes a dogma with everyone accept-
ing itas gospel. However, by now, it has been so well discounted or factored
into the price that the security in question is way overvalued. Even if the
price is not overvalued, the concept begins to lose its original premise and
a new scenario emerges. All those betting on the old idea then lose money
as the price reverses to the downside.

; These trends occur because investors tend to move as crowds and are sub-
ject to herd instincts. If left to their own devices, individuals isolated from
their peers would tend to act in a far more rational way. Say, for example,
you see stock prices starting to move up sharply after they had already moved
up a lot. Even though you might know from your own experience that they
cannot continue to go up forever, it would be difficult not to become caught
