
235/396

dozen houses in a field, attached to nothing
but each other, ending with unoccupied slabs
of concrete buried in weeds. You can see the
moment the money stopped flowing from the
Irish banks, the developer folded his tent,
and the Polish workers went home. “The
guys who laid this didn’t even believe it was
supposed to be finished,” says Ian. The concrete slab, like the completed houses, is riven
by the cracks that you see in a house after a
major earthquake but which in this case are
caused by carelessness. Inside, the floors are
littered with trash and debris, the fixtures
have been ripped out of the kitchen, and
mold spreads spiderlike across the walls. The
last time I saw an interior like this was in
New Orleans after Katrina.
Ireland’s Department of the Environment
published its first audit of the country’s new
housing stock in 2009, after inspecting
2,846 housing developments, many of them
ghost estates. The government granted

236/396

planning permission for 180,000 units, of
which more than 100,000 are unoccupied.
Some of those that are occupied remain unfinished. Virtually all construction has now
ceased. There aren’t enough people in Ireland to fill the new houses; there were never
enough people in Ireland to fill the new
houses. Ask Irish property developers who
they imagined was going to live in the Irish
countryside and they all laugh the same uneasy laugh and offer up the same list of prospects: Poles; foreigners looking for second
homes; entire departments of Irish government workers, who would be shipped to the
sticks in a massive, planned relocation plan
that somehow never materialized; the diaspora of seventy million human beings with
some genetic link to Ireland. The problem
that no one paid all that much attention to
during the boom was that people from outside Ireland, even those with a genetic link to
the place, have no interest in owning houses

237/396

in Ireland. “This isn’t an international property market,” says an agent at Savills’s Dublin branch named Ronan O’Driscoll. “There
aren’t any foreign buyers. There were never
foreign buyers.” Dublin was never London.
The Irish countryside will never be the
Cotswolds.
WHICH WAY ENTIRE nations jumped when the

money was made freely available to them obviously told you a lot about them: their desires, their constraints, their secret sense of
themselves. How they reacted when the
money was taken away was equally revealing. In Greece the money was borrowed by
the state: the debts are the debts of the Greek
people, but the people want no part of them.
The Greeks already have taken to the streets,
violently, and have been quick to find people
outside of Greece to blame for their problems: monks, Turks, foreign bankers. Greek
anarchists now mail bombs to German
politicians and hurl Molotov cocktails at

238/396

their own police. In Ireland the money was
borrowed by a few banks, and yet the people
seem not only willing to repay it but to do so
without so much as a small moan. Back in
the autumn of 2008, after the government
threatened to means-test the medical care,
the old people had marched in the streets of
Dublin. A few days after I’d arrived, the students followed suit, but their protest was less
public anger than theater, and perhaps an
excuse to skip school. (DOWN WITH THIS SORT
OF THING, read one of the signs.) I’d tapped
two students as they stumbled away from the
event, to ask them why they had all painted
yellow streaks onto their faces. They looked
at each other for a beat. “Dunno!” one finally
said, and burst out laughing.
Other than that . . . silence. It’s more than
three years since the Irish government foisted the losses of the Irish banks on the Irish
people, and in that time there have been only
two conspicuous acts of Irish social unrest.

239/396

In early 2009, at AIB’s first shareholder
meeting after the collapse, a senior citizen
hurled rotten eggs at the bank’s executives.
And late one night in September 2010, a
property developer from Galway named Joe
McNamara painted his cement mixer with
anti-banker slogans, climbed inside the cab,
drove across the country, and, after locking
its brakes and disabling the release, stalled
the machine between the gates of the Parliament. The elderly egg-thrower was a distant
memory, but McNamara was still, more or
less, in the news: declining requests for interviews. “Joe is a private person,” his lawyer
told me. “Joe feels like he’s made his point.
He doesn’t want any media attention.”
Before he’d parked his cement mixer in the
Parliament’s driveway, McNamara had been
a small-time builder. He’d started out laying
foundations, and, like a lot of tradesmen
from the sticks, he’d been given a loan by
Anglo Irish Bank. Thus began his career as a

240/396

property developer. He’d moved to Galway,
into a tacky new development beside a golf
course, but the source of his financial distress lay an hour or so beyond the city, in a
resort hotel he’d tried to build in the tiny village in which he’d gown up, called Keel, on a
remote island called Achill. “Achill,” says
Ian, after I tell him that’s where I’d like him
to drive me, then goes silent for a minute, as
if giving me time to reconsider. “This time of
year Achill’s going to be fairly bleak.” He
thinks another minute. “Mind you, in the
summer it can be fairly bleak as well.”
It’s twilight as we roll across the tiny bridge
and onto the island. On either side of the
snaking single-lane road, peat bogs stretch
as far as the eye can see. The feel is less
“tourist destination” than “end of the earth.”
(“The next stop is Newfoundland,” says Ian.)
The Achill Head Hotel—Joe’s first venture,
still run by his ex-wife—was closed and dark.
But there, smack in the middle of the tiny

241/396

village of his hometown of Keel, was the
source of all of Joe McNamara’s financial
troubles: a giant black hole, surrounded by
bulldozers and materials. He’d set out in
2005 to build a modest one-story hotel with
twelve rooms. In April 2006, with the Irish
property market exploding, he’d expanded
his ambition and applied for permission to
build a multistory luxury hotel. At exactly
that moment, the market turned. “We went
away in June of 2006,” Ronan O’ Driscoll,
the Savills broker, told me. “We came back in
September and everything had just stopped.
How does everyone decide at once that it is
time to stop—that it’s become mad?”
For the past four years the hotel site had
scarred the village. But it wasn’t until May
2010 that Anglo Irish Bank, which had lent
McNamara the money to develop it,
threatened to force him into receivership.
Irish bankruptcy laws were not designed for
spectacular failure, perhaps because the

242/396

people who wrote them never imagined spectacular success. When a bank forces an Irish
person into receivership, it follows up with a
letter to his blood relations, informing them
of his insolvency—and his shame. A notice of
the bankruptcy is published in one national
and one local newspaper. For as many as
twelve years the Irish bankrupt is not permitted to take out a loan for more than 650
euros, or to own assets amounting to more
than 3,100 euros, or to travel abroad without
government permission. For twelve years
part of what he earns may pass directly to his
creditors. “It’s not like the United States,
where being bankrupt is almost a badge of
honor,” says Patrick White, of the Irish Property Council. “Here you are effectively disbarred from commercial life.”
There is an ancient rule of financial life—if
you owe the bank 5 million bucks, the bank
owns you, but if you owe the bank 5 billion
bucks, you own the bank—that newly applies

243/396

to Ireland. The debts of Ireland’s big property developers—defined as anyone who
owed the bank more than 20 million
euros—are now being worked out behind
closed doors. In exchange for helping the
government to manage or liquidate their real
estate portfolios, the biggest failures have
been spared bankruptcy. Smaller developers,
like McNamara, are in a far harder place;
and while no one seems to know how many
of these people exist, the number is clearly
big. Ireland’s National Asset Management
Agency controls roughly 80 billion euros’
worth of commercial property loans. An Irish
property expert named Peter Bacon, who advised NAMA when it was created, recently
revealed that when he’d added up the smaller Irish property-related loans (those under
20 million euros), they amounted to another
80 billion euros. Some very large number of
former Irish tradesmen are in exactly Joe
McNamara’s situation. Some very large

244/396

number of Irish homeowners are in
something very like it.
The difference between McNamara and
everyone else is that he’d complained about
it, publicly. But then, apparently, had genuinely thought better of it. I’d tracked down
and phoned his ex-wife, who just laughed
and told me to get lost. I finally reached
McNamara himself, ambushing him on his
cell phone. But he only muttered something
about not wanting to draw further attention
to himself, then hung up. It was only after I
texted him to say I was en route to his hometown that he became sufficiently aroused
to communicate. “What are you doing in
Keel????” he hollered by text message, more
than once. “Tell me Why are you going to
Keel???” Then, once again, he fell silent.
“The problem with the Irish people,” Ian
says, as we drive away from the black hole
that bankrupted Joe McNamara, “is that you
can push them and push them and push

245/396

them. But when they break they go wacko.”
(A month later, after a period of silence,
McNamara would reappear, screaming from
the top of a building crane that he had driven
across the country and ditched, once again,
in front of the Parliament.)
TWO THINGS STRIKE every Irish person when he

comes to America, Irish friends tell me: the
vastness of the country, and the seemingly
endless desire of its people to talk about their
personal problems. Two things strike an
American when he comes to Ireland: how
small it is, and how tight-lipped. An Irish
person with a personal problem takes it into
a hole with him, like a squirrel with a nut before winter. He tortures himself and sometimes his loved ones, too. What he doesn’t
do, if he has suffered some reversal, is vent
about it to the outside world. The famous
Irish gift of gab is a cover for all the things
they aren’t telling you.

246/396

So far as I could see, by November 10,
2010, the population of Irish people willing
to make a stink about what has happened to
them had been reduced to one: the eggthrower. The next day we pull up outside his
home, a modest old row house on the outskirts of Dublin. The cheery elderly gentleman who opens the door in a neat burgundy
sweater and well-pressed slacks has, among
his other qualities, fantastically good manners. He has the ability to seem pleased even
when total strangers ring his doorbell, and to
make them feel welcome. On the table in
Gary Keogh’s small and tidy dining room is a
book, created by his grandchildren, dated
May 2009. Granddad’s Eggcellent Adventure, it is called.
In the months after Brian Lenihan’s bank
bailout, Keogh, for the first time in his life,
began to pay attention to the behavior of the
Irish bankers. His own shares in AIB, once
thought to be as sound as cash or gold, were

247/396

rapidly becoming worthless, but the bank’s
executives exhibited not the first hint of remorse or shame. AIB’s chairman, Dermot
Gleeson, and its CEO, Eugene Sheehy,
troubled him the most. “The two of ’em stood
up, time and again, and said, ‘Our bank is
one hundred percent sound,’” explains
Keogh. “As if nothing at all was the matter!”
He set out to learn more about these people
in whom he had always placed blind trust.
What he found—high pay, corporate boondoggles—outraged him further. “The chairman paid himself four hundred seventy-five
thousand to chair twelve meetings!” he still
shouts.
What Keogh learned remains both the
most shocking and the most familiar aspect
of the Irish catastrophe: how easily ancient
financial institutions abandoned their traditions and principles. An upstart bank, Anglo
Irish, had entered their market, and professed to have found a new and better way to

248/396

be a banker. Anglo made incredibly quick decisions: an Irish property developer could
walk into Anglo’s office in the late afternoon
with a new idea and walk out with hundreds
of millions of euros the same night. Anglo
was able to shovel money out its door so
quickly because it had turned banking into a
family affair: if they liked the man they
didn’t bother to evaluate his project.
Rather than point out the insanity of the
approach, the two old Irish banks simply
caved to it. An Irish businessman named
Denis O’Brien sat on the board of the Bank of
Ireland in 2005, when it was faced with the
astonishing growth of Anglo Irish. (Anglo
Irish was about to double in size in just two
years.) “I remember the CEO coming in and
saying, ‘We’re going to grow at 30 percent a
year,’” O Brien told me. “I said how the fuck
are you going to do that? Banking is a fiveto-seven-percent-a-year growth business at
best.”

249/396

They did it by doing what Anglo Irish had
done: writing checks to Irish property developers to buy Irish land at any price. AIB,
which had paid its lending officers based on
how many dollars they lent, opened a unit
nicknamed ABA (Anybody but Anglo), dedicated to poaching Anglo’s biggest property developer clients—the very people who would
become the most spectacular busts in Irish
history. In October 2008 the Irish Times
published a list of the five biggest real estate
deals from the past three years. Allied Irish
lent the money for ten of the fifteen, Anglo
Irish for just one. On Irish national radio the
insolvent property developer Simon Kelly,
who personally owes 200 million euros to
various Irish banks and who belongs to a
partnership that owes another 2 billion
euros, confessed that the only time in his career a banker became upset with him was
when he repaid a loan, to Anglo Irish—with
money borrowed from Allied Irish. The

250/396

former Anglo Irish executives I interviewed
(off the record, as they are all in hiding)
speak of their older, more respectable imitators with a kind of amazement. “Yes, we were
out of control,” they say, in so many words.
“But those guys were fucking nuts.”
Gary Keogh thought about how Ireland had
changed from his youth, when the country
was dirt poor. “I used to collect bottle caps,”
he says. “Now the health service doesn’t even
bother to take back crutches anymore? No!
We’re far too wealthy.” Unlike most people
he knew, Keogh had no debts. “I had nothing
to lose,” he says. “I didn’t owe anyone any
money. That’s why I could do it!” He’d also
just recovered from a serious illness, and felt
a bit as if he was playing with house money.
“I had just got a new kidney and I was very
pleased with it,” he says. “But I think it must
have been Che Guevera’s kidney.” He describes his elaborate plot the way an assassin
might describe the perfect hit. “I only had

251/396

two rotten eggs,” he says, “but by God they
were rotten! Because I kept them six weeks
in the garage!”
The AIB shareholders meeting of March
2009 was the first he’d ever attended. He
was, he admits, a bit worried something
might go wrong. Worried parking might be a
problem, he took the bus; worried that his
eggs might break, he designed a container to
protect them; worried that he didn’t even
know what the room looked like, he left himself time to case the meeting hall. “I got to
the front door early and had a little recce,” as
he puts it, “just to see what was going to happen.” His egg container was too large to
sneak inside, so he ditched it. “I had one egg
in each jacket pocket,” he says. Worried that
his eggs might be too slippery to grip and
throw, he’d wrapped each of them in a thin
layer of cellophane. “I positioned myself four
rows back and four seats in,” he says. “Not

252/396

too close but not too far.” Then he waited for
his moment.
It came immediately. Right after the executives took their places at the dais, a shareholder stood up, uninvited, to ask a question.
Gleeson, AIB’s chairman, barked, “Sit
down!”
“He thought he was a dictator!” says
Keogh, who had heard enough. He rose to
his feet and shouted, “I’ve listened to enough
of your crap! You’re a fucking bastard!” And
then he began firing.
“He thought he had been shot,” he says
now with a little smile, “because the first egg
hit the microphone and went Pow!” It
splattered onto the shoulder pad of Gleeson’s
suit. The second egg missed the CEO but
nailed the AIB sign behind him.
Then the security guards were on him. “I
was told I would be arrested and charged,
but I never was,” he says. Of course he
wasn’t: this was, at bottom, a family dispute.

253/396

The guards wanted to escort him out, but he
actually left the place on his own and
climbed aboard the next bus home. “The incident happened at ten past ten in the morning,” he says. “I was home by ten to eleven.
At ten past eleven the phone rang. And I was
on the radio for an hour.” Then, but briefly,
all was madness. “The press descended on
the house and they wouldn’t get out,” he
says. It didn’t really matter; he wasn’t sticking around. He’d done exactly what he’d
planned to do and saw no need to make a
further fuss. He flew out of Dublin Airport at
six the next morning for a long-planned
Mediterranean cruise.
* On July 10, 2011, after a phone-hacking scandal, News of
the World was closed.
† Lenihan died in June 2011, seven months after this
interview.

IV
THE SECRET LIVES OF
GERMANS

By the time I arrived in Hamburg, in the
summer of 2011, the fate of the financial universe seemed to turn on which way the German people jumped. Moody’s was set to
downgrade the Portuguese government’s
debt to junk bond status, and Standard &
Poor’s had hinted darkly that Italy might be
next. Ireland was about to be downgraded to
junk status, too, and there was a very real
possibility that the newly elected local Spanish governments might seize the moment to

255/396

announce that the former local Spanish governments had miscalculated, and owed foreigners a lot more money than they previously imagined. Then there was Greece. Of
the 126 countries with rated debt, Greece
now ranked 126th: the Greeks were officially
regarded as the least likely people on the
planet to repay their debts. As the Germans
were not only the biggest creditor of the various deadbeat European nations but their
only serious hope for future funding, it was
left to the Germans to act as moral arbiter, to
decide which financial behaviors would be
tolerated and which would not. As a senior
official at the Bundesbank put it to me, “If we
say no, it’s no. Nothing happens without
Germany. This is where the losses come to
live.” Just a year ago, when German public
figures called Greeks cheaters, or German
magazines ran headlines like WHY DON'T YOU
SELL YOUR ISLANDS, YOU BANKRUPT GREEKS?, ordinary Greeks took it as an outrageous insult.

256/396

In June of 2011 the Greek government started selling islands, or at any rate created a
fire-sale list of thousands of properties—golf
courses, beaches, airports, farmlands,
roads—that they hoped to auction in order to
help repay their debts. It’s safe to say that
the idea of doing this had not come from the
Greeks.
To no one but a German is Hamburg an obvious place to spend a vacation, but it
happened to be a German holiday, and Hamburg was overrun by German tourists. When
I asked the hotel concierge what there was to
see in his city, he had to think for a few
seconds before he said, “Most people just go
to the Reeperbahn.” The Reeperbahn is
Hamburg’s red-light district, the largest redlight district in the world, according to one
guidebook, though you have to wonder how
anyone figured that out. And the Reeperbahn, as it happens, was why I was there.

257/396

Perhaps because they have such a gift for
creating difficulties with non-Germans, the
Germans have been on the receiving end of
many scholarly attempts to understand their
collective behavior. In this vast and growing
enterprise a small book with a funny title
towers over many larger, more ponderous
ones. Written in the early 1980s by a distinguished American anthropologist named
Alan Dundes, Life Is Like a Chicken Coop
Ladder set out to describe the German character through the stories that ordinary Germans liked to tell one another. Dundes specialized in folklore, and in German folklore,
as he put it, “one finds an inordinate number
of texts concerning Scheisse (shit), Dreck
(dirt), Mist (manure), Arsch (ass). . . . Folksongs, folktales, proverbs, riddles, folk
speech—all attest to the Germans’ longstanding special interest in this area of human
activity.”

258/396

He proceeded to pile up a shockingly high
stack of evidence to support his theory.
There’s a popular German folk character
called der Dukatenscheisser (The Money
Shitter), who is commonly depicted crapping
coins from his rear end. The world’s first museum devoted exclusively to toilets is in Munich. (A second has opened in New Delhi.)
The German word for “shit” performs a vast
number of bizarre linguistic duties—for instance, a common German term of endearment once was “my little shitbag.” The first
thing Gutenberg sought to publish, after the
Bible, was a laxative timetable he called a
“Purgation-Calendar.” Then there is the astonishing number of anal German folk sayings. “As the fish lives in water, so does the
shit stick to the asshole!,” to select but one of
the seemingly endless examples.
Dundes caused a bit of a stir, for an anthropologist, by tracking this single low national
character trait into the most important

259/396

moments in German history. The fiercely
scatological Martin Luther (“I am like ripe
shit and the world is a gigantic ass-hole,”
Luther once explained) had the idea that
launched the Protestant Reformation while
sitting on the john. Mozart’s letters revealed
a mind, as Dundes put it, whose “indulgence
in fecal imagery may be virtually unmatched.” Hitler’s favorite word was Scheisskerl (shithead): he apparently used it to describe not only other people but himself as
well. After the war Hitler’s doctors told U.S.
intelligence officers that their patient had devoted surprising energy to examining his
own feces; and there was pretty strong evidence that one of his favorite things to do with
women was to have them poop on him. Perhaps Hitler was so persuasive to Germans,
Dundes suggested, because he shared their
quintessential trait, a public abhorrence of
filth that masked a private obsession. “The
combination of clean and dirty: clean
