
8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 153

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 153 •

enjoy playing with you. I called the boys, and they agree it would
be good for us to play with the world’s best bridge player. Don’t
worry about the money. Are you in?”
“How can I lose?”
“Okay. I’ll switch you over to Harry Edgar Dache, my office
manager. He will get the necessary information from you so we
can send a car to pick you up. You’re welcome to stay overnight;
we have plenty of bedrooms. The game never goes much beyond
ten o’clock during the week. We start at six and have sandwiches
at eight.”
“All right then, I’ll see you on Monday night.”
They incorporated Culbertson into their game by setting up a
handicap; whoever had Culbertson as a partner got penalized
1,000 points. But they were all such good players that they soon
eliminated the handicap and played even. It was more of a challenge. Livermore and his friends could not have been more excited
to sit and play with, and sometimes against, the world’s best bridge
player.
It was because Livermore and his friends all loved to play cards—
poker, gin, and bridge—that Dorothy got her “yacht pool” idea.
One Monday night, she walked in early with the butler, who was
carrying the sandwiches, and interrupted the game. “Fellas, I have
an idea for you to think about. You know your wives and I, we
love to play cards too. So I thought maybe you would consider a
yacht pool. You know, you each have your yachts parked in the back
of your houses, like we do. So why not just take one yacht at a time
down to Wall Street, instead of each of you taking your own? Then
you could play cards on the way down and also on the way back,
especially during the summer when the weather is so nice.”
“And what’s in it for you, Mousie?” Livermore asked.
“Well, then we girls could go play on the other boats, or even
go for a cruise.”

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 154

• 154 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The men broke out laughing, and the next morning the only
yacht pool in America was formed.
By the mid-1920s, it was well known on Wall Street that Livermore was one of the most skillful market traders. The press often
exaggerated his reputation, and it was enhanced by the mysterious
and secretive way that Livermore traded. He sometimes used up to
50 brokers to hide his trading activities; no one could easily get to
him. To the press, he was the mystery man of Wall Street, silent
and secretive.
At this time in history, from the turn of the century to the late
1920s, it was common to form pools on various stocks. These
pools were made up of investors and insiders who would pool
their stock in a particular issue. This was done to control the wild
fluctuations that might occur if big blocks were suddenly offered
for sale in a stock with thin volume. At least, that was the theory
offered by the promoters: Pooling created an orderly market. In
fact, most of the time they were just interested in distributing stock
to the public as expeditiously and at the best price as possible.
When individuals inside the pool wanted to get rid of their
equity holdings, they often went to a trading pro, like Livermore,
to sell their stock. This was usually done by the trading pro for a
fee. Livermore preferred to get a series of calls on the stock, so that
he could buy the stock at preset prices. As the stock price rose on
the exchange, he had a chance to buy down the stock, exercise the
calls, and cash in. He often used his own money to set the market
up for the distribution of the pool stock. That way he did not have
to explain his actions to anyone.
Market manipulation was commonplace in the stock market at
the turn of the century, and there were no strong regulations to
prohibit this kind of trading. It was not considered illegal as long as
no false or misleading statements were issued. But it was illegal to

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 155

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 155 •

have wash sales, in which stock would be bought and sold only by
the insiders in the pool. This would churn the stock into life, and
simply drive the stock price up as it passed back and forth through
the same pairs of hands.
Livermore had seen a lot of manipulation and just about every
trick in the book when it came to rigging a stock’s action. Livermore was therefore always an obvious choice to run a pool. He
was approached on a regular basis. If he believed that it was a good
situation, he would become the pool trader.
He would first evaluate the company to make sure that it had
promise and could legitimately support a rise in the stock price.
Second, he had to be sure there was no possibility of bankruptcy
or sustained losses in earnings. He would then apply his basic trading rules, pretesting the stock’s action, before he said yes. The
overall stock market’s line of least resistance would also have to be
basically positive. Livermore believed that no degree of manipulation could take a stock higher in a bear market climate.
Livermore was always very wary of his partners in any pool operation. They would often try to manipulate the manipulator. He
used the ticker tape to broadcast his activities on any pool operation
that he ran. He knew that there were thousands of tape-readers like
him who would pick up, almost immediately, when a stock started
to operate outside of its normal pattern, with increased volume and
a sharp spike upward in price. He knew this would spark the interest of other traders and immediately bring in new players with buying power. This was commonly called painting the tape.
Livermore also knew that this increase in action would
inevitably bring in short sellers, players who bet on the negative
side of the market, figuring it was only a pool play. These shortsellers could later be squeezed by driving the price higher. They
would then have to buy in and cover their short positions. This
would also drive the price higher.

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 156

• 156 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Livermore’s strategy was to build a strong base for the stock on
the way up, setting the stage to unload a huge amount of pool
stock onto the market. He had studied other great pool operators
such as James R. Keene, Jay Gould, and Commodore Vanderbilt.
Their strategy was simple: Manipulate the stock to the highest
point possible, and then sell the pool’s stock at the top and on the
way down, while the market was churning.
Livermore knew the psychology: When the stock came alive, so
would the greed of other speculators and investors. He particularly
liked sleepy stocks that he could wake up, but he never violated his
basic trading rule of first determining the line of least resistance.
Otherwise it was impossible, Livermore believed, to drive a stock
up, no matter how strong the pool was.
“The tape is the best means of getting tips spread,” Livermore
told his friends. It worked well for him. Often his partners were
more worrisome to him than was the stock manipulation.
Unlike his regular trading techniques for his own account,
when he would sell into a rising market, when Livermore ran a
pool, he sold out the bulk of the pool’s stock at the top and into a
falling market.
If the stock plummeted in price too fast, he would stop selling,
and perhaps even buy a little stock for support until the public
came back in. He knew the psychology of average traders, who
often wished they had sold at the top, and as a result he would wait
and not sell four or five points off the crested high. He would hold
his stock position, and wait for the powerful rally that he believed
was inevitable. He would sit and wait for a rally that might drive
the stock back up to the old high.
Also, Livermore knew that people like a bargain. It is their
nature to try to buy stock when it is cheap and sell it when it is
expensive. People often think a stock is cheap because the price is
lower than it was a few days before, when in fact it may decline

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 157

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 157 •

even further. Livermore knew that the wise trader waited until a
bottom had been firmly established and tested before going in and
buying stock.
The public was more inclined to believe that whatever had been
happening would continue to happen, and the pools depended on
this. A stock that had suddenly come alive and started to rise in
price would continue to rise in price. This was usually backed up
by carefully manufactured rumors that were released on a planned
basis by the insiders.
Livermore knew that selling on the way down was a timehonored way of achieving distribution. Wake up a sleepy stock, let
the tape tell speculators and investors that the stock was now alive,
let the tape provide the tips. Most of all, sell on the way down, not
on the way up. This was the key to manipulating a stock and achieving distribution of large quantities by the big pool operators—and
it has remained the key ever since, because human nature never
changes.
This is one of the reasons why both experienced and inexperienced stock speculators are subject to manipulation and often get
fooled. They believe the insiders are feeding out their stock on the
meteoric upward rise of a stock. They are often wrong. The public is usually being fed the majority of the insider or pooled stock
after the stock has crested by reaching new highs and is rolling
over, starting its decline. This is often the reason why a stock cannot make a new high—there is simply too much supply hanging
over the market. It is often insider or informed distribution that
makes it impossible for a stock to rise in price.
Livermore was well aware of this in his personal trading. It was
one of the reasons that new highs were so important to him. A
true new high meant that the stock had broken through the overhead supply of stock—now it was being accumulated again, and,
most important, the line of least resistance was strongly upward.

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 158

• 158 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

He was basically alone in this thinking in the 1920s. When the
majority of people saw that a stock had made a new high, they sold
it immediately and looked for a cheaper stock.
Livermore had long ago realized that the stock market was never
obvious. It was designed to fool most of the people most of the time.
His rules were based on thinking against the grain: cut your
losses quick; let your profits ride unless there’s a good reason to
close out the position; the action is with the leading stocks, which
change with every new market; new highs are to be bought on
breakouts; cheap stocks are often not bargains, because they have
little potential to rise in price. The stock market is a study in
cycles. It never goes up forever, nor does it go down forever, but
when it changes direction it remains in that new trend until it is
stopped. Livermore didn’t buck the trend.
In June 1922, the New York Stock Exchange listed the Piggly
Wiggly grocery stores for trading. The builder and owner of this
chain of retail stores was Clarence Saunders, a corpulent 40-yearold from Memphis, Tennessee. The shares were issued and the
stock promptly tanked, falling drastically in price.
Saunders, upset with the stock price, rounded up $10 million in
cash and came to Wall Street to get the price of his stock up. He
went directly to Livermore. Their partnership created the last corner in the history of Wall Street.
“Mr. Livermore, I want to get the price of my stock up. I have
a war chest of ten million for you to use to do it. Will you?”
“It’s selling at $35 right now. Is it worth more?”
“Yes. It came out at $50, and that was an undervalued price.”
“How many shares are there in the market?” Livermore asked.
“Two hundred thousand float. I got the rest!”
“When do you want to start?”

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 159

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 159 •

“What’s wrong with tomorrow?”
“Give me a few days, Mr. Saunders, to check things out.”
“Okay. You haven’t told me what it will cost me for your services.”
“Normally, I don’t take a fee; I just take a schedule of calls on
the stock. But this is a unique situation, so we can decide on a fair
fee for my services later.”
Livermore checked out the market and they met a few days
later.
“Okay, Mr. Saunders, I think we can work out a deal. I want
twenty percent of the increase in value of the stock.”
“That’s fair enough. Can you start right away?”
“I’ll start tomorrow.”
The next day, using Saunders’ $10-million war chest, Livermore
quietly started to buy the stock in the open market. By the end of
the first week, he had bought 105,000 shares out of the total float
of 200,000. He went back to Saunders.
“Mr. Saunders, I have been able to buy over half the float, and
the price hasn’t budged. It’s still $35.”
“What in tarnation does that mean?”
“It means that there is not a lot of interest in your stock.”
“Blast it! There will be! Use that money I gave you. That’s what
it’s for. That stock is worth a whole lot more than $35. So stick it
to ’em!”
Livermore went back into the market, and by March 1923 he
had pumped the price up to $70. He was now faced with what
would be one of the most important decisions of his entire career.
The Street had triggered to the fact that Piggly Wiggly was being
cornered. But most traders thought it was a pool at work, headed
by the inexperienced owner, Saunders, trying to get rid of his
stock. As a result, these seasoned traders started to short the stock,

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 160

• 160 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

borrowing the stock now to be replaced when they actually
bought the stock back later.
Livermore saw the problem by the time he had accumulated
198,000 shares for Saunders out of a float of 200,000 shares. The
problem was that his friends on the Street were in a terribly
vulnerable position. They could be ruined. He was called to see
Saunders.
“Livermore, you did a heck of a job. You got the price of the
stock to over $70, and there is no stock left for anyone to buy. I
want you to call for delivery of all the stock that has been borrowed to cover the stock that has been sold short.”
“That will drive the price of the stock up to . . .”
“Whatever we want it to be!” Saunders laughed. “Until I decide
to sell those smug bastards back a little of my stock.”
“I won’t do it. It is not a wise thing to do.”
“What are you talking about? You won’t do it? We made a deal!”
“Too many of my friends will be ruined. I didn’t make a deal to
destroy my friends.”
“Are you crazy, Livermore? How could they be your friends if
they went short a stock you were running?”
“It’s part of the game, Mr. Saunders. It all balances out.”
“Maybe it’s part of your game. But it ain’t part of my game. They
ignored my stock and now they’re gonna pay for it.” He studied
Livermore, who remained impassive. “And Livermore—what do
you mean by it isn’t a wise thing to do, drive the price up?”
“It will drive the stock up in a sudden spike. The other traders
will know it’s a short squeeze, and there isn’t any real demand for
your stock, so they will lay off the issue, and ultimately it will fall
like a stone.”
“Bunkum! You’re just talking for your friends now, because I
got ’em by the balls and I intend to squeeze. They didn’t show me
no mercy, and this is my only play on Wall Street. I’m not some

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 161

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 161 •

big-shot trader like you who has hundreds of plays to choose from.
Besides, you’re getting twenty percent of the value of the stock
over $35. We can drive the stock up to over $100. That’s another
fortune for you.”
“Keep it! I’m out, if you demand delivery of the stock certificates.”
“You never heard of what old Daniel Drew said about people
who sell short? ‘He that sells what isn’t his’n, must buy it back or
go to pris’n.’ ”
“Yes, I’ve heard that before Mr. Saunders, and I’ve also heard
‘Don’t do unto others what you would not like them to do to
you.’ I’m going to be making my living here for a long, long time
to come.”
“Well, if that’s your last word, then good luck to you. Thanks
for the help, sorry you didn’t make any money for your trouble.”
“There will be other deals. Goodbye, Mr. Saunders.” Livermore walked out.
The next day, Saunders did exactly what he said he was going to
do. He demanded delivery of all stock that was on loan to cover
the short positions. In hours, the stock spiked from $70 to $124.
But a mysterious rumor had started on the Street, from an
unknown source, that Saunders had cornered the stock. This was
against the new stock exchange rules. The rumor reached the board
of governors, which stepped in that afternoon and suspended trading in Piggly Wiggly. The stock fell like a stone to 82 as the rumor
was proven true. Livermore’s friends were home free and safe.
Saunders later went bust. But he never stopped talking about
how he had held stock market victory in his hands, only to be
screwed royally by that swindler Livermore and his bastard friends.
Livermore was always a mystery to the press. He would never confirm or specifically deny the rumors that followed his trades. He

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 162

• 162 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

was supposed to have lost $8.5 million in Mexican Petroleum
(“Mexican Pete”) by being on the short side of a runaway bull
market in the stock. The stock advanced a nonstop 75 points and
reportedly caught a lot of investors on the wrong side of the market. Livermore was rumored to be included.
“Gentlemen, gentlemen, I will neither confirm nor deny the
things you have asked me about Mexican Pete,” he said to the New
York Times on June 29, 1922.
“Why is that sir?” one reporter asked.
“Because I don’t want to spoil a good joke.”
“Go ahead and spoil it, Mr. Livermore, tell us what happened.
We heard you lost eight and a half million dollars for yourself and
your friends and you made a private settlement to get out of the
trap you found yourself in.”
“No, I’m having too much fun to spoil this joke. I’m enjoying
myself too much to bother you with the facts.” Livermore smiled.
“Look fellas, you printed that the stock got away from me on the
upside on the day that I was attending Lillian Russell’s memorial
services at the Hippodrome. I did not attend those services, and on
that day I left the office at five o’clock. I have witnesses to prove it,
which I had already told you yesterday, but you printed what you
wanted anyway.”
“Just tell us about Mexican Pete and the beating you took, Mr.
Livermore,” the Times reporter said.
“You printed that I made a settlement with the Mexican Pete
group to cover my shorts at $225 a share. You were told this by a
certain stock exchange house. At that very time, four in the afternoon, when I was supposed to be making that settlement with my
lawyer, with my friend Mr. E. L. Doheny present, I was actually up
in Poughkeepsie watching the boat races. I have witnesses to confirm that also.”
“So you’re denying this then?” a reporter yelled.

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 163

STOCK POOLS AND SCANDALS

• 163 •

“What I have told you is enough to give anyone sane an opportunity to draw their own conclusions as to whether I was the one
caught short of Mexican Petroleum. But I have to say this, in addition, if I did happen to be the one caught short of Mexican Petroleum, I would have taken my licking in the market and bought
back the stock to cover my position, no matter what the price was.
Gentlemen, I have never made a private settlement in my life, nor
will I.”
“What about the story published yesterday that you got caught
short with one hundred thousand shares, Mr. Livermore?”
“The reporter who wrote that story must have been inexperienced in the ways of Wall Street. At least he should have given me
the sense not to go short almost the entire floating supply of Mexican Petroleum shares. If that reporter had really known how much
stock of Mexican Pete I purchased on the afternoon I was supposed to be at the Hippodrome, such ridiculous stories would not
gain circulation.”
All through the 1920s, stories like this appeared in the press. Livermore helped sell a lot of newspapers, even though he tried to
avoid publicity. It only made the press more insatiable to know
about him.
One story that was never disclosed by the press shocked his son
Paul. He had asked his father to tell him a story that no one else
knew.
“All right, son. After the Great War ended in 1918, before you
were born, I felt that cotton would fall in price on a short-term
basis because the military demand would cease to exist. But I also
thought the demand would pick up again later as the nation got
back on its feet.
“So in 1919—quietly, in secret, using hundreds of brokers—I
started buying cotton. The price fell as I had expected, and over

8467_Smitten_08_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 164

• 164 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

about an eighteen-month period I realized that I had almost secured
a full corner on cotton. I had bought almost every single bale of
cotton. This fact did not escape the eyes of the U.S. government.
“As soon as I had my full position I got a call from the secretary
of agriculture to immediately come to Washington and meet with
President Wilson. I took the train to Washington and went straight
to the White House, where the secretary and the president were
waiting. I was ushered in directly to see the president.
“After greetings were exchanged, President Wilson began. ‘Mr.
Livermore, it has come to our attention that you have cornered the
Chicago cotton futures market. Is that true?’
“ ‘Yes, Mr. President,’ I said.
“ ‘Now we know what a smart fellow you are, and the price of
cotton is nice and low now, and you have properly figured out that
the projections for cotton demand in the next little while is high as
the nation comes back from war and prosperity begins in earnest.’
“ ‘Yes, Mr. President,’ I said.
“ ‘We know you understand about inflation, Mr. Livermore, and
with you having a corner on cotton you can pretty much name
your price as the demand grows,’ the secretary of agriculture said.
“ ‘And we don’t want inflation Mr. Livermore. Higher prices in
something as important as the cotton market will be very bad
while the nation is trying to get on its feet, don’t you think?’ the
president added.
“ ‘Yes sir,’ I said.
“ ‘Let me ask you a question, Mr. Livermore, a question that has
my full interest.’
“ ‘Yes sir,’ I said, and waited.
“ ‘Why? Why did you corner the cotton market?’
“ ‘To see if I could, Mr. President.’
“ ‘You cornered the entire United States cotton market, to see
if you could, Mr. Livermore?’ the secretary of agriculture blurted.
