2. Stop moved to breakeven after exit #1.
3. Trailing stop moved to below the .786 retracement.

Alternate Trade Management In this example we show you exiting in three parts versus two parts. On longer time frames and with larger
targets, using a trading strategy that employs a three-part scaling-out exit
can produce more profits. The downside, of course, is that if the trade is
stopped out at a loss, then additional losses will be incurred. The correct
money management for the trader’s portfolio should always be used and
never exceeded to implement this strategy. Another downside to this strategy is that if the third objective is not reached and the price reverses, the

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

The Gartley “222” Pattern

Char Count=

65

Figure 5.7 Soybeans daily chart showing an example of using Fibonacci retracement levels to trail a stop.

trader may end up giving back some of the profits if the third contract is
stopped out below the second profit objective area.
In Figure 5.6 we have marked the .786 level as the third and final profit
objective exit. The trader in this particular trade would most likely have
been able to gain an additional 11 cents per contract or $550.

Trade Setup #2: Gartley “222” Sell Pattern
Market: Google (GOOG) Stock
Shares: 200
A limit order to sell (refer to Figure 5.8) would be placed just below the
.786 at $384.25 per share to sell short. Once the order is filled, immediately
place a protective buy stop order above the 1.00 or X level for a risk of
$5.50 per share at $389.75. The first profit objective (exit #1) is equal to the
amount of risk in the trade at $378.75. Once this is filled, move the stop
down to breakeven. Exit #2 is at the .618 at $371.50. We would want to
shade the exit order to ensure a fill and would place the order at $371.75.
Once the second profit objective (exit #2) is reached, the protective buy
stop order is canceled.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

66

August 14, 2007

13:4

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 5.8 Google (GOOG) 60-minute chart of Gartley “222” sell pattern. The risk
in this pattern is acceptable to place the stop above the X point; the risk is $5.50 per
share, very low risk on a $384 stock.

Because of the high price of this stock and larger dollar movement,
the trader would certainly want to trail a stop to protect profits after the
price moves in the trader’s favor following moving the stop to breakeven.
It can be helpful to use a smaller time frame to see the most recent swings
to trail a stop if using visual chart points or Fibonacci retracement levels
(see Figure 5.9). In this case, using a 30-minute or 15-minute chart would
be sufficient.
This trade would have netted +$5.50 per share on the first exit and
+$12.50 per share on the second exit for a total of +$18.00 on the trade.

Alternate Trade Management An alternate and acceptable way to
manage this trade is to take a full exit at the .618 retracement. This would
give the trader close to a 3:1 risk/reward trade-off. Why don’t we do that
on each trade? The answer is simple: We have found over time that taking
partial profits around or close to the amount risked gives us a high win/loss
ratio on trades and quickly reduces the risk in the trade to close to a riskfree trade. Whenever we can put ourselves in the position of a risk-free
trade we do so.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

The Gartley “222” Pattern

August 14, 2007

13:4

Char Count=

67

Figure 5.9 Google (GOOG) 15-minute chart showing example of dropping down
a time frame to help the trader trail stops using most recent swings.

Figure 5.10 S&P E-mini 5-minute chart of failed Gartley “222” pattern. A wide
range bar, one of the warning signs, is present at the completion point, but it is not
likely that it would have been seen in full prior to being ﬁlled on the trade.

c05

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:4

68

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Trade Setup #3: Failed Gartley “222” Pattern
Market: S&P 500 E-Mini
Contracts: 2
In Figure 5.10, a limit order of 1270.00 to sell short is placed for this
trade. A protective buy stop-loss order above the 1.00 (X) point at 1273.50
is immediately placed upon being filled. We would have been filled on this
trade before the long bar was complete near the D completion point, which
is one of the warning signs. This just happens occasionally and is part of
trading. The protective buy stop-loss order keeps this loss small and enables us to move on to the next trade.
Accept the responsibility for the trade regardless of the outcome; this
is learning to think in probabilities. The Gartley “222” pattern places a positive expectation in the trader’s favor. It is the trader’s responsibility to accept the risk, use sound money management, and develop good execution
skills.

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

12:42

Char Count=

CHAPTER 6

The Butterfly
Pattern

T

he Butterfly pattern is certainly one of our favorite extension patterns. This particular setup is one that attempts to trade highs and
lows at market reversal points. The formations and completions tend
to occur at major tops and bottoms, and they can also be seen on all time
frames. It is not uncommon to see more than one Butterfly pattern on multiple time frames completing at the same price area.
The risk/reward profile is very favorable with this pattern. The best
patterns tend to turn immediately at or near the completion point. It is one
of the few patterns that can truly find tops and bottoms. This pattern is not
100 percent, though, and stop-loss orders must be used; as you will see in
the last trade setup in this chapter, when this one fails it usually fails in a
big way.

HISTORY OF THE BUTTERFLY PATTERN
In order to explain the history of the Butterfly pattern, we have to introduce the Australian trader and developer of the Wave Trader Program,
Bryce Gilmore. Bryce has spent a lifetime studying the works of the great
69

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

70

12:42

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

masters—R.N. Elliott, W.D. Gann, and many others. He developed the
Wave Trader Program in 1988; it was the first computer program to use
all the numbers of sacred geometry, including the Fibonacci summation
series. This pioneering led to the discovery of the Butterfly pattern.
The Wave Trader Program calculated each swing and ratio and went
through a sequence of analyzing that labeled the patterns from 1 to 10, 10
being the level at which 10 swings and ratios came together at the same
time and price. This was the level when multiple patterns had completed
with the ratios from sacred geometry. Bryce included all the numbers from
sacred geometry so that no stone was left unturned. As with many patterns,
when the Wave 10 level trades failed it was usually an indication that the
market would continue in the direction of the original trend.
Bryce was a perfectionist in everything he attempted. On one occasion he had done extensive analysis on the Treasury bond market and
had concluded that T-bonds would not exceed 101.00. He sold T-bonds at
101.00 and used a stop-loss order at 101.02, which is exactly $62.50 per contract. When Larry suggested that the stop might be a bit too close, Bryce
shouted, “If those bonds trade above 101.02, everything I’ve researched,
read, and believe in will be a total loss!” He went on to say that if bonds
were to trade above 101.03, he would burn all of his books and materials and return to race-car driving and playing golf in his home country of
Australia. The bonds made a swing high at 101.00 that lasted more than
two months.
The Butterfly pattern came into existence in 1992 on a trading day
when Larry was sitting with Bryce watching a Wave 10 pattern form. It
appeared in many different colors, and as two colorful right triangles came
together Larry commented that it looked like a butterfly. Bryce replied that
it was as good a name for the pattern as any, and that is how the name was
coined for this pattern. (See Figure 6.1.)
Almost two decades and thousands of Butterfly patterns later, it can be
said that it is one of the most profitable trading patterns with the proper use
of stop-loss orders. As you go through this chapter and learn this pattern,
pay special attention to risk.

BUTTERFLY PATTERN DESCRIPTION
The Butterfly pattern is best described as an extension pattern. It is also a
failed Gartley pattern where the D completion point completes above the
X. Remember that a Gartley pattern is considered a failed pattern if this
occurs, but with this failure a Butterfly pattern may be forming. (Refer to
Figure 6.2.) The extension of the AD swing and the CD leg can be thought

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

The Butterﬂy Pattern

August 31, 2007

12:42

Char Count=

71

Figure 6.1 Line drawings of the Butterﬂy buy and sell patterns showing two connecting triangles.

of as a stretched rubber band. It is at these points that the market becomes
overbought or oversold and a reversal can occur.
Even if a full reversal does not take place, the trader can still profit on
this pattern by exiting on retracements of the CD leg or the AD swing. You
will see an example of this in the “Trading the Butterfly Pattern” section

Figure 6.2 Google (GOOG) 60-minute chart showing a failed Gartley “222” pattern forming a Butterﬂy pattern.

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

72

12:42

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

of this chapter under “Trade Setup #2.” The pattern is formed by two right
triangles coming together at one point. It is this formation that gives the
pattern its appearance as a Butterfly. The completion points can be calculated by using Fibonacci ratios above 1.00, such as 1.272, 1.618, 2.00, and
2.618. Beyond 2.618 the pattern is considered negated and the trend most
likely will continue. In most cases the maximum risk is at the 1.618 level.
Because of the chance that any pattern can be a failed pattern and even
the Butterfly pattern can fail, we will note again here that this particular
pattern when failed can move very quickly against the trader’s position; if
the trader does not have the trading skills or discipline to use stops, it is
best to not trade this pattern until both of those elements are part of the
trader’s tool kit.

BUTTERFLY PATTERN STRUCTURE
The Butterfly pattern should be a very symmetrical pattern in its formation
and structure. As with the Gartley “222” pattern, the Butterfly pattern is
formed with four legs. The difference is that the last leg (the CD leg) of the
Butterfly pattern will extend beyond the X point and will move toward the
1.272 or 1.618 expansion of XA. (See Figure 6.3 for an example.) The BC leg
will also be an extension, but the completion point is generally determined
by the XA swing.
The AB leg of the pattern will usually be at the .618 or the .786 retracement levels. The pattern also is valid if this retracement is at the .382 or
.50. This retracement of the AB leg can go further than the .786, as is seen
in Figure 6.3, but the pattern will be negated if it goes beyond X. One clue
that a Butterfly pattern may be forming is if the first retracement, the AB,
goes to the .786 retracement level or further.
It is important to know what invalidates this pattern; here are five items
that would negate this pattern:
1. Absence of an AB=CD within the AD swing. This pattern must contain

an AB=CD.
2. An extension move beyond the 2.618 of XA. The 1.618 expansion is

generally the maximum risk.
3. B point above (for a sell pattern) or below the X point (for a buy pat-

tern).
4. C above or below the A point.
5. Failure of D to extend beyond X: D must extend beyond X to be a But-

terfly pattern.

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

12:42

The Butterﬂy Pattern

Char Count=

73

Figure 6.3 Soybeans daily chart showing an example of the structure of the Butterﬂy pattern.

It is not unusual to see smaller “ab=cd” patterns within one of the main
legs; for example, a small ab=cd may be seen within the larger AB=CD
formation of the AD swing in Figure 6.3.
Some of our favorite setups are those that contain multiple patterns in
several time frames completing in one price area. For more information,
see Chapter 8, “Retracement Entries and Multiple Time Frames.”

IMPORTANT CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
BUTTERFLY PATTERN
This pattern, of all the patterns in this book, can be the most rewarding
one if it is indeed a major turning point in a market. It is the ultimate contrarian’s trading pattern. The risk, however, can be great if the trader does
not take the time to study and learn how to properly assess and manage
this pattern. There are several characteristics that should be studied when
learning this pattern that will help the trader to identify acceptable risk-toreward setups and valid patterns. Refer back to Chapter 4, “The AB=CD
Pattern,” and review the “CD Leg Variations” and “Slope and Time Frames”

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

74

August 31, 2007

12:42

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

sections. That information also pertains to the AB=CD within the Butterfly
pattern.
Here are three points that are important characteristics of the Butterfly
pattern:
1. Thrust. How the move from the C point starts is important to watch

as it will give the trader information on whether the pattern may form
a Butterfly pattern rather than a Gartley pattern—that is, long bars or
gaps through the .618 or .786. Gaps should be watched closely by the
trader. They indicate an unknown or a change in sentiment and potentially signal changing market conditions. The thrust coming out of the
CD leg strongly suggest that the extension has a higher probability of
making a 1.618 new high versus a 1.272 new high.
2. Symmetry. Study the symmetry of the AB=CD; note the slope and angle of the AB leg and then the CD leg. If the CD leg is exhibiting a
steeper angle, that may be a clue that the CD leg will extend beyond
X and form a Butterfly pattern. The symmetry or slope of the AB leg
should be very close to that of the CD leg in order to keep the ideal
symmetry in the pattern. Note also the time bar relationship in these
legs; for instance, if the AB leg has taken eight bars to form, then the
CD leg should also take approximately eight bars to form, thus forming
an ideal Butterfly pattern.
3. Failure signs. Beware of price beyond the 1.618 expansion of XA.
Generally a move beyond the 1.618 will indicate a continuation of the
trend. If the technician will keep focused on these characteristics, it
will greatly reduce the potential for getting into trouble with the Butterfly pattern. Butterfly trades are not for the faint of heart, as they enter counter to the trend in markets when they appear the most bullish
and the most bearish.

PSYCHOLOGY OF THE BUTTERFLY PATTERN
We have discussed previously in Chapter 4, “The AB=CD Pattern,” and
Chapter 5, “The Gartley ‘222’ Pattern,” how these patterns are formed by
basic fear and greed. When there are more buyers, the price rises; when
there are more sellers, the price declines. Since the Butterfly pattern is an
extension pattern, is found for the most part at major tops and bottoms,
and often signals a major reversal point, then we can apply basic mass
crowd psychology and witness it at extremes. When this pattern is a major reversal turning point in a market, what you will witness is a market
turn and masses heading for the door at the same time. It is an extreme in
market emotions of fear and greed.

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 31, 2007

The Butterﬂy Pattern

12:42

Char Count=

75

At the tops, market participants start heading for the door trying to
sell. There is fear of losing money on wrong or early short positions, fear
of losing profits, profit taking on longs, or initiating new short positions.
At the bottoms, market participants start buying perceived bargain prices;
others are still heading for the door selling out losing long positions (this
has been called the puke point, the point at which traders or investors can
not hang on to a losing position one more cent); still others are taking profits on short positions. At this point, any new shorts will be forced to cover
losses as prices rise against them, adding more momentum. This point is
an extreme of fear of losing or missing out.
At these major turning points, one might notice an unusual amount of
press coverage on television and in magazines and newspapers, as well as
talk at social gatherings and even randomly on the street or in other public
places. All of this coverage or talk will be either very bullish at the top with
the Butterfly sell pattern or very bearish at the bottom with the Butterfly
buy pattern. The news at this point will be so overwhelmingly skewed in the
direction of the trend that it would be difficult to find anyone who would
admit to taking the other side of the public viewpoint and opinions. Anyone
using long-term moving averages would be nowhere near a decision on
taking a countertrend position as the Butterfly pattern nears completion.
Traders should remember that very few traders ever buy the exact high
or low of a stock or market and that the Butterfly pattern turns as the last
bull buys at the top or the last bear sells at the bottom.

TRADING THE BUTTERFLY PATTERN
The Butterfly pattern can provide instant gratification when the market
turns quickly at or near the completion point. However, it can also be one
of the fastest loss trades, because the trader is attempting to pick a high or
low spot in the market, and if it fails and the trend continues, the trade is
usually stopped out quickly. We have stressed several times the necessity
of using protective stop-loss orders, and it is especially important with this
pattern; this is not a pattern that traders would ever want to let go against
them beyond their trading plan and money management plan.
We give three trade examples here and several variations on managing
the trades with this pattern.

Trade Setup #1: Butterfly Buy Pattern
Market: Pfizer (PFE) Stock
Shares: 200

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

76

August 31, 2007

12:42

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

(See “Alternate Trade Management” for using a three-part scale-out
with the Butterfly pattern.)
This Butterfly buy pattern completes at the 1.272 and has a strong reversal from this point (see Figure 6.4). It is important to note that the gaps
and wide range bars are to the advantage of the trader going long on the
completion of this Butterfly pattern. This should be a signal that higher
prices are likely to come.
The entry point into this trade is at 20.30, with a stop placed below the
estimated 1.618 range of XA at 19.50. The stop-loss placement would be at
19.10 for a risk of $1.20 per share or $240 on 200 shares.
When trading any pattern, the risk in the trade must always be acceptable. If it is not, the trader must pass on the trade and find a setup that
is acceptable in terms of risk. When trading the Butterfly pattern, it is important to calculate where the 1.618 level is below the 1.272 and to determine whether placing the protective stop-loss order just above or below
this level will be an acceptable risk. If it is, then this is the logical place to
put the stop-loss order. If it is not, then the trader must make a decision to
either pass on the trade or possibly enter at or near the 1.618 completion if
the price gets there.

Figure 6.4 Pﬁzer (PFE) daily chart showing a Butterﬂy buy pattern completing
almost to the penny at the 1.272 retracement level. The gaps and wide range bars
in this case work to the trader’s advantage and should be a signal that higher prices
are coming.

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

The Butterﬂy Pattern

August 31, 2007

12:42

Char Count=

77

Another alternative is to use a dollar amount or percentage of capital
for the stop-loss with the knowledge that there may be another entry point
at or near that level and to be ready to reenter the trade if stopped out. Still
another alternative is to wait for a retracement entry or Gartley pattern to
enter the trade. Refer to Chapter 8 on retracement entries and Chapter 5
on the Gartley “222” pattern.
Risk-Free Trade The first exit on this trade is at the .618 level of the AD
swing at 21.70. (See Figure 6.5.) This initial risk in the trade was $1.20 per
share, and this exit reduces the risk to just above breakeven. After taking
the first exit, the stop-loss order is moved up to breakeven. The stop can
be trailed using either a dollar amount, percent of profit the trader feels is
the maximum amount to give back, or visual chart points such as the most
recent lows or gap areas. The method the trader chooses to trail the stop
should be known before entering the trade and should be part of the trade
plan.
The second exit in this trade is at the 1.272 extension of the AD swing at
23.25. Sometimes in trading you get lucky, and in this case the market gaps
up on the open, exceeding the second target, and would be filled around
the opening price at 25.15. This trade would have netted +$625 with an

Figure 6.5 Pﬁzer (PFE) daily chart showing Butterﬂy pattern proﬁt target exits
using the .618 retracement level and 1.272 extension.

c06

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

78

August 31, 2007

12:42

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

initial risk of $240. Figure 6.5 shows the retracement levels from the AD
swing and the first and second exits.
Alternate Trade Management The Butterfly pattern can be managed
several ways. The trader’s overall market knowledge and experience trading this pattern will determine what method can be used, or traders can
develop their own trade management style for this or any other pattern.
We know that when the Butterfly pattern is in full force on a reversal it
can be a very powerful move. Because of that, the trader may want to consider devising a trading plan to use a three-part scale-out rather than two
when trading the Butterfly pattern. Figure 6.6 shows a retracement from
the most recent swing high on the daily chart. An alternate trade management would allow for a first exit at an amount equal to the amount risked
on the trade, in this case $1.20. The entry is $20.30 and the first exit would
be planned at $21.50 with the initial stop-loss order moved to breakeven
at that exit. The initial stop remains the same; it does not change with a
three-part scale-out. Traders do, however, need to determine whether their
money management allows for trading an additional one-third shares. If it
does not, then they could divide the number of shares they would trade
into three or could stay with a two-part exit plan.
