
JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:27

Managing Risk

Printer: Courier Westford

253

if you are confident that you have the skills to achieve wealth, you are on
your way to becoming wealthy.

TRADING PSYCHOLOGY AND RISK
MANAGEMENT
There are very few laws for trading, but this is one of them: Improper risk
management leads to emotional trading problems. Win or lose, if you risk
too much on a trade, you will endure emotional problems. It is not only with
the losing trades that improper risk management rears its head. Improper
risk management—risking too much on a trade—leads to emotional issues,
even if the trade is successful. If too much risk is placed in a trade and it
ends up a winner, overconfidence, irrational exuberance, and sloppy trade
execution may be the result. If too much risk is placed in a trade that ends
up being a loser, any number of results may occur: trading rules may be ignored, psychological despair may result, and the management of the trade
will almost always be exceptionally poor. There is no way around this law
of trading.

Emotional Trading
Emotional issues are always related to your confidence in trading, the current trade in play, or your confidence in the trading system. Emotional issues will creep into your trading regardless of whether you like it. You think
that you keep your emotions out of your trading, but, for most traders, this
is not true. Most traders get extremely upset after a losing streak, or a losing trade, or missing out on a great trade opportunity. Under most circumstances traders have a very difficult time removing emotion from trading
decisions.
However, is it important to remove all emotions from your trading? Is
it a bad idea to trade unemotionally? After all, if it is impossible to remove
emotions from trading, perhaps you should embrace your emotions. The
standard opinion about emotional trading today, most gurus tell us, is that
emotional trading is destructive. This is not true. The only destructive trading is trading that is not according to your rules. So whether it is emotional
trading or logical trading, if you trade in a manner that is not consistent
with you rules, you are trading in a destructive matter.
Emotional trading is the result of improper risk management. When
the risk becomes too much, rational reaction to the market is impossible.
If you have ever had a trade in which you took a large position—too large

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

254

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

a position—and the trade went against you, you know what it is like to try
and think when your emotions are running wild.
The antidote to this is to apply proper risk management to your trades,
use a well-rehearsed set of trading rules, and apply these over and over
again in your trading.

Worst-Case Planning
Worst-case planning means planning for the maximum loss on each trade.
This way, the maximum loss cannot hurt you. Over time, by planning for
the same loss (your maximum loss, where your stop loss is placed), you
will become more efficient in executing your trades. This is the magic of
consistent risk management. If each trade has the same risk associated
with it, over time you will build up valuable experience with this risk level.
If you keep your risk the same, the worst-case scenario for each and
every trade is the same. If you walk outside barefoot on a hot day on the
asphalt, your feet may burn. However, if you walk outside every day when
it’s hot, the asphalt slowly becomes bearable. The same principle applies
to drug addicts; over time, drug addicts must take more and more of the
same drug to get the same high. This principle of tolerance also applies
to traders. It’s the tendency for trading execution to become more precise
over time when the same amount of money is at risk on every trade. By
risking the same percentage of your trading account on every trade, you
will become used to the amount of money at risk. You will become immune,
over time, to the equity swings in your account with each losing trade, or
each winning trade. What will happen, over time, is that you will begin
to focus on what is important—executing your trades, and you will not
concentrate on the money gained or lost on each trade.
TRADING TOLERANCE
Trading tolerance is the tendency for trading execution to become more precise
over time when the same amount of money is at risk on every trade.

Encourage Trading Tolerance
This is how you may encourage trading tolerance. First, calculate your
worst-case scenario. This should be the dollar loss if your stop loss is hit.
Second, add 20 percent to this amount. Third, use this figure when calculating the risk for your trades. You should assume this (percentage) risk for
all of your trades. Finally, use this formula to calculate your risk for each
trade. Before long, you will become accustomed to risking this amount. Be

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Managing Risk

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

255

prepared to lose this amount. Be prepared for these losing trades, and be
prepared for a sequence of losing trades.
Before long, the amount of money will not seem significant, and you
will begin to focus on trade execution. This is where the money is to be
made.

RISKY MONEY TRAPS
Why do most traders fail? Why is trading for consistent profits so difficult?
Traders are simply people who look to buy something when it is cheap,
and look to sell something when it is expensive. Traders get paid to be
bargain hunters and agile market participants. However, there are so many
people in the markets who find extreme difficulty attempting to extract
profits from the markets.
A close look at the reasons that traders fail—the risky money
traps—and how to overcome each of these traps will prepare you for entry into the markets. Remember to consider the other market participants.
Many of these people are well capitalized, and they have intelligent people
behind the construction and execution of their trading strategies. If you
find it difficult to overcome your own issues, if you fall into one of the risky
money traps before you have entered the markets, you are at a significant
disadvantage.

Your Account Is Unprotected
The number-one trading skill you need to succeed as a trader is the ability
to protect your trading account. This is paramount to all other goals, protecting your account means survival. Traders who are unable to make the
jump from novice trader to professional trader fail to recognize the importance of playing defense. Professional traders are very good at playing defense. Watch the “Tale of Three Trades” video at www.fxjake.com/book for
a real market example of how this concept may be applied to live trades. If
you can get into the habit of playing defense, you can become a successful
professional trader. Learn to recognize the importance of playing defence.
Without this you have no chance.
Traders who are unable to protect their money have difficulties with
beliefs. These traders may believe they are unworthy of large amounts of
money. They may also confuse their belief with the facts. Beliefs may become facts, but traders deal with odds when it matters most.
I may believe the USD/CAD is headed down because the market prints
a bearish kangaroo tail on the daily chart. I may decide to risk money based

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

256

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

on my belief that the USD/CAD will start trading lower soon. However, this
does not make my belief fact. I must wait for the market to tell me whether
my belief is going to become market fact.
If the market instead begins to trade higher and higher and higher,
I come to a crossroads. Perhaps I decide on one of the following three
courses of action: (1) I may decide to dump the trade because my belief
seems to be incorrect. (2) I may decide to move my stop loss higher, to
give the trade a little more breathing room because I know the market will
eventually fall. (3) I may even decide to walk away from my computer, to
let the market decide whether my belief is correct, knowing that either my
stop loss or my profit target will be hit. Two of these reactions (1 and 3)
are acceptable means of dealing with my belief, based on the current market activity. The other reaction, 2, is detrimental to my trading account. I
have decided to rewrite my trading plan (initial stop loss moved, the trade
now has more risk than originally planned for), and I have decided that my
belief is market fact, even when the market provides information to the
contrary.
Think about that. The market has told me that a fair price is higher, not
lower. I think the market is headed lower. This is my belief based on the
daily bearish kangaroo tail. However, the market trades higher. I ignore the
market information, the market freely provides me with information about
the USD/CAD (the fair market price is higher), and I decide to assume the
opposite is fact. The market goes up and I decide the market is wrong.
Who do you think will win this battle of wits? Will I win or will the
market win?
Remember to keep your beliefs in perspective. There are no beliefs
worth more than your entire trading account. You work hard for your
money, so defend it. Throw away your beliefs when the market tells you
they are incorrect. Keep your money instead.
There are many other beliefs that stand in the way of trading success.
Perhaps you are familiar with these risky ideas, such as the I-will-make-itbig-once-I-get-a-big-account idea.

You Need More Screen Time
At times it may seem as though you do not have the time to trade. Among
the daily commitments of work, family, and hobbies, it can be difficult to
find time to trade. Those missed opportunities can be awful. Simply watching the market march on without you can be more difficult to deal with
than the standard-issue losing trade.
Maybe more time in front of the computer will mean more profits?
Maybe you think that trading shorter-timeframe charts might multiply your
trading opportunities and accelerate your equity curve? Perhaps this is

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Managing Risk

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

257

true; if you are able to trade the shorter timeframes you may find more
opportunities, if you are able to schedule more screen time, more time in
front of your charts.
Please beware that “I need more screen time to trade” is not an excuse for avoiding back-testing. All of your systems should be vetted with
back-testing results, forward-testing results, and the smaller live-trading
account.
Most traders will use this excuse to create a case for leaving a job,
and this thinking is a dangerous place to be. Many traders are not quite
ready to start trading full-time, but they think that by leaving their full-time
permanent jobs, the added screen time will push them over the top and
make it easier for them to achieve trading success. Sadly, this is often not
true.

Your Job Is Holding You Back
Related to the I-need-more-screen-time trap is the I-gotta-dump-my-job
trap. Traders fantasize that more time, specifically more screen time, will
help them to achieve consistent profits. A little more focus will bring the
results they are looking for in their trading.
This seems logical, but it rarely works. Putting yourself in a situation in
which you need to make money consistently from your trading account, before you have learned how to consistently make money from your trading,
is a bad idea. You would not expect a stuttering game show contestant to be
able to rattle off quiz answers with the pressure of the clock ticking down,
would you? This is why it makes sense for you to take the proper steps,
starting with back testing, moving to forward testing, then on to small account trading, before you ever begin trading for a living, trading your large
trading account.
Unrealistic expectations may also affect your trading. It may be tempting to backward engineer your trading profits. Perhaps you decide to trade
the daily charts, and you would like to make $15,000 per month from your
trading. You decide that you need to make 500 pips each month and trade
for $30 per pip. $30 per pip × 500 pips = $15,000; simple math provides you
with your trading goal.
What if your trading account contains only $35,000? You may have
to be very careful. If you are trading at $30 per pip and your stop loss is
100 pips away from your entry price (certainly possible with a daily chart
trade), you are risking $3,000 on your trade, that is 8.5 percent of your trading account at risk. Three losing trades such as this one and you would be
down over 30 percent on your trading account. This is why many traders
have a difficult time making the jump from part-time to full-time trader,

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

258

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

your nice-to-have-profits turn into must-have profits; the focus is on the
money and not the trading results.
Thinking about trading in terms of money is precisely why many parttime traders want to leave their full-time jobs. It is also the reason many
part-time traders find consistently profitable trading so elusive once they
leave their jobs. Remember to concentrate on your trading, execute each
trade as best you can. The money will come if you concentrate on becoming
a better trader.

You Need a Bigger Account
Some traders insist on holding to the idea that only larger trading accounts
will allow for success. The idea is that the giant trading account in the sky
will bring some sort of nirvana. Unfortunately, for many of the reasons
listed earlier in this chapter (namely, attitudes toward money and wealthy
people), the opposite is actually true.
The great majority of traders around the world do much better trading
when placing trades in very small accounts. Once traders move up to larger
accounts, in most circumstances these traders end up thinking too much
about the money and too little about managing trades according to their
system rules.
It is possible to do exceptionally well, even if you start off with a very
small trading account. The focus should be on trading your system. Your
effort should be placed on executing and managing your trades as closely
as possible to the rules of your system. If you move away from trading your
system and instead focus on the dollar amounts, you will likely see your
performance suffer. If you have issues with money and wealthy people,
you are sure to see your performance suffer.
The idea that a large trading account will help you achieve your financial goals may be comforting, but until you have been able to successfully
manage your smaller trading account, and until you deal with your beliefs
about wealthy people and money, trading a large trading account will probably be little more than frustrating.
Large is, of course, a relative word. For some traders a large account
would be an account of $10,000, and for other traders an account size of
$150,000 is small. Think about this: the idea that a few traders may see an
account and think that it is very small and other traders may see the same
account and think that it is a very large account. The fact that traders can
view the same account very differently is more evidence for the idea that
traders’ attitudes and beliefs toward money will drastically effect how well
traders make money and sound trading decisions.
So if you find yourself thinking, “I need a bigger trading account so I
will really be able to make some serious money,” make sure that you are

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Managing Risk

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

259

making serious money with your smaller accounts first. A larger account
may simply make trading more difficult if you are not prepared for the
challenge.

Thinking That Trading Is Easy
Maybe you think that consistently profitable trading is easy. Perhaps you
have scrolled back on some charts and identified the wonderful opportunities staring back at you. These opportunities may come in the form of kangaroo tails and big shadows at market turning points, those places where
the market offers a clue about what will happen next. You may become
confident that successful trading can be yours. Maybe you begin to think
that profitable trading can be easy.
Be careful of this overconfidence that often appears as the successfultrading-is-easy idea. Trading successfully can be simple, but that does not
make it easy. Trading successfully will mean putting in the time back testing your system, developing a trading plan to cover all of the what-if scenarios you can come up with, and creating a method for overcoming the
doldrums of the inevitable drawdowns. Planning is critical for you to succeed in the long term, but it is not the only ingredient for success.
To succeed you will need a healthy dose of determination. History is
littered with stories of famous people who overcame adversity, people who
accepted success because failure was not an option. Determination is the
common thread among these stories. Walt Disney took three years (double the anticipated 18 months) to produce a movie that went over budget
by 400 percent. All the while, people surrounding him questioned whether
his full-length cartoon movie would have any mass appeal. The movie was
an overwhelming success—you may have heard of Snow White. Another
man had an altogether different life experience. His mother died when he
was nine. His friend lent him money to run a business, and a year later he
lost the business and went bankrupt. He ran for public office on five occasions and lost each time. The love of his life died before he could marry
her. He suffered a nervous breakdown. His second son died at a young
age. You may know him as Abraham Lincoln, the sixteenth president of
the United States. Another famous person began life as a child in a poor
household. She was the result of a one-night stand. Her mother worked
as a maid. Her father was in the military when she was born. As a young
child, she lived with her grandmother in poverty, often wearing dresses
made of potato sacks. She was sexually abused by her cousin, her uncle,
and a family friend from the age of nine. She ran away from home, became
pregnant, and her child died soon after his birth. Despite this dubious start
in life, Oprah Winfrey became a millionaire at age 32 and is considered the
richest woman in entertainment. She has acted in movies, co-authored five

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c16

260

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:27

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

books, and inspires millions who watch her television shows and read her
magazines.
Each of these people share one thing in common: determination. You
simply must have determination to succeed in trading (or any other endeavor). All successful people share determination. Your determination
will guide you to trading expertise in the form of all the hours spent in
front of charts, back-testing. Your determination will yield resourcefulness
when it is needed most, during drawdowns and when your confidence is
shaken. Your determination will help aid you to see your success before it
appears. Determination is your ride to success. Let it carry you to where
you want to be.
You know what to do now. The question remains: Are you determined
to succeed as a naked trader?

P1: OTA/XYZ
JWBT642-BM

P2: ABC
JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:32

Printer: Courier Westford

About the
Trading
Software and
Video Tutorial

I

n order to improve your trading, a special members’ area is available on
the web to supplement the concepts laid out in this book. At this special
link you’ll find interactive tutorials and a FREE software tool, including:

r Support and Resistance Interactive Video Tutorial: Gain confidence when trading with Support/Resistance by implementing my proprietary rules as laid out in this tutorial.
r Big Shadow Interactive Tutorial: Master the step-by-step rules to
trading my favorite and simplest yet most successful strategy by watching this interactive tutorial.
r Support and Resistance Software: Trade side by side with me, using
this cutting-edge software that sends my S&R lines right to your trading
charts, in real time.
Go to www.fxjake.com/book to create an account and access the
FREE Naked Trading members’ area today!

261

P1: OTA/XYZ
JWBT642-BM

P2: ABC
JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

262

23:32

Printer: Courier Westford

P1: OTA
JWBT642-babout

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

23:35

Printer: Courier Westford

About the Authors

Alex Nekritin
Alex Nekritin has been a professional trader for more than 10 years and is
the founder and president of TradersChoiceFX.com. TradersChoiceFX is a
forex-introducing brokerage firm that is able to enhance its clients’ forex
trading success by matching them up with the best fit forex dealer for them.
Alex’s specialties include risk management and system development.
He has a degree with a concentration in investment banking and derivative
instruments from Babson College in Massachusetts.
Walter Peters, PhD
Before becoming a professional trader, Walter Peters worked as a clown,
magician, online market researcher, and jury consultant. Dr. Peters has a
PhD in experimental psychology and an extensive background in statistics.
As a naked forex trader, Dr. Peters enjoys trading simple trading systems. He has a keen interest in trading psychology and how trading beliefs
yield trading results. He trades with forex traders around the world on his
website www.fxjake.com a place for naked traders. When he is not trading,
Dr. Peters enjoys spending time in the ocean and talking about trading.

263

P1: OTA
JWBT642-babout

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

264

23:35

Printer: Courier Westford

P1: OTA
JWBT642-IND

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 12, 2012

13:2

Printer: Courier Westford

Index

Action (cycle of doom phase), 204–205
Australian Dollar (AUD)
four-hour wammie trade, triggering, 121f
line chart, price action clarity, 69f
one-hour trendy kangaroo
stop loss, 189f
trade, survival, 192f
reversals, 68f
RSI buy signal, 13f
RSI sell signal, 12f
trade, stop loss placement, 197f
trendy kangaroo trade, 191f
weekly chart, kangaroo tail (printing),
143f
zones, pip distance difference, 61f
Australian Dollar (AUD) daily chart
bearish big belt, 153f
bearish big shadow, 99f
stop loss placement, 196f
three-bar exit, 195f
trade, stop loss placement, 197f
bearish big shadow, stop loss placement,
194f
bearish candlestick, 103f
bearish kangaroo tail, printing, 185f
bearish trendy kangaroo tail,
characteristics, 171f
candlestick, 195f
fake-out, 82f
kangaroo tail, 132f
trendy kangaroo
appearance, 167f
candlestick, consolidation range, 172f
uptrend, market pause, 165f
wammie trade, 124f
Australian Dollar (AUD) four-hour chart
bearish kangaroo tail, 141f
bullish kangaroo tail, 146f
profit target placement, 183f
