
of this general destructive force could have an overall impact on
the outcome of the snowball fight.
Let’s assume that our snowballs only come at the wall one at
a time. After 100 snowballs have hit the wall, the condition of your
wall will depend upon the relative volume of white and black snow
hitting the wall. In our model, you can measure the effectiveness of
the snowball fight by the condition of the wall. If the wall is growing, it means that the total volume of white snow hitting the wall is
greater than the total volume of black snow hitting the wall. And
the growing wall is like growing profits. You’ll feel more secure as
it gets bigger. If the wall is shrinking, then it means that relatively
more black, than white, snow is hitting the wall. Eventually, your
wall will lose all its protection and you will no longer be able to
play the game.
The relative volume of white versus black snow hitting the
wall is essentially the snow fight equivalent of expectancy. If relatively more black snow arrives, then the wall will shrink. If relatively more white snow arrives and if the destructive factor of the
snowballs is not too great, then the wall will grow. The relative volume of white versus black snow depends both upon the percentage
of white and black snowballs and upon the relative size of the two
kinds of snowballs. However, the bottom line is the net amount of
white or black snow impacting upon the wall.
In the real world of investing or trading, expectancy tells you
the net profit or loss that you can expect over a large number of sin@e-unit3 trades. If the total amount of losing trades is greater than
the total amount of winning trades, then you are a net loser and
have a negative expectancy. If the total amount of winning trades is
greater than the total amount of losing trades, then you are a net
winner and have a positive expectancy.
Notice that in the expectancy model you could have 99 losing
trades, each costing you a dollar. Thus, you would be down $99.
However, if you had one winning trade of $500, then you would
have a net payoff of $401 ($500 less $99)-despite the fact that only
one of your trades was a winner and 99 percent of your trades were
losers. Let’s also say that your cost of trading is $1 per trade, or $100
per 100 trades. Using this cost factor in the prior example, you
would only have a net profit of $301. Are you beginning to under-

stand why expectancy is made up of all of the first three variables?
And just as the effect on the wall was the result of the net volume
of black versus white snow, the effect on your equity is the result of
the net profits minus the net losses.
Now let’s continue our snow fight metaphor just a little further. Variable 4 is essentially the frequency at which snowballs are
thrown. Let’s say that the cumulative effect of 100 snowballs (white
and black) is to add about 10 cubic inches of snow to the wall,
Obviously, if a snowball is thrown once each minute, the impact
will be 60 times greater than if a snowball is thrown once each hour.
Thus, the rate at which snowballs are thrown will have a major
impact on the status of the wall.”
The frequency of your trades will have a similar effect in the
rate of change of your equity If you make $500 net after 100 trades,
then the amount of time it takes you to make those 100 trades will
determine the growth of your account. If it takes you a year to make
100 trades, then your account will only grow by $500 per year. If you
make 100 trades each day, then your account will grow by 510,000
per month (assuming 20 trading days per month), or $120,000 per
year. Which method would you want to trade? One that makes $500
per year or one that makes $120,000 per year? The answer is obvious,
but the methods could be exactly alike (i.e., in that both have the
same expectancy). The only difference is the frequency of trading.
On the basis of our discussion of the snow fight metaphor,
which of the six variables do you think are most important now?
Why? What is the basis of your conclusion? I hope that at this time
you can see how important variables 1 through 4 are. These are the
basis for expectancy, and they determine the effectiveness of your
trading system.
Variables 5 and 6-the size of the wall and the position-sizing
variables-are the most important factors in your overall profitability You should already understand how important the size of
the wall (variable 5) is in playing the game. If the wall is too small,
then a few black snowballs could destroy it. It must be big for protection.
Let’s look at variable 6, the variable that tells you how much.
Up to this point we’ve just assumed that our snowballs arrive at the
wall one at a time. But imagine the impact of having snowballs

arriving in large numbers at the same time. First, imagine the
impact on the wall of one black snowball the size of a golf ball hitting the wall. It would make a single, golf-ball-sized dent in the
wall. Now, imagine 10,000 of them hitting the wall simultaneously.
It totally changes the impact of your thinking, doesn’t it?
The metaphor of 10,000 snowballs simply illustrates the
importance of position sizing-that part of your system that tells
you how much. We’ve been talking about one unit of size up to
now-one snowball or one share of stock. But 10,000 black snowballs the size of golf balls could totally demolish your wall unless
the wall is massive.
Similarly, you might have a trading method that only loses a
dollar per share of stock when it loses. However, when you purchase your stock in units of 10,000, your loss suddenly become
enormous. It’s now $lO,OOO! Again, notice the importance of position sizing. If your equity is a million dollars, then a $10,000 loss is
only 1 percent. But if your equity is just $20,000, then a $10,000 loss
is 50 percent.
Now that you have the perspective of seeing all the key variables involved in the success of your system (or your snowball
fight), we can focus in on the details of expectancy.

LOOKING AT EXPECTANCY
UNDER A MAGNIFYING GLASS
Expectancy, as defined in this book, tells you how much you can
expect to make on the average (over a number of trades) per dollar
risked. So how do you find out the expectancy of a game or a system? Suppose that you are going to play a game drawing marbles.
The bag from which you will draw your marbles contains 60 blue
marbles and 40 black marbles. According to the rules of the game,
when you draw a blue marble, you win the amount you risked, and
when you draw a black marble, you lose the amount you risked.
Each time a marble is drawn, it is replaced. Notice that you now
have a definition for both variables 1 and 2 for this game. What is
the expectancy of this game? How much can you expect to win, on
the average, per dollar risked?
In this case, expectancy is defined by Formula 6-l:

138

PART

2

Conceptualization of Your system

Formula 61: Expectancy = (PW * AW) less (PL * AL)

TABLE61

where PW is the probability of a winning trade and FL is the probability of a losing trade AW refers to the average gain (win) and AL
refers to the average loss.
In the game, I’W = 0.6 and PL = 0.4. The average amount
won or lost in this game is $1-you win or lose exactly what you
risk. So for each dollar risked, you either win a dollar or lose a dollar Therefore, in our game:

Number and Color of Marbles

Expectancy = (0.6 * 1) less (0.4 * 1) = 0.6 - 0.4 = 0.2
In this particular game, you could expect to make 20 cents for every
dollar you risk on the average over many trials. This means that
you’d get your dollar back plus make 20 cents on the average over
many trials.
This certainly doesn’t mean that you’ll win every time.
Indeed, in this particular example, you’ll only win about 60 percent
of the time. In fact, over 1,000 trials you could easily have 10 losses
in a row. However, over that same 1,000 trials, you’ll make on the
average 20 cents per dollar risked. Thus, if you risked $2 on each
one, you’d probably make $400 over the 1,000 trials.
What would happen if our bag of marbles were more complex, like the average system investing in the market? Let’s say you
have a number of different possibilities of winning and losing. For
example, let’s say you have a bag of 100 marbles of a number of different colors. And let’s give each color a different payoff according
to the matrix given in Table 6-l.
Once again, we’ll assume that a marble is replaced in the bag
once it is drawn out. Notice that the chances of winning are only 36
percent in this game. Would you want to play it? Why or why not?
What’s the expectancy of this game? How much will you make per
dollar risked on the average playing this game? Is it better or worse
than the first game?
Fortunately, the normal formula for expectancy is additive.
Thus, Formula 6-l can be transformed as follows into Formula 6-Z:
Formula 6-2: Expectancy = Xci = 1 ton) (PW, * AW,)
les$ = , ton#‘L,

* ALJ

Win or Lose

PBYOtl

SO black marbles

,:I

10 blue marbles

2,

4 red marbles

3:1

20 green marbles

Win

I:1

10 white mad+s

Win

51

3 yellow marbles

Win

IO:,

3 clear marbles

Win

*0:1
A

.-

The summation sien indicates that the formula is additive. In other
words, you can add all the positive expectancies (i.e., the winning
marbles) and then all the negative expectancies (i.e., the losing marbles). You can then subtract the total negative expectancy from the
total positive expectancy to get the expectancy of the game.
Let’s go through the process step by step. First, let’s look at
(PW*AW) for all the winning marbles and add them up.
”

1. For green, PW = 0.2 and AW = 1; therefore (PW * AW) =

0.2 * 1 = 0.2.
2. For white, PW = 0.1 and AW = 5; therefore (PW * AW) =
0.1 * 5 = 0.5.
3. For yellow, PW = 0.03 and AW = 10; therefore (PW * AW)
= 0.03 * 10 = 0.3.
4. For clear, PW = 0.03 and AW = 20; therefore (PW * AW) =

0.03 * 20 = 0.6.
Now, let’s add them all up: 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 = 1.6. This gives
US the total positive expectancy in the game.
Second, let’s look at (PL * AW)-the negative expectancy-for
all the losing marbles and add them up.
1. For black, PL = 0.5 and AL = 1; therefore (PL * AL) = 0.5 *
1 = 0.5.

CHAPTER 6

140

2. For blue, PL = 0.1 and AL = 2; therefore (PL * AL) = 0.1 *
2 = 0.2.
3. For red, PL = 0.04 and AL = 3; therefore (FL *AL) = 0.04 x
3 = 0.12.
Once again, let’s add them all up: 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.12 = 0.82. This is
the total negative expectancy of the game.
Finally, the total expectancy of the game is the difference in the
two sums. We find the difference by subtracting the total negative
expectancy (0.82) from the total positive expectancy (1.6). The resulting answer is 0.78. Thus, over many marble draws in this game, you
could expect to make 78 cents per dollar risked. Notice that this
game is nearly four times more profitable than the first game.
Just with the two examples, you should have learned a very
important point. Most people look for trading games that have a
high probability of winning. Yet in the first game, you have a 60
percent chance of winning, but only a 20 cent expectancy. In the second game, you only have a 36 percent chance of winning, but your
expectancy is 78 cents. Thus, game 2 is almost four times as good as
game l-assuming the same opportunity factor. Notice that the key
factor in your system is not the probability of winning. Instead, the
key factor in determining the value of your system is its expectancy
per dollar risked.
It’s important to put in a word of caution here. Variables 5 and
6 are critically important to your profitability. You can only realize
your expectancy over the long term if you size your positions
wisely according to how much equity you have. Position sizing is
that part of your system that tells you how much to risk per position. It’s a critical portion of your overall system, and we’ll discuss
it extensively in Chapter 12.
But let’s look at an example just to see how position sizing and
expectancy go together. Suppose you are playing game l-the 60
percent marble game. You have a $100 total and you start playing
the game. Let’s say you start the game by risking your entire $100
on the first draw. You have a 40 percent chance of losing and you
happen to draw a black marble. That can happen, and when it does,
you will have lost your entire stake. In other words, your position
size (i.e., bet size) was too large relative to your equity to be safe.
You cannot play any more because you don’t have any more

Understanding

Expectancy

and

Other

Keys

to

Trading

Success

141

money. Therefore, you cannot realize the 20.cent-per-dollar-risked
expectancy over the long run playing the game.
Let’s look at another example. Suppose you decide to risk 50
percent of your stake on each draw, not 100 percent. Thus, you start
out with a $50 bet. You draw a black marble and you lose. Now
your stake is down to 550. Your next bet is 50 percent of what’s left,
or $25. Again, you lose. You now have $25 left. Your next bet is
$12.50 and you lose again. You are now down to $12.50. Three
losses in a row are quite possible (i.e., about one chance in five with
three consecutive events) in a system that only wins 60 percent of
the time. You must now make $87.50 just to break even-that’s an
increase of 700 percent. You’re not likely to make that much at all.
Thus, because of improper position sizing, you’ve again failed to
obtain your expectancy over the long run.
Remember that your position size
on a given trade must be low enough so
that you can realize the long-term expectancy of your system over many
trades.
At this point, you might say that
you control your risks by your exits, not
your position size. However, remember
the snow fight metaphor. Risk is essentially variable 2, the size of the wins
compared with the size of the losses.
That’s what you control by your exits. Position size is essentially
another variable (variable 6) on top of the relative size of the gains
and losses. It tells you position size relative to your equity.
Opportunity Factor and Expectancy
There’s one other variable involved in evaluating your system
that’s just as important as its expectancy That factor is opportunity,
our fourth variable. How often can you play the game? For example, suppose you could play either game 1 or 2.
However, you are only allowed to draw one marble every 5
minutes playing game 2, whereas you are allowed to draw one
marble every minute playing game 1. Under those conditions,
which game would you rather play?

142

CHAPTER 6

Let’s look at how the opportunity factor changes the value of
the games. Suppose you could play the game for an hour. Since you
could draw a marble every minute in game 1, you’d have an opportunity factor of 60, or 60 chances to play the game. Since you could
draw a marble every 5 minutes in game 2, you’d have an opportunity factor of 12-or 12 chances to play the game.
Remember that your expectancy is the amount you would
win per dollar risked over a large number of opportunities. Thus,
the more times you can play a game, the more likely you are to realize the expectancy of the game.
In order to evaluate the relative merits of each game, you must
multiply the number of times you can play the game by the
expectancy. When comparing the two games over an hour, assuming that you only risk $1 each time, you’ll get the following results:

trades, where the average winning trade is $275, and 10 percent losing trades, where the average losing trade is $2,700:

Game 1: Expectancy of 20 cents times 60 opportunities = $12.00
Game 2: Expectancy of 78 cents times 12. opportunities = $9.36
Thus, given the opportunity restraints that we arbitrarily
imposed, game 1 is actually better than game 2 assuming you only
risked $1 each time. And when you evaluate expectancy in the market, you must give similar consideration to the amount of opportunity your system presents you. For example, a 50 cent expectancy
system (after transaction costs) that gives you three trades per
week is much better than a 50 cent expectancy system (again after
transaction costs) that gives you one trade each month.
Prediction5
Let’s pause for a moment to discuss a common trap for most
traders and investors-the prediction trap. Thinking about the concept of expectation a bit will allow one to more clearly see why so
many people have been tripped up over the years making predictions of what a market or stock will do in the future. They all base
their prediction algorithms on history-sometimes even assuming
that it will repeat exactly. However, an extremely successful prediction can even result in losing all of your capital. How? You can
have a method that is 90 percent accurate and still lose all of your
money trading it.
Consider the following “system” that has~90 percent winning

Understanding Expectancy and Other Keys to Trading Success

143

Expectation = (0.9 * 275) ~ (0.1 * 2,700) = ~22.5
The expectation is negative. This is a system through which you get
to be right 90 percent of the time and you eventunlly lose n/l your money
trading it. There is a strong psychological bias to be right about what
we do with our investments. In most people, this bias greatly overrides the desire to make a profit overall in our approach, or it
inhibits us from reaching our true profit potential. Most people
have overwhelming needs to control the market. As a result, they
end up with the market controlling them.
It should be clear to you by now that it is the combination of
the payoff and the probability that allows you to determine
whether a method is viable or not. You also have to consider variable 4 (how often you get to play the game) to determine the relative worth of a system or method.
EXPECTANCY AND R MULTIPLES
So far we’ve been dealing with bags of marbles. In each bag of marbles, we know what the population of marbles is, what the probability of each marble being drawn is, and what its payoff is. None
of those things are true when we deal with trades that our system
generates in the market.
When you play the market, you don’t know the exact probability of winning or losing. Ir. addition, you don’t know exactly
how much you are going to win or lose. However, you can do historical testing and get some idea what to expect. You also can get
large samples of data from real-time trading or investing. You can
use either of those samples to get a general idea of the expectancy
of your system. This effort entails investigating individual trades in
an attempt to understand the reward-to-risk ratio of each trade and
its frequency of occurrence. After thoroughly performing this exercise, you will have a far greater understanding of the true nature of
your methodology.
If you are purely a discretionary, nonsystematic trader, you
can review your past trading results to develop insight into how

144

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

you are either making or losing money Following a similar procedure to what we will present here, you should look at each trade on
a one-lot or one-share basis. Knowing what your risk was going into
the trade (your initial exit point) and the closed profit and loss, you
can then calculate your reward-to-risk ratio for each trade.
R Multiples”
I refer to a trade’s reward-to-risk ratio as an “R multiple”-R simply being a symbol for the initial risk. To calculate a trade’s R multiple, simply take the number of points captured at the exit of the
position and divide by the initial risk. You can just as easily use dollar values per contract or per loo-share lot. For example, if you
risked $500 and made $1,500, you would have an R multiple of 3.
An example is shown in Figure 6-1.7 The entry was on 8/4/97 at
2,511. The system uses a 3-times the average true range (ATR, see
definitions) stop which was 104 points. Thus, the initial exit is at

Figure 6-l Multiples in a trade

CHAPTER 6 Understanding Expectancy and Other Keys tu Trading Success

145

2,511-104, or 2,407. The system eventually exits on 9/29/97 at
3,069 for a profit of 558 points. Since the initial risk (1 R) was 104
points and the final profit was 558 points, the profit was a 5.37 R
multiple. Do this for all trades, winning and losing. The losing
trades will simply be a negative R multiple.
The many individual R multiples that compose a historical
simulation or previous trading results are the components of your
expectation. The nature of these R multiples will totally determine
your method’s overall expectation. It will help you to define the
appropriate money management algorithm to apply to the trading
method to meet your overall objectives. By the nature of the R multiple I am referring to the size, frequency, and order of the individual R multiples.
For a moment, think of your system’s trades solely as R multiples. Then pretend that each trade is simply a marble being drawn
from a bag as in our previous examples. Once you draw the marble, you determine its R multiple and then replace it into the bag.
In playing this game you want to develop a position-sizing
algorithm that is supportive in exploiting the expectation. In addition, you want it to be linked to the initial risk for each trade and
the ongoing account equity. For starters, consider a percent risk
algorithm where you decide to continuously risk a constant percentage of current account equity This sort of position-sizing algorithm basically means that a 1-R risk becomes the same, no matter
when it is taken or in what stock or market it is taken. This is
because your position size is always a constant percentage (i.e., 1
percent) of your equity no matter how big the initial risk (R) is. See
Chapter 12.
In addition, you want to consider the potential distributim (the
order) of the marbles being drawn. The system’s winning percentage is inversely proportional to the length of strings of losing
trades. Therefore, you need a position-sizing algorithm that will
allow you to withstand potential substantial strings of losing trades
while being able to exploit the big winning trades.
Many traders have failed to trade a sound system because (1)
they were not prepared for the distribution of trades that the markets presented to them through their method and/or (2) they were
overleveraged or undercapitalized. You can estimate the maximum

PART 2

146

R-YYltiple

Marble

Game

Conceptuualization

of Your System

R-Multiples

MarMe Game, Betting with Expectation
Equity curve bj risk/bade

Trade Number

Figure 6-Z Multiples in a marble game

number of losing trades in a row for 1,000 trials given the winning
percentage of the system, but you really never know the “true”
value. Even flipping a fair coin can yield some lengthy streaks of
heads in a row, for example.
Figure 6-2 shows the distribution of trades for one 60.trade
sample of a marble game such as the one described in Table 6-1.
Note the lengthy losing streak between trades 46 and 55. It’s about
this time that many people playing the game develop one of two
opinions: (1) They decide it’s time for a winning marble to be drawn
or (2) they decide to bet against the expectation at some future
point in the game so they profit from streaks like these. If the losing
streak happens early in the game, opinion 2 is common. If the losing streak happens late in the game, then opinion 1 is common. The
psychology of some participants forces them to bet bigger the
deeper they go into a losing streak since they “know” a winner is
just around the corner. I’m sure you can guess the typical results of
such a game.
Figure 6-3 shows the equity curves for the above game betting
a constant 1.0 percent, 1.5 percent, and 2.0 percent of current equity
for each trade (and staying conipletely calm and detached the
