
Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

outstanding performance record. The results were dramatic and were
accomplished almost overnight. In 1982, Security Pacific’s Fund G was
ranked number one in the country.

Penny-Wise and Performance-Foolish
Some corporations put too much emphasis on saving management fees, particularly when they have giant funds to be managed. It’s usually an actuary
who convinces them of the money their pension fund can save by shaving
the fee by 1⁄8 of 1%.
If corporations have billions of dollars to be managed, it makes sense for
them to increase their fees and incentives so they can hire the best money
managers in the business. The better managers will earn the extra 0.25% or
0.50% ten or twenty times over. The last thing you ever want is cheap advice
in the stock market. If you were going to have open-heart surgery, would
you look for the doctor who’ll charge the absolute least?

How to Select and Measure Money Managers Properly
Here are a few tips for corporations and organizations that want to farm out
their funds to several money managers.
In general, portfolio managers should be given a complete cycle before
their performance is reviewed for the purpose of deciding whether to
change managers. Give them from the peak of one bull market period to
the peak of another cycle or from the trough of one cycle to the trough of
another. This will usually cover a three- or four-year period and will allow
all managers to go through both an up market and a down market. At the
end of this period, the bottom 20% or so of the managers in total overall
performance should be replaced. Thereafter, every year or two, the bottom
5% or 10% of managers over the most recent three- or four-year period
should be dropped. This avoids hasty decisions based on disappointing performance over a few short quarters or a year. Given time, this process will
lead to an outstanding group of proven money managers. Because this is a
sound, longer-term, self-correcting mechanism, it should stay that way.
Then it won’t be necessary to pay as many consultants to recommend
changes in personnel.
In the selection of managers, consideration should be given to their latest
three- to five-year performance statistics as well as to a more recent period.
Diversification among the types, styles, and locations of managers should be
considered. The search should be widespread and not necessarily limited to
one consultant’s narrow, captive universe or stable of managers.

421

422 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
The corporate or pension fund client with money to be managed also has
to be careful not to interfere at critical junctures—deciding, for example,
when a greater proportion of the portfolios should be either in stocks or in
bonds or that undervalued stocks should be emphasized.
Cities and counties that have funds to invest must be very careful, because
few of their personnel are highly experienced in the investment field. These
inexperienced people can easily be talked into investing in bonds that are promoted as being safe but that later can cause enormous losses. This happened,
of course, in 2008 with AAA subprime loans in real estate mortgage packages.
Clients can also interfere by directing where commissions should go or
insisting that executions be given to whoever does them most cheaply. The
latter, while a well-meaning attempt to save money, commonly results in
forcing upon a money manager someone who provides either poorer executions or no research input of real value. This handicap costs the portfolio
money, as it pays ½ point or more (or its decimal equivalents) on trades that
are executed by less experienced people.

Is an Index Fund the Way to Go?
Finally, a word about the indexing of equity portfolios. There’s an assumption that a pension fund’s objective is to match the performance of some
general market index. This theoretically could be a risky conclusion.
If we were to go through another 1929 market collapse, and the general
market indexes were to decline 90% in value, no intelligent trustee could
possibly believe his fund’s objective should be to lose 90% of its value. No
one will be happy just because the fund achieved its target of matching the
index’s disastrous performance.
I saw a small version of this happen in 1974 when I was called in to evaluate a fund that had lost exactly 50% of its assets because it was managed by
an organization that specialized in and promoted index funds. People were
very upset, but they were too embarrassed to state their conclusion publicly.
Why should anyone expect the majority of money managers to be any
better at their jobs than the majority of musicians, ballplayers, doctors,
teachers, artists, or carpenters are at theirs? The fact of the matter is that the
typical person in a given field may be slightly subpar. The answer in money
management is the same as in other occupations: to get above-average
results, you have to go out of your way to find the minority of managers who
can beat the market indexes fairly consistently.
Some people will say this is impossible, but that’s simply not true. To say
that all information is already known, that stocks can’t be selected in a way
that outperforms market averages, is nonsense.

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

Value Line’s rating system since 1965 is ample evidence that stocks can be
selected in a way that materially outperforms the market. Our own top
Datagraph-rated stocks have dramatically outperformed the market.
During a sabbatical at the University of Chicago, Professor Marc Reinganum of the University of Iowa, and later of Southern Methodist University, conducted an independent research study titled “Selecting Superior
Securities.” For his research, he picked nine variables comparable to those
discussed in this book and achieved a 1984–1985 result that was 36.7%
greater than the S&P 500. He’s not alone. We’ve now received more than
1,000 testimonials from investors who also have materially outperformed
the market indexes.
Those who say the stock market is a random walk are sadly misinformed.
There are a number of systems and services that can and do outperform the
market. Unfortunately, there are also too many poorly based opinions, too
many faulty interpretations, and too many destructive emotions that come
into play. Sometimes judgments are just bad or shallow. Sometimes there are
too many complex variables. Sometimes events change too fast to keep up
with, and finally, there are just too many fundamental and technical research
reports recommending mediocre stocks on their way down. That’s why sell
recommendations are few and far between when each bear market begins.
In the future, the indexing of a small part of social security investments
may eventually be possible if rules can be created to keep the government
away from influencing any of the investment decisions. After all, the rather
poor existing social security investments do not even keep up with inflation
over any long-term period of 20 years.
You can see that even the pros need to evaluate what they’re doing and
alter their preconceived methods if they aren’t working. We all make mistakes, but the answer is to learn what’s working once you see what’s not. History will give you solid examples that should guide you in your investing.
Only by careful study and research—and by not accepting conventional wisdom—have we uncovered these valuable findings. Use them and profit. You
can make it happen. Study the 100 examples in Chapter 1 carefully so you
will better know what to look for in the future.

423

20
• CHAPTE R •

Important Rules and
Guidelines to Remember

1. Don’t buy cheap stocks. Buy mainly Nasdaq stocks selling at between

$15 and $300 a share and NYSE stocks selling from $20 to $300 a share.
The majority of super stocks emerge from bases of $30 and up. Avoid
the junk pile below $10.
2. Buy growth stocks where each of the last three years’ annual earnings

per share have been up at least 25% and the next year’s consensus earnings estimate is up 25% or more. Many growth stocks will also have
annual cash flow of 20% or more above EPS.
3. Make sure the last two or three quarters’ earnings per share are up a

huge amount. Look for a minimum of 25% to 30%. In bull markets,
look for EPS up 40% to 500%. (The higher, the better.)
4. See that each of the last three quarters’ sales are accelerating in their

percentage increases or the last quarter’s sales are up at least 25%.
5. Buy stocks with a return on equity of 17% or more. The great compa-

nies will show a return on equity of 25% to 50%.
6. Make sure the recent quarterly after-tax profit margins are improving

and are near the stock’s peak after-tax margins.
7. Most stocks should be in the top six or so broad industry sectors in

IBD’s daily “New Price Highs” list or in the top 10% of IBD’s “197
Industry Sub-Group Rankings.”
8. Don’t buy a stock because of its dividend or its P/E ratio. Buy it because

it’s the number one company in its particular field in terms of earnings
and sales growth, ROE, profit margins, and product superiority.

424

Important Rules and Guidelines to Remember

9. Buy stocks with a Relative Price Strength rating of 85 or higher in

Investor’s Business Daily’s SmartSelect ratings.
10. Any size capitalization will do, but the majority of your stocks should trade

an average daily volume of several hundred thousand shares or more.
11. Learn to read charts and recognize proper bases and exact buy points.

Use daily and weekly charts to materially improve your stock selection
and timing. Long-term monthly charts can help, too. Buy stocks when
they initially break out of sound and proper bases with volume for the
day 50% or more above normal trading volume.
12. Carefully average up, not down, and cut every single loss when it is 7%

or 8% below your purchase price, with absolutely no exceptions.
13. Write out your sell rules that determine when you will sell and nail

down a worthwhile profit in your stock.
14. Make sure that at least one or two better-performing mutual funds have

bought your stock in the last reporting period. You also want your stocks
to have increasing institutional sponsorship over the last several quarters.
15. The company should have an excellent, new, superior product or ser-

vice that is selling well. It should also have a big market for its product
and the opportunity for repeat sales.
16. The general market should be in an uptrend and be favoring either small-

or big-cap companies. (If you don’t know how to interpret the general
market indexes, read IBD’s “The Big Picture” column every day.)
17. Don’t mess around with options, stocks that trade in foreign markets,

bonds, preferred stocks, or commodities. It doesn’t pay to be a “jack-of-alltrades” or to overdiversify or engage in too much asset allocation. Either
avoid options outright or restrict them to 5% or 10% of your portfolio.
18. The stock should have ownership by top management.
19. Look mainly for “new America” entrepreneurial companies (those with

a new issue within the last eight or ten years) rather than too many laggard, “old America” companies.
20. Forget your pride and your ego; the market doesn’t care what you think

or want. No matter how smart you think you are, the market is always
smarter. A high IQ and a master’s degree are no guarantee of market
success. Your ego could cost you a lot of money. Don’t argue with the
market. Never try to prove you’re right and the market is wrong.
21. Read Investor’s Corner and “The Big Picture” in IBD daily. Learn how

to recognize general market tops and bottoms. Read up on any company you own or plan to buy; learn its story.

425

426 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
22. Watch for companies that have recently announced they are buying

back 5% to 10% or more of their common stock. Find out if there is
new management in the company and where it came from.
23. Don’t try to buy a stock at the bottom or on the way down in price, and

don’t average down. (If you buy the stock at $40, don’t buy more if it
goes down to $35 or $30.)

Key Reasons People Miss Buying Big Winning Stocks
1. Disbelief, fear, and lack of knowledge. Most big winners are newer

companies (with IPOs in the last eight or ten years). Everyone knows
Sears and General Motors, but most people are simply unaware of or
unfamiliar with the hundreds of new names that come into the market
every year. The new America names are the growth engine of America,
creating innovative new products and services plus most of the new
technology. (A chart service is one easy way to at least be aware of the
basics of price, volume, sales, and earnings trends of all these compelling younger companies.)
2. P/E bias. Contrary to conventional wisdom, the best stocks rarely sell at

low P/Es. Just as the best ballplayers make the highest salaries, the better companies sell at better (higher) P/Es. Using P/Es as a selection criterion will prevent you from buying most of the best stocks.
3. Not understanding that the real leaders start their big moves by selling

near or at new price highs, not near new lows or off a good amount
from their highs. Investors like to buy stocks that look cheap because
the stocks are lower than they were a few months ago, so they buy
stocks on the way down. They think they are getting bargains. They
should be buying stocks that are on the way up, just making new price
highs as they break out of a proper base or price consolidation area.
4. Selling too soon, either because they get shaken out or because they are

too quick to take a profit, and psychologically having a hard time buying back a stock at a higher price if necessary. They also sell too late, letting a small loss turn into a devastating one by not cutting all their losses
at 8%.

One Final Thought
You can definitely become financially independent once you learn to save
and invest properly. My parting advice: have courage, be positive, and don’t
ever give up. Great opportunities occur every year in America. Get yourself

Important Rules and Guidelines to Remember

prepared, study, learn, and go for them. What you’ll find is that little acorns
can grow into giant oaks, and that with persistence and hard work, anything
is possible. You can do it, and your own determination to succeed is the most
important element.

Success in a free country is simple.
Get a job, get an education, and learn to save and invest wisely.
Anyone can do it. You can do it.

427

This page intentionally left blank

Success Stories

Over the course of 25 years and counting, Investor’s Business Daily has heard

from countless readers who have experienced life-changing financial success because of the CAN SLIM and IBD method. The following is a small
sample of the thousands of success stories we’ve received over the years
from people of all ages and experience levels. It’s a powerful testament to
the fact that with a little hard work, patience, and dedication, anyone can
learn to follow this system to improve their results.

Market Timing
“IBD is a proven and no-nonsense approach to investing. This system has
helped me find the big winners in a market rally, and more importantly, it
has helped me avoid the big losses in a market downturn. This, in turn, has
allowed me to retire in my early fifties, spend more time with my family,
work on my hobbies and interests, and generally lead a very happy life.”
Michael A., Florida, Retired
“I shared IBD’s ‘Big Picture’ recommendation to trim equity holdings and
raise cash in December 2007 with my “smart friends” (attorney and financial
services manager). I reiterated the fact that IBD had had the same market
call in January 2000. While my friends and colleagues were chasing financials (see falling knife), my wife and I were able to buy quality CAN SLIM
stocks at proper breakpoints. Suffice it to say that my wife and I have had a

429

430 Success Stories
great year being in cash for most of 2008. Thanks, IBD! Rest assured, you
may have two more subscribers on the way!!!”
Ken C., California, Financial Advisor
“I’ve been a follower of IBD for around 17 years. A serious follower for the
last four years. In 2007, I achieved a return of +56% in my trading account,
and I broke even in 2008 by staying out of the market for most of the year.
The system has never failed me. The paper’s content, format, and teachings
have only gotten better over the years.”
Eric M., Illinois, Engineer
“I have been a reader of IBD since 2005 and have profited immensely from
it. Also, I have attended more than five IBD workshops from level 1 to level
3, and each has made me a better disciplined investor. The CAN SLIM system, a system that works great whether in good times or bad times.”
Rajesh S., Texas, Electrical Engineer
“I’d like to take a moment to thank IBD for the ‘Big Picture’ and the ‘Market Outlook.’ I’m a federal employee with a 401(k) plan called the Thrift
Savings Program. We are limited to five basic funds. The government or ‘G’
Fund is invested in government securities and is our safe haven. The ‘C’
Fund is our S&P 500 stock fund, the ‘F’ Fund is our commercial bond fund,
the ‘S’ Fund is our small-cap fund, and finally the ‘I’ fund is our international
fund. By using the ‘Big Picture’ and ‘Market Outlook,’ I was able to follow
the general market trend and move all of my retirement funds out of the
market and into a cash position in the ‘G’ fund. While most of my coworkers
suffered huge losses in the market and the market in general lost over 35%,
my total return for 2008 was up 4%. I simply check the ‘Big Picture’ every
day and move my money either into or out of the market using ‘Market Outlook’ information. Again, thanks for your hard work.”
Brian D., Florida, Supervisory Special Agent

No Opinions, Only Facts
“In describing IBD, I would say it is without doubt one of the best sources
of information for investors that is available for the money. You don’t get any
‘Wall Street’ spin on the markets from IBD. It gives you the straight stuff. By
that, I mean IBD tells you the truth about the markets, economy, political
events, etc., that affect the markets, whether positive or negative. That is
huge in this climate because there is a lot of ‘Financial Nonsense’ being fed
to investors by too many unreliable sources these days. IBD tells investors
the truth. You can count on it!”
Steve C., Texas, Ophthalmologist

Success Stories

“IBD and Investors.com let you focus on what the market is actually doing
at any given moment, allowing you not to have to listen to all the noisy fortune tellers on the tube.”
Norm D., California, Individual Investor
“IBD is a tremendous time-saver. I make it a part of my daily process to read
IBD every business day, even if I do not read anything else. It is a great way
to quickly get a feel for the general market direction, continue to remain
educated, and learn about the secrets of success that keeps me motivated.
Where else can you get that in about 15 minutes a day? It is an extraordinary
publication!”
George M., California, Executive
“To me, Investor’s Business Daily is an outstanding market analysis resource
because it is based on objective empirical research that cuts through pundit
opinions and personal emotions in buying and selling stock. Its greatest
strength is its direct, clear-thinking presentation of market-relevant news
that leaves often confused approaches of other publications behind.”
Allen A., Connecticut, Ph.D.

CAN SLIM
“Since I started using CAN SLIM and IBD, and now Investors.com, I was
able to make 359% on my original investment! IBD has so many features
that help me find the great stocks. I’m grateful for all the work you do to
help investors.”
Barbara J., California, Individual Investor
“Just studying IBD and CAN SLIM shows that if you really apply yourself
properly, you can succeed. You don’t have to be at the mercy of so-called
experts who really aren’t. I don’t like the intimidation tactics or the pressure
tactics of the money managers. There are no guarantees in investing, but
with IBD and CAN SLIM, the odds are on your side.”
Carol T., Massachusetts, Anesthesiologist
“I have been trading stocks full time since 2003, thanks largely to William
O’Neil’s How to Make Money in Stocks and IBD. I have reread the book
many times and am rereading it again. It is full of different-color marks, as
each time I read it I find something new and useful. I must say, How to Make
Money in Stocks, the IBD subscription, and the online tools are essential to
successful stock trading. Just like people grab their family photo albums
from the house on fire, if I were to pick just one thing to assure my continued success in stock trading, it would be William O’Neil’s How to Make
Money in Stocks.”
Slav F., California, Stock Trader

431

432 Success Stories
Proven Rules
“Investors Business Daily is a source for useful and accurate information
about how the market works. I have found that following the buy and sell
rules works. If you follow those seemingly simple but at times hard to follow
rules, you will make money.”
Herb M., Michigan, Individual Investor
“It was only when I started properly applying the IBD sell rules that I realized
the power to not only cut losses short, but stay away when conditions are not
good for making money. A day without IBD is a day of missed opportunity.”
Dennis H., Florida, Retired Broker
“I have done well in the market since 2003 by following IBD’s investment
rules. The only time I haven’t done well is when I violated those rules
because I got too big for my britches! When my friends ask me for market
advice, I just recommend a subscription to IBD and tell them to study the
paper every day, learn IBD’s rules for successful trading and stick to them,
and learn to read charts. Thanks to all at IBD and William O’Neil for publishing a great newspaper, the only paper I read now.”
Edward K., Arizona, Retired Doctor
“William O’Neil taught me the two rules that form the cornerstone of my
investing plan: (1) keep your losses small, and (2) average up, never down.
Those two simple rules have kept me out of a lot of trouble. When I have
strayed from them, it inevitably cost me money. Thank you, Bill, for all you
have done for the average investor.”
Peter M., California, Executive
