
SPINNING TOPS. These are neutral lines. They occur when the
distance between the high and the low, and the distance between the
open and the close, are relatively small.

DOJI. This line implies indecision because the security opened and
closed at the same price. These lines can appear in several different
patterns.

DOUBLE DOJI. This implies a forceful move will follow a
breakout from the current indecision.

HARAMI (“pregnant” in English). This pattern indicates a decrease
in momentum. It occurs when a line with a small body falls within
the area of a larger body. In this example, a bullish line with a long
body is followed by a weak bearish line and implies a decrease in
the bullish momentum.

55

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

56

CANDLESTICK FORMATIONS
The market can only move in three directions: up, down, or sideways. When
it moves, the candlesticks provide a visual sign that monitors the strength
or weakness of the market in a certain direction. However, there are two
basic types of candlesticks:
1.
2.

Decision candlesticks
Indecision candlesticks

Decision candlesticks are full-bodied bullish or bearish candles with relatively small wicks on either side. They communicate to the trader that
either the bulls or the bears are in control. The indecision candlestick
formation is exactly the opposite, with small bodies and, in some cases, no
bodies at all—just a line where the open and the close were at the same
price with large wicks on either side or on both sides (see Figure 4-5).
As the market moves, it creates visual waves, and the candlesticks form
different patterns. Movements are caused by investors entering and exiting
the market. When there are more buyers than sellers, the market begins to
rally; when there are more sellers than buyers, the market begins to dip, or
decline; and when there are equal numbers of buyers and sellers, the market
goes sideways. These patterns communicate the strength or weakness of the
continued move. The terms rally and some dipping retracement are used for
a market increase, and the terms dip and some rally retracement are used in
FIGURE 4-5

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

57

a dip or fall in market prices. As the market moves, it waves, and the candlesticks form bullish and bearish reversal patterns. These patterns are the
sign language of the market and the buy and sell signals for the traders. The
patterns communicate when it is time to get in and when it is time to get out.

BULLISH CANDLESTICK FORMATIONS OR BUY SIGNALS
Even though there are many candlestick formations and patterns, there are
three major bullish and three major bearish patterns that offer great buy and
sell signals.
The three major bullish candlestick patterns are
•

A morning star

•

A bullish engulfing pattern

•

A tweezer bottom

These formations will appear in an uptrend as well as in a downtrend, but
they are of great value and offer great financial return if spotted and traded
in an uptrend. These patterns can become invaluable whenever they appear
at the end of a downtrend in a smaller time frame, which many times is
nothing more than the end of a retracement in a larger time frame. It is
imperative to note that as the market moves sideways in a 20- to 40-pip
trading range, the market may form all kinds of bullish and bearish candlestick patterns, which should be ignored. It is imperative not to trade these
candlestick formations in small consolidated or sideways movement.
The charts being used in this book have black and white candles— the
black candles are bearish and the white are bullish.

THE MORNING STAR (BUY SIGNAL)
Figure 4-6A clearly shows the formation of the morning star. What is
important to note is that in the formation of morning stars, they start out
with a bearish decision candle, followed by one, two, three, or even
four indecision candles before the decision bullish candle appears. In
Figure 4-6B, a morning star appears at the bottom of the chart, signifying
the end of the recent dip. A morning star forms when you have a large bearish decision candle followed by one or more indecision candles, which are
followed by a bullish decision candle that closes beyond the 60 percent
mark, or beyond the top half of the beginning bearish decision candle. It
indicates the market is U-turning. If the last bullish candle closes below the

58

FIGURE 4-6
(A)

(B)

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

59

halfway point of the first bearish candle of the formation, it is a sign of continued bearish sentiment.

Investor Psychology Behind the Morning Star
The bears are losing control and investors are no longer selling when you
spot a morning star. More buyers have come into the market, which creates
an equal number of buyers and sellers. In the end, more buyers step in and
take control of the market. Bears are placed in hibernation, and bulls come
out of their corrals in herds. The final bullish candle of the formation sends
ripples of greed throughout the trading community and a major rally takes
place, especially when accompanied by significant trading volume.

THE BULLISH ENGULFING PATTERN (BUY SIGNAL)
A bullish engulfing candlestick formation often signifies the end of a down
move, or a reversal. It can also be the turning point or the end of the retracement in an uptrend (see Figure 4-7A). An ideal bullish engulfing candle is
formed when the candle opens lower than the close of the previous bearish
decision candle, engulfing the previous two or three bearish candles. This
is a strong sign of a U-turn. The bulls are clearly taking control, as seen in
Figure 4-7B.
FIGURE 4-7
(A)

60

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

FIGURE 4-7 Continued

Investor Psychology Behind the Bullish Engulfing Pattern
The wind has been taken out of the bears’ sails, and the bulls have arisen
with increased stamina. Traders with short positions make a quick dash to
cover their exposure, and their rush to exit their positions adds power to the
creation of the pattern. The volume on the uptake component shows that the
majority of traders have changed camp from bearish to bullish within the
duration of one period.

TWEEZER BOTTOM BULLISH FORMATION (BUY SIGNAL)
Tweezer bottoms form when bears lose control. Buyers step in and create
an environment of equal buyers and equal sellers, which forms two or more
indecision candles. Figure 4-8A shows the formations.
When the market has been falling and a clear decision has been made
by the bulls to take over, tweezer bottoms are formed. The market continues to move down, and bearish candles are formed. All of a sudden, an
indecision candle appears, which means more bulls have started buying.
We now have equal buyers and sellers. A tweezer bottom formation starts
with a bearish decision candle, followed by perhaps one, two, three, even

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

FIGURE 4-8
(A)

(B)

61

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

62

four indecision candles, as seen in Figure 4-8A. When bears attempt to
take prices lower and bulls step in and buy more than bears, a long wick on
the south side of a small-bodied candle forms. A second attempt is made by
the bears to take prices lower, with the same results, leaving another indecision candle with a long wick on the south side of the small body of the
indecision candle, next to the last one. The lows of the two candles, as displayed by the wicks, are usually at the same price or within a couple of pips
difference, which now creates a new level of support. The tweezer bottoms
scream out, “This is the end of this down move and the market is now getting ready to rally. Anyone wanting to make a profit in this next rally needs
to start buying right now!” Why? Because higher prices are likely to follow
the formation of tweezer bottoms, as you see in Figure 4-8B.

Invester Psychology Behind the Tweezer Bottoms
The bears have created lower prices, which have been tested, and new buyers have entered the market. As traders note more bullish participation, a
rally is implied. The bears were unable to acquire the interest of more sellers and were not strong enough to hold prices down. Several attempts for
lower prices failed, as evidenced by the long wicks on the south side of the
small-bodied candles. The tweezer bottoms are a sign of selling exhaustion.
It is important to note that the tweezer bottoms do not need to be sideby-side; they can be several candles apart, as long as the lows of the wicks
are close to each other, with only a difference of a few pips. Such a formation will create a level of support.

BEARISH CANDLESTICK FORMATION OR SELL SIGNALS
The three major bearish candlestick patterns are
•

An evening star

•

A bearish engulfing pattern

•

A tweezer top

These formations will appear in a downtrend as well as in an uptrend, but they
are of great value and offer great financial return if spotted and traded in a
downtrend. These patterns can become invaluable whenever they appear at the
end of an uptrend in a smaller time frame, which many times is nothing more
than the end of a retracement in a larger time frame. Once again, it is imperative to note that as the market moves sideways in a 20- to 40-pip trading range,

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

63

the market may form all kinds of bullish and bearish candlestick
patterns, which should be ignored. It is imperative that you remember not
to trade these candlesticks formations in small consolidated or sideways
movement.

THE EVENING STAR (SELL SIGNAL)
Figure 4-9A shows what an evening star looks like. What is important to
note is that it starts out with a bullish decision candle, followed by perhaps
one, two, three, even four indecision candles before the decision bearish
candle appears.
In Figure 4-9B, an evening star appears at the top of the chart, signifying the end of the recent rally. An evening star forms when you have a large
bullish decision candle, followed by one or more indecision candles, which
are followed by a bearish decision candle that closes beyond the 60 percent
mark, or beyond the bottom half of the beginning bullish decision candle.
It signifies the market is U-turning. If the last bearish candle closes above
the halfway point of the first bullish candle of the formation, it is a sign of
continued bullish sentiment.

Investor Psychology Behind the Evening Star
In Figure 4-9B, the bulls start out rallying like a rocket going to the moon,
driving prices higher. Initially, it seems nothing can stop them. These initial
candles reinforce the bullish sentiment. All of a sudden, a spinning top
appears—a sign of indecision—in the form of a small indecision candle. It
is quickly followed by a bearish decision candle and the session quickly
U-turns. The bulls lose control and investors are no longer buying. More
sellers come into the market, which creates the dip in prices. Bulls run for
cover and begin liquidating their bullish positions, which adds to the
bearish momentum. In the end, more sellers step in and take control of the
market. Bulls are corralled and bears come out of hibernation. The final
bearish candle of the formation sends ripples of fear throughout the trading
community and a major sell-off takes place, especially when accompanied
by significant trading volume.

THE BEARISH ENGULFING PATTERN (SELL SIGNAL)
A bearish engulfing candlestick often signifies the end of an up move, or a
reversal. It can also be the turning point or end of the retracement in a
downtrend, as seen in Figure 4-10B. As prices continue to rally and the
charts form small decision bullish candles, all of a sudden, a very large

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

64

FIGURE 4-9
(A)

Ideal

Realistic

Copyright 2005 by Market Traders Institute, Inc.

(B)

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

65

FIGURE 4-10
(A)

Bearish Engulfing Candle
Is a bearish candlestick formation that engulfs the previous bullish candle or candles after
an upswing price move. The opening price of the bearish engulfing candle must be higher
than the close of the previous bullish candle and the closing price of the bearish engulfing
candle must be lower than the open of the previous bullish candle.

66

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

decision bearish candle appears and literally engulfs the previous one to
three bullish candles (see Figure 4-10A). The prototypical bearish engulfing candle occurs when the open of the bearish engulfing candle opens
higher than the close of the previous bullish decision candles and engulfs
several previous bullish candles. This is a strong sign of a U-turn when the
bears are taking control.

Investor Psychology Behind the Bearish Engulfing Pattern
On an emotional level, a devastating blow has been swiftly delivered to the
bulls when an engulfing bearish candle appears. Those feeling optimistic
and buoyant about the upward market direction have been proverbially
kicked in the teeth. Traders with long positions make a quick dash to cover
their exposure, and their rush to exit their positions adds power to the
creation of the bearish engulfing pattern. Within the duration of one period,
the majority of traders have changed camp from a bullish perspective to a
bearish orientation.

TWEEZER TOP FORMATION (SELL SIGNAL)
Tweezer tops form when bulls lose control. Sellers step in and balance out
the numbers of buyers, which forms two or more indecision candles (see
Figure 4-11A).
In Figure 4-11B, the market has been rallying, but a clear decision has
been made by the bears to take over, observed via the formation of tweezer
tops. As the market was moving up, bullish candles were forming. Then all
of a sudden, an indecision candle appears, which means more bears have
stepped in selling. There are now equal buyers and sellers. A tweezer top
formation starts out with a bullish decision candle, followed by perhaps
one, two, three, or even four indecision candles, as seen in Figure 4-11A. A
tweezer top appears when the bulls attempt to take prices higher and bears
step in and sell more than the bulls, creating a long wick on the north side
of a small-bodied candle. A second attempt is made by the bulls to take
prices higher, with the same results, leaving another indecision candle with
a long wick, on the north side of the small body of the indecision candle
next to the last one. The highs of the two candles, as displayed by the wicks,
are usually at the same price or within a couple of pips difference, which
now creates a new level of resistance. The tweezer tops scream out, “This
is the end of this uptrend move and the market is now getting ready to dip.
Anyone wanting to make a profit in this next dip needs to start selling right
now!” Why? Because lower prices are likely to follow the formation of this
pattern, as shown in Figure 4-11B.

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

67

FIGURE 4-11
(A)

Ideal

Realistic
Copyright 2005 by Market Traders Institute, Inc.

(B)

68

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

Investor Psychology Behind the Tweezer Tops
Bulls have made prices higher via their rally, however, bears, or more sellers,
have entered the market. Indecision candles have formed next to each other
and, in this case, three in a row, as seen in Figure 4-11B. With such resistance,
the market collapses. With increased bearish participation, bears enter the
market charging, and the result will be a dip. Shortly after the dip, the bulls
try one last time to see if they can attract any more buying interest. The failed
test by the bulls sends out the alarms, “Buyers are not strong enough to hold
prices up—everyone sell!” The bulls are exhausted, and the bears take control. It is important to note that the failed attempt of the bulls to create higher
prices formed the tweezer tops, although they do not need to be side by side.

TRADING CANDLESTICK PATTERNS
Learning how to identify and trade candlestick formations can be
extremely useful in identifying potential coming patterns. However,
although these patterns offer great trading signals, as seen in Figure 4-12,
FIGURE 4-12 Examples of Candlesticks Formations Daily EUR/USD Chart

CHAPTER 4

TRADING JAPANESE CANDLESTICKS

69

you should not trade these candlesticks patterns on their merit alone. Your
common sense is an excellent guide as well.
For example, your common sense should tell you that in a downtrend,
only trade bearish candlestick formations, not bullish. Why? Because you
are trading in the direction of the trend where the market strength is. You
have a greater probability of the market moving in your direction after
entry versus fighting against the trend. Obviously, you would do the opposite in an uptrend. When you trade in the direction of the trend, you will
always have the market movement on your side, pushing the market in the
direction of the current trend.
In trading any candlestick formation, you must wait until the last candle
closes before you enter the market because the market may not necessarily
react immediately after the candlestick formation has formed. Keep in mind
that as long as you have your stop-loss orders in place, you are protected. The
market will move on its own timetable—not yours. You have no control of the
future movement of the market. No one knows where the next pip will go.
As long as the candles are above the outer moving uptrend line, you
should enter buying bullish candlestick formations and exit selling bearish
candlestick formations; the opposite applies in a downtrend. When the
candles are below the outer moving trend line, enter selling bearish candlestick formations and exit buying bullish candlestick formations, as shown
in Figure 4-12.
Trading is a game of probabilities and to put the probability of success
in your favor, it is always helpful to compile more than one piece of evidence that the market will potentially U-turn and move in your direction at
the price level you enter. In other words, success is increased if you have
more than one educated reason to enter the market. When you have more
than one good reason to enter a trade, that is what is called creating a convergence. This is, in essence, nothing more than building a case as to why
the market is going to turn at that location.
Why is it that all of a sudden, at one number, the market creates a
candlestick formation and changes direction or U-turns? It is almost as if
there was a conspiracy taking place among a group of traders. We all know
that is impossible, because there is no Forex building or pit filled with
Forex traders who could manipulate prices. My sense is that nature must
stay in balance, and nature takes whatever course it must to remain in balance. As human beings, we are part of nature and because we are the ones
trading in the market, it is our buying and selling that make the movement
in this market. The market is part of nature and will take whatever course it
must to remain in balance, as you will see in Chapter 9.

70

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

CONCLUSION
I don’t consider myself a religious man, but I am a spiritual man. I believe
there is a greater power, perhaps a force of nature, orchestrating everything
and everyone’s outcome in this world. Nature can provide signs on our path
to success of which I know most people never think about it. However,
those individuals who try to understand it and tap into the potential it holds
are the people who will benefit most and live fulfilling and wonderful lives.
Conversely, those who just exist, living on automatic, never thinking about
it, slowly become the victims of nature’s balance because their focus is on
survival.
I thought about all the trading opportunities I had missed over the
years, due to the fact that I was not educated or ready to read the signs of
success the market provided, like the evening stars and morning stars. If
learning to become a successful trader is something you really want to
achieve, you will need to prepare yourself to read the signs of the market.
It is there you will find success.

C

H

A

5
P

T

E

R

THE FINANCIAL
GAME OF
SUPPORT AND
RESISTANCE
NEVER THOUGHT IN MY wildest dreams that trading in the financial

I

markets was going to be a game, but it is. It is a game played on a
daily basis by two teams, or two types of investors on opposite sides
of a trade. The bulls want the market to go up. The bears want the
market to go down. The two sides are in constant, unrelenting battle, fighting for control of the trading territory. Some make millions while
others keep hoping the market will turn in their favor as they continue to
root for their team—the bulls or the bears.
It sounds crazy when you hear that a trillion-dollar financial market
works this way, but it does. Like any game in our lives, there are objectives,
rules, and penalties. Each side is trying to get ahead by scoring points,
following the rules of the game. You must obey the rules if you are planning
to succeed in trading. If you break them, you are more than penalized—
you fail.

71
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

72

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

On one of my trips to Australia, I bought a book titled Fake: My Life as
a Rogue Trader by David Bullen. It is a story told by one of the former chief
traders in the Forex department of the National Australia Bank about the
bank’s $360 million foreign currency scandal. It is a fascinating book that
relates how, at one point, the president of the bank had not placed the proper
controls over what his Forex traders were doing and describes the calamity
that resulted. Because of the lack of rules or oversight, a rogue group of
Forex traders began to take huge financial positions in various currencies.
As the market started to move against them, they began to make their own
rules to try and protect the bank’s equity. In time, they started adding to their
losing positions in hopes that they could cost average down (which is the
term used in a trading strategy where additional positions are taken in the
same direction at lower prices from the original entry, in an attempt to
average out your buying price). In the 1990’s many stock and mutual fund
managers used the same strategy and unfortunately the currencies kept moving in the wrong direction, and the traders kept breaking all their own rules,
losing millions of dollars from clients’ account with every movement.
Like any group of kids that find themselves in major trouble, the traders
agreed to hide their misdeeds. However, as is usually the case with wrongdoing, one eventually will become so guilt ridden that the individual has to
spill the beans, and this situation is no different. After finding themselves in
trading positions that had created unrealized losses close to $360 million,
one trader couldn’t stand it any longer and admitted what they had done.
Of course, ASIC (Australian Securities and Investment Commission,
the regulatory body for the Australian government) stepped in and
demanded the bank liquidate all its losing positions immediately to the tune
of well over $360 million in losses. At the beginning of the investigation, it
was determined that no real crime was committed by the traders—they were
just irresponsible. The shareholders of the bank immediately demanded that
the bank president be fired because of his lack of control over the bank. As
the investigation continued, many believed the only real crime committed
was that of ASIC, which demanded the bank liquidate its positions. This was
clearly unfortunate for the bank, because soon after all positions were liquidated and losses realized, all the currencies took off in the opposite direction. If the four rogue traders had maintained their silence and just held onto
those positions for one more month, they would have recovered from all
their unrealized losses and probably would have made millions for the bank.
This would have turned the bank president into a hero instead of a fired
zero! The reality of the market and the amazing part of this story is that rule
breakers are just as necessary as rule makers, and in the end the disciplined
trader who abides by the rules makes a profit.
