Negative Attributes
Perhaps the biggest deficiency of the case study was the failure to consider complex rules. Complex rules result from combining and condensing, in some fashion, the
information contained in a multiplicity of simple rules. This is a severe defect for several reasons. First, few TA practitioners, subjective or objective, restrict themselves to decisions based on one rule. In this sense, the
case study did not replicate what subjective or objective analysts actually
do. However, as commented on later in this chapter, subjective analysts
are severely constrained in their ability to properly interpret the information pattern embodied in a multiple rule configuration.
Second, complex rules should produce superior performance on difficult prediction problems, such as financial markets. A nonlinear combination of simple rules allows the complex rule to be more informative than
the summed information contained in its individual constituents. This allows the rule to comply with Ashby's Law of Requisite Variety,5 which stipulates that a problem and its solution must have similar degrees of
complexity. In the context of prediction, this in1plies that a model (rule)
intended to predict the behavior of a complex system (e.g., a financial
market) must also be complex. The general superiority of complex rules
even of a linear form, was demonstrated in an analysis G of 39,832 rules,
both simple and complex. This rule set was tested on four stock market
indexes: Dow Jones, S&P 500, NASDAQ, and Russell 2000 over the period
1990 through 2002. Of the entire rule set, 3,180 or 8 percent were complex
rules, but of the 229 rules that generated statistically significant profits,
188, or 82 percent, were complex rules. This study took account of the
data-nUning bias by using WRC to compute significance levels. Incidentally, the study showed that none of the rules produced statistically significant gains on either the Dow Jones Industrials or the S&P 500 Index.
The case study was restricted to simple rules to keep its scope manageable. However, I did so in the belief that at least a few of the 6,402 rules
would prove significant. Clearly, I was overconfident.
Complex Rules Were Not Considel'cd.

Also in the interest
of keeping the case study manageable, the rule set was restricted to one
type of binary rule; long/short reversal. As discussed in Chapter 1, this restriction can distort the TA concept a rule is intended to express. This is
an acknowledged limitation of binary rules in general and of long/short reversal rules in particular. The requirement that a rule always hold a marOnly Long/Short Rcvel'sal Rules Considcred.

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

451

ket position, which is true of reversal rules, rests on the unlikely assumption that the market is in a perpetual state of inefficiency and continually
presents profit opportunities. In contrast, rules that are more selective in
identifying when market exposure is warranted are consistent with the
more reasonable assumption that markets are occasionally inefficient.
Therefore, tri-state rules, which would allow for long/shorUneutral positions, or binary rules, which are long/neutral or shorUneutral, may be superior. No such rules were examined by the case study.
Rules Limited to S&P 500 'Irading. Also in the interest of limiting
the scope of the case study, rules were applied to only one market, the
S&P 500 Index. The large rule study7 referred to earlier did not find any
rules, either simple or complex, which were effective on the S&P 500.
When I selected S&P 500 as the market to trade, I was unaware of the
larger rule study, which did find useful rules for the NASDAQ and Russell
2000. Had I known of the study and decided to use either NASDAQ or Russell 2000 as the target market, I would have been guilty of snooping prior
research, thereby compromising the validity of the p-values that were obtained in the case study. On the other hand, had I chosen the NASDAQ or
Russell 2000 without knowledge of that study and found successful rules,
they would have been discovered legitimately and the reported p-values
would have been accurate.

POSSIBLE CASE STUDY EXTENSIONS
The aforementioned limitations suggest several possible extensions to the
case study.
Application to Less Seasoned Stock Indexes

The Hsu and Kuan study referred to earlier that found statistically significant rules for the NASDAQ and Russell 2000 suggested that TA rules
may be more successful on indexes of less seasoned stocks. Thus, one
extension would be to apply the case study's rule set to stock market indexes of other countries with securities of less-seasoned companies.
This would be practical if the raw data series needed to construct the
indicators were available, such as advance/decline statistics, up and
down volume, new highs and lows, and such. A literature search uncovered a number of studies8 that lend credibility to the notion that newer
stock markets may be more amenable to prediction than more developed and presumably more efficient markets. One practical limitation of

452

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

a newer stock market would be shorter market history and fewer historical observations.
Improved Indicator and Rule Specification
The profitability of a rule is determined by the information content of
the indicators on which the rule is based. The more effectively an indicator quantifies an informative feature of market behavior the higher
the rule's profit potential. The 6,402 rules used in the case study considered three TA themes: trends, extremes, and divergences. The indicators used were thought to be reasonable ways to quantify these themes.
No doubt there is room for improvement. As pointed out in a subsequent section, the most important future role of the TA practitioner will
be developing indicators that quantify market behavior in a more informative manner.
For example, as mentioned in Chapter 8, divergences might be better measured with indicators based on conintegration. 9 Indicators intended to measure extremes might prove more useful if they employed
the Fisher transform, discussed by Ehlers. 10 He points out that the frequency distribution of an indicator based on channel normalization has
an undesirable property, specifically, extreme values are considerably
more likely than values in the middle of the indicator's range. This is
hardly the behavior one would want in an indicator designed to detect
rare extremes. However, by applying the Fisher transform to channelnormalized data, Ehlers claims that the resultant indicator is close to
normally distributed. An indicator with a normal distribution has the desirable characteristic that its extreme values are rare. This may, in turn,
make them more informative. Because Ehlers offers no data supporting
evidence of the Fisher transform's efficacy, at this time it is only an interesting conjecture worthy of further investigation.
Consideration of Complex Rules
Complex rules are derived by combining the information in two or more
simple rules in order to augment predictive power. There are two key issues in deriving complex rules: Which rules should be combined? and
How should they be combined? The how refers to the mathematical or
logical form used to combine the simple rules' outputs to produce the
complex rule's output.
The simplest method of combining is linear. A linear combination is
based on summing rule the outputs of simple rules. It treats the output of
each simple rule as if it makes an independent contributi.on to the output
of the complex rule. That is to say, the contribution of each simple rule is

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

453

unaffected by the output of any other rule. The simplest linear combination gives the same weight to each constituent. Thus, a simple linear combination of two binary reversal rules would assume a value of -2, when
both are short; zero, when one is short and one is long; and +2 when both
rules are long. A more sophisticated, though not necessarily superior, linear combination assigns varying weights to each rule, depending upon its
predictive power. The relative weight of each rule is represented by a coefficient, designated by the letter a. The set of weights-which are best according to some figure of merit, such as minimum predictive error or
maximum financial perfonnance-can be found by optimization. The general form of a weighted linear combination is illustrated in the following
equation:

Linear Combining Is Additive

Where:

Y is Output of complex linear rule
q is the output of ith rule
ai is the weight for the ith rule
ao is a constant - y intercept
In contrast to a linear combination, a nonlinear combination considers interactions between the rules. In other words, the combined value, Y,
is not simply a weighted sum of the individual rule values. In a nonlinear
combination, the contribution of any individual rule to the combined output Y depends, in some way, on the output values of the other rules. In a
linear combination, each rule's contribution to Y is unaffected by (independent of) the value of any other rule. The advantage of a nonlinear combination is that it can express more complex infonnation patterns.This
creates a disadvantage, however, in that a nonlinear combination may not
be expressible as a neat easily understood equation. Because we are left
in the dark about how the rule outputs are being combined (i.e., interacting), nonlinear models are sometimes referred to as black-box fonnulas.
Nonlinear combinations produced by neural network software would be
an example of a black-box fonnula.
The distinction between linear and nonlinear combining is more easily portrayed when one considers continuous variables rather than binary rule outputs. Continuous variables can assume any value within a

454

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P SOO INDEX

range rather than being restricted to discrete values such as those of binary rule (-1 and +1). When a linear model is illustrated graphically, as
in Figure 9.4, the response surface, which represents the complex rule's
output (Y), assumes a flat shape. There are no hills and valleys. Another
way to say this is that the slope of the response surface, with respect to
each input (Xl and X 2), remains constant throughout the entire range of
the input. The slope of the surface with respect to input Xl is designated by
the coefficient a p and the slope with respect to input X 2 is given by coefficient a 2 . The values a j and a 2 are typically discovered from a set of data
by a statistical technique called regression analysis. The values at and a2
in combination with a third coefficient ao' called the Y intercept, orient
the plane so as to best slice through the set of data points used to estimate the model's coefficients. The fact that the slope of the response
surface is constant (flat) tells us that there are no nonlinear interactions
between the inputs. Said differently, the inputs XI and X 2 are interacting
in an additive manner.
In a nonlinear model, nonadditive interactions between the inputs are
allowed. This means that the value Y is not simply a weighted sum of the
individual input values. In a nonlinear model, the contribution of any input (indicator) depends, in some arbitrary way, on the values of the other
inputs. This manifests as a response surface with hills and valleys. In
other words, the slope of the model's response surface with respect to any
individual input, Xi, will not be constant throughout its range. This variation in the slope over the range of the inputs can produce a response surface like the one shown in Figure 9.5.

455

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

y

Lincar COlllbinations ",Uhin a Thclllc. Despite the simplicity of
combining rules via addition, complex rules with a linear form have
proven useful. The study conducted by Hsu and Kuan ll tried three methods for creating complex rules. Two of the methods were based on linear
forms: voting rules and fractional position rules. The third type, which
they referred to as a learning rule, did not combine rules, but rather was
based on selecting the simple rule from a set of similar rules that had the
best recent performance. The complex rules based on voting and fractional positions were essentially additive combinations of all simple rules
within a given theme. Examples of themes would be all rules based on
channel breakouts or all rules based on a moving average of on-balance
volume. The output of a complex rule based on a voting scheme was derived by polling all rules within a theme (channel breakout) and taking a
one-unit position that reflected the majority vote. For example, if the majority of rules were indicating a short position, a one-unit short position
was taken. The output of a complex rule based on the fractional-position
concept was also based on polling all the simple rules within a theme,
however, the size of the position taken was proportional to the net percentage of rules that were long or short ([number long minus number
short) divided by total number of rules). For example, Hsu and Kuan considered 2,040 on-balance volume rules. If 1,158 were signaling a short position and 882 were signaling a long position, a 0.135 unit short position
would be taken ([882 - 1,158)/2,040 = -0 .135).
Thus one logical extension of the case study would be to create linear
complex rules based on voting or fractional-position schemes. This could
be done for rules within a given theme, for example all divergence rules.

456

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P sao INDEX

An indicator commonly used in TA, called a diffusion indicator, is based
on a similar idea. An example of a well known diffusion indicator is the

percentage of New York Stock Exchange stocks that are over their 200day moving averages. In this instance the percentage is essentially an unweighted linear combination.
The diffusion indicator would simply be the net percentage of divergence rules that were long or short. Using a voting scheme, if more than
50 percent of the divergence indicators were in a + 1 state, a long position
would be held, else a short position. Using a fractional-position scheme, a
partial long or short position would be held and adjusted as the net
long/short percentage changed. It is important to note that the creation of
diffusion indicators from the 6,402 rules used in the case study would require that inverse rules be eliminated. Their inclusion would cause a diffusion indicator to always assume a value of zero. Thus, a diffusion
indicator based on the trend-rule category would be constructed only
from TT rules and TI rules would be excluded. Likewise, a diffusion indicator based on rules in the extreme and transition category would be
based only on types 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Types 7 through 12 would have to
be excluded inasmuch as they are the inverse of types 1 through 6.
Complex rules that
combine simple rules in a nonlinear or nonadditive fashion could also be
derived from the case study's rules. However, this would require the use of
autonomous machine learning (data-mining) systems such as neural networks,12 decision trees and decision tree ensembles, multiple regression
splines,13 kernel regression,14 polynomial networks,15 genetic programming,16 support-vector machines,17 and so on. These systems employ inductive generalization to synthesize a complex nonlinear rule (model) by
learning from a large set of historical examples. Each example is a a case,
characterized by a set of indicator values as of a given date and the value
of an outcome variable that the model is intended to predict.
Complex nonlinear rules could be derived in two ways. One would be
to submit the rules in binary form, as the candidate inputs. A second approach would be to submit the indicators used by the rules.
To the best of my knowledge, there is no product currently available
for generating complex nonlinear rules that incorporates a significance
test that is robust to the data-mining-bias problem. In the absence of this
protection, data miners searching for complex nonlinear rules must rely
on the protection provided by a sophisticated form of out-of-sample testing that involves three data sets (training, testing, and evaluation). This is
described later in this chapter.
Allowing the search to optimize a rule's complexity, rather than restricting it to finding the optimal parameter values for a rule whose comMachine-Induced Nonlinear Combinations.

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

457

plexity is fixed, has an upside and a downside. The upside is that allowing
complexity optimization increases the chance of discovering a superior
rule. The downside is that the added search dimension can greatly increase the number of rules considered before a best is selected. This increases the chance that the best-performing rule is overfitted. This refers
to a rule that not only expresses the sample data's valid patterns but that
also describes its random effects or noise. Overfitted rules do not generalize well. That is to say, their out-of-sample performance is typically
poor relative to their in-sample performance. This is an example of datamining bias.
To guard against the risk of overfitting when complexity optimization
is allowed, three data segments are often used: training, testing, and validation. Recall from Chapter 6 that only two data segments are required
when data mining is restricted to finding the optimal parameter values of a
fixed-complexity!8 rule: training and testing.
In its search for the nonlinear rule of optimal complexity, machine
learning algorithms cycle through the training and testing sets in two distinct loops. The inner loop searches for the optimal parameters at a given
level of complexity. The outer loop searches for the optimal level of complexity. Once the best complex rule has been found, it is evaluated in the
third data segment, called the validation set. This data has been held in
reserve pending the discovery of the parameter values and complexity degree of the best-performing rule. Because the validation set was not utilized in this process of discovery, the performance of the best rule in this
data set is an unbiased estimate of its future performance. This is shown
in Figure 9.6.
This three-segment scheme can be conducted on a walk-forward basis. After the best rule has been found in the first data fold (train! test/validation), the tripart data window slides forward and the entire process is
repeated in the next fold. This is illustrated in Figure 9.7.
The motivation for the tripart data window warrants some additional
explanation. Market behavior is presumed to be a combination of systematic behavior (recurring patterns) and random noise. It is always possible
to improve the fit of a rule to a given segment of data by increasing its
complexity. In other words, given enough complexity, it is always possible
to fashion a rule that buys at every market low point and sells at every
market high point. This is a bad idea. 19 Perfect timing on past data can
only be the result of a rule that is contaminated with noise. In other
words, perfect signals or anything approaching them almost certainly
means the rule is, to a disturbing degree, a description of past random behavior (Le., overfitted).
Overfitting manifests when the rule is applied to the test data segment. There, its performance will be worse than in the training data. This

458

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

Foldi

(-----~-----\
Complexity
Search
Loop
Parameter
Search
Loop

~

U

~

Best

~ ~Ule

LJ'-----_I
fl-------!rainin g Set
.

- -Validation
- - - - .Set
L..
..
r--

Test Set

~

Optimal Rule's
Performance
Evaluated Here

<::sJ7

f - - - - - - - - - - - T i m e - - - - - - - - - - -....
F'IGURE 9.6

Searching for optimal parameters and complexity of best rule.

Fold4

r

(-----~-----\
Time

-----1 Training Set

Test Set

Validation

~

Fold3

(-----~-----"

------1 Training Set

Test Set

Validation

I---.~

Foldz

(-----~-----\
~---ll Training Set

Test Set

Validation

II------.~

Fold]

(-----~-----\
~ Training Set
FIGURE 9.7

Test Set

Validation

Walk-forward complexity search.

I--------. .~.

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

459

is because the legitimate patterns found in a training set recur in the test
set, but the noise in the training set does not. It can be inferred that profitability in the training set that does not repeat in the testing set was most
likely a consequence of overfitting.
During the process of complexity optimization, the first sign that the
rule has become overfit is when its performance reaches a peak in the
testing set and then starts to degrade. Complexity optimization proceeds
as follows. It begins with a low complexity rule, which is run repeatedly
over the training data set using different parameter values. Each run produces a performance figure (e.g., rate of return). The parameter(s) that
yields the highest performance in the training data, let's call it best-rule 1,
is then run on the test data set and its test set performance is noted. That
completes the first complexity loop. The second complexity loop begins
with a rule that is a notch higher in complexity than best-rule 1. That is to
say, it has a greater number of parameters. Again, there is a search for the
best parameter values of this more complex rule in the training set. The
best rule at this complexity level, let's call it best-rule 2, will almost certainly perform better in the training set than best-rule 1 because of its additional complexity. Best-rule 2's performance is then measured in the test
set. This process continues as a succession of rules of increasing complexity are mined from the training set and evaluated in the testing set.
Typically, performance on the test improves as the rule's complexity is increased. The improvement is an indication that ever-more-intricate but
valid patterns in the training set have been discovered. However, at a certain point in the rule's complexity growth, the performance in the testing
set will start to decline. This indicates that the most recent increment in
complexity has started to describe the random effects (nonrecurring
noise) in the training set. In other words the rule has now become overfitted. Had the rule's complexity growth been stopped prior to this point, the
rule would have failed to capture all the data's valid patterns. Such a rule
is said to be underfitted. The phenomenon of underfitting and overfitting
is illustrated in Figure 9.8. Note that increased complexity always produces improved performance in the training set, which is shown by the
continual growth in training set performance. Also note that the boundary
between underfitting and overfitting is defined by the point at which the
test set performance peaks and begins to decline.
The concept of complexity search is abstract and may be new to some
readers. In the interest of clarification, consider following the specific example of a human guided rather than a machine guided complexity optimization. We begin with a basic two moving-average crossover reversal
rule. 20 The rule is defined by two parameters, the short-term moving-average
look-back span and the long-term moving-average look-back span. Initially, all possible combinations of the parameters for the two averages
