
Burniske 03.indd 242

9/9/17 2:41 PM

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

243

While all of the aforementioned indices are bitcoin-focused, we expect to
see many indices focused on other maturing cryptoassets appear. This will
foreshadow more capital market vehicles to come.

TALKING TO A FINANCIAL ADVISOR
ABOUT CRYPTOASSETS
David Berger, creator of the Digital Currency Council, believes the time has
come for financial advisors to be able to discuss bitcoin and cryptoassets as
they relate to their clients’ portfolios. “Advisers need to understand the technological underpinnings of Bitcoin, as well as how to hold, securely store, and
utilize it. Advisers also need to understand the digital-currency ecosystem and
the ways to evaluate risk and invest wisely within that ecosystem. They should
familiarize themselves with the financial and tax implications, as well as the
legal and regulatory issues—all of which are developing daily.”40
Currently, GBTC is available for typical investors through brokerage firms.
With an online and self-directed investment account, investors should be able
to get a quote on GBTC and buy the asset for their accounts.
For investors with an advisor at a wealth management firm, placing the
order for GBTC may require interfacing with your advisor so the firm can
make the purchase. It won’t be uncommon to get some pushback due to a
lack of awareness related to this investment vehicle from financial advisors,
whether they’re independent or from a wirehouse. At this point, innovative
investors should recognize that bitcoin and other cryptoassets can have a positive impact on their investment portfolios. Financial advisors and investment
firms would be well served to be knowledgeable, informed, and open to discuss these investment vehicles appropriately with clients.
Fortunately, the financial services industry is warming to these investments
and the need to bring advisors up to speed. In 2014, the Financial Planning
Association (FPA) produced a report clearly detailing its take on the matter titled, “The Value of Bitcoin in Enhancing the Efficiency of an Investor’s
Portfolio.”41 The FPA supports financial advisors and others associated with
the Certified Financial Planner™ (CFP™) certification. In the report it asserted
that, for many investors, bitcoin could provide a potential opportunity to
diversify and boost their portfolios.
Although we expect that advisors will increasingly become aware of and
knowledgeable about bitcoin and cryptoasset investments, the innovative
investor may encounter an immediate dismissal, a sense of curiosity, some

Burniske 03.indd 243

9/9/17 2:41 PM

244 CRYPTOASSETS

level of knowledge, or perhaps just a chuckle from his or her advisor on the
topic. Given this, here are some points to consider:
1. A good advisor is truly looking out for his or her clients. Bitcoin and

cryptoassets are new and have short and volatile track records, so
the adviser’s immediate negative reaction or dismissal shouldn’t be a
refutation of his or her quality as an advisor.
2. Investors should be prepared to provide links and resources to educate the advisor. The Resources section in the back of this book can
be a big help.
3. Remind the advisor that it’s not about putting everything in these
investments, and his or her advice can help identify where these
assets may appropriately fit in the asset allocation model the advisor
has built. (If there’s no asset allocation model or financial plan the
advisor can reference, that should be a red flag for the investor.)
4. If the advisor doesn’t believe in these assets, or refuses to invest in
them on the innovative investor’s behalf, the asset can be purchased
directly as outlined in Chapter 14 or by purchasing GBTC through a
self-directed account. If the investor takes this route, we highly recommend informing the advisor of this investment so the advisor can
include it in his or her records as reference for the advisor’s asset
allocation plans. Good advisors should be open to keeping records of
client assets held away from their firm.
5. If the financial advisor is a deer in the headlights on the topic, hand
him or her a copy of this book.
INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL ADVISORS
VERSUS WIREHOUSE ADVISORS
Ric Edelman, one of America’s top financial advisors, agrees with Berger.
Edelman is an author and speaker, and has been named America’s top independent financial advisor three times by Barron’s magazine. Now we can
add bitcoin believer to the list. “It’s important that investors stay aware and
knowledgeable about bitcoin,” Edelman says. Beyond bitcoin, Edelman sees
great potential in blockchain technology as a solution for many businesses
that he believes “can benefit from advancements made in this technology.”42
Edelman’s attitude as an adviser may be unique, and one reason may
be because he’s an independent financial advisor, which is different from a

Burniske 03.indd 244

9/9/17 2:41 PM

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

245

wirehouse-based financial advisor who works at Wells Fargo, Morgan Stanley,
or Merrill Lynch. Wirehouse advisors may have more constraints on their ability to recommend investment vehicles related to bitcoin or cryptoassets. This
may be due to those firms having internal policies that keep their advisors
from recommending products that haven’t been fully evaluated by their own
internal research teams or simply by a lack of knowledge and interest in these
assets as investment vehicles.

WHAT’S NEXT?
We believe that cryptoasset investment vehicles will continue to proliferate,
broadening exposure to even the most conservative investors who will eventually realize the uncorrelated value add of this new asset class. Even though the
SEC didn’t approve the Winklevoss or SolidX ETFs, we believe international
regulators will continue to explore this innovative new asset class, which ultimately may help to raise the SEC’s comfort level with bitcoin and cryptoassets.
That said, the SEC’s priority is consumer protection, and if it feels there are still
not enough consumer protections in place for bitcoin and other cryptoassets,
then it has no obligation to approve any exchange-traded products.
Globally, securitization efforts will continue around bitcoin, which will
open the door for other cryptoassets that hold true merit, like ether, to be
incorporated into capital market vehicles. Grayscale has moved forward with
the Ethereum Classic (ETC) Investment Trust, which operates similarly to the
BIT but holds ether classic, not to be confused with the much larger asset,
ether.
Ultimately, we see a future in which there will be numerous options to
invest in capital market vehicles that securitize cryptoassets. For example, we
expect there to be multiasset mutual funds with cryptoassets used for diversification. Similar to REX Share’s S&P 500 gold-hedged ETF, we may someday
have a S&P 500 bitcoin-hedged ETF. Similarly, we will likely have funds of
cryptoassets based on their functionality, such as a cryptocommodity fund, or
perhaps a fund of the privacy focused cryptocurrencies like monero, dash, and
zcash. Lastly, given the growing trend of indexation, as the cryptoasset space
matures significantly, we could see network value weighted cryptoasset ETFs,
including potentially a basket of the top 5, 10, or 20 cryptoassets.
In the last two chapters, we discussed how the innovative investor can gain
access to bitcoin and cryptoassets from a wide range of vehicles, including

Burniske 03.indd 245

9/9/17 2:41 PM

246 CRYPTOASSETS

mining, direct purchases from exchanges, and capital market investments like
GBTC and its kin. Another exciting part of the cryptoasset world for the innovative investor includes the ability to get involved directly with the developer
teams, launching cryptoassets from the beginning. In the past, this world was
open only to the wealthy, but with new trends such as crowdfunding, token
launches, and innovative regulation via the JOBS Act, opportunities exist for
innovative investors of all shapes and sizes to get involved.

Burniske 03.indd 246

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Chapter 16
The Wild World of ICOs

D

uring the early tech days, innovators such as Steve Jobs, Bill Gates,
and Michael Dell became iconic figures who had turned ideas into
multibillion-dollar businesses. Over the last decade, we’ve seen visionaries such as Elon Musk, Peter Thiel, and Mark Zuckerberg do the same. These
innovators changed the world because people believed in their visions, and
these early believers invested money to turn their ideas into reality. While
these investments brought great benefit, they were not based on altruism; initial investors were looking to get a sizable return on their risky investments.
Investing in early stage, private companies is most often referred to as venture capital. The term itself conveys the risk involved. After all, venture as a
verb conveys a journey into the unknown, and capital refers to wealth and
resources. Venture capital is just that: risking the unknown in the pursuit of
outsized rewards, but knowing all along that the probability of failure is high.
Venture capital is a relatively young industry, intimately entwined with
Silicon Valley. While Silicon Valley made venture capital the famous industry it is today, venture capital made Silicon Valley. One of the earliest and
most widely recognized companies that helped jump-start the venture capital
industry was Intel, which today produces the chips in most of our computers.
The company was started in Santa Clara, California, by well-known and highly
regarded scientists, Gordon E. Moore (famous for creating “Moore’s Law”1)
and Robert Noyce (cocreator of the integrated circuit), but they were hardpressed to raise money for their new company. Ultimately, Intel found a bene247

Burniske 03.indd 247

9/9/17 2:41 PM

248 CRYPTOASSETS

factor in Arthur Rock—an American financier who coined the term venture
capitalist2—who helped them raise $2.5 million in convertible debentures that
included $10,000 from his own pocket.3 The company went public two years
later in 1970, raising $6.8 million and providing significant rewards to Rock
and those who bought the debentures. Intel was one of the first companies to
utilize venture capital as a method of funding its startup, and due to its success,
helped pioneer the concept in Silicon Valley.
Despite the relative youth of venture capital, many cryptoasset firms are
now turning the model on its head. The disruptors are in danger of being disrupted. For the innovative investor, it’s key to realize that cryptoassets are not
only making it easier for driven entrepreneurs to raise money, they’re also creating opportunities for the average investor to get into the earliest rounds of
what could be the next Facebook or Uber. Welcome to the colliding worlds of
crowdfunding and cryptoassets.

THE OLD METHOD: THE INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
Up until recently, the first opportunity the average investor had to invest in a
company was upon its initial public offering (IPO), when the company’s shares
began trading on a well-known exchange like the Nasdaq or NYSE. However,
leading up to an IPO, the company had likely gone through numerous rounds
of private funding. As a private company grows, there are different names for
each investing round, starting with a seed round before moving to a Series A,
B, C, D, and so on. In each of these rounds, when investors put money into
the company, they typically receive a percentage of that company, which is
expressed in shares. Such funding is usually open only to venture capitalists,
other private equity investors, or wealthy individuals. An IPO converts those
private shares into public shares, which are then traded on a public exchange
that the everyday investor can get access to.
As the innovative investor can probably infer, the earliest rounds, when the
risks are highest, are often the most profitable rounds for an investor if the company succeeds. On one hand, keeping these rounds shielded from the public
protects the average citizen from the inherent risks of these early stages of investing, but on the other, it also excludes them from the opportunity. Compounding
the issue, over the last decade companies have been waiting longer and longer
to go public, which places more and more of the returns in the private markets.
Ben Evans, an analyst at Andreessen Horowitz—one of the most famous
venture capital firms in the world—published a report in 2015 that clearly laid

Burniske 03.indd 248

9/9/17 2:41 PM

THE WILD WORLD OF ICOs

249

out the value shift toward private markets. The median time for a tech company to IPO in 1999 was four years, whereas in 2014 it was 11 years,4 meaning
the average investor now has to wait nearly three times as long to get access
to company shares. Although there’s less enthusiasm for IPOs than there was
during the tech boom, much of the delay is due to regulatory changes as a
result of that tech and telecom boom, as well as the financial crisis of 2008.
In the late 1990s, companies used to IPO with $20 million in annual revenue,
whereas in 2014, the median annual revenue was just shy of $100 million,
which had come down from a peak of nearly $200 million during the financial
crisis.5 While this trend has resulted in more stable IPOs and reduced risk for
capital market investors, with less risk, there’s often less reward.
As Ben Evans wrote in his report, “Almost all the returns are now private.
Old world tech giants returned plenty in public markets—new ones have not.”
By old world tech giants, he’s referring to companies such as Microsoft, Oracle,
and even Amazon, all of which have provided much more value creation
for public markets than private markets. Meanwhile, with companies like
LinkedIn, Yelp, Facebook, and Twitter, the clear majority of returns have gone
to private investors. For example, while Microsoft grew private money 20,000
percent, it grew public money 60,000 percent. Compare that to Facebook,
which grew private money 80,000 percent, and public money under 1,000 percent. As Ben Evans put in his slides, “For Facebook to match Microsoft’s public
market returns, it would need to be worth $45 trillion,” which is two and half
times the GDP of the United States.6

THE OLD METHOD: THE COMPANY’S PERSPECTIVE
While it may seem like the average investor has been excluded somewhat
over the last decade, they haven’t been the only ones. Most companies are
also locked out of the funding model described above because securing venture capital is an extremely competitive process, and the path to the public
market is even more rigorous. For first-time founders who want to approach
venture capitalists for an investment, often they must know someone-whoknows-someone. Having such a connection allows for a warm introduction
as opposed to being among the hundreds of cold calls that venture capitalists
inevitably receive. To know someone-who-knows-someone requires already
being in the know, which creates a catch-22.
Turning to the public markets from inception for funding is also rarely possible, as an IPO is a laborious and expensive process. An IPO requires manage-

Burniske 03.indd 249

9/9/17 2:41 PM

250 CRYPTOASSETS

ment to file an S-1 with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), go
on a road show to make investors aware of their offering, pay expensive investment bankers to properly price the public shares, and so on.
Due to the laboriousness of going public, only the largest and most successful companies typically pursue this funding path. They do so once they
have matured and want access to the even bigger capital pool provided by the
public markets. Furthermore, going public allows them to reward their early,
private investors, who after the IPO can sell their shares in the more liquid
public markets.
Without access to venture capitalists or the public markets, the preferred
method for most startups to raise funding involves family and friends, credit
card debt, and a healthy dose of faith. The good news is that the Internet boom
has spawned a stream of aspiring entrepreneurs, and regulations are adapting
to allow the innovative investor and innovative entrepreneur to unite around
new ideas.

A NEW METHOD OF FUNDING STARTUPS
During the financial crisis of 2008, debt markets froze and stock markets
crashed, causing major, and in many cases catastrophic, losses for the individual investor. To protect investors from similar experiences in the future,
new regulations were put into place. Many of these targeted banks and their
involvement in the crisis, which ultimately affected the ability of startups to
gain access to the capital markets and other traditional funding methods,
including loans and borrowing. In part, these regulations are why we have
seen an increase in the amount of time it takes for companies to get to an IPO.
However, some leaders recognized that the world needed to spur more
innovation and not strangle it.7 They began to question the regulations and
used famous Internet company founders, such as Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, and
Michael Dell, as examples of how American innovation has made the country
great. These leaders understood that if starting a company and securing funding was made more difficult, America would suffer.
Simultaneously, a funding shift was occurring, as many entrepreneurs
realized they didn’t have to rely on venture capital, family, debt, or the capital markets to raise seed money: the Internet had become a major force in
connecting entrepreneurs to investors through the process of crowdfunding. It allowed individuals and businesses with an idea and plan to seek out

Burniske 03.indd 250

9/9/17 2:41 PM

THE WILD WORLD OF ICOs

251

other individuals who were willing to invest. What grew out of the inability
of entrepreneurs of small or obscure projects to gain access to the more traditional methods of raising capital was a new method for connecting them to
all levels of investors.
Crowdfunding sites such as Kickstarter, Indiegogo, and others positioned
themselves online as a way for connecting entrepreneurs and investors. In
exchange for investors pledging money, the project or company promised
to return the fruits of its labor, depending on the amount a specific investor
pledged. Recognizing that this platform was a fertile ground for scams, the
sites implemented policies and procedures to protect investors. For instance,
Kickstarter maintains investor funds in escrow until a project is funded to a
sufficiently high level. If not enough people invest, then funding stops and
investors get their money back.
Many projects have been funded by investors who simply wanted to see
it become a reality, while others funded projects to receive the product. To
get a feel for what Kickstarter can provide to investors interested in the bitcoin and blockchain space, simply type those terms into the search box on the
Kickstarter site.8 Opportunities for investing in documentaries, books, games,
and application development can be found. Fund a documentary on Bitcoin,
for example, and on completion investors receive a DVD of that documentary.
One of the most compelling aspects of crowdfunding was that it not only
allowed dreamers to build their product or business, it allowed investors of all
levels to participate in seeing these dreams come true. Prior to crowdfunding, in those cases where investors wanted to share in the equity opportunities
provided by a startup, they still had to be an accredited investor. While the
intention of requiring investors at this stage to be accredited is good, it has
the side effect of locking the average investor out of some of the earliest stage
investments with the highest returns.
In 2012, the phenomenon of crowdfunding came to the forefront of government regulator attention. Fortunately, rather than killing the concept, the government decided to create policies around it and market it to assist startups.
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act was signed into law on April
5, 2012.9 It was an acknowledgment of the potential of crowdfunding to provide alternative financing methods for startups. Additionally, the act sought
to provide equity-based opportunities to a wide range of investors, including
nonaccredited ones.10

Burniske 03.indd 251

9/9/17 2:41 PM

252 CRYPTOASSETS

CROWDFUNDING PORTALS FOR ALL INVESTORS
The ability of the JOBS Act to open the door to venture capital for non­
accredited investors, including crowdfunding and ICO investments, has been
a great step forward in increasing the number of people who may be included
in these opportunities. One of the provisions of the JOBS Act will be the
implementation of portals—online platforms on which investors can find
investment opportunities. These portals must be approved by both the SEC
and FINRA.11 Although there aren’t currently many such portals (Wefunder is
one), over time, the number will increase and provide even more opportunities for investors and entrepreneurs.12 Additionally, we expect that portals
will soon be set up by broker-dealers to provide a combination of investment
opportunities with advice and access.

The JOBS Act gave nonaccredited investors their first opportunity in
80 years13 to invest privately in startups and receive equity compensation.
Although the act was signed into law in 2012, Title III of the act, which allows
for nonaccredited investors, was only put in place in May 2016.14 Much of
this delay had to do with the need for the SEC to be involved and adopt “final
rules to permit companies to offer and sell securities through crowdfunding.”15
Some of the policies put in place with Title III included restrictions on the
length of fundraising efforts, the amount that an investor could invest, and
that investments must take place within an SEC-regulated intermediary, either
through a broker-dealer or a funding portal.16
It’s expected that even with these restrictions, investors will have more
opportunities to gain equity-based compensation for investments in new
businesses, including cryptoasset-based investments. The barn door of alternative financing methods for startups is wide open, and those involved with
cryptoasset-based projects have already begun using their technologies to
find ways to raise capital.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
A CRYPTOASSET AND A STARTUP
Before we dive into the specifics of how a cryptoasset offering is carried out,
the innovative investor needs to understand that the model of crowdfunding
