
THE SLOPE OF HOPE
In 1995, I had been trading stocks and options for about 17 years, and I
had also sold the company I founded, Prophet Financial Systems. I was
spending a lot of time trading, and a family member suggested that I start a
blog about it.

For Bears Only

479

Although blogging was relatively new at the time, I was hesitant to do
my own blog, mainly because it seemed a bit too trendy. I really didn’t
see the point of writing a blog, particularly since the handful of friends
and family that might check it out didn’t really have an interest in stocks
in the first place. But I decided to give it a shot and did my first post on
March 27, 2005.
From the very beginning, I made my blog—which I initially called Technically Speaking, but later renamed Slope of Hope—all about my own trading ideas. For the most part, I would post charts and talk about how I felt
about these charts, whether I was buying or selling them, and what kinds
of stop price I was using. I would also periodically post the kinds of things
you would see on any personal blog, such as funny videos, anecdotes from
my life, and the occasional picture.
As I predicted, my blog’s traffic—if one could even call it that—was
only about a hundred views per day. Almost no one knew about Slope, but
I kept doing posts on a regular basis. Generally speaking, I would do one
post per day, although on occasion I might do a couple of posts. It was rare
that I would skip a day, since even with a small audience I felt a certain
obligation to put something new up.
As the years went on, traffic went from a few hundred views to a few
thousand to a few tens of thousands. As the traffic grew, I began to post
more actively (since the need to keep the blog stocked with fresh content was something I felt more keenly), and more important, conversation
within the blog became more active. In my blog’s first year, I would get excited if anyone at all would post a comment. By the time Slope was popular,
it was getting over 1,000 comments every day.
The reason I am bringing this story up is to stress the importance of
community. I have been part of the online social network scene since 1981,
which was a quarter-century before “social network” was a commonplace
term. And as much as the technology has changed over those years, the
nature of the interaction really hasn’t changed that much. The kinds of interactions, camaraderie, and inside jokes I remember from CompuServe’s
CB Radio chat room was little different than the most modern discussion
platform on the Internet.
What I would encourage you to do is go to www.SlopeOfHope.com in
your browser and join the discussion. Reading the blog and participating
are free, and you’ll probably find that the topics being discussed and the
articles being shared are instructive to your trading. The blog also has a
reputation for having a bearish bend to it, which is why I’m making a point
of mentioning it in this chapter.
Speaking for myself as a trader, there are two major benefits I have
received from doing the blog: first, since I have a large audience, I think
much more deeply and critically about any trading ideas I have than if

480

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

I only had to convince myself of their wisdom. Second, the audience on
the blog makes a terrific sounding board for ideas and knowledge base for
trading information. It’s like having a non-stop convention of active traders
constantly talking, sharing, and guiding one another. The collective mind
of the blog has been invaluable to me, and I am very proud of the culture
that I have cultivated over the years on Slope of Hope. I hope to see you
there.

CHAPTER 18

A Practical
Guide to Trading

n this book, we’ve covered a lot of ground with respect to technical
analysis, charting, and the ProphetCharts product. There are hundreds
of books written about other aspects of trading, including books about
technical indicators, the psychology of trading, futures, options, and just
about every other imaginable subject.
We shall not endeavor to incorporate the vast knowledge and information from those books here, since it is the principal goal of this volume to
make you comfortable and confident using ProphetCharts. However, there
are some basic guidelines about any kind of trading that will be helpful to
most people who decide to trade, be it professionally or casually, and we
will review those in this final chapter.

I

TRADING RULES
It is often tempting for people to keep a list of their own trading rules,
particularly as they generate losses they regret and wish to avoid in the
future. Keeping a diary of trading experiences is a valuable exercise, but
what often happens with a list of rules is that the list grows so long and
arcane as to be almost useless. The old saying about how you can never
step into the same stream twice holds true for trading, and over the months
and years that you are trading, you will be faced with a never-ending set of
changing circumstances.
I’ve got my own list, but it is short and sweet. I ignore some of these
rules from time to time, and virtually every time I do, I regret it. If one day
481

482

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

I can follow these rules consistently, I’ll be a much better trader for it. An
acronym for the rules below is SOB FEES, which is appropriate considering how many tears were spent attaining them.

r Stops—A stop price must be in place at all times for all positions.
r Opening Bell—No new positions should be initiated in the first
30 minutes of any trading session. In addition, after-hours trading is to
be avoided altogether, since the volume is terribly thin and thus prone
to easy manipulation.
r Balance—This one is the hardest of all to define, but because it is impossible to know with certainty the future direction of the market, a
balance between bullish and bearish positions is the most prudent. In
addition, if you are heavily weighted, either bullish or bearish, and if
the market moves strongly in your favor intraday, you should consider
taking on a large opposite day-trade position for insurance profits in
case that intraday move reverses.
r Freshness—Positions should be regularly refreshed for the sake of
updated stops. This is especially important when the market has
moved in your direction a meaningful amount so that you can lock in
some profits with tighter stops.
r Emotional Awareness—Use emotional awareness to your advantage, understanding that fear often accompanies reversals in your favor
and hubris often accompanies reversals against your positions.
r Exits—The only acceptable exit is either being stopped out of a
position or reaching a target price that has a clear technical rationale,
and even in cases of the latter, partial exits are preferable to outright
closes.
r Sizing—Initial position sizing must be consistent among instrument
types irrespective of anticipated opportunity.
Following these rules consistently isn’t easy. But every year I get a little
better at it, and every year I do better in my trading. I urge you to consider
making these rules an important part of your trading life.
Let us now examine some of these rules more deeply and from a different angle with three simple components: how to open a position, how to
hold a position, and how to close a position.

HOW TO OPEN A POSITION
When traders open up a position, they are at their most optimistic. There
are many different profit possibilities available: the classic Buy Low/Sell

A Practical Guide to Trading

483

High; the oft-ignored Buy High/Sell Higher (such as is the case with strong
performers that seem too expensive to much of the investing public); and
for short-sellers, Sell High/Buy Low.
No matter what your disposition is on a stock, there are five easy-tofollow rules that will probably save you a lot of trouble and money.

Don’t Enter a Trade in the First 30 Minutes
of the Day
Although you may be eager to jump into a trade the very moment the market opens, it is wise not to do so. There is a tremendous amount of noise
in the first 30 minutes of the trading day. Amazingly, a significant percentage of stock orders are placed even before the opening bell. This creates a
rather distorted picture of the market in the first part of the day.
It is, of course, all right to let a stop order close out a position for you
(more on this later) in the first 30 minutes. After all, it is the job of a stop
order to get you out of a trade if it needs to do so. But letting the smoke
clear out of the market is essential before you enter any new positions.
Even if you pay a little more for a stock by waiting out the first half hour, it
will be immaterial if the position turns out to be a good one.

Pay a Good Price
This may seem like absurd advice, akin to never lose money. But the point
is simply this: when you examine a chart, you have an opportunity to see
what constitutes an attractive price for a security. This will depend strictly
on the chart, so there is no predetermined rule for all securities. If, for
example, a stock explodes out of a basing pattern and quickly rises from
its former resistance level of $15 to $25, you may decide to wait until the
stock is $17 or less before purchasing it. It may never reach that level again,
and you may find yourself denied the opportunity of profiting from future
growth. But rushing into a stock just after it has had a major price ascent
may put you in a position of unnecessary risk.
The key is to make a decision for yourself (preferably not during market hours, so that you can calmly and rationally decide what a fair price
would be) as to what price you are willing to pay for the security. You want
to seek a good risk/reward ratio. The risk is measured by calculating the
price you would pay for a security versus the price at which you would be
stopped out of the position; the reward is based on the difference between
the target price for the security and the price you would pay for it.
For example, assume you were willing to pay $16 for a stock with a
target price of $36 and a stop price of $14. The risk is $2 and the potential
reward is $20, which is a risk/reward ratio of 10. In other words, you are

484

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

risking $1 for every $10 in reward you are seeking. That’s a very attractive
ratio. On the other hand, it is unlikely you would want to buy into a stock at
$34 with a stop price of $15 and a target price of $40. Even though there’s
still a potential profit to be had, the risk/reward profile doesn’t make it
worthwhile.
You cannot control how high the stock will go, but you can certainly
control what you pay for it. Therefore, you have much more say in the risk
you are willing to undertake as opposed to the reward you may or may not
make. Determine your price in advance and don’t pay anything higher, as
tempting as it might be. It often pays to wait for the stock to return to the
level you seek.

Trade Only Active Securities
Although there are many tens of thousands of stocks and options that trade
in the U.S. equity markets, only a few thousand of them trade in significant
enough volume to be worthwhile. Although you may find a chart with a
very alluring pattern, be sure to check its average daily volume to ensure
you don’t get stuck with a security that has too thin a market.
The problem with a thin market is twofold: first, there is typically a
substantial bid/ask ratio. In other words, for a heavily traded security, you
will enjoy a very tight bid/ask ratio. The NASDAQ 100 index (QQQQ), for
example, might trade with a bid of $36.02 and an ask of $36.03, because
there are so many people making a market in this security that a penny
spread is sufficient. On the other hand, a security that trades just a few
thousand shares a day might have a bid of $43.20 and an ask of $45.00. This
means that the moment you enter the position, you have a $1.80 per share
loss on your hands.
The other problem is that you are far more vulnerable to someone gunning for your stop price. As you will read next, having a stop price is crucial
for responsible trading. But if a market is extremely thin, it becomes very
little trouble for others in the market to push the market either up or down
and execute orders based on existing stop prices. You will not experience
this kind of problem in actively traded shares.
As for what defines “actively traded,” securities that trade at least a
million shares a day are best, but at a minimum, you should avoid anything
that trades less than 250,000 shares per day unless the chart is so spectacular that it is worth the extra risk.

Have a Stop and Target Determined in Advance
Just as you should have a price you are willing to pay determined in advance, you should likewise figure out a stop price and a target price.

A Practical Guide to Trading

485

As a reminder, a stop price is a price below which (or, if you are short,
above which) a market order will be instantly executed. For instance, let’s
say you bought 5,000 shares of Apple (AAPL) at $50, and you set a stop
price of $47.99. As long as AAPL trades at $48 or above, your order will not
be executed. But if any trade at $47.99 or lower goes through, there will be
an instant order submitted to the market to sell your position at the best
available price.
The reason stops are so crucial is that they allow you to dispassionately
get out of bad trades. You should never, ever have a position without a stop
price. In fact, the moment you get your order filled, you should place the
stop order. It is far too tempting to talk yourself out of selling a stock if it
falls and you don’t have a stop order in place. By automating the process,
you remove the emotional element from getting out of a bad trade.
The target price is less important, because it is much harder to judge
how far a stock will go, and it is likely that if a stock moves in the direction
you anticipate, you will update your target. But a target is important to
judge the risk/reward ratio of a potential position.
If you are trading options, there is a special point. It isn’t wise to place
a stop order based on the option price itself. Options are typically far too
thinly traded to make this a reasonable approach. What makes more sense
is to go with a broker that offers contingent orders. This means that if the
underlying security falls above or below a certain price, then the order to
close the option position is placed. Stocks are far, far more heavily traded
than their options, so this is absolutely the best way to go to protect your
option positions.

Trade Only Based on Completed Patterns
Patterns do not form overnight. They take weeks, months, or even years
to form. And when they are about 70 percent to 80 percent complete, it
becomes easy to see what pattern might ultimately take shape.
In a situation like this, it is very tempting to enter a trade based on
the supposition that a pattern will complete. For example, perhaps you
are looking at a head and shoulders chart that has the left shoulder, the
head, and about half of the right shoulder. You can clearly see what the
pattern would look like if it were to complete as expected. You can also
see that you will make more money getting into the position now, since the
area between the neckline and the current price of the stock represents
that much more profit to you. In other words, you want to beat the crowd
before they realize the pattern has broken.
As tempting as this is, you should wait for the pattern to complete before taking action. An incomplete pattern isn’t a pattern at all—it’s simply
something that may become a pattern. You will find that jumping the gun

486

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

like this will backfire so many times that it simply doesn’t become worth
the extra profit you might make. So wait for the trend line to be crossed,
the neckline to be violated, and the resistance level to be overcome. Don’t
rush in before the chart is ready for you.

HOW TO HOLD A POSITION
Once you’re in a position, having steadfastly followed these five rules, now
what do you do? The easiest thing to do is sit back and let your positions
take care of themselves. If your stock reaches your target, terrific, you can
cash in your profits. If your stock gets stopped out, that’s okay, because
you’ve managed your loss and kept it reasonable. But too often people meddle in their portfolios and cause themselves harm they never intended. Let
us review some rules to avoid this.

Let the Winners Run
This is one of the most basic rules offered to traders (more completely, cut
your losses and let your winners run). It would seem obvious for people to
let profits grow. The reason this often doesn’t happen is based on a human
impulse articulated by another old saying: You’ll never go broke taking a
profit.
People love to take profits, and often they take them far too soon. For
every person who enjoyed a 1,000 percent return on a stock, there are
hundreds of other people who bought the exact same stock at the exact
same time, took a 10 percent profitm and felt they were financial geniuses
(until the stock kept moving higher). It feels good to take a profit, because
it means you not only get to pocket the extra cash but also you eliminate
the risk of holding the position in the first place.
Unfortunately, instead of letting winners run and cutting losses short,
it is human nature to let losers run and cut winners short. A person holding
a losing stock will always find many reasons to hold onto that position, hoping that it will turn around, and a person with a profit has the urge to bank
that profit as swiftly as possible. But small profits can never pay for large
losses, and in the end, taking this approach will create a shrinking portfolio.
So what you should do instead is simply hang on to the position as long
as it doesn’t violate your stop price (or until such time as it reaches your
target). This is how multihundred percent returns are created.

Let Your Stops Manage Your Losers
Stop orders are your friend. Placing a stop order the moment you are in
a position does a couple of very good things for you. First, it relieves you

A Practical Guide to Trading

487

from the duty of staring at a computer screen, monitoring your positions. If
the stop price is hit, you’ll be taken out at once. Second, it injects a healthy
dose of responsibility into your trading. Determining and setting a stop
price with a calm, rational, objective mind-set will save you a fortune in
the long run.
For years there has been a late-night TV ad for a kitchen appliance
where the host says to the audience, “Set it, and forget it!” This is, for the
most part, also true of stop orders for your positions.

Keep Your Stops Updated
When you initially establish a stop price, you are doing so at a price below
the current value of the stock (or above the current value, if it is a short
position). But if the stock moves in the direction you anticipate, the stop
price is going to become less and less relevant. As a position matures, a
stop price’s function should change from minimizing your loss to instead
preserving your profit.
For example, if you bought 1,000 shares of a $20 stock and set a stop
price of $18, you have $2,000 at risk. If the stock moves up over time to
$100, it would be silly to continue to have an $18 stop in place. There is
no reason to risk the entirety of your profits after a stock has moved that
much.
Instead, it pays to check your charts on a regular basis and update the
stop prices based on the most recent chart activity. For example, let’s say
the same stock just mentioned traded at about $25 for several weeks before
moving higher. You may decide to update your stop price to $24.99 since
there seems to be a strong new level of support at $25. You could therefore
lock in $5 of profit and still allow the stock to go higher.
Some brokers offer trailing stops, which base the stop price on a percentage of the stock’s current value. This is much like laying down a moving average on top of a chart and stating to sell the stock if it crosses below
that moving average. If you don’t have time to update your stops regularly,
this is a nice compromise, since it automates the act and ensures that you
can lock in some profits. The only trouble is that trailing stops aren’t really
based on the pattern per se, since they are little more than a raw moving
average based on recent price activity. But they are certainly better than
leaving your initial fixed stop price in place forever.

HOW TO CLOSE A POSITION
Saint Teresa of Avila wrote: “More tears are shed over answered prayers
than unanswered ones.” A trader might paraphrase that by saying: “More

488

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

tears are shed over profits than losses.” The reason is that a closed profitable position often goes on to a wildly profitable position, and you missed
most of the ride.
There were five rules for opening a position and three rules for holding
a position, but there’s really only one rule for closing a position: close it
when your target has been reached or your stop has been violated. It’s as
simple as that.
Never do an ad hoc close. In other words, don’t decide in the moment
to rush out of a position for any reason—that reason might be the thrill
of a sudden profit, the shock of a sudden loss, or anything in between. As
long as your stop is in place, let the position run, and if your target is met,
terrific—close it out. Until then, allow the seeds you’ve planted to grow,
undisturbed.
When you do close a position, you may want to jot down some notes
about what you learned from that particular trade. If you lost money, can
you figure out if your analysis was wrong? If you made money, are there
things you did correctly that you want to emphasize for future trades?
There is always something to be learned from a properly closed position,
whether you made money or lost it. Over the course of time, these trading
lessons will form a helpful mosaic for your ongoing career.

TIME AND MONEY
One aspect of being a trader that is simultaneously appealing and nervewracking is that the results a trader generates are just about the purest
reflection of whatever talent the trader might have. In other words, the
talent is almost perfectly correlated with the result.
This is not the case with most other endeavors. Let’s say you are a fifthgrade schoolteacher. You have certain talents that are germane to the job:
patience, discipline, knowledge, a rapport with young people, a rapport
with their parents, the ability to wake up and get to school on time, and so
forth. There are dozens of attributes that factor into your potential success
in that occupation.
How does one measure the result? That’s a tough question right there.
It could be measured by the change in test scores from the start of the year
to the end, by the relative performance of that class versus similarly aged
classes in the same school, by the results of a satisfaction survey that the
students fill out, or a similar survey by the parents. As you can see, even
defining “success” in this occupation is very hard.
Similar challenges would be seen for a lawyer, a dentist, or a bricklayer.
