The semistrong version of EMH makes a less informative and narrower claim, saying that the market is only efficient with respect to public
information. This version of EMH can be falsified with any evidence of
market-beating returns produced by an investing strategy based on either
public fundamental data (PIE ratios, book values, and so forth) or technical data (relative strength rank, volume turnover ratios, and so forth). In
effect, EMH semistrong denies the utility of fundamental and technical
analysis.
Finally we have EMH weak, which makes the least bold and least informative claim. It asserts that the market is only efficient with respect to
past price, volume, and other technical data. Because EMH weak only denies the utility of technical analysis, it presents the smallest and hardestto-hit target by would-be falsifiers. Their only hope would be to present
evidence that shows excess returns generated by an investment strategy
based on TA.
Because EMH weak is the hardest version to falsify and is thus the
least likely to be proven false, its falsification would also generate the
most surprise. In other words, of all versions of EMH, falsification of EMH
weak would generate the biggest increase in knowledge. This points out a
general principle of science: the largest gains in knowledge occur when
the most timid and hardest to falsify hypotheses are falsified. A test showing that inside information, like the tip from a corporate president, was
able to generate excess returns (i.e., falsification of EMH strong) would
not be surprising nor would we learn very much from it. Big deal, so inside information generates profits. What else is new? In contrast, the falsification of EMH weak would be a highly informative event for both TA
practitioners and EMH supporters. Not only would it mean the final destruction of the EMH, an important principle of finance for over 40 years,
but it would be an important confirmation of TA's validity. Both would represent large changes in the current state of knowledge.
Thus, it can be said that the gain in knowledge that occurs upon falsification of a hypothesis is inversely related to its information content.
Likewise, it can be said that the knowledge gained by confirmation of a
hypothesis (observations consistent with its predictions) is directly related to the information content of the hypothesis. The most informative
hypotheses make the most audacious claims of new knowledge. They attempt to bring within the realm of understanding the broadest range of
phenomena with the greatest degree of precision while at the same time
involving the fewest assumptions. When such a hypothesis is falsified, we
are not very surprised nor do we learn very much. Few would have expected the hypothesis to be confirmed, except perhaps for the bold scientist proposing it. For example, suppose a bold new theory of physics is put
forward, one of whose predictions is that it is possible to build an anti-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

139

gravity device. If true, such a theory would represent a major increase in
knowledge. However, if the device fails to work, no one would be surprised by the prediction's failure. However, it is exactly the opposite when
a timid hypothesis is falsified. For example a timid hypothesis would be
one that merely asserts that the currently accepted theories of physics are
true and predicts that the antigravity device should fail. The falsification
of this weak hypothesis via observations of the antigravity device working
would result in a very significant gain in knowledge-the verification of
new physics.
The most timid hypothesis that can be put forward is one that asserts
that there have been no new discoveries. In other words, it says that all
that is currently known is all that there is to know. This hypothesis denies
the truth of any other hypothesis that asserts that something new has
been discovered. The timid hypothesis that asserts that nothing new had
been discovered has a special name in science. It is called the null hypothesis and it is the starting assumption in the investigation of any claim that
a new discovery has been made. Whether that claim asserts that a new
vaccine will cure a dreaded disease, that a new principle of physics tells
us how to nullify gravity, or that a TA rule has predictive power, we always
start by assuming that the null hypothesis is true. Then, if evidence can be
produced that falsifies the null hypothesis, a most timid claim, it generates
a big gain in knowledge.
Thus, science proceeds as follows. Every time a bold new hypothesis
is put forward, it spawns an opposing claim, the null hypothesis. The null
is as timid as the new hypothesis is bold. Jonas Salk's bold hypothesis that
his vaccine would prevent polio better than a placebo spawned a competing claim, the null hypothesis. It made the timid prediction that the vaccine's ability to prevent infection would be no better than a placebo. This
was a timid prediction because every prior attempt to develop a vaccine
against polio had failed. These two competing claims left no middle
ground. If one hypothesis could be falsified, by logic's Law of the Excluded Middle, we know that the other must be true. Salk's experin1ental
evidence made it clear that the rate of infection among those receiving the
real vaccine was significantly less than those receiving the placebo. In
other words it was sufficient to falsify the null's prediction. This was a surprising result that represented a huge increase in medical knowledge!
How Scientists Should Respond to Falsification

How should a scientist respond when a hypothesis or theory that has survived many prior tests is ultimately falsified because recent observations
conflict with predictions? The proper response is whatever leads to the

140 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

biggest increase in knowledge. Because scientists are human beings, they
sometimes fail to do what is scientifically correct.
There are two possible responses that increase knowledge. The first
is to preserve the existing hypothesis by using it to predict new, previously unknown facts. If these new facts are confirmed and can explain
why the observations that had been in conflict with the hypothesis are no
longer in conflict, then the hypothesis deserves to be retained. The new
facts represent an increase in what we know about the world. A second
proper response is to throw out the old hypothesis and propose a new
one that not only accounts for all observations that had been explained
by the prior hypothesis but also explains the new discordant observations. This also represents an increase in knowledge in the form of a new
hypothesis with greater explanatory or predictive power. However, in either case the correct response is to do whatever advances the frontier of
knowledge the most.
Unfortunately the interests of science sometimes take a back seat to
personal agendas. Human nature gets in the way of good science. Emotional, economic and professional ties to a prior hypothesis can motivate
attempts to explain away the discordant evidence in a way that reduces
the information content and falsifiability of their cherished hypothesis.
This moves the frontier of knowledge backward. Fortunately science is a
collective self-correcting enterprise. The community of scientists happily
takes their fallen brothers to task when they stray from the path of righteousness in this way.
Some examples will clarify these abstract concepts. First, I present an
example of a proper response to predictions being contradicted by new
observations. In this case, new facts were predicted to rescue an established theory from falsification. This high road was taken by two astronomers during the nineteenth century, and it led to new knowledge in
the form of a new planet being discovered. At that time, Newton's laws of
motion and gravity were the accepted physics of planetary motion. They
had been confirmed and reconfirmed by countless observations, but then,
to the surprise of astronomers of that day, new and more powerful telescopes showed the planet Uranus was deviating from the orbit predicted
by Newton's laws. A rigid and improper application of falsificationism
would have called for an immediate rejection of Newtonian mechanics.
However, all theories rest on a bed of auxiliary assumptions. A key assumption in this case was that the solar system contained only seven planets with Uranus being the seventh and furthest from the sun. This led
astronomers Adanls and Leverrier to boldly predict the existence of a yet
undiscovered eighth planet (the new fact), lying beyond Uranus. If this
were true, that new planet's gravitational effects could explain the aberrant motion of Uranus, which seemed to be in conflict with Newton's laws.

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

141

In addition, if an eighth planet did exist, one of Newton's laws would predict the exact spot in the sky where the new planet would be observable.
This was a bold, informative, and highly falsifiable prediction that put
Newton's laws to a most stringent test. The astounding prediction made
by Adams and Leverrier about where the new planet would appear in the
sky was indeed confirmed in 1846 with the discovery of Neptune. They
saved Newton's laws from falsification by demonstrating that the theory
was not only able to explain the deviant behavior of Uranus but was also
able to make a highly accurate prediction. This is the kosher way to retain
a theory when it is confronted with dissonant observations.
In the end, however, Newton's laws proved to be provisionally true, as
is ultimately the case for all laws and theories. Although Newton's laws
had worked perfectly for more than 200 years, early in the twentieth century more precise astronomical observations were found to be truly inconsistent with the theory's predictions. The old theory had finally been
falsified and it was time for a new one. In 1921, Albert Einstein responded
properly by putting forward his new and more informative Theory of General Relativity. Today, almost one hundred years later, Einstein's theory
has survived all attempts to falsify it.
ewton's theory qualified as scientific because it was open to empirical refutation. In fact, Newton's theory was not wrong so much as it was
incomplete. Einstein's General Theory of Relativity not only accounted for
all of the phenomena covered by the Newtonian model, but it accommodated the new observations that conflicted with Newton's more limited
theory. This is how science progresses. Longevity and seniority mean
nothing. Predictive accuracy and explanatory power are everything.
The case of Adams and Leverier make clear why claims must be open
to empirical refutation. Falsifiability alone gives scientific knowledge a
large advantage over conventional wisdom. The ability to jettison false or
incomplete ideas and replace them with ever more informative ones produces a body of knowledge that is self-correcting and in a continual state
of improvement. This in tum provides a stable base upon which new ideas
can be erected that reach ever higher levels of understanding. Intellectual
activities that have no procedure for eliminating erroneous knowledge inevitably get bogged down in nonsense. This is precisely the problem with
the popular version of TA.
Now we will consider an example of an improper response to falsification. It occurs in the field of finance. The injection of science into finance is relatively recent. Perhaps this explains the defensive,
unscientific response of those who support the efficient markets hypothesis. When observations collided with their favorite theory, they
tried to save it from falsification by reducing its information content. As
mentioned earlier, its least informative version, EMH weak, predicts

142 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

that investment strategies based on TA32 will not be able to earn risk adjusted returns that beat the market index. When EMH supporters were
faced with studies showing that TA-based strategies were able to earn
excess returns,33 they responded by trying to immunize their theory
from falsification. They did so by inventing new risk factors and
claimed that the excess returns earned by TA were merely compensation for risks inherent in pursuing such a strategy. In other words, EMH
defenders claimed that investors who followed the TA strategy were exposing themselves to a risk that was specific to that strategy. This allowed the EMH supporter to characterize the TA strategy's returns as
non-market-beating. Recall EMH does not claim that earning returns
higher than the market is impossible. It only says that higher returns entail the assumption of additional risk. If the returns earned by the TA
strategy were indeed compensation for bearing higher risk, then EMH
would remain intact despite the studies that show TA strategy earning a
return higher than the market index.
There was one problem with the way EMH supporters did this. They
cooked up the risk factor after the TA studies had been performed. 34 This
is not kosher science. It would have been scientifically correct if EMH
had defined the risk factor in advance of the study and predicted that a
test of the TA method would generate what appeared to be market-beating
returns. Had they done this, the status of EMH would have been enhanced with a successful prediction. Instead, EMH supporters took the
low road to save their favored hypothesis by giving themselves the license to invent a new risk factor any time they needed to explain away
findings that conflicted with their favored theory. In so doing, EMH supporters rendered their hypothesis unfalsifiable, thereby draining it of any
infornlation content.
The precedent for this knowledge-regressive method of immunizing
the EMH hypothesis against falsification had already been established
by earlier flawed defenses of EMH. These earlier, and similarly misguided,
efforts to save EMH were in response to studies that had shown that
public fundamental information, such as the price-to-book ratio and PE
ratio, could be used to generate excess returns. 35 In response to this inconvenient evidence, EMH defenders claimed that low price-to-book ratios and low PE ratios were merely signals of stocks with abnormally
high risk. In other words, the fact that a stock's price is low relative to
its book value is an indication that the company is facing difficulties. Of
course, this reasoning is circular. What is key here is the fact that EMH
advocates had not defined low price-to-book or low PE as risk factors in
advance of the studies showing that stocks with these traits were able to
earn excess returns. Had EMH theorists done so, it they would have bol-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

143

stered the information content of EMH with an additional dimension of
risk. Instead, EMH theorists invented these risk factors after the fact, for
the specific purpose of explaining away discordant observations that
had already been made. Such explanations are termed ad-hoc hypotheses-explanations invented after the fact for the specific purpose of saving a theory or hypothesis from being falsified. Popper referred to this
knowledge regressive, save-the-theory-at-any-cost behavior as falsification immunization.
Had Popper known of it, he would have chastised the die-hard supporters of EMH, but he would have probably applauded the efforts of
those advocating behavioral finance. This relatively new field has proposed testable hypotheses that explain the profitability of strategies based
on public technical and fundan1ental data as arising from the cognitive biases and illusions of investors. It is ironic that erroneous beliefs in the validity of subjective TA and the valid profitability of some forms of
objective TA may both be the result of cognitive foibles.

The Scientific Attitude: Open yet Skeptical
Falsificationism makes a clear distinction between two phases of scientific discovery: proposal and refutation. These phases demand different
mindsets-openness and skepticism. The coexistence of these opposite
mindsets defines the scientific attitude.
An attitude of openness to new ideas is vital when hypotheses are
being formulated. The willingness 36 to see things in a new way, to advance new explanations and take bold inductive leaps characterizes the
proposal phase. Most practitioners of TA function well in this mode.
New indicators, new systems, and new patterns get proposed all the
time.
However, once a bold conjecture has been made, receptivity must
morph into skepticism. Doubt about the new idea motivates a relentless
search for its flaws. Thus, there is an ongoing tension in the scientist's
mind between speculative curiosity and hard-nosed disbelief. However,
the doubt is not an unremitting skepticism but one that yields to persuasive new evidence. This is the quasi-schizoid state that defines the scientific attitude.
Beyond the distrust of the new hypothesis, another form of skepticism thrives in the mind of a scientist: doubt about the mind itself.
This springs from a profound awareness of the all-too-human tendency
to generalize hastily and leap to unfounded conclusions (see Chapter
2). The procedures of science can be seen as safeguards against these
tendencies.

144 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

THE END RESULT:
THE HWOTHETICO-DEDUCTIVE METHOD
Some would say there is no such thing as the scientific method. 37 "The scientific method, as far as it is a method is nothing more than doing one's
damnedest with one's mind no holds barred."38 At its essence it is intelligent problem solving.
The problem-solving method used in science today has come to be
known as the hypothetico-deductive method. It is commonly described as
having five stages: observation, hypothesis, prediction, verification, and
conclusion. "In actual scientific work these stages are so intertwined that
it would be hard to fit the history of any scientific investigation into this
rigid scheme. Sometimes the different stages are merged or blurred, and
frequently they do not occur in the sequence listed."39 Rather, it is a useful
way to think about the process.
The hypothetico-deductive method was initiated by Newton in the
seventeenth century, but was not formally named until after Popper's contributions were introduced. It is the outgrowth of several hundred years of
tussling between scientists and philosophers. The method integrates both
inductive and deductive logic, paying heed to their individual limits while
leveraging their respective powers.
The Five Stages
1. Observation: A possible pattern or relationship is noticed in a set of
prior observations.
2. Hypothesis: Based on a mysterious mixture of insight, prior knowledge, and inductive generalization, it is hypothesized that the pattern
is not an artifact of the particular set of observations but one that
should be found in any similar set of observations. The hypothesis
may merely assert that the pattern is real (scientific law) or it may go
further and offer an explanation about why the pattern exists (scientific theory).
3. Prediction: A prediction is deduced from the hypothesis and embodied in a conditional proposition. The proposition's antecedent clause
is the hypothesis and its consequent clause is the prediction. The prediction tells us what should be observed in a new set of observations
if the hypothesis is indeed true. For example: If the hypothesis is true,
then X should be observed if operation 0 is performed. The set of
outcomes defined by X makes clear which future observations would
confirm the prediction and, more importantly, which future observations would be in conflict with it.

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

145

4. Verification: ew observations are made in accordance with the operations specified and compared to the predictions. In some sciences
the operation is a controlled experiment. In other sciences it is an observational study.
5. Conclusion: An inference about the truth or falsity of the hypothesis
is made based on the degree to which the observations conform to the
prediction. This stage involves statistical inference methods such as
confidence intervals and hypothesis tests, which are described in
Chapters 4 and 5.
An Example (Tom TA

The following is an example of the hypothetico-deductive method as it
would be applied to testing a new idea about technical analysis.
1. Observation: It is noticed that when a stock market index, such as
the Dow Jones average or the S&P 500, rises above its 200-day moving
average, it generally continues to appreciate over the next several
months (probabilistic generalization).

2. Hypothesis: On the basis of this observation, inductive generalization, and prior findings of technical analysis, we propose the following hypothesis: Upward penetrations of the 200-day moving average
by the DJIA will, on average, produce profitable long positions over
the next three months. I'll refer to this hypothesis as 200-H.
3. Prediction: On the basis of the hypothesis, we predict that an observational investigation, or back test, will be profitable. The hypothesis
and the prediction are turned into the following conditional statement:
If 200-H is true, then the back test wiU be profitable. However this prediction creates a logical problem. Even if the back test is profitable it
will not be helpful in proving the truth of 200-H because, as previously
pointed out, while a profitable back test would be consistent with the
truth of 200-H, it cannot prove that 200-H is true. An attempt to do so
would commit the fallacy of affinning the consequent (see argument 1
below). If, on the other hand, the back test turns out to be unprofitable, it would be valid to conclude 200-H is false by the valid logical
form falsification of the consequent. See Argument 2 below.
Argument 1

Premise 1: If 200-H is true, then a back test wiU be profitable.
Premise 2: The back test was profitable.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, 200-H is true. (fallacy of affirming
the consequent)

146 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Argument 2

Premise 1: If 200-H is true, then a back test will be profitable.
Premise 2: The back test was NOT profitable.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, 200-H is false.
However, our objective is to prove the truth of 200-H. To get around
this logical problem, suppose we had formulated a null hypothesis at
stage 2, specifically, Upward penetrations of a 200-day moving average do not generate profits over the following three months. Let's refer to this as Null-200. From this we can formulate the following
conditional proposition: If Null-200 is true, then a back-test will
NOT be profitable. If the back test does turn out to be profitable, we
can validly argue that the null hypothesis has been falsified (falsifying
the consequent). By the Law of the Excluded Middle, either 200-H is
true or Null-200 is true. There is no middle ground; there is no other
hypothesis possible. Thus by disproving the null we will have indirectly proven that 200-H is true. Thus we have the following conditional syllogism:
Premise 1: If Null-200 is true, then the back test will be unprofitable.
Premise 2: The back test was NOT unprofitable (i.e., it was
profitable) .
Valid Conclusion: Null-200 is false, therefore 200-H is true.
4. Verification: The proposed rule is back tested and its profitability is
