4. Scale out of one contract at a 10-point profit and move the stop to break-even minus 10 for the second contract.
5. For the second contract, stay in the trade until momentum runs out on the histogram. This is indicated by the histogram’s failure to make consecutive higher highs if
long or consecutive lower lows if short. Wait for two consecutive higher/lower bars before exiting at the market on the second contract.
PSYCHOLOGY
Psychology plays a very important role in trading, and the development of a proper trader’s mindset should not be taken for granted. The unsuccessful trader has firm
beliefs and expectations that are often not met by the market. When the outcome doesn’t match the expectation, the trader feels pain and often views the market in a
threatening way. Once this occurs, traders are doomed to fail unless they can recognize what is wrong and develop the proper winning attitude of a successful trader.
Adopt the following for trading success:
• Every Moment Is Unique: Either the trade works or it doesn’t.
• Anything Can Happen: Develop a resolute, unshakable belief in uncertainty. The market has no responsibility to give us anything or do anything that would benefit
us.
• Markets Are Neutral: The market does not generate happy or painful information; therefore, no threat exists. Our expectations formed from our original beliefs are
the sole source of any happiness or pain.
• Losses Are Okay: Losing and being wrong are inevitable realities of trading, since anything can happen. Taking small losses is part of a successful trader’s job.
• Accept Risk: Fully acknowledge the risks inherent in trading and accept complete responsibility for each trade (not the market). When a loss occurs, do not suffer
emotional discomfort or fear.
• Monitor Emotions: Learn how to monitor and control the negative effects of euphoria and the potential for self-sabotage.
• Abandon S earch for Holy Grail: Attitude produces better overall results than analysis or technique.
• Rigid Rules, Flexible Expectations: Adopt rigidity in your trading rules and flexibility in your expectations.
PROFIT GOALS
Income Goal = $20,000 full-time trading profits using two YM contracts (June–December).

491

PROFIT RULES
• $143/day profit objective.
• Once my daily profit goal is obtained, stop trading for the day. Eric, remember you will have losing days too. You will want $143 to be an average, not a stopping
point for the day. If you make $300 one day, and lose $100 the next, then your average over the past two days is $100 per day.—JC
• If I have a day in which I am up double my daily goal and the next trade is a loser, I will stop trading for the day.
• If I triple my daily profit goal before 9:00 a.m. Pacific, I will stop trading for the day and will take the next day off.
• If I meet or exceed my weekly profit goal ($780) before the end of the week, I will take the rest of the week off.
• Track daily P&L and convert to percent returns per day.
DRAWDOWN RULES
• Daily drawdown maximum is 2 percent. If I exceed this level by the end of the day, I cannot trade the next day. If I exceed 2 percent again that week, I will stop
trading for the rest of the week.
• If I am down by 10 percent for the month, I cut my position size in half for the rest of the month.
• If I am down by 15 percent for the month, I will stop trading for the rest of the month.
• If I am down to a 20 percent total drawdown, it is time for at least a four-week break from trading until I can figure out and correct what I am doing wrong.
GRADE CARD
Track and rate the performance of all trades as follows:
PERFORMANCE SCORING

5. Target hit
4. Out at a different price from target, but profitable (time stop)
3. Out at even (scratch, time stop)
2. Out at a different price from stop, but a losing trade (time stop hit)
1. Stop hit
Eric, this is good, but you will also want to grade how well you follow the setups you have chosen—in other words, how well you execute your plan. This is
particularly important given your tendency to overanalyze what you are doing. You also tend to blame yourself when you lose money, i.e., “What am I doing wrong?” If
you follow the setup the same way each time, then the focus of what is “wrong” becomes the setup, not you personally. This way you focus on tweaking the setup, not
blaming yourself. I would adopt the following scale to use to grade how well you actually executed the trade:
EXECUTION SCORING

5. Followed trade as dictated in your plan.
4. Followed trade entry, but closed out position before predetermined target was hit.
3. Followed trade entry, but removed stop and let position run past original target.

492

2. Entered setup late and didn’t set target.
1. Impulse trade.—JC
Add up daily scores and divide by the total number of trades to get an average for both categories. This will keep a grade point average of the number of trades
made that are profitable and those that are executed as originally planned. Track by trading method used (gaps, pivots, and squeeze) so I am able to rate each method
and tweak as needed. Review the score at end of each month to see what needs to be modified.
Note: Any trade that does not fall into one of the three strategies outlined in this plan will be labeled an “impulse play.” Impulse plays are a weakness because they
violate the trading plan, so I must track them to see what impact they have on my trading. I will write down notes on each trade and recognize if I jumped in too soon,
missed a fill, or chased at an extended price.
I will also track various trends in my trading journal:
• How many days did I start off losing, only to come back by the end of the day?
• How many days did I start off strong, only to give it back?
• Were there interruptions during trading hours that may have affected my results?
• Did I decide not to trade because it was a narrow range day?
• Did I get too confident because of a good morning and trade outside my parameters?
OFFICE SETUP
I will use one room in my house as my office, and it will be strictly for trading. The office will be set up with the following:
• Trading computer with three monitors using broadband Internet access.
• Day-to-day computer with separate broadband connection used for nightly research, e-mail, and as a backup to the primary trading computer.
• All computers will run with a battery backup and have M axtor external hard drive.
• Antivirus and firewall protection.
• Spyware software.
• Printer.
• Separate phone line and cell phone.
Eric, this is good. You and your wife also just had your first child (congratulations). How does this fit into your trading? Who is going to watch the baby during the
day? Are you going to get a nanny, etc.? My wife and I are expecting our first child, and I’m in the process of hiring a live-in nanny to help with the daily tasks of raising
children. This is so that Daddy can sleep at night and be ready to trade the next day.—JC
GENERAL TRADING RULES

• Do not hold any intraday positions overnight.
• As a day trader, I am limited by time and range, so I need to be keen to where the market is trading and avoid shorting/buying dead lows/highs of day.
• Parameters of trades are not to be changed once entered. I will define my profit target and stop before the trade is executed. After execution, I will let the trade play
out to see what happens.
• Do not rush into a trade unless parameters are defined before the trade is placed. There will always be another opportunity down the road, and there is no reason to
chase the market.
• Trade on the path of least resistance. For intraday trading, use moving averages on 5-, 15-, and 60-minute charts to confirm the market’s short-term trend. If market
dynamics are strong and moving averages are rising on all time frames, do not take short signals. For mixed markets, take long and short setups in line with
buying/selling pressure on that particular day. Also, use a squeeze indicator to help with determining short-term market bias. If a daily squeeze exists on YM ,
focus on long setups and pass on shorts.
• Be aware of monthly and weekly pressures to be on the right side of the market.
• Focus on executing trades efficiently and not on P&L.
• Do not trade during lunchtime doldrums (8:30 a.m.–11:00 a.m. Pacific).
• M inimize trading on Fed days. M aybe look at the first ½ hour and the last hour for any opportunities.
• During options expiration week, reduce your position size to one contract and consider trading only M onday to Wednesday of that week. Do not trade on Thursday
493

and Friday.
• Trade light during the month of August, especially the last two weeks, as volume dries up and the trading gets choppy. Focus on preparing for September trading
when volume and players return to the markets.
• Consider taking time off during Thanksgiving week and during the last two weeks of December.
WHAT TO T RACK
On a daily basis, keep track of the following:
• M arket dynamics spreadsheet: tracks sector performance, advance/decline, breadth, and so on, of the major markets. This should be done in both intraday and end-ofday formats. For intraday, data will be logged every ½ hour.
• Pending economic data and when it is being released, key earnings reports, and any upcoming Fed meetings.
• Review major markets and key sectors on 15-minute, 60-minute, and daily time frames. Note position of moving averages to gauge supply/demand dynamics,
oscillators, and key price levels on daily and 60-minute charts. Use monthly and weekly charts to help confirm support/resistance on shorter time frames. Look
for confluence at price levels. From this information, a bias should be developed for the next day.
• Keep a trading journal that documents each trading day’s action.
This is the end of Eric’s trading plan.

Summing Up the Trading Plan
Eric put a lot of thought into his plan, and, as a result, he will not be staring at the markets each day wondering what he should be doing. This mental flailing around is
what initiates most of the mistakes all amateurs tend to make. If you are a new trader without a plan, remember that you are going to be trading directly against Eric
and other people like him who have put a lot of thought into their trading plan. For every hundred traders who are out there, fewer than five have a plan as detailed as
this. Who do you think stands a better chance of winning more consistently over the long run? You can visit www.tradethemarkets.com/plan to download an updated
copy of my trading plan.
The fun in trading comes from the thrill of the hunt, the anticipation of the kill. All the research, all the work culminates into a single moment in time when a trader
makes a decision to pull the trigger and is shortly thereafter presented with the results. A trader who can string together enough consistent winners opens the door to a
whole new life of independence. The lure of this challenge draws people of all ages and from all walks of life into the markets. Those who can face up to the challenge
of drawing up a plan to pave the way will have the odds of success in their favor.

494

25
Tips and Tricks for When
It’s Not Working for You, No
Matter What You Do
Do not blame God for having created the tiger, but thank him for not having given it wings.
—INDIAN PROVERB
There is an island of opportunity in the middle of every difficulty. Miss that, though, and you’re pretty much doomed.
—DESPAIR.COM

Will Cry for Food—Using Your Emotions to Make Money
The biggest problem traders have is controlling their emotions. I see it all the time. Traders know the setup they are supposed to follow, but they get swept up in their
emotions and blow the trade. By stepping back and examining this process in more detail, traders can learn to use their emotional reactions as indicators. Properly
tuned, these emotional indicators, instead of leading to mistakes, can create great triggers to enter and exit a market. This is part of the transition from amateur to
professional—instead of getting sucked into a trade because of your emotions, use the emotional triggers to fight back and do exactly the opposite of what they are
signaling you to do.

The Four Seasons Hotel Trade
When I am in a trade that is going my way and I start to feel overly excited and have the urge to add to my position, I instead use this as my trigger to set up a “double
stop order.” As an example, let’s say I’m long 10 E-mini S&P contracts. The market is screaming higher. I find myself thinking of how many nights I could live at the
Four Seasons on M aui with the day’s profits. I recognize this feeling and immediately take the “Four Seasons trigger”: I place a trailing 2-point stop for 20 contracts,
double the size of my current position.
What happens is that I will stay in the trade as long as it is moving higher, but once the market turns, not only am I out of my position for a nice profit, but I also
simultaneously get short 10 contracts. This process takes advantage of the market dynamics of human emotion in a very clean fashion. The sell-off that occurs will be
driven by other traders who succumbed to their emotions and bought at the top, because of either fear of missing a move or the euphoria of having a current winning
position. Once the market does reverse, it will be these traders who will provide the fuel for the move down as they start dumping their positions once they can’t take
the pain of losing any longer. This is one example of how to get your emotions working for you instead of against you.

Thank You, Sir, May I Have Another?
When I’m in a trade, I visualize what a newer trader would be doing—or what I would have been doing when I first started out. “If I entered here, where would my
pain point be?” I’ve found that on the S&Ps, a move of 6 points without any meaningful retracements is the maximum “uncle point” for most traders. When I see a 6point move without a retracement, I picture new traders and try to imagine the pain they are feeling. After about 6 points, I know they won’t be able to take the pain
any longer, and I step in and take the opposite side of this move, just as they are bailing out of their position and throwing cabbage at their screen. One person’s stop
run is another person’s entry point.
As a professional trader, you will always be using a stop, so you will no longer find yourself in this very real, very frequent, and very unfortunate position. Use
your emotions to feel other traders’ pain and figure out when they are going to throw in the towel.

When I Tick, You Tick, We Tick
A more technical way to measure emotion is to watch the ticks. This is the same setup we talked about in Chapter 9. This time, however, if you are sitting there and
the market is running away from you, instead of blindly jumping in, look at the ticks. Are they approaching +1,000? They are probably getting close, as pools of
amateur traders continue to buy at the market and tempt the goddess of good luck. The ticks are a great emotional balancing mechanism. A frequent surge of adrenaline
that comes from watching a market that’s moving without you can be quickly tempered by a quick look at the ticks.

Dive, Captain, Dive
M y trading partners and I run an Internet-based trading room where people log in from around the world. One of the things we all like to do is watch how the newer
traders react to the market action. There are “noises” that the people in the room can use. One of the classic actions is that when the market is falling, falling, falling,
one of the free trial users in the room posts that she is going short and initiates the “submarine dive, dive, dive” noise. Immediately upon hearing this, I know it is time
to cover my shorts and go long. The experienced traders in the room also know this, and we all jump in and take the trade. The market usually reverses quickly, and
once the newbie traders say that they are stopped out of the short trade, we cover our longs. It’s emotion-based trading at its finest. Of course, we then share this
information with the newbie traders. Once they catch on, we just have to wait for the next free trial to show up.
As a trader, if you find that you are constantly shorting the lows and buying the highs, picture newbie traders getting so excited that they are about to literally “push
the dive, dive, dive button.” Do you want to be trading with or against these people?

High Five, Baby

495

Whenever traders I work with—or myself, for that matter—start slapping one another on the back as the result of a good open trade that is racking up profits, I
immediately snap alert and close out my position. This is the result of extreme emotion, and extreme emotion is not sustainable. I call this the “high five sell signal.”
Any time you actually utter a noise or pound on something as the result of a trade that is going really well, it’s a wake-up call for you to turn back into a
professional trader.

Discover Your Personality Type and Find Out If It’s Holding You Back
One of the themes I’ve discussed in this book is the importance of finding the right markets and the right setups that best fit a trader’s personality. People view the
trades they are taking through one of the three dominant personality traits that all human beings share. Some of these personality types are naturally better suited to
the world of trading than others. Unfortunately, there are also personality types that will not win at trading no matter what they do. However, there is a silver lining
here. The reason these personality types lose is that they are unaware that their personality is the very thing that is responsible for their mounting losses and
continued frustration. Once a trader learns about this, he can then use this information to turn his trading around.
The following 20-question quiz will help you determine your dominant personality type. There is no right answer, and it may seem to you that there are two right
answers to some of the questions. Just pick the one that makes the most sense in terms of how it relates to you. Don’t think about these too long. The faster you can
move through this, the more accurate the readings will be, and the better the information you will have to improve your trading. This is one of the personality profiles I
have traders take when they come and work with me, so I can get a better idea of who they are and which markets and setups are best suited to their personality. Here
we go:
1. When you think back to one of the best vacations you’ve had, what part of the vacation do you first remember?
A. The sights and how the place looked.
B. The different sounds you experienced.
C. The way you felt while on vacation there.
2. When you think back to a person who captivated your interest, what is the first thing that really attracted you to him or her?
A. The person’s appearance and looks.
B. What the person said to you.
C. How you felt being around the person.
3. When you are driving, how do you get around?
A. I look for road signs or follow a map.
B. I listen for familiar sounds that point me in the right direction.
C. I follow my gut and get a sense of where I am.
4. When I play my favorite sport, I really enjoy:
A. The way the sport looks, and the way I look playing it.
B. The way it sounds, like the bang of the bat hitting the ball or the cheering fans.
C. The way the game feels, like holding on to a tennis racket or the feeling of running around the court.
5. M aking a decision is easier when:
A. I can see all the choices in my mind’s eye.
B. I can hear discussions from both sides in my head.
C. I can sense how I would feel if either option came to fruition.
6. From the following list, I would say my favorite activities are:
A. Photography, painting, reading, sketching, and films.
B. M usic, musical instruments, the sound of the sea, wind chimes, concerts.
C. Ball games, woodworking, massage, introspection, touching.
7. When I am shopping for clothes, after seeing the item for the first time, the very next thing that I do is:
A. Take another really good look at it or picture myself wearing it.
B. Listen closely to the salesperson and/or have a dialogue with myself about the pros and cons of buying it.
C. Get a feeling about it and/or touch it to see if it’s something I’d enjoy wearing.
8. During the times I find myself thinking of a former lover, the first thing that happens is that I:
A. Visualize the person clearly in my mind.
B. Hear the sound of the person’s voice in my mind.
C. Start feeling a certain way about the person.
9. When I am at the gym or working out, my feeling of contentment comes from:
A. Seeing my reflection in the mirror improving.
B. Hearing compliments from people around me about how good I look.
C. Feeling my body get stronger and sensing that it’s more in shape.
10. When I’m doing math, I check my answer by:
A. Viewing the answers to see if the numbers look correct.
496

B. Counting the numbers in my mind.
C. Using my hands and fingers to get a sense of whether or not I am right.
11. When I write out words, I verify the correct spelling by:
A. Seeing the word in my mind’s eye to see if it looks right.
B. Pronouncing the word out loud or hearing it in my mind.
C. Getting a gut feeling about the way the word is spelled.
12. When I love someone, I get an immediate experience of:
A. The way we appear with each other through the eyes of love.
B. Hearing or saying “I love you.”
C. A warm feeling toward that person.
13. When I do not like someone, I immediately experience dislike:
A. When I see that person coming toward me.
B. When that person starts talking to me.
C. When I know that person is around.
14. When I am at the beach, the initial thing that makes me happy to be there is:
A. The look of the golden sand and the beautiful sun and placid water.
B. The sound of the thrashing waves, the howling winds, and whispers from afar.
C. The touch of the sand, the salty air at my lips, and the feeling of calmness.
15. With regard to my career, I know I’m on the right path when:
A. I see myself clearly in one of the executive offices.
B. I hear the president say, “You are one of the company’s stars.”
C. I feel satisfaction in getting a promotion.
16. In order for me to get a good night’s sleep, it is critical that:
A. The room is dark, with little or no light coming in from outside.
B. The room is quiet, without any distracting noises.
C. The bed feels incredibly soft and comfortable.
17. When I get anxious, the first thing I notice is:
