
PART THREE

118

F I G U R E

Rediscovering Profitability

6.1

The vertical price bar shows up at key intersections of price and time, often signaling the end of a swing in
either direction. AES Corporation sells off from 9.48 to 4.80 and bounces in March. The stock ticks higher in a
series of rally waves, finally reaching the 78.6% retracement of the last downswing. The rally lurches forward
in a wide range bar that completes the 100% round trip and prints a first rise pattern. Note how the big bar also
yields the final wave of an Elliott five-wave rally set within a larger third-wave rally.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

old high or low. In Fibonacci lore, the 62.8% and 78.6% retracements mark
the last lines in the sand for price to reverse and start a counterswing. The
mounting of the last Fib barrier, at 78.6%, often triggers a surging market
that completes the 100% retracement and hits a larger scale support or
resistance level. This follows the mechanics of the first rise/first failure
pattern discussed in The Master Swing Trader.

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

119

Above all else, price swings denote the major highs and lows that
stand out on the charting landscape. Markets seek out these highs and
lows, as well as any barriers (like gaps) that block movement into these
magnetic levels. These inflection points then become price targets for our
trades in both directions. When we evaluate progress within a swing and
properly analyze the angle of attack, we can estimate, sometimes with
amazing accuracy, how long it will take for price to get to a major termination point. This magic number then determines the holding period for
all positions that are intended to take advantage of that particular swing.
The devil is in the details because the markets move through multiple
swings in different time dimensions simultaneously. This goes back to
the concept of trend relativity, which affects every aspect of our trading
performance. In a nutshell, trends move independently in all time frames
until they come into the territory of larger-scale swings, which then take
priority. You’ve committed a logistical mistake, which I’ve dubbed the
trend relativity error, when you find a swing in one time frame but trade it
in another time frame.
Debris within the charting landscape increases or reduces the odds
that price will complete a 100% swing back to the last high or low. Gaps,
trendlines, and moving averages all stand in the way of progress toward
those magnetic price levels. These barriers need to be reviewed and
measured as part of our trade preparation because each one has the power
to force a reversal well below an old high or above an old low. The distance
between the entry and termination point of the current swing denotes the
initial profit target. The distance between the entry and inception point of
the current swing denotes the initial risk or failure target. Your analysis
then reduces reward and risk, taking into account any debris above and
below the entry price that is likely to trigger reversals. Once completed,
you’re looking at a quick snapshot of what you might gain or lose on that
trade.
You can modify the reward side of the equation even further by
increasing your holding period to accommodate small-scale counterswings within the bigger swing, i.e., consolidations and corrective waves.
You can modify the risk side of the equation even further by shortening up
your holding period and placing stops behind small-scale counterswings
that have already printed within the bigger swing. Finally, you have the
option of reducing risk even more by using absolute or percentage based
stops that will take you out of the trade at prespecified loss levels.
Simply stated, the most profitable positions arise when there are
few barriers between your entry and the last swing high/low and many
barriers between your entry and the inception point of the current swing.

120

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

This marks the low-hanging fruit that shows up from time to time in the
evolution of pattern cycles through stocks, futures, currencies, and the
broad indices. It’s surprisingly easy to train your eyeballs to find these
favorable patterns when flipping through the charts, doing your nightly
analysis. In fact, I find it amazing how few folks pay close enough attention
to this reliable profit-making machine.
In Figure 6.2, Celestica rallies from 7.36 to 12.22 over a three-month
period. The uptrend yields two sharp price waves (1,3), with a consolidation pattern (2) in between. The continuation gap (A) at 10 marks the
halfway point of the larger-scale swing as well as a breakout from the
six-week trading range. Note how this gap also prints a breakaway gap in
a smaller time frame. The stock tops out in October, printing a small head
and shoulders reversal pattern (C). It breaks down in a high volume gap
and swings lower (4), retracing the entire breakout. Notably, the selloff
also breaks the 50-day moving average, which now stands as resistance on
any recovery attempt. The downtrend pauses right on top of the summer
consolidation pattern (2) for over a month. Price finally breaks down, ticks
higher in a pullback to resistance (B), and plunges in a second selloff (5)
that retraces the first rally wave.
The convergence of the consolidation pattern (2) and continuation
gap (A) marks the only barriers that are limiting reward potential during
the initial selloff. The trader uses that price level as the profit target, with
the failure target lying just above the neckline of the broken head and
shoulders pattern. What happens if the trader is late to the party and
the initial selloff bar is well under way? No problem, because the 50-day
EMA breakdown sets up a new barrier on any recovery effort. In turn, this
supports a new failure target just above the moving average.
In early December, the recovery attempt has run its course, and the
stock breaks support around 9.50. This triggers an initial sell signal that
can be entered on the downside momentum thrust. Better yet, wait for
the pullback to resistance (B). The trader can then enter at the ideal price,
where the small bars fill the gap at 9.70, or the ideal time, when price rolls
over and breaks the six-day bear flag pattern. The failure target for the new
short sale lies just above the gap or flag. The profit target is sitting at the
low of the consolidation pattern (2), but selling pressure carries quickly
through that support level. When that happens, there are no barriers until
falling price reaches the inception point of the upswing at 7.36, so that
level becomes the new profit target. The stock continues lower for the next
two weeks, until downside momentum finally washes out and points to a
time-based exit.

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

F I G U R E

121

6.2

Celestica round-trip.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

The utopian “perfect” trade combines your well-defined edge with
accurate swing analysis, utilizing a holding period that matches the specific
opportunity. The edge, in this case, refers to your skill in finding decent
patterns based on your personal experience, effective market scanning,
and the concepts in this book. Accurate swing analysis refers to the profit
and failure targets, modified by chart debris inhibiting favorable price
movement.
Ask yourself the following two questions when pulling up a pattern
that looks like a good trade:

122

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

• How far can it go before hitting the next obvious barrier?
• How long will it take to get from point A to point B?
Your honest answers are more important than the pattern itself,
which might show an attractive cup and handle, perfect rectangle, or
a well-honed trendline. Simply stated, it doesn’t matter if a financial
instrument breaks out or breaks down when it has nowhere to go. This is
a bigger problem than you might think, because traders routinely engage
in an unconscious process of formfitting in which they focus narrow
attention on the price pattern while ignoring the considerable obstacles
that make actual trade risk unpalatable. This goes back to our love of the
hunt. We get so excited uncovering a textbook pattern that we forget it
means absolutely nothing unless the reward to risk profile is favorable
and the swing size fits into our trading plan. Of course, price can overcome all the barriers between the entry price and the swing termination
point, but most of our plans can’t cope with the drawdown and extended
holding period.
Context is everything in the financial markets. In other words, the
significance of what’s happening today is directly related to what happened in the past. That’s why it is vitally important to evaluate the
context of the current swing if you want to make good trades. No, it isn’t
an easy task because every financial instrument oscillates through multiple swings in multiple time frames simultaneously. Realistically,
though, the size and structure of the last major counterswing usually
provides the bulk of information needed for any trades that pass through
those levels.
It’s wrong to think of price swings as sawtooth patterns, with alternating V-shaped oscillation. Rather, a notable swing usually gives way
to a trading range, often three to four times the length of the swing,
which then yields to a trend in the same or opposite direction. This consolidation pattern adds actionable levels in the same way as any largerscale topping or bottoming pattern. Fibonacci retracements come into play
here because the current swing can be measured as a retracement percentage of the prior swing. A trading range often fills up the first 38% of the
journey back toward an old high or low, limiting the best profit potential
to the second half of the new swing. Trading ranges taking up less
retracement space, say 20% to 25% in a typical scenario, offer more advantageous position taking than broader congestion patterns. You can see how
this worked with the “compact” Celestica head and shoulders pattern,
which took up just a minor portion of the evolving downswing.

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

F I G U R E

123

6.3

Context is everything in the financial markets. Mattel sells off over two points and bounces at 13.88. It carves
out a wide double bottom pattern that takes up 50% of the prior downswing (1). The stock finally breaks out (2)
above the “Big W,” or center point of the double bottom, and triggers a buy signal. However, there’s now just a
single point of profit between the trade entry and top of the prior swing (3), which will trigger a renewed
sell signal.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

Convergence-Divergence
Charles Dow outlined the most famous convergence-divergence (C-D)
analysis in market history when he wrote a series of articles that gave birth
to the Dow Theory over 100 years ago. In a nutshell, he postulated that
trends in both directions lacked persistence unless they were confirmed

124

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

through coordinated price movement between the industrial and railroad
averages. In other words, the two big indices of his era needed to converge
in order to “prove” that a bull or bear trend was valid. In addition, Dow
insisted that volume had to support the trend, with participation increasing during movement in the trend direction and decreasing during
movement counter to the trend. His logic assumed that rising volume in
an uptrend pointed to convergence, while falling volume in an uptrend
pointed to divergence, or the polar opposite of convergence.
There are literally thousands of C-D relationships in our modern
markets. Therein lies the Gordian knot for the survivalist trader. If you
don’t know which two data points to compare or which trend to compare
them with, whatever information you glean from the analysis might turn
out to be worthless. Even worse, your scrutiny could lead to inaccurate
conclusions that yield misinformed trading or investment decisions. Ironically, this particular error cost market players as much money after the
2008 crash as the actual crash itself.
Technical analysis and tape reading rely on effective C-D interpretation. Not surprisingly, the subject matter overwhelms many traders
because, literally, every two data inputs in the markets yield an underlying
C-D relationship. To overcome these infinite variations, we need to keep
things simple and find the narrow relationships that predict price
movement, direction, and timing. Positioning of the major indices or their
derivative instruments is the obvious place to start our C-D examination.
Our primary analysis, day to day, simply compares the progress of our
watch lists and active trades with the S&P 500 and Nasdaq-100 indices or
index futures. We looked at this aspect in the second chapter, highlighting
the impact of program algorithms on the C-D equation. In fact, you’ll find
that C-D analysis is an overriding theme throughout this book and in The
Master Swing Trader. If you take a second look at the cross-verification
process outlined in the first book, you’ll discover it’s simply a set of convergence-divergence relationships. And so it goes through nearly every
aspect of market analysis. That’s why attempting to trade profitability
without becoming a lifetime student of cross-market influences is an
exercise in futility.
C-D relationships are defined as bullish or bearish. This sets up four
possible outcomes: bullish convergence, bullish divergence, bearish convergence, and bearish divergence. It’s perfectly normal to recognize a convergence or divergence relationship but not understand whether it will
have a positive or negative impact on market movement, direction, and
timing. To complicate matters even further, most C-D relationships have
little or no impact on those three elements. Fortunately, common sense

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

125

and a little intuition go a long way in correct C-D interpretation. In other
words, if the relationship “feels” bullish, it probably is, and if your tummy
hurts because C-D is going haywire, it’s usually a good time to step back
to the sidelines and reevaluate.
Ironically, the best way to check the accuracy of your C-D observations is through yet another C-D relationship. Take the bias you’ve
established through your analysis, and compare it with broad market
action. Does the ticker tape support or refute that bullish or bearish point
of view? For example, you note a bearish divergence, but the tape remains
in strong rally mode despite your misgivings. This signals a divergence
between your established bias and the reality you’re staring at. It also
means you’re probably wrong. You might not realize it, but this process of
comparing predisposition versus price action is codified in the classic
market wisdom to “trade what you see and not what you believe.”
Convergence-divergence analysis requires on-the-fly decision making. Say you’re holding three long positions overnight: a tech stock, a
retail stock, and a bank stock. You wake up the next morning with the
Nasdaq-100 glowing green while the S&P 500 is down a half percentage
point. You check the news and discover that Google just raised estimates
while Bank of America disclosed significant trading losses in the current
quarter. Adding to the mix, monthly same store sales for the retailer you’re
holding come in right on expectations. This diverse data flow has generated
a myriad of C-D relationships that will mean the difference between a
profitable morning and a total disaster. Start your triage by examining the
most dangerous situation first—the bank stock getting hit by bearish sector
news. Check the premarket quote to see how it’s trading vis-à-vis the prior
close. Then compare the percentage loss, if any, to price action on Bank of
America. At a minimum, your position should be lower by a smaller
percentage than the issue hit directly by the news. Not surprisingly, it’s a
major bearish divergence if it’s the other way around. Next, check if your
stock is trading at, above, or below the next obvious support level. It’s a
bullish divergence if it hasn’t broken support despite the news. Finally,
compare price action in the opening minutes of the regular session to the
bank index performance to see if it sells off a smaller or greater percentage.
If bullish divergences add up, discount the news by holding on or reducing
position size as opposed to selling outright. If bearish convergences line
up or your analysis shows conflicting information, sell the bank stock and
move on.
The tech stock is easier to manage because the positive Nasdaq-100
converges with your long-side risk. The addition of good news from
Google adds another layer of convergence that supports the position

126

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

and raises the attractiveness of adding sector exposure. C-D analysis of
the retail stock is more challenging than it might appear at first glance.
On the surface, there’s no obvious C-D relationship because the news
matches expectations. But the perfect match actually generates all sorts
of C-D data, starting with the market’s reaction to the nonnews event. In
other words, does the stock trade higher or lower, and how does that price
action compare to broader sector activity?
Of course, it’s extremely frustrating to watch a long position sell off
after meeting high expectations. This is especially true during earnings
season, which presents traders and investors with the most steroidal
C-D events of the entire year. It also points out the tremendous value of
decision making based strictly on C-D relationships and the underlying
technicals, rather than relying on fundamentals, external opinion, or
outdated portfolio theories.
Finally, the crazy quilt of C-D relationships addresses a question
that’s been posed repeatedly to me in the last decade: how can I learn to
read the ticker tape? In truth, effective tape reading is nothing more than
watching set after set of C-D relationships pass before your eyes and then
translating those observations into accurate predictions of movement,
direction, and timing. It’s a deceptively simple practice that can take
decades to master. And so it goes with convergence-divergence because
there’s no way to shorten the trader’s path when it comes to divining the
crosscurrents of economics, price action, and psychology that translate
into the diabolical mind of the market.

Defensive Short Selling
It isn’t easy for most traders to make money by selling first and buying
last. In fact, we have an uncanny ability to watch prices plummet for hours
and then sell short at exactly the wrong time. Sadly, this is one of the great
truths of playing that side of the trading game. Ironically, even a bear
market can make life tough for short sellers because the diabolical tape
will always find a way to punish the majority. Fortunately, the survivalist
mindset provides a defensive workflow that avoids common pitfalls of
this classic strategy, like chasing into a morning bear trap.
In most sessions, the markets show tremendous overlap in daily
price ranges. In other words, pick out today’s high and low for a particular instrument, and tomorrow’s market will probably trade through

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

127

a good portion of that daily range. This is a big problem for short sellers
because it undermines logical stop placement and makes low-risk entry
prices harder to find. In truth, price goes nowhere most of the time, even in
a bear market, with real declines occurring quickly and in sudden bursts
of negative energy. This narrow window of opportunity means that sellers
need to wait for a seller’s market and/or risk getting burned because
their timing isn’t absolutely perfect. Even then, short selling makes a
terrible group sport because many stocks attract overcrowding, which can
trigger endless squeezes until weak-handed players get shaken out. And,
just to rub salt into the wound, the most obvious selling spots routinely
trigger the most violent squeezes. Taken together, these adverse dynamics
warn us to travel the less trampled path if we’re serious about selling
the market.
Short sales require three primary attributes in order to book consistent profits: the right strategy, perfect timing, and extreme patience. If
you can’t meet all of these requirements, it’s best to forgo the activity and
limit your trading to the long side. Indeed, short covering rallies focus
most of their bloodletting on weak-handed players who haven’t perfected
these interconnected components. The majority of profitable short sales
will follow one of these four entry strategies:
1.	Failed breakouts (2B reversals). The 2B reversal sets up when a
financial instrument at a new high fails a breakout by dropping
under the last swing high. This failure usually takes place within
one to three bars after the breakout, but it can occur much later.
The actual sell signal triggers when price trades through the low
of the first recovery bounce. These short trades can occur in all
time frames but are especially effective on the daily chart, when
price breaks out on high volume after much effort and then
traps buyers in a wide-range selloff or gap down bar. You’ll find
a detailed example of the 2B reversal trade in Chapter 7 of The
Master Swing Trader.
2.	Pullbacks. Pullback shorts rely on weak rallies into resistance after
the financial instrument incurs obvious technical damage. This
pattern can appear high in an uptrend if there’s a notable gap that
breaks support, but it occurs more often within the context of a
well-established downtrend. In both cases, the sell signal triggers
when price spikes into an obvious resistance level and rolls over,
or above an obvious resistance level and then sells off, like the
Canadian Solar breakdown discussed later in this chapter.

128

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

3.	Narrow range. Selling short within narrow range patterns is less
risky than chasing the market in either direction. This defensive
strategy looks for tight congestion at a key support level after an
instrument sells off in a developing downtrend. Enter the sell
order within the two- or three-day range, placing a buy cover stop
just above the short-term high in case price turns tail and heads
into a larger-scale recovery.
4.	Momentum entry. Shorting downside momentum is a highly
