
c11.indd 223

11/2/07 12:46:41 PM

224

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

$7.99 while the cost of pizzas around the world have now gone up to
$12.99 your intrinsic value for this pizza coupon is now $5.

Closing Your Option Position at Expiration
We said in the previous chapter that you are not required to ever buy
the shares of stock if you own a call option, but you do have the right
to do so. Most traders just take their profits by selling the contracts
in the open market without ever buying the shares. Now that you
know how to exercise your option contract and also understand how
to calculate intrinsic values, we will now show you that there really
isn’t any difference between the two choices of either exercising your
option or closing it in the open market at expiration.
Assume that that you buy a $40 call for $5 and, at expiration,
the stock is trading for $50. You could call up your broker and tell
them you want to exercise your call, which would require your having to pay $4,000 toward the purchase of the stock (remember each
option contract represents 100 shares of stock). Then you could
immediately sell 100 shares of stock at $50 per share and collect
$5,000 on the transaction. This, of course, would leave you will a net
profit of $500 because you originally paid $5 for the option (100 
$5  $500) but collected a profit of $1,000, which was the difference
between your sale price of $50 per-share times 100 shares less your
buy price of $40 per share times 100 shares. Now, how would you do if
you just sold your option without exercising it? With the stock trading $50 a share your $40 call would have an intrinsic value of $10
so if you sold it you would collect $1,000 (100  $10  $1,000), less
the $500 you paid for the option, leaves you with a profit of $500.
So you would have a gain whether you exercised your option and
sold the stock in the open market or just sold the calls in the open
market.
The big difference that you have to consider is what might happen after you have closed out your position. If the stock goes higher
on the Monday after expiration Friday you may wish that you just
exercised the option and held on to the long stock position. Then
again, there is always the chance that the stock could drop after you
exercise your call option. This is a matter of how much risk you want
to take in the overall position. Just make sure the decision you make is
in favor of the trend that exists in that stock at that particular point
in time.

c11.indd 224

11/2/07 12:46:41 PM

Essential Options, Part 2

225

Closing Your Option Prior to Expiration Friday
Okay, so there is no difference to us whether we close out of an
option at expiration when compared to exercising it and selling
the stock in the open market. What about if we wish to close out of the
option position prior to expiration? Well, now, this does make a difference and sometimes it makes a big difference. Assume you that
you buy a longer-term call option that has two months left before
expiration and you purchased a $40 call for $7 when the stock was
trading $45 per share. Let’s also say that the stock is now trading for
$47 a share.
If you decide to go ahead and exercise your $40 call you will
again have to call up your broker and put in a request to exercise
your option. Once you do this you will have to pay out $4,000 to
buy 100 shares of the stock at $40 per share. You would then sell
your stock at $47 per share and collect $4,700. The credit received
for this transaction would be the difference between your sell price
and the exercise price which is $4,700 minus $4,000 or a profit of
$700. But don’t forget you paid $7 for the option, which works out
to be a cost of $700 (100 shares  $7  $700). When you subtract
the cost of the option from the profit on the trade you are left with
a net profit of ZERO. When you exercise an option early, you forfeit
the time premium and prematurely give it away to the person who
sold you the option in the first place. Therefore, the majority of the
time, you would not want to exercise your option when there is time
value left in the premium.
Looking at the other scenario, we have the same position:
Long one $40 call with two months left until expiration. Your
purchase price for the option was $7 when the stock was trading $45
per share. Now that the stock is trading $47 per share, the premium
on that option has also gone up to $8.50. Should you close the position by selling the call in the open market you will be able to collect
a credit of $850 (100  $8.50  $850). This credit of $850 less the
$700 you paid for the option allows you to collect a net profit of
$150. So you need to be careful before you decide to exercise your
options. Carefully consider how much time value you would be giving
up before you call up your broker to go through with you exercise
instructions. The reason there is no difference between exercising
a call at expiration when compared to selling it in the open market is because there is no time value left in the option. There is no

c11.indd 225

11/2/07 12:46:41 PM

226

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

time remaining on Expiration Friday, and the time value is therefore
nothing. Prior to expiration, time value does count and there can be
significant differences between the two choices.
As you become more familiar with options, you’ll hear caveats to
the “don’t exercise early” rule such as only exercise early to capture
a dividend. Exercising early may make sense, but it really only offsets
some small losses. Most dividends are small and usually not our concern as traders of call options (unless it is a large, surprise dividend).
But, for now, just understand that in the vast majority of cases, it is
never to your advantage to exercise a call option early. If you wish to
take profits, simply sell the call option in the open market. Now you
see why the majority of contracts are just closed in the open market.
Most traders never intend to buy the shares and just buy and sell the
contracts by themselves.

Let’s Talk Volatility
Okay, we have talked about the basics of call options, and we’ve said
that they are not that much different from pizza coupons other than
the fact that options have value. So why do you suppose that pizza
coupons have no value whereas call options do? Many are inclined to
say that it’s due to the prices and that stocks are far more expensive
than options. That’s partially true, but the bigger reason is because
of the uncertainty of prices. You can be almost certain that the $7.99
pizza price will stay just about the same and as competitive the pizza
market is, there is a good chance that the price of pizza may even fall.
Because we are fairly certain about the prices we will pay for pizza
next week, next month or even next year for pizza, there’s no reason
we would want to “lock in” the price of pizza. As a consequence,
pizza coupons have no real value other than a slight discount off of
the normal price of a pie.
Options, however, do carry value since stock prices can change
so unpredictably. One day, the stock will be up and the next day
it could be down 10 percent or more. We just never know what is
going to happen to the price from one day to the next. Because of
this uncertainty, traders and investors are very willing to pay for the
right to lock in a price for the stock. Their goal is to avoid holding
the stock and having to lay out large sums of money in the process.
Stock prices that exhibit dramatic price ranges are considered to
be more volatile than one that does not. While there are many ways

c11.indd 226

11/2/07 12:46:41 PM

Essential Options, Part 2

227

to measure the volatility of a stock, just understand that the more
volatile the stock’s price, the more money people are willing to pay
for an option. Therefore, a one-month, at-the-money option on a
more volatile stock will be much more expensive than a one-month,
at-the-money option on a less volatile stock. In the next section, we
will talk about some easy-to-learn strategies that will help you profit
from both sides of the market—the upside and downside—while at
the same time considering how volatility comes into play.

Long Calls
Let’s start with one of the most basic option strategies: the long call
position. We’ve shown that call options get more valuable as the stock
price rises. For any given strike or “coupon” price you hold, the higher
the price, the more someone will be willing to buy your coupon for
and as a result they will bid a higher price in order to hold it.
Let’s compare two traders, Trader A and Trader B, who are
both looking to trade 1,000 shares of Wal-Mart (ticker symbol:
WMT). Trader A will be using stock, while Trader B uses options.
In Figure 11.2 you can see that Trader A has laid out $48,000 to
buy 1,000 shares of Wal-Mart. Having this much money in this position means that it’s possible to lose a significant amount should
Wal-Mart shares crash.
Trader B can accomplish the same thing with less risk by buying
10 of the call options. Buying 10 option contracts for $3.50 will cost

Figure 11.2 Long Stock vs. Long Calls

c11.indd 227

11/2/07 12:46:42 PM

228

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

a total of $3,500 plus commissions and no matter what happens to
the price of Wal-Mart between now and June expiration, Trader B
has a defined maximum loss potential of $3,500. Notice that Trader
A does not have a defined loss potential even if he uses a stop loss
order. Stop loss orders do not define maximum loss potential should
the stock move against you. Trader A is now long 1,000 shares of
WMT while Trader B owns 10 $45 calls. If Wal-Mart falls more than
$3.50 per share or lower by expiration, Trader A is going to wish he
had bought the calls instead. Trader A will continue to suffer losses
for all prices below $44.50, whereas Trader B will no longer have to
suffer a loss below the $3.50 paid for the option. You can only lose
what you pay for an option and no more.
Now let’s take a look at the stock to see what would happen if the
stock were to rise. Let’s assume that Wal-Mart rises and is now trading $55 per share (see Figure 11.3). Trader A paid $48 per share and
sold it at $55 per share for a profit of $7,000 less commissions.
This $7-per-share gain works out to be a profit of 14.6 percent.
However, with a $7 rise in the stock the June $45 calls now have
intrinsic value of $10. Trader B paid $3.50 for the calls and can now
sell them for at least $10 in the open market for a $6.50 gain, which
works out to be a profit of 186 percent.
This is just one simple example of how a trader can get leverage in the market without having to lay out large sums of money to
trade, and this example shows what can happen if the stock makes
a big percentage move in price. The other thing to consider is that

Figure 11.3 Stock vs. Option Profit when Wal-Mart Is $55

c11.indd 228

11/2/07 12:46:42 PM

Essential Options, Part 2

229

when you buy options, you need the stock to move. We need speed
for the option to be most effective and if the stock drops just below
the strike price and closes there, the owner of the option will lose
that amount paid for the option because at that point there will be
no intrinsic value in the option and the calls will expire worthless.
This is the trade-off when compared to trading a stock position.
Shares of stock do not have expiration dates, so you will be able to
hold on to the stock position long after the options have expired,
and should the stock rally afterward, you could eventually get a
return on your investment. So the lesson you need to learn here
is to make sure you are buying calls that help you position yourself
in the direction of the trend, and should the stock continue in an
upward trend, the returns can be far better than if you had just
purchased the shares alone.

Long Puts
Let’s now assume that you are bearish on Wal-Mart and you wish to
short shares of the stock. For many people, the concept of shorting is still very unfamiliar. Short selling is simply a way for you to
sell stock that you do not own in order to profit from a downturn
in the stock. To do this, you would borrow stock from your broker
with a promise to return those shares to them at a later date. Once
you have borrowed the stock, you would then sell those shares in
the open market with the intention of buying them back at a lower
price. So the idea is to sell high and buy low, then keep the difference. However, should you sell the shares that you borrowed from
your broker and the price of that stock goes up after you have taken
the short position, you subject yourself to unlimited loss potential
because there is no limit to how high a stock can go. Eventually, you
will have to buy back the stock in order to repay your loan, and this
unlimited loss potential is one of the reasons most people shy away
from the short-selling strategy.
Buying puts allows you to take advantage of a downturn in the
market without subjecting yourself to the unlimited loss potential.
In Chapter 10, we discussed how puts act as insurance policies for
the person who owns stock. But you don’t have to own stock to buy
puts; you can own an asset that acts like a short stock position. The
terms we used for calls, with regard to the “moneyness” of the option,
also apply for puts with one exception: Put premiums go up when

c11.indd 229

11/2/07 12:46:42 PM

230

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

the stock price goes down. Figure 11.4 will help you understand the
difference between in-, at-, or out-of-the-money strike prices for puts.
The best thing about owning a put versus shorting the stock is
that the most you can lose is the amount you paid for the put.
Let’s revisit Traders A and B to see how they compare when trading the “short side” strategies. Trader A has decided to borrow 1,000
shares of Wal-Mart from his broker and sell them in the open market
for $48 per share (Figure 11.5). Trader B has chosen to buy 10 June
$50 puts for $2.50, which costs a total of $2,500 for the total option
position plus the cost of commissions.
Both traders want the stock to drop to maximize their profit
potential, but let’s first look at the risk to the upside in both positions.
Remember that Trader A has a loan to pay back, which is to deliver
the shares he has borrowed from his broker, so should the stock go
up by $10 per share, Trader A would have to buy back the stock at a

Figure 11.4 Put Options Intrinsic Value Chart

Figure 11.5 Short Stock versus Long Puts

c11.indd 230

11/2/07 12:46:42 PM

Essential Options, Part 2

231

higher price than where he sold it in the first place. Trader A has to
make a decision to either buy back the shares at $58 or not buy back
the shares and continue to stay exposed to an unlimited risk position.
For now, let’s just say Trader A decides to get out of this position that’s
hurting him and takes the loss. Buying back 1,000 shares at $58 would
create a loss of $10,000 ($58  $48  1,000 shares  $10,000). After
the shares are bought back, Trader A returns the shares back to his
broker and is left with the loss in his account.
Trader B, however, has a different position to deal with. With a
long put position that is totally paid for, Trader B is now long the
10 June $50 puts. With the stock trading at $58, these puts have no
intrinsic value; however, if there is any time left before Expiration
Friday, the June $50 puts may still have some time value left in them.
The great thing about owning the put versus selling the stock short
is that Trader A is completely out of his position with no chance to
recover a profit, while Trader B still has a chance to make a profit
even though the puts are worth less than the price he paid to open
the position.
On the positive side, puts work very well to leverage buying power
in that stocks have a tendency to drop faster than they rally. This has
a lot to do with the emotional charge of the market. As mentioned
in previous chapters, fear has a way of charging the market with volatility, and volatility is an option trader’s best friend. If the stock were
to drop to $40, this would allow Trader B to lock in $10 or intrinsic
value. Owning the $50 puts gives Trader B the right to sell stock at
$50, so once the trader buys the stock at $40, he can immediately
sell those shares for $50. This $10 profit less the cost of the puts
($2.50) winds up giving Trader B a $7.50 profit which is close to a
300 percent return after commissions are paid out. It’s not uncommon to see these types of returns in the option markets. Of course,
you should not expect to profit on every single trade you make
but the important thing to remember is that your downside risk is
precalculated so you are more likely to stay consistent in your performance if you have mastered the stock selection process we have
outlined for you.

Cash-Secured Put Selling
The long put gives us the right to sell stock at a predetermined price,
but one of our favorite strategies is to sell puts in stocks that show

c11.indd 231

11/2/07 12:46:43 PM

232

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

signs of good strong support or stocks that indicate upward trends
with positive volume on the technical charts. Before you initiate a
strategy such as this, it’s important for you to understand that you
would never consider selling puts in stocks that are breaking down
below key support levels or in stocks that are in downward trends.
Should you do this, you would be placing yourself in a high-risk position. You should approach a short put strategy in the same way an
insurance company would approach a potential policy holder. Would
an insurance company issue a life insurance policy on a person who
was terminally ill? Or . . . would the insurance agent ever insure a
driver who had a long history of drunk driving? Of course not—
insurance companies hire actuaries, who make sure the companies
they work for are not taking unnecessary risk. Unless the premiums
were out of this world and over the top, insurance companies would
go bankrupt if they made it a policy to insure only high-risk individuals, so why would you, the put seller, ever consider high-risk stocks?
The put-selling strategy we teach is one where you would sell puts
only in stocks that you would consider owning. If you were willing to
buy shares of Wal-Mart, you could obligate yourself to buy the stock at a
given strike price and in return receive a premium for the risk you take.
The strike price you sell is the agreed-upon price at which you would
commit to purchase the shares. So the role you take in this example is
that of the insurer. You would collect a premium for providing the put
buyer with the peace of mind of knowing that if the stock drops, you
will be there to limit their loss. However, you want the stock to stay flat
or go up from that point. The last thing you want to happen is for the
stock to crash. Similarly, the last thing the insurance company would
want to have happen is for you to crash your car after they have insured
you. Do people crash their cars from time to time? Yes, but the insurance company assumes this risk, betting that you will not crash your car.
Therefore, they look to insure safe drivers who have a clean history of
accident-free driving.
Stocks that show strong signs of support and ones that have
good upward trends are the types of stocks you would want to insure.
When you find stocks like this, you would put up enough cash in
your account to secure the purchase of the shares; should you be
“put” the stock—in other words, be asked to fulfill your obligation—
the cash moves out of your money market fund and you buy the
stock. As an insurer of stock price, it’s also important for you to know
where your breakeven point is for the stock. If the stock trades from

c11.indd 232

11/2/07 12:46:43 PM

Essential Options, Part 2

233

Figure 11.6 Cash-Secured Put-Selling Example

$48 per share down to $44 per share, you will still be able to make a
profit because, although the stock is below the strike price, your cost
basis is still below $44.
This is where your technical analysis skills will come into play.
If you see that the stock has good, strong support around the $43
area, you might make a decision to hold on to this new long stock
position because there is a chance that it could rally from this point.
Your cost basis is $43.50 so even though the stock is trading at $44
you may still be able to squeak out a profit of $.50. However, if you
see that the stock is not holding support, you would make a decision
to close out of your position to minimize risk. Remember that you
don’t want to be buying stocks that are crashing. In this chapter we
are just grazing over some of the basic strategies we use, and you will
need to delve into more of the details surrounding these concepts
to become more fluent in this put-selling strategy. The label we use to
identify this strategy is cash-secured put selling. Figure 11.6 is an example of what this would look like in your trading account.

The Covered Call
Most traders who are new to options will always hear about the covered call since it is considered to be a basic, safe strategy. Let’s take
a look at how it works.
Let’s assume you own 300 shares of Wal-Mart at $45 (maybe you
got assigned on a short put—hopefully, you’re starting to see how
you can combine option strategies to gain even more flexibility).

c11.indd 233

11/2/07 12:46:43 PM

234

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

You’re willing to hold the shares and are now waiting for it to rise.
Rather than wait, you can sell a call against your shares. By selling
a call, you have an obligation to sell shares if the long call holder
decides to exercise his right to buy. You could sell three contracts of
the July $50 calls at $2.75, which is a total credit of 300  $2.75  $825.
Again, this cash is available for your immediate use to use however
you wish.
You would just call your broker and say, “Sell to open, three
contracts, of the Wal-Mart July $50 calls, at market.” You would then
be long 300 shares of stock and short three $50 calls.
If the stock rises above $50 at expiration, you would be required
to sell for $50. If the stock stays still, you get to keep the $825, which
is something that the long stock holder will never see. Notice that
this credit provides a little downside protection, too. If the stock
falls $2.75 below your cost basis, you’re still at breakeven. The initial credit from the sale acts as a cushion against adverse stock price
movements.
The reason this is called a “covered call” is that you already own
shares of the underlying stock. In other words, the upside risk of a
short call is already “covered” by the long shares of stock. You have no
need to worry about being able to deliver the shares if the stock rises.
Of course, you still have all of the downside risk that the long stock
owner has, but you were willing to assume that anyway. What if you
weren’t willing to hold the shares but entered the covered call anyway?
Now you’re speculating with options, and it is then considered a risky
position. The risk in options depends on how you are using them.
