
By the early 1980s, Rose and Louie Blumkin had built the largest furniture store in North America. Its three
acres sold over $100 million of furniture a year under one roof, ten times the volume of stores of similar
size.28 From then on, sales grew every single year, in good economies or bad, whether Omaha grew or
shrank.29 The prosperous, established home furnishing retailers in Omaha who had been her competitors
when she started had vanished. Other retailers came into the city and tried to compete with the Mart. Rose
cased their showrooms, she and Louie created discount campaigns, and they broke them financially and
drove them away. The Mart captured half the business in the metropolitan area—more than Sears,
Montgomery Ward, Target, and all the other furniture and appliance retailers combined. Customers began to
arrive from Iowa, Kansas, and the Dakotas.
“She grew her own town. Her retailing circle just kept spreading out farther and farther, and her parking
lot was full of cars from a hundred or more miles away.”30
Rose became known as Mrs. B, even to her family. She awoke at five a.m., ate only fruits and vegetables,
and never touched liquor. A few gray hairs appeared around the edges of her lacquered black bun, but it
stayed firmly in place as she raced around the store with the energy of a young woman, shouting or slicing
her arms through the air for emphasis. As her bargaining position grew stronger, she brooked no sympathy for
her suppliers. “Seven dollars? We go bankruptcy tomorrow should we pay that,” she sniffed at one’s
demand.31 The wholesalers who had formerly snubbed her now kneeled at her feet. She loved it. “If you
want to sell her twenty-three hundred end tables, she will know in a minute what she can pay, how fast she
can move them…and she’ll buy them from you. She’ll wait until just before your plane is going to leave in
some blizzard when you have to get the hell out of Omaha and can’t afford to miss your flight. She will be
very tough in dealing with you.”32
She was hard at it six and a half days a week. “It’s mine habit,” she said. In her mind, the showroom was her
home. Her daughter, Cynthia Schneider, who decorated her mother’s house, had arranged the furniture “just
as you would find in the store” because “it’s the only way we could be sure she would be comfortable.”33
The lampshades remained covered in plastic. Price tags dangled from some of the furniture. “I only use the
kitchen and bedroom,” said Mrs. B. “I can’t wait until it gets daylight, so I can get back to the business.”
On Sunday afternoons—the only time all week she wasn’t at the store—she drove around town with Louie.
“I go shop the windows,” she said. “I plan an attack on the shopkeepers, thinking, ‘How much hell can I give
them?’”34 All her work, she said, was inspired by her “diamond mother,” who had run a grocery in Russia.
She never forgot waking in the night to find her mother doing laundry and baking bread at three a.m. “She
would carry a hundred pounds of flour twenty blocks for three cents’ profit,” she said. “It broke my heart.”35
And so, Rose’s soft spot was refugees and immigrants. She sometimes put them to work in the bookkeeping
department, telling them, “You don’t need English to count.”36
In 1982, the Omaha World-Herald interviewed her. She said that over the years the family had rejected
several offers to buy her company. “Who could afford to buy a store this big?” One of the offers, she told
Louie, was Berkshire’s. Buffett had talked to her a few years earlier and she’d told him: “You’ll try to steal
it.”37
A year later, Buffett heard that the Blumkins were negotiating with a company in Hamburg, Germany, that
operated the largest furniture store in the world, a model similar to theirs. The Blumkins were selling! “You
don’t have to be very smart to figure out it’s a good idea to go into partnership with Mrs. B,” Buffett said.38
Maybe this time they were serious. Twenty-some-odd years before, on yet another occasion, Rose had
summoned Buffett to her store downtown, indicating that she was thinking of selling. He really wanted to buy
the Furniture Mart for Berkshire. He had walked in to find a short, squat woman lecturing a group of men
lined up against the wall: her grandsons and sons-in-law and nephews. She turned to Buffett. “‘See all these
guys next to me?’ she said. ‘If I sell it to you, you can fire them. These people are a bunch of bums, and they

are all related to me and I can’t fire them. But you can fire them. They’re bums, bums, bums.’
“She went on like this for an hour, literally. The word ‘bums’ recurred many, many times.” The relatives,
long used to Rose, stood, impassive. “Then she dismissed me. I had served my purpose.”
It was too bad; he would have liked to buy the store.39
“She thought the only one who was worth anything was Louie, and he was perfect.” When she was pleased
with Louie, as she usually was, she told him, “Oy, oy, oy, oy, it’s beautiful, you did such a good job.”40
If the Blumkins had talked themselves into selling, now was the time. Mrs. B had had two knee replacements,
ceding most of the day-to-day operations to Louie. But she was still running the carpet department.
“Something about carpet fascinated her,” said Louie.41 If somebody needed carpet for a nine-by-twelve
room, she priced it out, added the tax, and gave the buyer a discount for being a good customer, all calculated
within seconds in her head. And she still made occasional forays into the furniture department, often enough
that the family could never be sure if even their own furniture was safe. Once, Rose called her daughter and
told her to “empty the baby chest,” because she had a customer. “When I made up my mind,” she said, “I
didn’t want to wait for nothing. That’s mine habit.”42 Nevertheless, it was Louie to whom Buffett talked.
Louie said, “You should meet my sons Ron and Irv, who’ll be running the store someday.”
Buffett invited Ron and Irv to come to his office for a visit, and struck up a relationship with them. He sent
Louie a letter, explaining his thoughts on the pros and cons of their selling to Berkshire. The Blumkins should
be in no hurry to sell, he wrote, dealing with them as honestly as anyone possibly could. If “you decide not to
sell now, you are very likely to realize more money later on. With that knowledge you can deal from
strength and take the time required to select the buyer you want.”
Then he laid out what he really had to offer. They could sell to another furniture company, he wrote, or to
somebody in a similar business. But “such a buyer—no matter what promises are made—usually will have
managers who feel they know how to run your business operations, and sooner or later, will want to get into
hands-on activity…. They will have their own way of doing things and, even though your business record
undoubtedly will be far better than theirs, human nature at some point will cause them to believe that their
methods are superior.”
Then there is “the financial maneuverer, usually operating on large amounts of borrowed money, who
plans to resell either to the public or to another corporation as soon as the time is favorable,” he wrote. “If
the sole motive of the owners is to cash their chips and put the business behind them, either of these types of
buyers is satisfactory…. But if the sellers’ business represents the creative work of a lifetime and remains
an integral part of their personality and sense of being, both of these types of buyers have serious flaws.
“Any buyer will tell you that he needs you and, if he has any brains, he most certainly does need you. But a
great many, for the reasons mentioned above, don’t subsequently behave in that manner. We will behave
exactly as promised, both because we have so promised, and because we need to.”
Buffett explained that if he bought, he wanted the Blumkins to stay on as partners. If they looked back with
regret, the deal would be a disappointment for everyone, including him. He told Louie that he would get
involved in only two things: capital allocation and selecting and compensating the “top man.”
Buffett had something else to offer. He was not German. The German company had offered well over $90
million, but to Mrs. B, who had traveled 9,000 miles across Asia to escape the pogroms, selling to a German
company was anathema. The Blumkins agreed to sell the company to Berkshire, so Buffett drove out to the
200,000-square-foot store to make a deal. There he found the eighty-nine-year-old Rose gunning the motor
of her three-wheeled golf cart and racing around the store, roaring at her employees, “You’re all good for
nothing! I wouldn’t give a nickel for all of you!” while Louie and her three sons-in-law looked on.43
“I don’t even want to take inventory,” said Buffett. “I’ll take your word, Mrs. B, whatever you say you got.”

Mrs. B looked at her sons-in-law, who stood against a wall. One of them was taller than her by at least a foot.
“Norman’s been married to Frances forty-one years,” she said. “Jerry’s been married to Sylvia thirty-six
years. Charles was married to Cynthia thirty-nine years ago. I told those boys, ‘I don’t take return
merchandise!’”
Her daughters owned twenty percent of the stock and had sent their husbands to sign off on the deal. The
sons-in-law were not dumb and knew that they’d get far more money from the Germans. “And she snarled at
them, Just tell me how much more you think you’re going to get and I’ll give it to you. She wanted to divide
up the money and get them out of there so it would be Louie’s company, and they stood there against the
wall, quivering. They wanted to go. And then she said the price was fifty-five million dollars for ninety
percent of the company.” Mrs. B had said, “I don’t understand stock.” She wanted cash. “They stood there
mute, but they were also thinking, as soon as this sale goes through, we get the money, we’re getting the hell
out of here.
“She really liked and trusted me. She would make up her mind about people and that was that.” Buffett
knew she made decisions about everything once and for all and in the blink of an eye, so he wasn’t taking
much risk, but, “I told Mrs. B after she signed, I said, ‘If you change your mind on this it’s okay with me.’ I
would never say that to any other seller in the world, but I just felt that this was just such a part of her, if
there was any reason she decided she didn’t want to do it after—I didn’t want her to feel bound. And she
said, ‘I don’t change my mind.’
“When I was leaving, I told Louie, ‘I’m terrible with accents. Sometimes I don’t understand your mother
perfectly; the last thing I want in the world is a misunderstanding with her.’ And Louie said, ‘Don’t worry,
she’ll understand you.’
“After the deal was done, I said, ‘Mrs. B, I’ve got to tell you something. It’s my birthday today.’” Buffett
was fifty-three. “And she said, ‘You bought an oil well on your birthday.’”
The Blumkins had never had an audit, and Buffett did not ask for one. He did not take inventory or look at
the detailed accounts. They shook hands. “We gave Mrs. B a check for fifty-five million dollars and she
gave us her word,” he said.44 Her word was as good as “the Bank of England.” Buffett, however, still
wanted to make sure that Rose had no regrets.
The contract was just over a page of Carnegizing. It began, “You own a hundred percent of the outstanding
stock of Nebraska Furniture Mart, Inc. (‘NFM’) which operates a remarkably successful furniture and
appliance retailing business…. Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. (‘Berkshire’) has long admired what you have
accomplished together and hereby proposes to purchase from you ninety percent of such outstanding
stock.”45 To announce the deal, he held a press conference and showed a video on the company’s history.
Mrs. B dabbed at her eyes as the film was shown.46
Buffett had not only found another unusual specimen to add to his collection of interesting personalities.
Something about Mrs. B’s indomitable will, history of hardship, and strength of character inspired awe in
him.47 “Dear Mrs. B,” he wrote to her. “I have promised Louie and his boys that all members of the family
are going to feel good about this transaction five, ten, and twenty years from now. I make you the same
promise.”48
Buffett had promised more than that. Mrs. B was used to operating in total control and privacy; she did not
want Buffett to throw her financial dress up in the air and show her knickers to the world. He had promised
her that the accounts of the Furniture Mart would not be separately reported when Berkshire Hathaway filed
its financial statements with the SEC, as of course was legally required.
Buffett had no worries about getting a waiver from the SEC—or rather getting one of his employees to get
the waiver. He was a likable boss who never lost his temper, never changed his mind capriciously, never said
a rude word to anyone, never berated or criticized his employees, didn’t second-guess people on their work,

and let them do their jobs without interference. He also operated on the assumption that if somebody was
smart, they could do anything. Charlie Munger said of him, “Warren doesn’t have stress, he causes it.” Dale
Carnegie said to give people a fine reputation to live up to, and Buffett had learned that lesson well. He knew
how to Carnegize heroic accomplishments out of his people.
The gist of what he told his employees was something like: “You’re so good, this won’t take you any time at
all, and it won’t cost anything to do. And, of course, you’ll have it back to me in the next mail. Because
you’re just so damn great at what you do. It would take three people to replace you.”49
Verne McKenzie, who had only just finished mopping up the Blue Chip mess, was assigned the thankless task
of convincing the SEC to grant an exception to its rules so that Mrs. B would not suffer the pains of an audit
or of having to unveil her financial secrets to the shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway. He began to go
through torture navigating the government’s unsympathetic maze while Buffett offered blithe assurances that
he could easily get this done.50
Buffett, meanwhile, had the happy job of diving into a new business and a new collection of people. He grew
fond of Louie and “the boys” he started driving out to 72nd Street at eight-thirty in the evening when the
store closed to go out to dinner with Louie, Ron, and Irv, talking for hours about furniture and merchandising.
He started taking “the boys” and their wives on an annual vacation.
That fall the Buffett Group lurched across the North Atlantic in heavy seas on the Queen Elizabeth II. Some
of Buffett’s friends were shocked when told to send $125 in advance for tips and asked to bring tuxedos for
several formal dinners. Joy Ruane was so intimidated by this new hauteur that she showed up with seventeen
suitcases.51 The food onboard the ship was “second rate,” said one member, and the agenda a mix of the
typical and the unusual: Wyndham Robertson, another Fortune reporter who was a member of the group, on
investing during inflation; a session on stock options; George Gillespie and Roy Tolles on splitting up assets in
a divorce—a subject on which views ran hot; Tom Murphy on the race between television networks CBS and
Cap Cities; and Charlie Munger on Benjamin Franklin. Buffett spoke on using “game theory” to solve
economic problems, based on pioneering economist Adam Smith’s “invisible hand,”52 in which people
laboring to further their own interests acted collectively for the good of everyone.
All the while, Buffett delighted in telling his friends about the immigrant saga of Mrs. B and her wonderful
Furniture Mart, the new money-churning prize he had just bought himself. However, he was almost upstaged
by Ed Anderson, who made the prudish members of the group—the majority—fall out of their chairs when
he explained his funding of human sexuality research and told with perfect earnestness the touching story of
someone who had had a sex-change operation and kept his severed organ in a jar.
But the Buffett Group was falling out of its chairs, anyway. Those who were not below in their staterooms
vomiting were imprisoned inside the saloon, where plates slid off the tables and ashtrays flew while the ship
rocked and surged across the ocean in driving rain and gale-force winds and they heard story after story of
the unsinkable Mrs. B. The Buffett Group was supposed to tour England for several leisurely days upon
arriving, but five hours after they landed in Southampton, Rick Guerin was on a plane back to New York.
Nonetheless, through the howling wind, the homilies of Ben Franklin, divorce planning, and penises in a jar,
one message came through, loud and clear: Buffett’s affection and admiration for Rose Blumkin.53 He had
plans for her and enlisted Buffett Group member Larry Tisch in his behind-the-scenes machinations. In a
virtuoso display of gratitude and showmanship, he had decided to turn the geriatric Rose into Cinderella.
With the help of Tisch, who was a trustee of New York University, he arranged it so that both Creighton
University and NYU gave Rose honorary degrees.54 At Creighton, the tiny Mrs. B was so overcome that she
covered her face with her hands and cried on the stage, saying, “Oy, oy, oy, I never even believe it.”55 Then
she spoke of America, the country that made her dream come true. Her advice to the graduating seniors:
“First, honesty,” she said. “Second, hard work. Next, if you don’t get the job you want right away, tell them
you’ll take anything. If you’re good, they’ll keep you.”56

In the city for the New York University ceremony, the family took care to keep her from seeing the price of
her hotel room, for she had been to New York before and thought anything more than $75 for a hotel room
was outrageous.57 She had Louie take her to see Ellis Island and Delancey Street, but getting around the city
was a struggle, for she felt cheated by the price of a taxi.58 On the morning of commencement, Mrs. B was
“robed” with great pomp and circumstance and received her degree alongside Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan and the poet Octavio Paz.
Despite the august company of the NYU ceremony, when asked which of the two honorary degrees she
preferred, Rose did not hesitate. It was Creighton’s. They had bought carpet from her.
Soon after, Berkshire’s auditors conducted the Nebraska Furniture Mart’s first inventory. The store was
worth $85 million. Mrs. B, seized with a severe case of remorse after she had sold it for a total value of $60
million, including the share retained by the family, told Regardie’s magazine, “I wouldn’t go back on my
word, but I was surprised…. He never thought a minute [before agreeing to the price], but he studies. I bet
you he knew.”59 Buffett, of course, could not have “known,” not literally. But he had certainly known there
was a whopping margin of safety in the price.
Nevertheless, he practically considered himself a member of the family by now. When Mrs. B turned ninety,
the Furniture Mart organized a huge sale, taking out full-page ads for days in the local paper, as it did every
year on her birthday. Buffett would tease her about the date of her birthday sales.
“She measured her birthday by the Jewish calendar, which moved around. I used to tease her about that; it
really didn’t fall on the same day every year. But I said that the way she moved it around was whenever she
needed a little more business. Her birthday was quite flexible. She’d smile and look at me and say, ‘Well,
you don’t understand the Jewish calendar.’”
Within two years, however, this fairy tale of a story turned ugly. The indomitable Mrs. B yelled at her
grandsons Ron and Irv in front of the customers, calling them bums. As tough a life as she’d lived, and as
hard as she’d had to work, who could know more about the business than she? Gradually—and
understandably—“the boys” stopped speaking to her.
Finally, when she was age ninety-five, her grandsons overruled her on a carpet purchase and she exploded. It
was the last straw. “I was the boss. They never told me nothing,”60 she said, and quit. She also demanded
$96,000 in unused vacation pay on her way out the door.61
But sitting at home alone, she acknowledged, was “awful lonely, not to do nothing. I go nuts.”62 In ominous
newspaper interviews she referred to her grandsons as “dummies” and, shockingly, “Nazis.”63 She hinted at
solo trips to the North Carolina High Point Market, the furniture industry’s largest trade show. She suddenly
arranged to have a warehouse she owned right across the street from the Furniture Mart refurbished. She held
a “garage sale” in it, and cleared $18,000 in one day, selling “some of her own things.”64 A few months later,
“Mrs. B’s Warehouse” was grossing $3,000 a day before it officially opened.
Asked about the impending battle for customers, she snarled to the local paper, “I’ll give it to them.” When
the paucity of parking spaces at her new store was mentioned, she pointed to the Furniture Mart’s lot and
said, “Park there…they won’t notice.” Soon she was embroiled in a fight with her grandsons over city
parking ordinances. She put up a sign: “Their price $104, our price $80.”65 When Bob Brown on ABC’s
20/20 program asked her about the Furniture Mart, she said, “I would it should go up in smoke. I like they
should go down to hell….”66
Some time earlier, Buffett had created a saying. “I would rather wrestle grizzlies,” he said, “than compete
with Mrs. B and her progeny.”67 Stuck wrestling grizzlies, Buffett acted as he always did when any of his
friends’ relationships broke down. He refused to take sides. Mrs. B thought that was disloyal. “Warren

Buffett is not my friend,” she told a reporter. “I made him fifteen million dollars every year, and when I
disagreed with my grandkids, he didn’t stand up for me.”68 This was torture to Buffett, who couldn’t bear
conflict and broken relationships.
Louie, who could do no wrong in his mother’s eyes, made no headway with Rose. “She figured she lost
control of this place, and she blew her top,” he says.
“He always treated his mother perfectly,” Buffett says. “It was the hardest thing in the world for her to
accept that she was giving up control. And she was angry at the world for having to give up the thing that
she loved most.”
After two years, Mrs. B’s Warehouse, while still small, was growing at such a rate that pound for pound, it
was trouncing the Mart. Finally Louie intervened again. “Mother,” he said, “you’ve got to sell this thing back
to us. There’s no sense competing one against the other.”69 And so Rose called Buffett. She missed the Mart.
She missed her family. She was lonely in her house, separated from her family. “I was wrong,” she said;
family meant more than pride and more than business. Mrs. B told Buffett that she wanted to come back.
With a box of See’s Candies under his arm and holding a huge bouquet of pink roses, Buffett went out to see
her. He offered her $5 million simply for the use of her name and her lease.
He added one catch: This time she must sign a noncompete agreement, a contract designed so that she could
never again compete with him. This was something he wished he’d done before. The absurdity of imposing a
noncompete agreement on a ninety-nine-year-old woman was far from lost on him. Nevertheless, Buffett was
realistic. The agreement was cunningly written to outlast Mrs. B. If she retired, or quit in a rage or for any
other reason, no matter how old she was, for five years afterward she could not compete with Buffett and her
relatives. Even if she lived to be 120 years old, Buffett was taking no chances. “I thought she might go on
forever,” he says. “I needed five years beyond forever with her.”
Mrs. B still could not read or write English. Nevertheless, she signed the noncompete, which had been
explained to her, with her characteristic mark. The truce made headlines. “And then I made sure she never
got mad,” Buffett says. He set about flattering his new employee unctuously to make her so happy that she
would never, ever quit and start the clock running on her noncompete.
On April 7, 1993, the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce put her in the inaugural class of its business hall
of fame, alongside Buffett, Peter Kiewit, and several others. Then Buffett, knees trembling slightly, got up on
a stage at the Highland Club and sang in public, for the first time in his life, to Mrs. B on her hundredth
birthday. He also donated a million dollars to a local theater she was renovating.
Nobody could believe it. Warren Buffett had given away a million dollars.
And through all of the hosannas, none of it ever went to Rose Blumkin’s head. Not even the million dollars
that Warren Buffett had given her. She felt she owed everything, all her good fortune, to this country for the
opportunities it had given her. At family events, she insisted that her favorite song, “God Bless America,” be
played every time, sometimes even more than once.
“I don’t think I deserve it,” she said, over and over, of the accolades.70 But she did.
