
9/9/17 1:12 PM

Chapter 4
The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

A

s we’ve seen, bitcoin ignited the cryptoasset revolution, and its success
has led to the birth of numerous other permissionless (public) blockchains with their own native cryptoassets. We also refer to these as bitcoin’s digital siblings. As of March 2017, there were over 800 cryptoassets with
a fascinating family tree, accruing to a total network value1 of over $24 billion.2
At the time, bitcoin was the largest and most widely transacted of these assets
by a wide margin, with a network value of $17 billion, accounting for nearly 70
percent of the total network value of cryptoassets. The next largest cryptoasset
by network value was Ethereum’s ether at over $4 billion. Yes, the numbers
have changed a lot since. Crypto moves fast.
As the investment landscape for cryptoassets continues to grow beyond
bitcoin, it’s vital for the innovative investor to understand the historical context, categorization, and applicability of these digital siblings, so that potential
investment opportunities can be identified. To this end, we aim to provide
a historical grounding of who and what led to the creation of many notable
cryptoassets. Through this process, we will also introduce more detailed concepts that will go into the innovative investor’s toolset when investigating
future cryptoassets.

31

Burniske 01.indd 31

9/9/17 1:12 PM

32 CRYPTOASSETS

CRYPTOCURRENCIES, CRYPTOCOMMODITIES,
AND CRYPTOTOKENS
Historically, cryptoassets have most commonly been referred to as crypto­
currencies, which we think confuses new users and constrains the conversation on the future of these assets. We would not classify the majority of
cryptoassets as currencies, but rather most are either digital commodities
(crypto­commodities), provisioning raw digital resources, or digital tokens
(cryptotokens), provisioning finished digital goods and services.
A currency fulfills three well-defined purposes: to serve as a means of
exchange, store of value, and unit of account. However, the form of currency
itself often has little inherent value. For example, the paper bills in people’s
wallets have about as little value as the paper in their printer. Instead, they have
the illusion of value, which if shared widely enough by society and endorsed
by the government, allows these monetary bills to be used to buy goods and
services, to store value for later purchases, and to serve as a metric to price the
value of other things.
Meanwhile, commodities are wide-ranging and most commonly thought
of as raw material building blocks that serve as inputs into finished products.
For example, oil, wheat, and copper are all common commodities. However, to
assume that a commodity must be physical ignores the overarching “offline to
online” transition occurring in every sector of the economy. In an increasingly
digital world, it only makes sense that we have digital commodities, such as
compute power, storage capacity, and network bandwidth.
While compute, storage, and bandwidth are not yet widely referred to as
commodities, they are building blocks that are arguably just as important as
our physical commodities, and when provisioned via a blockchain network,
they are most clearly defined as cryptocommodities.
Beyond cryptocurrencies and cryptocommodities—and also provisioned
via blockchain networks—are “finished-product” digital goods and services
like media, social networks, games, and more, which are orchestrated by crypto­
tokens. Just as in the physical world, where currencies and commodities fuel an
economy to create finished goods and services, so too in the digital world the
infrastructures provided by cryptocurrencies and cryptocommodities are coming together to support the aforementioned finished-product digital goods and
services. Cryptotokens are in the earliest stage of development, and will likely
be the last to gain traction as they require a robust cryptocurrency and cryptocommodity infrastructure to be built before they can reliably function.

Burniske 01.indd 32

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

33

In summation, we believe that a clearer view of this brave new world of
blockchain architecture includes cryptocurrencies, cryptocommodities, and
cryptotokens, just as we have had currencies, commodities, and finished goods
and services in the preceding centuries. Be it a currency, commodity, or service, blockchain architectures help provision these digital resources in a distributed and market-based manner.
In this chapter, we focus on the most important cryptocurrencies today,
including bitcoin, litecoin, ripple, monero, dash, and zcash. The next chapter
covers the world of cryptocommodities and cryptotokens, the development of
which has been accelerated by the launch of Ethereum and its value proposition as a decentralized world computer. Besides its status as the number two
cryptoasset by network value, Ethereum has also spawned many other crypto­
assets that creatively utilize its network.
While we cannot possibly cover all the cryptoassets, we will focus on those
we believe will help the innovative investor gain the broadest perspective. To
those entrepreneurs and developers who’ve created assets that we’re unable to
cover here, we apologize. Many amazing projects were created in the process
of writing the book, and if we tried to incorporate them all the book would
never have been finished. To that end, we’ve included a listing in the resources
section to enable access to information on other cryptoassets.
WHY CRYPTO?
Sometimes the word crypto makes people shudder, perhaps because they
associate it with illicit activity, but that’s a mental bias that is important to
overcome. Crypto is simply a tip of the hat to and a shortening of the key
technology underlying these systems: cryptography. As discussed in Chapter
2, cryptography is the science of securely transmitting data so that only
intended recipients can make use of it. Cryptography is used to ensure that
cryptoassets are transferred to the intended recipients securely. Given our
digital world and the increasing prevalence of hacks, the secure transmission
of resources is paramount, and cryptoassets have such security in spades.

THE EVER-EVOLVING NATURE OF CURRENCIES
The pursuit of a decentralized, private, and digital currency predates bitcoin
by decades. Bitcoin and its digital siblings are just part of a broader evolution of currencies that has taken place over centuries. At their inception,

Burniske 01.indd 33

9/9/17 1:12 PM

34 CRYPTOASSETS

currencies were a solution to ease the impreciseness of barter trade, and for
centuries metal coins with material value served as the currencies of choice.
Fiat currency was an innovation beyond metal coins, as it was much easier to
transport, but the entirety of its value relied upon the government’s stamp of
approval and mandate of legal tender. We believe that currency void of any
physical representation is the next phase of the evolution, and in our Internettethered world an inevitable one.
As innovations underlying the Internet gained steam, so too did the realization that we would need a secure form of digital payment. One of Bitcoin’s
most famous ancestors was pioneered by a company called DigiCash, led by
David Chaum, who remains one of the most famous cryptographers in crypto­
asset history. In 1993, prior to Marc Andressen founding Netscape, Chaum
invented the digital payment system called ecash. This allowed secure and
anonymous payments across the Internet, no matter the amount.3
Clearly, Chaum’s timing could not have been better given the tech boom
that followed through the mid- to late-1990s, and his company, DigiCash, had
several opportunities for growth, any of which might have made it a household
name. However, while Chaum was widely regarded as a technical genius, as
a businessperson he left much to be desired. Bill Gates approached Chaum
about integrating ecash into Windows 95, which would have immediately
given it global distribution, but Chaum refused what was rumored to be a
$100 million offer. Similarly, Netscape made initial inquiries about a relationship, but management was quickly turned off by Chaum’s attitude. In 1996,
Visa wanted to invest $40 million into the company but were dissuaded when
Chaum demanded $75 million (if these reports are correct, it’s clear that the
potential price for Chaum’s creation was dropping).4
If all had gone well, DigiCash’s ecash would have been integrated into all
our web browsers at the ground floor, serving as the global Internet payment
mechanism and potentially removing the need for credit cards in online payments. Sadly, mismanagement ultimately ran DigiCash into the ground, and
in 1998 it declared bankruptcy. While DigiCash failed to become a household
name, some players will resurface in our story, such as Nick Szabo, the father
of “smart contracts,” and Zooko Wilcox, the founder of Zcash, both of whom
worked at DigiCash for a time.5
Other attempts were made at digital currencies, payment systems, or stores
of value after ecash, like e-gold and Karma. The former ran into trouble with
the FBI for serving a criminal element,6 while the latter never gained main-

Burniske 01.indd 34

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

35

stream adoption.7 The pursuit of a new form of Internet money drew the attention of present day tech-titans such as Peter Thiel and Elon Musk, both of
whom had a hand in founding PayPal. Except for Karma, the problem with all
these attempts at digital money was that they weren’t purely decentralized—
one way or another they relied on a centralized entity, and that presented the
opportunity for corruption and weak points for attack.

THE MIRACLE OF BITCOIN
One of the most miraculous aspects of bitcoin is how it bootstrapped support
in a decentralized manner. The importance, and difficulty, of being the first
currency to do so cannot be emphasized enough. Until people understand how
bitcoin works, they often argue that it has no value as currency because, unlike
what they’re used to, you can’t see it, touch it, or smell it.
Paper currency has value because it is mutually agreed upon by members
of society that it has value. It’s much easier for society to agree to this with
a government involved. Getting a global society to agree that something has
value and can be used as a currency without government support and without
a physical form is one of the most significant accomplishments in monetary
history.
When bitcoin was launched, it had zero value in the sense that it could be
used to purchase nothing. The earliest adopters and supporters subjectively
valued bitcoin because it was a fascinating computer science and game theory
experiment. As the utility of Bitcoin’s blockchain proved itself a reliable facilitator of Money-over-Internet-Protocol (MoIP),8 use cases began to be built
using bitcoin, some of which now include facilitating e-commerce, remittances, and international business-to-business payments.
Concurrent with the early development of use cases, investors started to
speculate on what future use cases would look like and how much bitcoin
those use cases would require. Together, the combination of current use cases
and investors buying bitcoin based on the expectation for even greater future
use cases creates market demand for bitcoin. How much is a buyer willing to
pay for something (the bid), and how much is a seller willing to receive to part
with that item (the ask)? As with any market, where the bid and ask meet is
where the price is set.

Burniske 01.indd 35

9/9/17 1:12 PM

36 CRYPTOASSETS

Mathematically Metered Supply
One of the keys to supporting bitcoin’s value was its issuance model. Recall
from Chapter 2 that miners—the people running the computers building
Bitcoin’s blockchain—are paid each time they append a block of transactions.
They are paid in new bitcoin created by a coinbase transaction that is included
in each block.9 For the first four years of Bitcoin’s life, a coinbase transaction
would issue 50 bitcoin to the lucky miner. The difficulty of this proof-of-work
process was recalibrated automatically every two weeks with the goal of keeping the amount of time between blocks at an average of 10 minutes.10 In other
words, 50 new bitcoin were released every 10 minutes, and the degree of difficulty was increased or decreased by the Bitcoin software to keep that output
time frame intact.
In the first year of bitcoin running, 300 bitcoin were released per hour (60
minutes, 10 minutes per block, 50 bitcoin released per block), 7,200 bitcoin
per day, and 2.6 million bitcoin per year.
Based on our evolutionary past, a key driver for humans to recognize something as valuable is its scarcity. Satoshi knew that he couldn’t issue bitcoin at a
rate of 2.6 million per year forever, because it would end up with no scarcity
value. Therefore, he decided that every 210,000 blocks—which at one block
per 10 minutes takes four years—his program would cut in half the amount
of bitcoin issued in coinbase transactions.11 This event is known as a “block
reward halving” or “halving” for short.
On November 28, 2012, the first halving of the block reward from 50 bitcoin
to 25 bitcoin happened, and the second halving from 25 bitcoin to 12.5 bitcoin
occurred on July 9, 2016. The third will happen four years from that date, in
July 2020.12 Thus far, this has made bitcoin’s supply schedule look somewhat
linear, as shown in Figure 4.1.
However, when we step back and take a longer-term perspective, bitcoin’s
supply trajectory looks anything but linear (see Figure 4.2). In fact, by the
end of the 2020s it will approach a horizontal asymptote, with annual supply inflation less than 0.5 percent. In other words, Satoshi rewarded early
adopters with the most new bitcoin to get sufficient support, and in so doing
created a big enough base of monetary liquidity for the network to use. He
understood that if bitcoin was a success over time its dollar value would
increase, and therefore he could decrease the rate of issuance while still
rewarding its supporters.

Burniske 01.indd 36

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

37

Number of Bitcoin Outstanding

18,000,000
16,000,000
14,000,000
12,000,000
10,000,000
8,000,000
6,000,000
4,000,000
2,000,000
0
Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15 Jan-16 Jan-17
Date

Figure 4.1 n Bitcoin’s supply schedule (short-term view)
Data sourced from Blockchain.info

Number of Bitcoin Outstanding

25,000,000
20,000,000
15,000,000
10,000,000
5,000,000

13

05

21

97

21

89

20

81

20

73

20

65

20

57

20

49

20

41

20

33

20

25

20

17

20

20

20

09

0

Date

Figure 4.2 n Bitcoin’s supply schedule (long-term view)

Long term, the thinking is that bitcoin will become so entrenched within
the global economy that new bitcoin will not need to be issued to continue
to gain support. At that point, miners will be compensated for processing
transactions and securing the network through fees on high transaction
volumes.
It’s common to hear that bitcoin supply will max out at 21 million units by
2140. This is a function of continuing to divide the units of supply released by
a factor of two every four years. As of January 1, 2017, already 76.6 percent of
bitcoin’s supply had been brought into existence,13 and by the time the next

Burniske 01.indd 37

9/9/17 1:12 PM

38 CRYPTOASSETS

block reward halving happens in 2020, 87.5 percent of the bitcoin ever to be
minted will be in existence. A few years after 2100, we will reach a supply of
20,999,999 bitcoin, which is effectively 21 million. It is bitcoin’s scarce supply
schedule that makes many think of it as digital gold.14

THE BIRTH OF ALTCOINS
Within a couple years of launching, it had become clear that bitcoin was the
first fully decentralized cryptocurrency to gain significant adoption, but there
were some aspects with which people were not fully satisfied. For example,
bitcoin’s 10-minute block time meant that, depending on when a consumer hit
send, it could take up to 10 minutes, sometimes more, for the transaction to be
appended to Bitcoin’s blockchain.
Often this delay was more of an issue for the merchant than the consumer,
as the merchants needed to know they were getting paid before they could
release a good or service. Others worried about bitcoin’s hash function in the
proof-of-work process, because hardware was being created that specialized
in this hash function and would lead to increased centralization of the mining network. For a decentralized currency, increased centralization of the
machines that processed its transactions was concerning. Fortunately, Bitcoin’s
protocol is open-source software, which meant developers could download
the entirety of its source code and tweak the aspects they felt most needed
fixing. When the updated software was ready, the developers released it in a
manner similar to how Bitcoin was originally released. The new software operated similarly to Bitcoin, but required its own set of developers to maintain it,
miners to provide the hardware, and a separate blockchain to keep track of the
debits and credits of the new native asset.
Through this combination of open-source software and ingenious programmers, many other cryptocurrencies have been brought into existence. Those
that are only slight modifications of Bitcoin are often referred to as altcoins.
BITCOIN’S FIRST DIGITAL SIBLING
Namecoin15 was the first significant fork away from Bitcoin. Interestingly, it
was less about creating a new currency and more about utilizing the immutable nature of the blockchain, a use case we’ll address more in the next
chapter. A website created with Namecoin comes with the .bit domain (as

Burniske 01.indd 38

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

39

opposed to the .com domain) and provides security and censorship resistance
to those sites registered with it.16
Namecoin grew out of an idea on the Bitcointalk forum in 2010 that
focused on BitDNS (DNS stands for domain naming service, which handles
all web addresses).17 In 2013, a service called NameID was released that
uses the Namecoin blockchain to enable the creation of and access to websites that have a Namecoin identity.
Namecoin acts as its own DNS service, and provides users with more
control and privacy. As opposed to the typical way in which websites are registered through a government controlled service such as ICANN, a Namecoin
site is registered through a service that exists on each computer on the
Namecoin network. This improves security, privacy, and speed. To gain a .bit
site, one must have namecoin to do so, thus the need for the native asset.

Litecoin
While a handful of altcoins were released through 2011, Litecoin was the
first that would retain significant value to this day. The cryptocurrency was
developed by Charlie Lee, an MIT graduate who was a software engineer at
Google. When Lee learned of Bitcoin he quickly understood its power, leading
him to mine bitcoin before trying to create his own variants. After the unsuccessful launch of Fairbrix in September 2011, Lee tried again with Litecoin in
October.18
Litecoin aimed to improve upon Bitcoin in two ways. For one, Litecoin’s
block times were 2.5 minutes, four times faster than Bitcoin’s, which would be
important for merchants needing faster confirmation of consumer’s payments.
Second, Litecoin used a different hash function in the proof-of-work process—also known as a block hashing algorithm—which tried to make the
mining process more accessible to hobbyists. To put it into perspective, in the
early years of Bitcoin mining, people used central processing units (CPUs),
which are the core chips in personal computers, effectively forcing the computers to be used solely for mining purposes. In 2010, people after greater
efficiency began using the graphic card (GPU) of an existing computer for the
mining process.
Many, including Lee, anticipated a shift to yet more dedicated and specialized mining devices called ASICs (application-specific integrated circuits).
ASICs required custom manufacturing and specifically designed computers.

Burniske 01.indd 39

9/9/17 1:12 PM

40 CRYPTOASSETS

As a result, Lee correctly foresaw that bitcoin mining would ramp beyond the
reach of hobbyist miners and their homegrown PCs.
Lee wanted a coin that retained its peer-to-peer roots and allowed users
to be miners without the need for specialized and expensive mining units.
Litecoin accomplished this by using a block hashing algorithm called scrypt,
which is memory intensive and harder for specialized chips like ASICs to gain
a significant edge upon.
Other than these two tweaks, much of Litecoin remained similar to Bitcoin.
The innovative investor will have realized, however, that if blocks are issued
four times as fast as bitcoin, then the total amount of litecoin released will be
four times greater than that of bitcoin. This is exactly the case, as litecoin will
converge upon a fixed 84 million units, whereas bitcoin will converge upon a
quarter of that, at 21 million units.19 Lee tweaked the halving characteristics,
too, so that a halving occurs at 840,000 blocks, as opposed to bitcoin’s 210,000.
As Figure 4.3 shows, this puts litecoin on a similar yet larger supply trajectory
than bitcoin. Notably, the annual rates of supply inflation are exactly the same
for the number of years the cryptocurrency is from launch.
It’s important to realize that if bitcoin and litecoin are both being used in
similar size markets and therefore have the same size network values, a unit
of litecoin will be one-fourth as valuable as a unit of bitcoin because there are
four times as many units outstanding. This is an important lesson, because all
cryptocurrencies differ in their supply schedules, and thus the direct price of
each cryptoasset should not be compared if trying to ascertain the appreciation potential of the asset.
Litecoin

Bitcoin

Number of Coins Outstanding

90,000,000
80,000,000
70,000,000
60,000,000
50,000,000
40,000,000
30,000,000
20,000,000
10,000,000
0

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

Years from Launch

Figure 4.3 n The comparative supply schedules of Litecoin and Bitcoin

Burniske 01.indd 40

9/9/17 1:12 PM

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

41
