
Betting on the brains behind the operation
When you invest in a company, you’re not just investing in its brands, products, and assets. You’re having faith that the management team is properly
equipped to best manage the company to deliver outstanding results.
Return on equity and return on capital, both discussed in Chapter 8, are the
best and quickest ways to figure out how well a company is managed. But
many fundamental analysts dig even deeper by dissecting return on assets.
Return on assets, by itself, is a helpful thing for fundamental analysts to consider. It tells you how much profit the company is generating from the assets
it has under its control. Return on assets helps you see how well a company
is running itself without any financial distortion caused by the use of debt.
If you compare a company’s return on assets to that of its peers, using the
same techniques applied to return on equity in Chapter 8, you get a good
idea of how well the company is managing your money.
But dissecting return on assets into parts can reveal even more about a company’s management. To show you want I mean, first consider the formula for
return on assets:
Return on assets = Income / Assets
Income, in the numerator of the formula above, means different things to different fundamental analysts. Some use net income, since it’s easily obtained
from the income statement. Yet others use earnings before interest and taxes,
or EBIT, instead of net income to measure return on assets. You can refresh
your memory about the advantages and disadvantages of both net income and
EBIT in Chapter 8.

16 506455-ch10.indd 165

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

166 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
You might try testing out return on assets on industrial company 3M, using
the company’s 2008 financials summarized in Table 10-2.
Plugging in the numbers in Table 10-2, you determine 3M’s return on assets to
be 13.8%:
Return on assets ( 0.138) = Income ($3,455) / assets ($25,121)
You can convert return on assets into a percentage by multiplying the answer
above by 100 to get 13.8%.
Certainly, knowing 3M generated a 13.8% return on assets is helpful. That is
a tremendous return, compared with the rest of the stock market and other
industrial conglomerates. During the early 2000s, the average company in the
S&P 500 generated a return on assets of 5.8%, and a 3% return was the norm
for industrial companies as a group, Reuters says.

Table 10-2

3M’s Vital Stats for 2008

Line item

Amount in $ millions

Revenue

$25,269

EBIT

$5,528

Tax-adjusted EBIT (assuming 37.5%)

$3,455

Total assets in 2008

$25,547

Total assets in 2007

$24,694

Average assets at end of 2008

$25,121

Source: S&P’s Capital IQ

It’s one thing to know 3M has a high return on assets. But fundamental analysis helps you figure out why. You can do this analysis by breaking return on
assets into its pieces. Bear with me as I present to you yet another formula. It’s
return on assets broken into its component parts:
Return on assets = Profit margin × asset turnover
And let’s cut that formula down even further to say:
(Income / assets) = (Income / revenue) × (Revenue/ assets)
Once your eyes stop glazing over, you’ll recognize the power of this formula.
What it’s telling you is that a company’s return on assets is a function of its
profit margin and its asset turnover. A company’s profit margin is how much it
keeps in profit from every $1 in sales, discussed at length in Chapter 5. And
the asset turnover is how much revenue a company earns from its assets.

16 506455-ch10.indd 166

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

167

Breaking down the return on assets clearly shows you the two levers a company can pull to boost its return on assets: profit margins and asset turnover.
When you plug the numbers from Table 10-2 into the formula, you can see
that return on assets for 3M breaks into these pieces:
($3,455 / $25,121) = ($3,455 / $25,269) × ($25,269 / $25,121)
I could have spared you from these formulas. But just as doing your own personal taxes helps you understand how your actions affect your tax bill, breaking down return on assets lets you see how a company’s management can
boost returns to shareholders, which is of great importance in fundamental
analysis. Just know that when looking for stocks to buy, find those that are:
✓ Boosting their profit margins: Profit margins, however you measure
them, are a key component to a company’s future.
✓ Putting their assets to full use: The more revenue a company can generate from its assets, the better the returns.
✓ Doing everything simultaneously: Even a small improvement in profit
margins and a modest improvement in asset use can have an explosive
effect on a company’s returns.

Minding the earnings yield
There aren’t many things in life that are as useful upside down as they are rightside up. Many a child has shed a tear over an upside down ice-cream cone.
But the price-to-earnings ratio, or P-E, is one of the few things that can be
of value upside down. In Chapter 9, you found how the P-E is a key tool to
understand a stock’s valuation and whether it’s an attractive investment.
When you flip the P-E ratio over, and look at the reciprocal, you get what’s
called the earnings yield. While the P-E gets all the attention, the earnings
yield can also be easier to understand. The earnings yield tells you how much
in earnings a company is generating for you.
Let’s keep things simple and use 3M’s net income during 2008 and stock
price at the end of 2008 for an example. 3M’s stock ended the year at $57.54 a
share, and the company reported diluted earnings per share of $4.89 a share.
Dividing the price by the diluted earnings per share, you arrive at a P-E of
11.8 times. If you’d like to review how to calculate a P-E ratio, flip back to
Chapter 8, where it’s described in detail.
But now, try instead, dividing the diluted earnings per share by the price and
multiplying by 100 to convert it into a fraction. Go ahead, it won’t hurt. You find
out that the company is generating earnings of 8.5% on every dollar invested in it.

16 506455-ch10.indd 167

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

168 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
The earnings yield is so useful because it puts the P-E into a form that is easily
understood and compared with other investments. For instance, if you could
get 8.5% in a savings account, then the 8.5% earnings yield from 3M wouldn’t
be all that attractive. You’ll want to make sure the extra risk is worth it, for
instance, if you’re convinced the company’s earnings will skyrocket.

Knowing When to Bail Out of a Stock
If you thought trying to pick the right time to buy a stock was hard, that’s
nothing compared to trying to sell at the right time. Inevitably, when you sell
a stock it ends up taking off and doubling; at least it feels that way most of
the time. At the same time, you may have been in a situation where you held
onto a stock and it just kept falling.
Knowing when to sell is tremendously important when you buy and sell individual stocks. When you buy individual stocks, as opposed to buying broad
index funds, you’re taking on company-specific risk. Not only are you subject
to the normal ups and downs of the market, but you’re adding the risk that the
individual company will make mistakes. For that reason, you need to be very
disciplined about when you part ways with a stock. Some investors who apply
technical analysis (discussed in Chapter 19), urge you to sell a stock once it falls
10% from your purchase price. This will prevent you from taking any large losses.

Breaking down some top reasons
to say bye to a stock
There are many reasons why a fundamental analyst might decide to part with
a stock. Some of the major ones include:
✓ Decelerating earnings or revenue growth: When you start noticing a
company’s growth is stalling out, that can be a warning sign of trouble.
Flip ahead to Chapter 17 on ways to isolate trends at a company.
✓ Deteriorating financial ratios: When companies start taking a dramatically longer time to collect cash from customers or pay their bills, that
can tip you off to trouble. See Chapter 8 for more details on this.

16 506455-ch10.indd 168

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

169

✓ Poor corporate governance or questionable management: If the motives
of a company’s executives get out of line from those of investors, that can
be a problem. Chapter 9 will show you how to do this analysis.
✓ Overvaluation: Even good companies can get overvalued. As hard as it
is sometimes, you might be best off selling a stock when the company
seems like it can do no wrong and the stock price is soaring to unsustainable heights. There are many ways for a fundamental analyst to
measure valuations. The earnings yield, discussed above, is one way;
another is the dividend discount model, discussed below. But don’t
forget about the P-E and PEG, discussed in Chapter 8, and the discounted
cash flow analysis covered in Chapter 11.
✓ Rising risk of default: If you have any questions at all whether a company can pay its debt, sell first and ask questions later. Perhaps the first
way to sense this is by analyzing a company’s interest coverage ratio, as
described in Chapter 8. But you also want to scour the annual report for
the words going concern from the auditors. If the auditors are worried, you
should be petrified. I’ll show you where to look for this in Chapter 12.
✓ Chronically missing expectations: Wall Street analysts routinely forecast how much they expect a company to earn in a given quarter or
year. Companies that miss these expectations are sometimes giving you
a heads up that either the stock is too high or the company is struggling.
You can read more about this in Chapter 14.
✓ Your appetite for risk has changed: Perhaps you have recently changed
jobs or think you’ll need your money sooner than you’d thought. You
might consider selling some of your smaller or more speculative stocks,
since they tend to be riskier over time.

Why selling stocks everyone
else wants can be profitable
There are many aspects of investing that just don’t make any logical sense.
One thing that often perplexes investors is the fact that sometimes the best
time to sell a stock is when it seems everyone else wants to buy it.
A good company’s stock may turn out to be a bad investment if you overpay
for it.

16 506455-ch10.indd 169

9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

170 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
There are a few telltale signs that show too many investors are piling into a
stock, perhaps making it overvalued and a candidate to be sold, including:
✓ Inflated price-to-book ratio: The price-to-book ratio, described in
Chapter 8, is your first tip-off when a stock is getting driven up too
much. The ratio compares the stock price to the value of a company,
according to the accountants. The most basic way to think of book value
is the total of a company’s assets minus its liabilities. When you see a
stock’s price-to-book pull ahead of its industry peers, you might consider selling.
✓ Lofty price-to-earnings ratio: Unfortunately, there’s no concrete definition of when a P-E is too high. But one thing’s for sure. When a company’s P-E gets high relative to the other stocks in the industry, you ought
to be concerned and consider selling. Also, if the stock market’s P-E is 15
and your stock’s P-E is above 100, you might consider selling a bit.
Data have proven how investors are often best served avoiding the stocks
that other investors are clamoring to buy, and stick with the ones that are
being largely ignored. Table 10-3, for instance, shows how growth stocks,
those with the highest valuations, have performed worse than value stocks
with low valuations and the market in general. It’s another reminder that
when others are talking (or bragging) about a stock at a cocktail party, you
might consider selling.

Table 10-3

Betting On The Favorites May Cost You

Type of Stock

Return between December 31, 1998 and December 31, 2008

All stocks

–0.8%

Growth stocks

–4.0%

Value stocks

1.7

Source: Russell Investments, based on Russell 3000, Russell 3000 Growth, and Russell 3000 Value
indexes

What Dividends Can Tell You about
Buying or Selling a Stock
Companies can, and often do, put their best spin on their financial reports.
As discussed in Chapters 5 through 7, there are things companies can do to
put their results in the best possible light. But there’s one thing companies
just can’t fake: dividends.

16 506455-ch10.indd 170

9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

171

Dividends are typically cash payments companies make to their shareholders. These payments are tangible. You can actually spend them. Dividends
are real money that gets deposited into your account. Companies that pay
large dividends often get popular during financial scares, as investors take
comfort in the fact they’re getting real cash from the company.
These cash payments, while seemingly small, are very important to the overall profit you can expect to reap from an investment.
Don’t confuse a company’s dividend with the interest you might get from a
bond or a certificate of deposit. Dividends are not for sure. Companies can,
and often do, slash their dividends to conserve cash. General Electric in
February 2009, for instance, stunned investors when it cut its quarterly dividend by 68% from 31 cents a share to 10 cents a share.

Calculating the dividend yield
When you hear that GE, for instance, pays a 10-cents-a-share dividend, it
doesn’t tell you much. Sure, that means that you might expect to earn 40
cents in dividends in the year, but that’s about it.
That’s why the dividend yield is such a key aspect of fundamental analysis.
The dividend yield tells you how much cash you’re getting in the form of dividends for every $1 you’ve entrusted to the company. If the stock price were
to remain flat and do nothing, the dividend yield would be your investment
return. The formula for dividend yield looks like this:
Dividend yield = Annual dividend / Share price
Fundamental analysts measure the annual dividend in several different ways.
Some add the actual dividends paid over the past year, while others annualize the current quarterly dividend, or convert the quarterly dividend into an
annual one by multiplying by 4. When a company has recently cut its dividend,
it’s best to use the annualized current dividend.
Using GE as an example:
Dividend yield = (Current quarterly dividend × 4) / Share price × 100
On Feb. 27, 2009, the day GE cut its dividend, the stock price was $8.51. That
means the dividend yield was 4.7%, measured this way:
4.7 = (.10 × 4) / 8.51 × 100
At 4.7%, GE’s dividend yield, even after the cut, was slightly higher than the
S&P’s dividend at the time.

16 506455-ch10.indd 171

9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

172 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Knowing if you’re going
to get the dividend
Investors who are investing in a company need to pay close attention to the
timing of the dividends. Companies are meticulous about which shareholders
receive the dividend, and there are several key dates to know about:
✓ Ex-dividend date: This is the date that you must already be a shareholder or buy the stock by in order to make sure you get the dividend.
✓ Date of record: This is the date that the company looks at its records to
see who its shareholders are and determines who’s getting the dough.
If you bought or own the stock by the ex-dividend date, you’ll be on the
list on the date of record.
✓ Payable date: This is the date you actually get your dividend.

Making sure the company
can afford the dividend
It might be tempting to look for stocks with the biggest dividend yields. Some
investors get dollar signs in their eyes, thinking about dividends as their
portfolio’s version of money for nothing. There’s just one problem, though.
There’s no law saying a company must continue paying the dividend. And if
the dividend gets cut, you may be sorely disappointed.
There’s no for-sure way to know whether a company will cut its dividend.
However, there are some telltale signs. For instance, if you see a dividend
yield creep dramatically above the average for the S&P 500, that can be a tipoff a cut could be on the way. GE’s dividend yield before the February 2009
cut was 14.1%, definitely lofty when the average for the S&P 500 was 3.1% at
the end of 2008, S&P says.
When you start seeing a company’s dividend yield creep up well above the
rest of the market, that’s a signal to you that either the dividend yield is about
to get cut or the company is in a deeply distressed situation. Keep in mind,
though, dividend yields are best compared to like companies. Utilities and
banks, for instance, have historically paid larger-than-average dividends and
need to be compared to one another.
Fundamental analysts will often use some financial footwork, called a dividend payout ratio, to see how affordable a dividend is to the company paying
it. The formula is:
Dividend payout ratio = Annual dividend / Diluted earnings per share * 100

16 506455-ch10.indd 172

9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

173

To calculate GE’s dividend payout ratio, for instance, divide its annual dividend of 0.40 (40 cents) by the $1.72 a share the company earned in 2008 and
multiply by 100 to arrive at 23%. In other words, 23 cents of every $1 in earnings are paid out as dividends. A 23% dividend payout ratio is reasonable, but
you don’t want to see it creep much higher than that since most companies
need to retain some cash to reinvest in themselves.
Investors need to be very suspicious when a dividend payout ratio gets to 50%
or higher. A dividend payout ratio that high might mean the company will not
be able to increase the dividend or might have to cut it.
Some real-estate companies, including those structured as real-estate investment trusts or REITs, are required to pay out 90% of their earnings as a dividend. REITs are a special case, and the dividend payout ratios do not apply.

Using dividends to put a
price tag on a company
You can tell a great deal about a company by its dividend policy, or track
record of either paying a dividend or not. When a company doesn’t pay a
dividend, for instance, it’s telling shareholders it still has plenty of profitable
ventures to plow its extra cash into.
But using fundamental analysis, you can get even more information from a
company’s dividend. Using a technique called the constant dividend model,
you can get a rough idea of what a company’s stock price should be based on
the dividends the company pays. The formula looks like this:
Value of a stock = (Next year’s dividend) / (Required return – dividend
growth rate).
You’ll need to make a number of assumptions to use the constant-dividend
model. First you need to approximate what you think the company’s dividend
will be next year. Secondly, you need to estimate what return investors are
demanding in exchange for providing their cash to the company. This is a
complicated analysis I’ll discuss in more detail in Chapter 11. Lastly, you must
guess at what rate the company will increase its dividends in the future.
At this point, let’s just assume GE plans to pay an annual dividend next year
of 40 cents a share, investors will demand a return on their money of 11%,
and dividends will grow by 8% a year. You can measure the value of the GE’s
stock this way:
Value of stock ($13.33) = 0.40 / (0.11 – 0.08)

16 506455-ch10.indd 173

9/24/09 10:33:50 PM

174 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
If all your assumptions come true, GE’s stock price on February 27 of $8.51
would appear to be undervalued.
If you haven’t noticed, the assumptions you make can dramatically alter the
results of the constant-dividend model. For instance, if you assume dividends
will grow by 3% a year, instead of 8%, the value of the stock falls to $5, which
would make the current price appear overvalued.
Also, the constant-dividend model only works on companies that pay a dividend. Many smaller or faster growing companies do not pay dividend. With
those types of companies, you’ll need to use the discounted cash-flow model,
as explored in Chapter 11.

Dividends are not money in the bank
Many investors make the grave mistake of
thinking dividends paid by companies will keep
rolling in year after year. In fact, some investors ask me if it’s safe to replace their savings
accounts, which often pay low interest rates,
for dividend-paying stocks.
There’s certainly a case to be made for dividend paying stocks. Even if you’re an income
investor, or someone looking for regular cash
payments from your investments to pay bills,
dividend paying stocks can make sense. Not
only do dividend paying stocks give you a shot
at making extra money if the stock’s price rises,
very often, companies might increase their dividends over time. The chance at getting extra
cash is a good thing as you try to preserve your
nest egg from the ravages of time and inflation.
But I cannot stress enough that even dividends
paid by massive companies or even seemingly stable businesses are not guaranteed.
Dividends are not to be considered a replacement for interest you receive through savings
vehicles such as certificates of deposits, money
market funds or bonds.
If the financial crisis that began in 2007 taught
investors anything, and it did teach several

16 506455-ch10.indd 174

painful lessons, is was just how fleeting dividends could be. As the financial crisis worsened,
company after company slashed or downright
eliminated their dividend payments. Even
companies that had been paying dividends for
decades were forced to slice their dividends to
preserve precious cash. For some companies,
cutting the dividend was the first thing to do as
financial pressures mounted.
The dividend cut-fest reached historic proportions in 2009 as companies, especially banks
that usually pay fat dividends, cut deeply. In
fact, dividend payments from stocks in the
Standard & Poor’s 500 fell by 32% in July 2009
from their level in 2008, says S&P. That brutal
decline made July 2009 the worst July for dividend payments since 2002. And as of July 2009,
S&P estimated investors would get $61.5 billion
less in dividend payments than they did in 2008.
Talk about a financial hit.
And that’s why, if you’re angling for dividends,
you need to be very mindful of which companies are most likely to protect their dividend
payments. Again, fundamental analysis can be
your best friend when you’re trying to predict
which companies are likely to keep paying their
