
They are determined. They are focused. They neglect their family, miss their daughter’s softball game, and lose track of time. But it’s all worth it, because seven days
later, at 3:45 in the morning, they discover what they’ve been looking for. On their stochastic, they’ve been using the settings 14, 3, 3 when they should have been
using 15, 3, 1! They put it on a chart and apply it to historical data. It works much better! The traders once again reformat all their charts and, once again, eagerly await
the next trading day.
And when this doesn’t work, they go from a 15-minute chart to a 13-minute chart. And when that doesn’t work, they switch from trading the E-mini S&P to trading
the E-mini Nasdaq. And when that doesn’t work, they learn that the euro is the place to be. And when that doesn’t work, they become gold bugs, because, don’t you
know, it’s the only real money? It’s always, always, always the next best thing. This cycle repeats itself forever until the trader gets sick of this roller coaster and
jumps off at the next stop. M ost never figure this out and remain stuck here for the rest of their trading lives. Their kids go from diapers to dormitories, and they
barely notice because they’re still lost, tweaking the next best thing, never realizing that they’re the chump with the strategy who would be welcomed with open arms
in any casino. Like Duluth, M innesota, in February, it’s a terrible place to be.
This whole situation is summed up succinctly by one of the hedge fund characters in Ben M ezrich’s entertaining book Ugly Americans: The True Story of the Ivy
League Cowboys Who Raided the Asian Markets for Millions: “The whole game of arbitrage is spotting who the asshole is. If you can’t spot the asshole—well, then
you’re the asshole.”

What Are the Signs That a Trader Is Stuck in Phase I, II, or III?
Here are a few additional anecdotes and situations that let traders know that they are still stuck in these beginning stages of trading.

Good Till Close
A popular order type for swing traders is called a GTC order, or “good till canceled.” This means just what it says: “Keep my order in place until my target is hit or
until I cancel the order.” M y partners and I, as well as many brokers, refer to GTC orders as “good till close.” This is because many traders will keep their “good till
canceled” order in place right up until price action gets “close” to their order. What happens is that the stock they are in is rallying hard and approaching their GTC sell
order. They start looking at the stock and think, “Wow, this stock is acting great! I don’t want to get out of it because it’s going to keep heading higher.” So they call
their broker and cancel their GTC sell order. The stock rallies, pushes up through that order level, and then eventually starts to sell off. The trader has no exit strategy,
and the stock continues to fall and turns into a losing trade. This starts off as a greed play and turns into a fear play. When this happens to traders often enough, they
start to get really fearful about losing money.

Size Really Does Matter
When traders get scared and start to put most of their focus on not being wrong, a variety of bad things start to happen. The most common is that the traders get into a
new position, and as soon as they see a small profit, they take it. They buy the minisized Dow at 10,100, and it goes to 10,104. Even though there are screaming buy
signals in place and there are zero sell signals, they, miracle of miracles, have a profit, and they’ll be damned if they are going to let the market take it away from them.
So they pocket the four Dow points, which amount to $20 per contract, or about $14.00 after commissions. Never mind that the Dow goes on to rally another 40
points before it gives an exit signal.
What happens is that these traders are taking a four-point profit, a three-point profit, and a six-point profit, and then the last trade of the day goes 30 points against
them. So the traders have three winners out of four, but they are down on the day. And this is kind of a typical thing that’ll happen to traders who are in this frame of
mind of not wanting to have to go through the pain of watching a profitable position go all the way back into the red.
M any brokers actually analyze their clients’ accounts in order to predict when they are going to blow up. This way they can hedge the traders before the losses
actually occur, essentially trading against their clients. The number one indicator that a trading account is going to blow up is an increase in the frequency of trading
combined with an increased use of market orders instead of limit orders. Firms that hedge see this situation develop, begin to lick their chops, and fade their customer’s
account, taking the opposite side of every trade. In general, traders who suddenly start taking smaller profits are also trading much more frequently than they used to.
It is important to realize that some firms will see this activity and take specific action, because 90 percent of the time this means that a trader is about to blow up his
account. Don’t be the trader who comes up on the broker’s radar screen as a hedging candidate.
Yes, size does matter. Bigger losses are a lot worse than smaller profits. However, a trader who takes small profits because of fear is not following a plan. A trader
who is not following a plan, who is reacting only to internal emotions, is going to get beaten. Not maybe. Not probably. Going to.

Greed Is Bad Nourishment for the Brain
There are limitless ways in which traders can sabotage their accounts, but this is a particularly good one. What happens is that traders get into a comfortable routine.
M aybe they are averaging $250 a day trading the mini-sized Dow on a $50,000 account. This, for them, is a reasonable goal with the capital they are trading. One night
such a trader is at dinner with his spouse, who asks how the trading is going. The trader responds that all is going great. The spouse is pleased and says something like,
“Well, since your trading is going so well, I’ve been thinking that I’d really like to get a BM W. Can we go ahead and get one?”
And so the next day, the trader wakes up and think, “Okay, if I’m going to get this BM W, I’ve got to step up my trading and start making $750 a day. This way I
can set aside a large down payment, and I can get the car in the next six to eight weeks.” The very second a trader utters those words, a trigger clicks in the remote
recesses of his mind, and he has unknowingly entered a period in which he will not be able to do anything right. Instead of sticking to his original parameters, he is
going to start reaching for more. What used to look like a perfectly good 20-point profit in the mini-sized Dow now looks puny—it certainly won’t have much of an
impact on the BM W purchase. So the position doesn’t get sold, and the trader sits back and waits for the market to give him more money. The market inevitably turns,
and the trader ends up getting stopped out for a loss. In this mindset, what once used to look like a reasonable profit becomes too small, and this throws the entire
trading plan out the window.
I remember working with one trader who was in almost exactly this situation. He was a good trader, but he had recently entered a losing streak, and he couldn’t
figure out why. I asked him if he suddenly was trying to trade his way into any big, specific purchases. Yes. Aha. Something for his wife. We talked about this
36

phenomenon for a while, including the story about the fur coat, which is described in Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, by Edwin Lefevre, a book that is a must read
for all traders. M y friend paused for a moment and rubbed his chin. “Well, I think I know how to fix this problem,” he said. “I’ll just divorce my wife.”
This is the home run mentality, and it’s a pitfall for all traders. It’s important for the trader to remember that the market is not going anywhere. Like an all-you-caneat buffet in Vegas, it’s going to be there all the time. There is no reason to try to load up your plate to the max on your first trip through the buffet line. You can grab
your plate, mosey on over to the buffet, pick up a couple of pieces of shrimp, and saunter back over to your table and enjoy them. Then, when that’s done, you can go
back and pick out a few slices of brie. There is no need to be a hog and load up your plate. The buffet is always going to be there. A person can sit there all day and
take little nibbles from the buffet all day long. Remember, in the markets, bulls can win and bears can win, but pigs get slaughtered.

Speaking of Jesse Livermore
M any traders know that Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, by Edwin Lefevre, is a book about Jesse Livermore, the famed trader who made approximately $100
million in 1929 dollars in the stock market crash (about a billion in today’s dollars). What many people do not know is that on M arch 5, 1934, he filed for bankruptcy,
and on November 28, 1940, he blew his brains out in the bathroom stall of a hotel. Although this may not sound like a strong endorsement for the book, it is a must
read for any serious trader. While this book talks about the trading strategies that made him his fortune, the book Jesse Livermore, World’s Greatest Stock Trader , by
Richard Smitten, also goes into detail about the years and days leading up to his suicide.
I majored in history, and I was trained to take pieces of historical data and form an opinion, based on facts, about what really happened in the past. From what I’ve
read about Jesse Livermore’s life and eventual demise, my opinion is that he suffered a bout of euphoria after the 1929 crash. This euphoria caused him to trade
recklessly and with huge size, and this caused him to lose his fortune in less than five years. Although he had gone broke and made a fortune three times before, the size
of this loss did permanent psychological damage, and the pressing weight of “trying to make it all back” is what eventually did him in. Let’s take a look at what
euphoria can do to a trader.

Euphoria: Redefining Stupid
Euphoria is the worst emotion for a trader to succumb to, even worse than greed. What happens with euphoria is that traders have such a great day in the markets that
they proclaim themselves king of the trading world. Let’s say they normally trade 10 contracts. Well, now, since they are “king,” they are going to start off with 50
contracts, and go up from there if they feel like it. After all, they are now “the world’s greatest trader” and can do no wrong.
This happens to traders frequently, and the resulting act of insanity is just like doubling each bet on a roulette wheel. People can sit on red and keep doubling up on
each bet until they win. This works great right up until the time that they have maxed out their capital on red, and the color comes up black. Doubling and tripling up
on positions just because a trader is feeling confident is yet another sucker’s game. What’s worse is that this strategy always leads to traders giving back all the
fantastic gains that made them euphoric in the first place. This places added pressure on them—now they have to trade in order to get back to where they were. This,
of course, causes a multitude of bad habits.
Increasing trading size just because you are feeling awesome about your trading is like being in a marriage that is going fantastically well. The conversations are
sparkling, the mutual adulation is adoring, and life under the covers is grand. Happiness abounds in spades. How can you make this better? Double up! Have an affair.
It may seem like a good idea in theory, but this is going to turn out only one way—very, very badly.

Paper Trading—Why Is It More Worthless Than an Iraqi Dinar?
When I wrote the title of this section in 2005, I never imagined that there would be a growing popularity of advertisements from firms pushing paper Iraqi dinars as an
investment. Admittedly, the ads sound very appealing. For just a few thousand dollars, you can buy a million dollars worth of dinars, and “when the dinar goes to
parity with the U.S. dollar,” it will then be worth a million U.S. dollars. And of course the firm that is selling these dinars is also the only place where a market is being
made. Never mind that this exchange rate is a hoax and that the black market for dollars in Iraq is many multiples of what is being shown in the advertisements (that is,
the Iraqi dinar is even more worthless than advertised because people prefer having U.S. dollars). Hopefully I’m not the first person to give the heads up that this is
one of those scenarios where “if it sounds too good to be true, then pull your head out of the sand, because it is too good to be true.” Yes, at some point the dinar may
be pegged to the U.S. dollar, but that is not even in the ballpark of going “to parity” with the U.S. dollar. And if it does go to parity with the U.S. dollar, guess how
that will happen? It will be revalued. Iraqi dinars can be printed at will. That does not constitute rarity and value. The few thousand dollars you are tempted to throw
at this in the hopes of turning it into millions would be better served by putting them toward a vacation or something tangible like silver. And even if you want to sell
it, who is going to buy it? There is no market for it. Ah, but there is! Go on eBay and sell it to someone who thinks it’s going to parity with the U.S. dollar. But hurry
before the jig is up. If you have any doubts, then think of it this way—if this were a legitimate opportunity, then George Soros would already have cornered this
market. He knows a little more about currencies than you and I do.
This reminds me of the “ostrich scam” that hit Texas a decade or so ago. Breeder ostriches were going for $50,000 each because of the high nutritional value of the
meat. Unfortunately, no one bought the meat, so the breeders just kept selling their stock to other people who wanted to breed ostriches, and so on, until everyone
who wanted to breed ostriches had them. After that, you literally couldn’t give the large birds away, and to this day there are some of them roaming free on the Texas
plains. Which brings us back to paper trading.
There are a few good reasons for people to paper trade. Paper trading will help a trader learn a new execution platform. This way, she can figure out how to use the
software through a demo account and save herself the costly errors that can arise when people they try to place orders on an unfamiliar system. Also, paper trading is
good for forward-testing a system or strategy to see how it works before committing real money. However, paper trading does have one distinct disadvantage—it can
be worthless in a way because it does not take into account how a trader will act when there is real money on the line. That is what makes or breaks a trader. It’s okay
to trade smaller size, but without real money on the line, a trader won’t understand how she holds up under pressure. This is also a good way for a trader to test how
far apart she is mentally from “paper trading vs. real trading.” A trader should feel the same, or at least as close as possible, when trading paper as she does when she is
trading with real money. To the extent that she feels extreme emotions when she is really trading rather than paper trading, it will give her a clue as to where she is on
the psychological trading scale. In other words, how screwed up is she psychologically when she is actually trading with real money? When a trader freaks out on a real
trade, it is a red flag that she is trading too big for her account size. Her judgment goes to zero, and financial ruin is just around the corner. In this case, a trader should

37

keep trading smaller size until she feels the same emotionally as when she is in a paper trade.
Building up trading size is very similar to building up muscle with weights. The first time a person goes into the gym, he may only be able to bench-press 140
pounds for 10 repetitions. A month later, he is able to push 140 pounds 15 times, at which point he ups the weight to 150 pounds for 10 reps. This continues over the
course of a few years, at the end of which he is cranking out 200 pounds for 10 repetitions. Yet had he tried benching 200 pounds at the outset, he could literally have
killed himself. It’s the same in trading. The first time I lost $1,000, I threw up. The next time, I merely choked on my own bile. By the tenth time, it became something
that my intestines could handle. At that point, I realized it was time to up my trade size to where I could risk $1,500 on a trade without getting “too intense”
emotionally. And as the years went by, I was able to increase that to larger and larger amounts as mentally and emotionally I got used to the dollar swings on my
scoreboard. And it has to be treated as such—a scoreboard. The moment you start thinking in terms of purchasing power, of something that you could buy with your
winnings or could have bought with the current losing trade, all is lost. Emotions at that point rule the day, and that strategy only works to the trader’s detriment. One
thing I’ve studied over the years, and we’ve come out with irrefutable proof— staring harder at the screen does not make the market do what you want it to do. If you
find yourself staring intently at the screen, it’s a heads-up that you are trading too big for your account size.
The most dramatic instance I’ve seen of this is in working with traders in Asia, specifically in Taipei, Hong Kong, Tokyo, and Shanghai. Asians are fantastic
gamblers, willing to risk huge sums. This can be a problem with trading, and it takes only one bad trade to ruin an account. One guy I worked with was trading 100 lots
at a time in a $100,000 account (obviously using the maximum day-trading margin). Each 1-point move in the S&Ps represented $5,000. The first day he made 5 points
($25,000), and the next day he lost 7 points ($35,000). These were normal fluctuations for him, and it showed. He’d get so excited and animated that I thought he was
going to implode. I had him cut his size down to 10 lots. At first he was bored, but then a strange thing happened. He wasn’t excited, so he traded objectively … and
he made money. We got him to trade in the same mental state he was in when he was paper trading, and it made all the difference. Being able to work with traders
overseas is a great win/win for me, as I get to learn how other people view the U.S. markets, as well as see how U.S. news is filtered through their local news channels.
Being able to put yourself in another person’s shoes brings more understanding of how the world really works. That may not help you decide whether or not to take
the next trading setup that comes your way, but it does help you form a macro view of the world—and it does make life more interesting.

But What About Phase IV—How Does a Person Learn How Not to Lose Money?
This is the trickiest part for traders to get their arms around. Learning how not to lose? In trading, first you lose, then you learn how not to lose, and then, and only
then, can you get on the road to generating a consistent income. “Learning how not to lose” is a simple way of summing up everything we’ve talked about up to this
point. It’s about having the patience to wait, the courage to get out, and the integrity to follow your plan—all of that leads to learning how not to lose. It’s about
focusing on limiting risk, not having to be right, and limiting the downside so that the upside can take care of itself. And once this starts to sink in and you get
comfortable with “learning how not to lose,” then and only then can you make the transition to generating a consistent income from trading. Ironically, though we all
think we are different and unique human beings, people who lose consistently in the markets over time all do exactly the same things. They (1) overtrade, or trade way
too frequently, (2) use too tight stops (their fear of loss is so strong that they don’t even give the trade a chance to work out), (3) trade with too much leverage (they
would be far better off trading smaller size), or (4) have one big loss that wipes out a big chunk of their account. Losing traders consistently do at least one—if not all
— of these four things. I’ve looked at hundreds of brokerage accounts, and they all tell the same story. In fact, I know traders who fixed their trading simply by doing
the opposite of this. They (1) undertrade, or trade one or two solid setups each day, (2) use too wide stops, staying outside of the market noise, (3) trade with
appropriate leverage, which is why they are able to use wider stops, and (4) never have a big losing trade. It really can be that simple.

Why Does the Plateau Money Management Method Work?
Up to this point, I haven’t talked about a specific money management method, but there is one I’d like to talk about now. It’s something I’ve been surprised to find
that not many traders think much about. The usual mindset is, “Get some setups, follow them, and make some money.” Yet once a trader has his psychology in check,
the next issue that has to be resolved is money management. There are innumerable methodologies and schools of thought where money management is concerned. And
plenty of them work, at least up to a point.
What many money management systems fail to acknowledge is that as traders inch up the ladder of profitability, they frequently hit mental plateaus. M aybe a
trader can start with a $25,000 account and run it up to $40,000, but then, instead of climbing still further and taking the account to the next level, the trader plateaus,
and things begin to fall apart. This $40,000 plateau becomes an invisible barrier that holds the trader down and prevents him from moving to the next level. Plateaus can
easily turn into very real stumbling blocks. They can trigger bad habits, usually based on the idea that a trader now has a “comfortable cushion of cash” to work with in
his account. This makes him lax, more prone to break his rules. This amount will be different for everyone. M aybe you have a $5,000 account and you do a great job
running it up to $7,500, but when you reach that, you hit a big losing streak. Or maybe you have $75,000, and every time you hit $100,000, you start trading with
“house money” and getting more aggressive, and soon you find yourself back at $75,000.
I’ve struggled with this problem myself over the course of my trading life, although my plateaus have grown over time. It’s almost like lifting weights. You have to
reach new levels all the time, not just in terms of your trading skills, but in terms of figuring out how to wrap your mind around specific amounts of money. You have
to get comfortable with progressively larger and larger sums.
I have solved this problem by employing a particular strategy that I call “the plateau method” of managing my day-trading accounts. Specifically, this is for trading
shorter-term, highly leveraged accounts such as futures, forex, and options. I don’t use this methodology for swing and position trading.
Let’s use a $10,000 hypothetical starting account. Your initial goal is to run the account up to 2.5 times your starting capital, which is $25,000. (This is an example;
your amount to reach may be different.) Under this methodology, when you reach your desired target ($25,000, in this case), you withdraw your original $10,000, plus
a profit of $2,500, leaving you with a balance of $12,500 in your trading account.
Now you tweak your goal. Instead of $25,000, your aim is to run your account up to 2.5 times your new starting capital, which equals $31,250 ($12,500 × 2.5).
Once you reach your target of $31,250, withdraw half of the account ($15,625) and reset your goal.
Now your goal is to take the $15,625 and increase it 2.5 times yet again, making your goal $39,062.50. When you reach that target, take out half, and continue.
The time it takes to do this isn’t critical. You aren’t focused on achieving your target in a week or a month or a quarter. You’re simply following your plan and
taking your setups, and when you hit the plateau, you’ll take money out and establish a new goal. When you’re trading leveraged instruments, one solid runner can
make a big impact on your account. This is why it is so critical to keep your losses small.
Here’s the key: you aren’t trading your whole stake. If you have $50,000 with which to trade, then use only $10,000 as your stake to get started. This allows you
38
