
Getting liquid without getting soaked
Liquidity refers to the level of market interest — the level of buying and selling volume —
available at any given moment for a particular asset or security. The higher the liquidity, or the
deeper the market, the faster and easier it is to buy or sell a security.

From a trading perspective, liquidity is a critical consideration because it determines how
quickly prices move between trades and over time. A highly liquid market like forex can see
large trading volumes transacted with relatively minor price changes. An illiquid, or thin,

market will tend to see prices move more rapidly on relatively lower trading volumes. A
market that only trades during certain hours (futures contracts, for example) also represents a
less liquid, thinner market.

I refer to liquidity, liquidity considerations, and market interest throughout this book
because they’re among the most important factors affecting how prices move, or price action.

It’s important to understand that, although the forex market offers exceptionally high
liquidity on an overall basis, liquidity levels vary throughout the global trading day and
across various currency pairs. For individual traders, though, variations in liquidity are more
of a strategic consideration rather than a tactical issue. For example, if a large hedge fund
needs to make a trade worth several hundred million dollars, it needs to be concerned about
the tactical levels of liquidity, such as how much its trade is likely to move market prices
depending on when the trade is executed. For individuals, who generally trade in smaller
sizes, the amounts are not an issue, but the ebb and flow of liquidity are an important strategic
factor in knowing when and how prices are likely to move.
The next section shows how liquidity and market interest changes throughout the global trading day
with an eye to what it means for trading in particular currency pairs. (I explain individual currency
pairs in greater detail in Chapters 8 and 9.)

Around the World in a Trading Day
The forex market is open and active 24 hours a day, from the start of business hours on Monday
morning in the Asia-Pacific time zone straight through to the Friday close of business hours in
New York. At any given moment, depending on the time zone, dozens of global financial centers
— such as Sydney, Tokyo, or London — are open, and currency trading desks in those financial
centers are active in the market.
In addition to the major global financial centers, many financial institutions operate 24-hour-a-day
currency trading desks, providing an ever-present source of market interest. It may be a U.S. hedge
fund in Boston that needs to monitor currencies around the clock, or it may be a major international
bank with a concentrated global trading operation in Singapore.

The opening of the trading week
There is no officially designated starting time to the trading day or week, but for all intents the
market action kicks off when Wellington, New Zealand, the first financial center west of the
international dateline, opens on Monday morning local time. Depending on where you live, it

roughly corresponds to early Sunday afternoon in North America, Sunday evening in Europe, and
very early Monday morning in Asia.

The Sunday open represents the starting point where currency markets resume trading after
the Friday close of trading in North America (5 p.m. eastern time [ET]). This is the first
chance for the forex market to react to news and events that may have happened over the
weekend. Prices may have closed New York trading at one level, but depending on the
circumstances, they may start trading at different levels at the Sunday open. The risk that
currency prices open at different levels on Sunday versus their close on Friday is referred to
as the weekend gap risk or the Sunday open gap risk. A gap is a change in price levels
where no prices are tradable in between.

As a strategic trading consideration, individual traders need to be aware of the weekend
gap risk and know what events are scheduled over the weekend. There’s no fixed set of
potential events and there’s never any way of ruling out what may transpire, such as a terror
attack or a natural disaster. You just need to be aware that the risk exists, and factor it into
your trading strategy.
Of typical scheduled weekend events, the most common are G7 or G20 meetings (see Chapter 3
for more on the G7/G20) and national elections or referenda. Just be sure you’re aware of any
major events that are scheduled.
On most Sunday opens, prices generally pick up where they left off on Friday afternoon. The
opening price spreads in the interbank market will be much wider than normal, because only
Wellington and 24-hour trading desks are active at the time. Opening price spreads of 10 to 30
points in the major currency pairs are not uncommon in the initial hours of trading. When banks in
Sydney, Tokyo, Singapore, and Hong Kong enter the market over the next few hours, liquidity
begins to improve and price spreads begin to narrow to more normal levels.

Because of the wider price spreads in the initial hours of the Sunday open, most online
trading platforms do not begin trading until 5 p.m. ET on Sundays, when sufficient liquidity
enables the platforms to offer their normal price quotes. Make sure you’re aware of your
broker’s trading policies with regard to the Sunday open, especially in terms of order
executions.

Trading in the Asia-Pacific session
Currency trading volumes in the Asia-Pacific session account for about 22 percent of total daily
global volume, according to the 2010 BIS survey. The principal financial trading centers are

Wellington, New Zealand; Sydney, Australia; Tokyo, Japan; Hong Kong, and Singapore.
In terms of the most actively traded currency pairs, that means news and data reports from New
Zealand, Australia, and Japan are going to be hitting the market during this session. New Zealand
and Australian data reports are typically released in the early morning, local time, which
corresponds to late afternoon/early evening in North America. Japanese data is typically released
just before 9 a.m. Tokyo time, which equates to roughly 7 or 8 p.m. ET. Some Japanese data
reports and events also take place in the Tokyo afternoon, which equates to roughly midnight to 4
a.m. ET.
The overall trading direction for the NZD, AUD, and JPY can be set for the entire session
depending on what news and data reports are released and what they indicate. For example, an
unexpected interest rate hike in NZ can see an outsized reaction in the NZD against other major
currencies.
Also during Asia/Pacific trading, late speakers from the United States, such as Federal Reserve
officials speaking on the West Coast of the United States, may offer remarks on the U.S. economy
or the direction of U.S. interest rates that affect the value of the U.S. dollar against other major
currencies.

With the rapid growth of China over the last decade, Chinese news and data have become
critical drivers of global markets. China is now the second largest national economy after the
United States and overtook Germany as the world’s leading exporter in 2010. Chinese data or
policy changes that indicate growth there can fuel short-term rallies in everything from stock
markets to commodities, with supportive implications for commodity currencies like AUD,
CAD, and NZD (see Chapter 9 for more on the commodity currencies). On the other hand,
Chinese data that point to slowing growth, or policy changes intended to fight inflation, for
example, that may curb growth, can send global stock and commodity markets into a tail-spin.
China also holds more than $2.6 trillion in currency reserves, with more than half allocated
to U.S. Treasury debt, so any news of shifts in China’s currency reserve management policies
can trigger strong shifts in major currencies, especially the USD.
For individual traders, overall liquidity in the major currency pairs is more than sufficient, with
generally orderly price movements. In some less liquid, non-regional currencies, like GBP/USD
or USD/CAD, price movements may be more erratic or nonexistent, depending on the
environment. With no Canadian news out for the next 12 hours, for example, there may be little
reason or interest to move that pair. But if a large market participant needs to make a transaction in
that pair, the price movement could be larger than normal.

Trading in the European/London session
About midway through the Asian trading day, European financial centers begin to open up and the

market gets into full swing. European financial centers and London account for more than 55
percent of total daily global trading volume, with London alone accounting for more than one-third
of total daily global volume, according to the 2010 BIS survey.
The European session overlaps with half of the Asian trading day and half of the North American
trading session, which means that market interest and liquidity is at its absolute peak during this
session.
News and data events from the Eurozone (and individual countries like Germany and France),
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom are typically released in the early-morning hours of the
European session. As a result, some of the biggest moves and most active trading take place in the
European currencies (EUR, GBP, and CHF) and the euro cross-currency pairs (EUR/CHF and
EUR/GBP).

Because of the larger size of the European/London session volume, market moves that
started earlier in Asia can become much more pronounced after Europe/London gets started.
For example, an unexpected decline in a Chinese leading index earlier in the day may see
global stock markets and commodities decline only slightly in response. But after the big
money in Europe/London gets to work, market-price declines could become much more
severe.
Asian trading centers begin to wind down in the late-morning hours of the European session, and
North American financial centers come in a few hours later, around 7 a.m. ET.

Trading in the North American session
Because of the overlap of North American and European trading sessions, the trading volumes are
much more significant. Some of the biggest and most meaningful directional price movements take
place during this crossover period, roughly between 7 a.m. and noon ET. On its own, however, the
North American trading session accounts for roughly the same share of global trading volume as
the Asia-Pacific market, or just under 20 percent of global daily trading volume.
The North American morning is when key U.S. economic data is released, and the forex market
makes many of its most significant decisions on the value of the U.S. dollar. Most U.S. data reports
are released at 8:30 a.m. ET, with others coming out later (between 9 and 10 a.m. ET). Canadian
data reports are also released in the morning, usually between 7 and 9 a.m. ET. There are also a
few U.S. economic reports that variously come out at noon or 2 p.m. ET, livening up the New
York afternoon market. (See Chapter 7 for more details on individual economic data reports.)
London and the European financial centers begin to wind down their daily trading operations
around noon eastern time (ET) each day. The London, or European close, as it’s known, can
frequently generate a volatile flurry of activity. A directional move that occurred earlier in

European trading or the New York session may be reversed if enough traders decide to take profit
(selling out or exiting long positions) or cover shorts (buying back short positions). Or the
directional move may extend farther, as traders betting against the earlier directional move throw
in the towel and decide to go with the primary move. There’s no set recipe for how the European
close plays out, but significant flurries of activity frequently occur around this time.

On most days, market liquidity and interest fall off significantly in the New York afternoon,
which can make for challenging trading conditions. On quiet days, the generally lower market
interest typically leads to stagnating price action. On more active days, where prices may
have moved more significantly, the lower liquidity can spark additional outsized price
movements, as fewer traders scramble to get similarly fewer prices and liquidity. Just as
with the London close, there’s never a set way in which a New York afternoon market move
will play out, so traders just need to be aware that lower liquidity conditions tend to prevail,
and adapt accordingly.

Lower liquidity and the potential for increased volatility are most evident in the least-liquid
major-currency pairs, especially USD/CHF and GBP/USD and their crosses, like EUR/GBP
or EUR/CHF.
North American trading interest and volume generally continue to wind down as the trading day
moves toward the 5 p.m. New York close, which also sees the change in value dates take place.
(See Chapter 4 for more on rollovers and value dates.) But during the late New York afternoon,
Wellington and Sydney have reopened and a new trading day has begun.

Key daily times and events
In addition to the ebb and flow of liquidity and market interest during the global currency trading
day, you need to be aware of the following daily events, which tend to occur around the same
times each day.

Expiring options
Currency options are typically set to expire either at the Tokyo expiry (3 p.m. Tokyo time) or the
New York expiry (10 a.m. ET). The New York option expiry is the more significant one because it
tends to capture both European and North American option market interest. When an option
expires, the underlying option ceases to exist. Any hedging in the spot market that was done based
on the option being alive suddenly needs to be unwound, which can trigger significant price
changes in the hours leading up to and just after the option expiry time.

The amount and variety of currency option interest is just too large to suggest any single
way that spot prices will always react around the expiry (there may not even be any
significant option interest expiring on many days), but you should be aware that optionrelated interest is most in evidence around the daily expiries.

Setting the rate at currency fixings
There are several daily currency fixings in various financial centers, but the two most important
are the 8:55 a.m. Tokyo time and the 4 p.m. London time fixings. A currency fixing is a set time
each day when the prices of currencies for commercial and financial transactions are set, or fixed.
(See Chapter 3 for more on fixings.)

From a trading standpoint, these fixings may see a flurry of trading in a particular currency
pair in the hour or two before the fixing that abruptly ends just after the fixing time. A sharp
rally in a specific currency pair on fixing-related buying, for example, may suddenly come to
an end at the fixing time and see the price quickly drop back to where it was before.

Month-end and quarter-end fixings usually see the biggest volumes as they include asset
managers’ portfolio hedging or rebalancing flows. Significant monthly gains/declines in
national stock markets can mean a particular currency may need to be sold/bought to maintain
hedging ratios. For example, if the U.S. S&P 500 gains 5 percent in a month, the USD value
of foreign asset managers’ U.S. stock portfolio will have increased. To maintain a steady
hedge ratio, they will need to sell USD against their home currency.

Squaring up on the currency futures markets
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), one of the largest futures markets in the world, offers
currency futures through its International Monetary Market (IMM) subsidiary exchange. Daily
currency-futures trading closes each day on the IMM at 2 p.m. central time (CT), which is 3 p.m.
ET. Many futures traders like to square up or close any open positions at the end of each trading
session to limit their overnight exposure or for margin requirements.

The 30 to 45 minutes leading up to the IMM closing occasionally generates a flurry of
activity that spills over into the spot market. Because the amount of liquidity in the spot
currency market is at its lowest in the New York afternoon, sharp movements in the futures
markets can drive the spot market around this time. There’s no reliable way to tell if or how
the IMM close will trigger a move in the New York afternoon spot market, so you just need
to be aware of it and know that it can distort prices in the short term.

The U.S. dollar index
The U.S. dollar index is a futures contract listed on the Intercontinental Exchange, or ICE, futures
exchange in the United States. The dollar index is an average of the value of the U.S. dollar against
a basket of six other major currencies, but it’s heavily weighted toward European currencies: The
European currency share of the basket — Eurozone, United Kingdom, Sweden, and Switzerland —
totals 77.3 percent.

The U.S. dollar index is great parallel universe to the spot U.S. dollar currency pairs. As a
currency trader, be sure to follow the U.S. dollar index, especially its technical
developments. (See Chapter 11 for more on technical analysis.) When the market outlook for
the U.S. dollar is uncertain or mixed against other major currencies, the U.S. dollar index can
frequently provide a clearer picture. If the U.S. dollar index breaks key technical levels,
many currency traders react in the major spot currency pairs, building on the break of the U.S.
dollar index. The flows can go either way — sharp moves in spot currency pairs may spur
similar moves in the U.S. dollar index, or breakouts in the dollar index may provoke sharp
adjustments in the spot U.S. dollar pairs — so look to the U.S. dollar index as another key
indicator of the overall direction of the U.S. dollar.

Currencies and Other Financial Markets
As much as I like to think of the forex market as the be all and end all of financial trading markets,
it doesn’t exist in a vacuum. You may even have heard of some these other markets: gold, oil,
stocks, and bonds.

Risk on or risk off?
Generally speaking, currency markets overlap with other major asset markets based on the global
investment environment, with risk sentiment as the key barometer. Risk sentiment refers to
investors’ moods and the level of risk appetites they’re displaying: Are investors seeking risk, or
are they seeking safety? When times are good, risk assets (such as stocks and commodities) tend to
appreciate as growth and demand expectations are positive. When times are bad or uncertainty is
high, risk assets tend to suffer, and more defensive assets (like government bonds, gold, or the
USD) are sought after.
The currency market corollary breaks down by individual major currencies, with the USD, JPY,
and CHF typically viewed as the safe haven currencies and most others viewed as risk
currencies. Of course, the overlap between FX and other major assets classes will also be
determined by what’s happening to other key drivers of individual currencies, such as interest

rates or growth expectations.

The U.S. dollar has a special place among major currencies because it’s the primary
currency for international trade, and the U.S. government bond market is the largest in the
world. When there is a USD-driven movement, say the USD is weakening in a dramatic
fashion due to Fed policy, the spillover effects to other markets can be quite strong, such as
driving commodity prices far higher than what demand would suggest. The flip side is that
when major uncertainty develops or really bad things happen (think Eurozone debt crisis), the
USD tends to strengthen as investors seek safety in U.S. Treasuries.

Be very careful about getting caught up in the supposed correlations between the forex
market and other financial markets. Even when a high degree of correlation is found
(meaning, the two markets move in tandem or inversely to each other), it’s probably over the
long term (months or years) and offers little information about how the two markets will
correlate in the short term (minutes, hours, and days).

Always keep in mind that all the various financial markets are markets in their own right
and function according to their own internal dynamics based on data, news, positioning, and
sentiment. Will markets occasionally overlap and display varying degrees of correlation? Of
course, and it’s always important to be aware of what’s going on in other financial markets.
But it’s also essential to view each market in its own perspective and to trade each market
individually.
With that rather lengthy disclaimer in mind, let’s look at some of the other key financial markets
and see what conclusions we can draw for currency trading. (See Chapter 9 for an idea of
correlations.)

Gold
Gold (XAU) is commonly viewed as a hedge against inflation, an alternative to the U.S. dollar,
and as a store of value in times of economic or political uncertainty. In recent years, gold has also
been viewed as an alternative to major fiat currencies, with gold strengthening as both the USD
and EUR came under pressure. Over the long term, gold’s relationship is mostly inverse to the
USD, with a weaker USD generally accompanying a higher gold price, and a stronger USD coming
with a lower gold price. However, in the short run, each market has its own dynamics and
liquidity, which makes short-term trading relationships more difficult to gauge.

Overall, the gold market is significantly smaller than the forex market, so if I were a gold

trader, I’d sooner keep an eye on what’s happening to the dollar, rather than the other way
around. This is referred to as an asymmetric bias, where a weakening USD tends to trigger
larger gold gains, while falling gold may not lend much support to the USD, and a sharply
stronger USD may see outsized gold losses.

You can trade gold directly against other major currencies (like XAU/EUR, XAU/GBP or
XAU/JPY), allowing you to more directly pinpoint a trade to exploit a potential currency’s
strength or weakness.

Despite the mania around gold in recent years, it does not possess any magical properties
that ensure it will always rise in value. Always treat gold for what it really is: a speculative
commodity that can rise and fall based on supply and demand. On gold’s merits as a hedge
against inflation, I would note that gold would need to be around $2,200 per ounce to match
its inflation-adjusted high from 1980–81, meaning if you owned gold since then, you’d have
lost money.
