
TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

FIGURE 14.1

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 14.1

Testing a Trend Channel Line

A trend channel line points in the direction of the trend but is on the opposite side
of the trend from the trend line. Extend it to the right and watch how the price acts
when it penetrates the channel line. Does it reverse or does the trend accelerate,
ignoring the line?
Trend channel lines are commonly drawn in one of two ways. The first way is
to draw it as a parallel line (dashed lines in Figure 14.1) of a trend line (solid lines),
drag it to the opposite side of the action, and place it to touch a swing point located
between the two bars used to create the trend line. Choose the point that will result
in all of the bars between the trend and channel lines being contained between the
lines. The second type (dotted lines in Figure 14.1) of a trend channel line is drawn
across swing points and is independent of any trend line. You can also simply draw
a best fit, but these are usually not helpful in trading.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c14

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

Figure 14.2

10:40

Printer: Donnelly

TREND CHANNEL LINES

215

FIGURE 14.2 Slope of the Final Flag

The slope of the final flag of the bull trend provided direction for the subsequent bear trend in Figure 14.2. A linear regression trend line drawn between
bars 1 and 2 became a rough bear trend channel line for the sell-off that extended
into the next day. It is possible that it contributed to the buying at bar 7, but
bar 7 was a buy simply based on the break of the trend line drawn over the first
hour of trading, and the second attempt to reverse the breakout below the bar 5
low of the open. It is usually far better to place orders based on the most recent price action if it provides a justification for a trade than to look back 30 or
more bars.
In hindsight, the bull trend effectively ended at bar 1, even though the market
made a higher high after bar 2. The move down to bar 2 was the first leg down in
the bear channel.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c14

216

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:40

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

Figure 14.2

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The market was in a bear channel in Figure 14.2 for the ﬁnal couple of hours of yesterday,
so the odds of a successful ﬁrst attempt to reverse upward were not great. The breakout
below the trend channel line reversed up with the ﬁrst bar of the day, which was a bull
trend bar, but the failed breakout went only a few bars before setting up a breakout
pullback short.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c14

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:40

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 14.3

TREND CHANNEL LINES

217

FIGURE 14.3 Lengthy Trend Channel Line

In Figure 14.3, the trend line from bars 2 and 3 was used to create a parallel that
was dragged to bar 1 and extended to the right. This trend channel line was not
penetrated by bar 6. Also, it was anchored to bar 1, which was not in between bars
2 and 3 (the bars used to create the original trend line). However, traders should
always be looking at every possibility. Had there been a penetration and reversal,
the chances of a two-legged rally off the bar 5 low would have been improved.
The simple trend channel line created from the bars 1 and 5 lows was penetrated by bar 6, but this was not an ideal trend line to use as a basis for a countertrend trade since bars 1 and 5 were far apart and bars 5 and 6 were close together. Trend lines work best when they are tested by a third leg. Here, bars 5 and
6 were essentially still part of the same leg (three pushes down, bars 4, 5, and 6).
The trade was still worth taking because bar 6 was small, so the risk/reward ratio
was good. This was also a shrinking stair pattern down (discussed later, but it is a
series of lower lows where each successive breakout is smaller than the prior one),
which indicated waning bearish momentum and supported a long.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The large gap down in Figure 14.3 was a breakout, as all large gaps are, and the day
started as a trend from the open bear day. The small opening range put the market in

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c14

218

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:40

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

Figure 14.3

breakout mode, and there was a large bear breakout bar. However, an unusually large
bear trend bar forming after a bear trend has gone a long way usually is a sell climax
that will be followed by at least a two-legged sideways to up correction that lasts at least
10 bars. Bar 1 was a strong bull reversal bar that set up the failed breakout long. There
was a two-legged sideways correction that ended with the bar 3 failed breakout of a tight
trading range, and it formed an approximate double top with bar 2. Even though most
of the trading was sideways, the day still opened near its high and closed near its low.
This was a trending trading range day with upper and lower trading ranges.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 15

Channels

hen trading is mostly confined to between a pair of lines, it is in a channel.
The market is always in some kind of channel if you look hard enough
to find one, and it usually is simultaneously in several, especially if you
look at other time frames. A trend channel is a channel that is diagonal and is contained by a trend line and a trend channel line. For example, a bear channel has
a descending trend line above (a bear trend line) and a descending trend channel line below (a bear trend channel line). A trading range is contained between
a horizontal support line below and a resistance line above. Sometimes a trading
range can be slightly rising or falling, but if so, it is better to think of it as a weak
trend channel.
Triangles are also channels, since they are areas of price action contained between two lines. Since they have either higher highs or lower lows, or both in the
case of an expanding triangle, they have some trending behavior in addition to their
trading range behavior. An expanding triangle is contained between two diverging
lines, both of which are technically trend channel lines. The line below is across
lower lows, so it is below a bear trend and therefore a trend channel line, and the
line above is across higher highs and therefore a bull trend channel line. A contracting triangle is contained between two trend lines, since the market is both in a small
bear trend with lower highs and a bull trend with higher lows. An ascending triangle
has a resistance line above and a bull trend line below, and a descending triangle
has a support line below and a bear trend line above. A wedge is an ascending or
descending channel where the trend line and trend channel line converge, and it is
a variant of a triangle. An ABC correction in a bull trend is a small bear channel,
and when it is in a bear trend it is a small bull channel.

W

219

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

220

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

Although the moving average often functions as support or resistance in a
strong trend and many traders create curved channels and bands based on the
moving average and many other factors, straight trend lines and trend channel lines
consistently provide more reliable setups and profitable trades.
A bull channel can be in a trading range, a bull trend, a bear trend, or at a
possible bottom of a bear trend as the market begins to reverse up. When it is in a
trading range, traders can consider buying when in the lower half of the range, but
the odds of success become less as the channel progresses into the upper half of the
range. When a channel is in a bull trend, higher prices are more certain, and traders
should look to buy near the bottom of the channel. The chance of a successful long
remains good until the channel begins to have prominent selling pressure, or until
it approaches significant resistance. When a channel is especially tight, meaning
that the trend line and trend channel lines are close together and the pullbacks are
small, it is a sign that the trend is strong, and it can be a spike on a higher time frame
chart. A broader channel may follow, which might reach a measured move target,
based on the height of the tight channel. A channel that is so tight that it has no
pullbacks or only one or two tiny pullbacks is a micro channel, which is discussed
in the next chapter.
When a bull channel forms in a bear trend, it is a bear flag, and traders should
look to short near the top, or on the pullback from a downside breakout. Sometimes
when a bear trend begins to reverse up, the first five to 10 bars are in a weak bull
channel, with lots of overlapping bars and one or more attempts to break below
the bear flag, but these fail and quickly reverse up. After a failed low 2 or low 3,
the market then sometimes breaks out to the upside from the bear flag, the market
suddenly becomes always-in long, and a bull reversal begins. When traders suspect
that a bear flag might be the start of a bull trend, many will buy below the low 1, 2,
or 3 signal bars, expecting them to fail and for the market to reverse up.
As a channel is forming, traders are uncertain if there will actually be a channel
or just a two-legged move and then a reversal. In fact, you usually cannot even draw
channel lines until after the market begins to reverse from the two-legged move and
the reversal fails, and the third leg begins. For example, if the market just completed
two legs up and has started to reverse, many traders will short the reversal if the
rally is not a strong bull trend. However, if the leg down ends and is comparable
in size to the first leg down (the leg after the first leg up), and then it reverses up
again, traders will now begin to assume that a bull channel is underway rather than
a reversal down into a bear leg. Once that second leg ends, traders will draw a
trend line from the bottom of the first leg down to the bottom of this second leg
and extend it to the right. They will look to buy whenever the market again comes
back to the trend line. They will also create a parallel of the line and drag it to the
top of the first leg up, and this is their first creation of a channel. Whenever the
market rallies up to that trend channel line, traders will take profit on their longs,
and look to short. Since a bull channel needs at least those first two legs down to

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHANNELS

221

confirm the existence of the channel and the market will usually then test above
the top of the second leg up, bull channels usually have at least three pushes up.
Traders will usually not look for a reversal and a downside breakout of the channel
until after that third leg up forms. However, once it does, especially if there is an
overshoot of the trend channel line and a strong bear reversal bar, traders will short
aggressively because the odds of a successful downside breakout have increased.
Because of this, many bull channels end after a third push up. Likewise, many bear
channels end after a third push down.
Why does the market race toward the top and bottom of the channel? This is
because of a vacuum effect. For example, if there is a bull channel and there is a leg
that is approaching the trend channel line above, the traders believe that the market
will likely touch that line and may even go a tick or two above it. Since they believe
that the market will go at least a little higher than it is right now, they will hold back
on their selling. The bulls want to sell out of their longs eventually to take profits,
and the bears want to sell to initiate new shorts. The current relative absence of
selling creates a buy imbalance, and whenever there is any imbalance, the market
moves quickly. The result is that there is often a large bull trend bar or two that
form as the market tests the top of the channel. This often attracts overly eager
bulls to buy at the top of the spike since they think the market is forming a new,
stronger bull leg. However, most breakout attempts fail, and this one will likely fail
as well. Why? Because of the institutional traders. The strong bears want to short,
but they believe that the market will touch that upper trend channel line, so they
wait. Once the market is there, they short heavily and overwhelm the bulls. They
like to see a strong bull trend bar because they believe that the market will go lower
and there is no better price to short than at the point of maximum bullishness. The
market might pause for a small bar at the top of the bull trend bar as both the bulls
and the bears decide if the breakout will fail, but it will usually then quickly fall
since both the institutional bulls and bears know that the odds are strongly in favor
of all breakout attempts failing.
So what do those strong institutional bulls do? They stop buying and they
quickly sell out of their longs, capturing a brief windfall profit. They know that
this opportunity will likely be brief because the market does not stay at an extreme
for long, so they exit and they won’t look to buy again for at least a bar or two. The
relative absence of these institutional bulls and the aggressiveness of the institutional bears force the market down quickly to the bottom of the channel, where the
opposite process begins. Both the bulls and the bears expect the trend line below
to be tested; the bears will keep shorting until the market gets there and then they
will buy back their shorts as they take their profits, and the bulls won’t buy until
the market gets there. This creates a brief, sharp move down that will entice beginning traders into shorting, expecting a bear breakout, but they are doing the exact
opposite of the institutions. Remember, your job is to follow what the institutions
are doing. You should not be doing what you hope they will soon do, and you should

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

222

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

never do the exact opposite of what they are doing. Each of these small pullbacks
is a micro sell vacuum. Once the market gets close to the bottom of the channel,
both the bulls and the bears expect the market to reach the bull trend line and they
stop buying until it gets there. Once there, the bulls buy to initiate new longs and
the bears take profits on their short scalps. Both expect a new channel high and a
test of the top of the channel, where the process begins again. This takes place in
all channels, including in trading ranges and triangles.
Even in a trend channel, there is two-sided trading taking place and this is trading range behavior. In fact, a trend channel can be thought of as a sloping trading
range. When the slope is steep and the channel is tight, it behaves more like a trend,
and trades should be taken only in the direction of the trend. When the slope is less
steep and there are broad swings within the channel, some lasting five or even 10
bars, the market is behaving more like a trading range and can be traded in both
directions. As with all trading ranges, there is a magnetic pull in the middle of the
trading range that tends to keep the market in the range. Why does the market stay
in a channel and not suddenly accelerate? Because there is too much uncertainty,
like with all trading ranges.
For example, in a bull channel, the bulls want to buy more, but at a lower
price. The weak shorts want a sell-off so they can exit with a smaller loss. Both
the bulls and the weak bears are concerned that there may not be a pullback that
will allow them to buy all of the shares that they want to buy (the weak shorts are
buying back their losing short positions) at a better price, so they continue to buy in
pieces as the market goes up, and this adds to the buying pressure. They buy even
more aggressively on any small dip, like with a limit order below the low of the
prior bar or at the moving average or near the trend line that forms the bottom of
the channel.
In general, when a channel is beginning it is better to trade with the trend, and
as it is approaching a target area and as it develops more two-sided trading, experienced traders will often to start trading countertrend. So at the start of a bull
channel, it is better to buy below the lows of bars, but as the channel reaches resistance areas and starts to have more overlapping bars, bear bars, deeper pullbacks,
and prominent tails, it is better to consider shorting above bars instead of buying
below bars.
However, for traders just starting out, whenever they see a channel, they should
trade only with the trend, if at all. Trading channels is very difficult because they are
always trying to reverse, and have many pullbacks. This is confusing to beginning
traders and they often take repeated losses. If there is a bull channel, they should
only look to buy. The most reliable buy signal will be a high 2 with a bull signal bar
at the moving average where the entry is not too close to the top of the channel.
This kind of perfect setup does not occur often. If traders are just starting out,
they should wait for the very best setups, even if that means missing the entire

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHANNELS

223

trend. More experienced traders can buy on limit orders below weak sell signals
and near the moving average and near the bottom of the channel. If traders are not
consistently profitable, they should avoid taking any sell signals in a bull channel,
even if there is a small lower high. The market is always-in long and they should not
be looking to short, even though there will be many signals that look acceptable.
Wait for the market to become clearly always-in short before looking to short. That
will usually require a strong bear spike that breaks below the channel and below
the moving average and has follow-through, and then has a lower high with a bear
signal bar. If the setup is any weaker than that, beginners should wait and only
look to buy pullbacks. Do not fall into the regression toward the mean mind-set
and assume that the channel looks so weak that a reversal is long overdue. The
market can continue its unsustainable behavior much longer than you can sustain
your account as you bet against that very weak-looking trend.
Many bulls will be scaling into their long positions as the market goes up, and
they will be using every conceivable logical approach to do this. Some will buy on a
pullback to the moving average, or below the low of the prior bar, or on pullbacks
at fixed intervals, like every 50 cents below the most recent high in AAPL. Others
will buy as the market appears to be resuming the channel up, like every 25 cents
above the prior low. If you can think of an approach, so can some programmer,
and if she can show that it is effective mathematically, her firm will probably try
trading it.
With both the bulls and trapped bears wanting lower prices but afraid that they
will not come, both continue to buy until they have nothing left to buy. This always
happens at some magnet like a measured move or a higher time frame trend line or
trend channel line. Since channels usually go much further than what most traders
expect, the trend usually continues up beyond the first one or more obvious resistance levels until it reaches one where enough strong bulls and bears agree that the
market has gone far enough and will likely not go much higher. At that point, the
market runs out of buying pressure and the strong bulls take profits and sell out of
their longs, and the strong bears come in and sell more aggressively. This results in
a reversal into a deeper correction or into an opposite trend. The bull trend often
ends with a breakout of the top of the channel as the last desperate bears buy back
their shorts in despair, and the weakest bulls who have been waiting and waiting
for lower prices finally just buy at the market. The strong bears expect that and will
often wait for the strong breakout and then begin shorting relentlessly. They believe that this is a brief opportunity to short at a very high price and that the market
won’t stay here for long. The strong bulls see the spike up as a gift and they exit
their longs and will now buy again only after at least a two-legged pullback lasting
at least 10 bars. They often will not buy until the market gets down to the beginning of the channel, where they originally bought into a profitable trade. The strong
bears know this and will look to take profits exactly where the strong bulls will be

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

224

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

buying again; the result usually is a bounce and then often a trading range as both
sides become uncertain about the direction of the next move. Uncertainty usually
means that the market is in a trading range.
Or at least that is the conventional logic, but it is probably more complicated,
sophisticated, and unknowable. All institutions are familiar with this pattern, and
you can be certain that their programmers are constantly looking for ways to capitalize on it. One thing an institution might do is try to create a buy climax. If it
has been buying all the way up and is ready to take profits but it wants to be sure
that the top is in, it could suddenly buy a final big piece with the realization that it
might even take a small loss on it, but with the goal of creating a climactic reversal
on the charts. If the firm is successful, and it might be if several other institutions
are running programs that are doing similar things, it can exit all of its longs, most
with a profit, and then even reverse to short, confident that the sellers now control
the market.
Does this happen with every climax? It is unknowable and irrelevant. Your goal
is to follow what the institutions are doing, and you can see it on the charts. You
never have to know anything about the programs behind the patterns, and the institutions themselves never know what types of programs the other institutions are
running. They only know their own programs, but the market rarely goes far unless many institutions are trading in the same direction at the same time, and they
have to be trading with enough size to overwhelm the other institutions that are
doing the opposite. The only time that the vast majority of the institutions are on
the same side is during the spike phase of a strong trend, and that occurs in fewer
than 5 percent of the bars on the chart.
It is not just bulls and weak shorts who are placing trades as the channel continues up. Strong shorts are also selling as the market moves higher, scaling into
their positions, believing that the upside is limited and ultimately their trade will be
profitable. Their selling begins to create selling pressure in the form of more bars
with bear bodies, larger bear bodies, tails on the tops of the bars, and more bars
with lows below the low of the prior bar. They are looking for a downside breakout of the channel and maybe even a test to the beginning of the channel. Since
they want to short at the best possible price, they are selling as the market is going
up rather than waiting for the reversal. This is because the reversal might be fast
and strong and then they would end up shorting much further below the top of the
channel than they believe is likely to be profitable.
They have several ways to add to their short position, like selling on a limit
order above the high of the prior bar or above a minor swing high in the channel, at
every test of the top of the channel at the trend channel line, at measured move targets, at a fixed interval as the market goes up (like every 50 cents higher in AAPL),
or on each potential top. Once the market reverses, they might hold their entire
position with the expectation of a significant reversal, or they might exit at a profit
target, like on a test of the trend line at the bottom of the channel or even at the
