
1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

41

If change does not come, and the matter is sufficiently serious,
the outside directors should resign. Their resignation will signal
their doubts about management, and it will emphasize that no outsider is in a position to correct the owner/manager's shortcomings.
The third governance case occurs when there is a controlling
owner who is not involved in management. This case, examples of
which are Hershey Foods and Dow Jones, puts the outside directors in a potentially useful position. If they become unhappy with
either the competence or integrity of the manager, they can go directly to the owner (who may also be on the board) and report
their dissatisfaction. This situation is ideal for an outside director,
since he need make his case only to a single, presumably interested
owner, who can forthwith effect change if the argument is persuasive. Even so, the dissatisfied director has only that single course
of action. If he remains unsatisfied about a critical matter, he has
no choice but to resign.
Logically, the third case should be the most effective in insuring first-class management. In the second case the owner is not
going to fire himself, and in the first case, directors often find it
very difficult to deal with mediocrity or mild over-reaching. Unless
the unhappy directors can win over a majority of the board-an
awkward social and logistical task, particularly if management's behavior is merely odious, not egregious-their hands are effectively
tied. In practice, directors trapped in situations of this kind usually
convince themselves that by staying around they can do at least
some good. Meanwhile, management proceeds unfettered.
In the third case, the owner is neither judging himself nor burdened with the problem of garnering a majority. He can also insure that outside directors are selected who will bring useful
qualities to the board. These directors, in turn, will know that the
good advice they give will reach the right ears, rather than being
stifled by a recalcitrant management. If the controlling owner is
intelligent and self-confident, he will make decisions in respect to
management that are meritocratic and pro-shareholder. Moreover-and this is critically important-he can readily correct any
mistake he makes.
At Berkshire we operate in the second mode now and will for
as long as I remain functional. My health, let me add, is excellent.
For better or worse, you are likely to have me as an owner/manager for some time.
After my death, all of my stock will go to my wife, Susie,
should she survive me, or to a foundation if she dies before I do. In

42

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

neither case will taxes and bequests require the sale of consequential amounts of stock.
When my stock is transferred to either my wife or the foundation, Berkshire will enter the third governance mode, going forward with a vitally interested, but non-management, owner and
with a management that must perform for that owner. In preparation for that time, Susie was elected to the board a few years ago,
and in 1993 our son, Howard, joined the board. These family members will not be managers of the company in the future, but they
will represent the controlling interest should anything happen to
me. Most of our other directors are also significant owners of
Berkshire stock, and each has a strong owner-orientation. All in
all, we're prepared for "the truck."
Charlie Munger, our Vice Chairman, and I really have only
two jobs. One is to attract and keep outstanding managers to run
our various operations. 8 This hasn't been all that difficult. Usually
the managers came with the companies we bought, having demonstrated their talents throughout careers that spanned a wide variety
of business circumstances. They were managerial stars long before
they knew us, and our main contribution has been to not get in
their way. This approach seems elementary: if my job were to
manage a golf team-and if Jack Nicklaus or Arnold Palmer were
willing to play for me-neither would get a lot of directives from
me about how to swing.
Some of our key managers are independently wealthy (we
hope they all become so), but that poses no threat to their continued interest: they work because they love what they do and relish
the thrill of outstanding performance. They unfailingly think like
owners (the highest compliment we can pay a manager) and find
all aspects of their business absorbing.
(Our prototype for occupational fervor is the Catholic tailor
who used his small savings of many years to finance a pilgrimage to
the Vatican. When he returned, his parish held a special meeting to
get his first-hand account of the Pope. "Tell us," said the eager
faithful, "just what sort of fellow is he?" Our hero wasted no
words: "He's a forty-four medium.")
Charlie and I know that the right players will make almost any
team manager look good. We subscribe to the philosophy of
Ogilvy & Mather's founding genius, David Ogilvy: "If each of us
8

[The other is capital allocation, discussed in Parts II and V.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

43

hires people who are smaller than we are, we shall become a company of dwarfs. But, if each of us hires people who are bigger than
we are, we shall become a company of giants."
A by-product of our managerial style is the ability it gives us
to easily expand Berkshire's activities. We've read management
treatises that specify exactly how many people should report to any
one executive, but they make little sense to us. When you have
able managers of high character running businesses about which
they are passionate, you can have a dozen or more reporting to you
and still have time for an afternoon nap. Conversely, if you have
even one person reporting to you who is deceitful, inept or uninterested, you will find yourself with more than you can handle. Charlie and I could work with double the number of managers we now
have, so long as they had the rare qualities of the present ones.
We intend to continue our practice of working only with people whom we like and admire. This policy not only maximizes our
chances for good results, it also ensures us an extraordinarily good
time. On the other hand, working with people who cause your
stomach to churn seems much like marrying for money-probably
a bad idea under any circumstances, but absolute madness if you
are already rich.
C.

The Anxieties of Plant Closings 9

In July we decided to close our textile operation, and by
yearend this unpleasant job was largely completed. The history of
this business is instructive.
When Buffett Partnership, Ltd., an investment partnership of
which I was general partner, bought control of Berkshire
Hathaway 21 years ago, it had an accounting net worth of $22 million, all devoted to the textile business. The company's intrinsic
business value, however, was considerably less because the textile
assets were unable to earn returns commensurate with their accounting value. Indeed, during the previous nine years (the period
in which Berkshire and Hathaway operated as a merged company)
aggregate sales of $530 million had produced an aggregate loss of
$10 million. Profits had been reported from time to time but the
net effect was always one step forward, two steps back.
At the time we made our purchase, southern textile plantslargely non-union-were believed to have an important competi9

[1985.]

44

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

tive advantage. Most northern textile operations had closed and
many people thought we would liquidate our business as well.
We felt, however, that the business would be run much better
by a long-time employee whom we immediately selected to be
president, Ken Chace. In this respect we were 100% correct: Ken
and his recent successor, Garry Morrison, have been excellent
managers, every bit the equal of managers at our more profitable
businesses.
In early 1967 cash generated by the textile operation was used
to fund our entry into insurance via the purchase of National Indemnity Company. Some of the money came from earnings and
some from reduced investment in textile inventories, receivables,
and fixed assets. This pullback proved wise: although much improved by Ken's management, the textile business never became a
good earner, not even in cyclical upturns.
Further diversification for Berkshire followed, and gradually
the textile operation's depressing effect on our overall return diminished as the business became a progressively smaller portion of
the corporation. We remained in the business for reasons that I
stated in the 1978 annual report (and summarized at other times
also): "(1) our textile businesses are very important employers in
their communities, (2) management has been straightforward in reporting on problems and energetic in attacking them, (3) labor has
been cooperative and understanding in facing our common
problems, and (4) the business should average modest cash returns
relative to investment." I further said, "As long as these conditions
prevail-and we expect that they will-we intend to continue to
support our textile business despite more attractive alternative uses
for capital."
It turned out that I was very wrong about (4). Though 1979
was moderately profitable, the business thereafter consumed major
amounts of cash. By mid-1985 it became clear, even to me, that
this condition was almost sure to continue. Could we have found a
buyer who would continue operations, I would have certainly preferred to sell the business rather than liquidate it, even if that
meant somewhat lower proceeds for us. But the economics that
were finally obvious to me were also obvious to others, and interest
was nil.
I won't close down businesses of sub-normal profitability
merely to add a fraction of a point to our corporate rate of return.
However, I also feel it inappropriate for even an exceptionally
profitable company to fund an operation once it appears to have

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

45

unending losses in prospect. Adam Smith would disagree with my
first proposition, and Karl Marx would disagree with my second;
the middle ground is the only position that leaves me comfortable.
I should reemphasize that Ken and Garry have been resourceful, energetic and imaginative in attempting to make our textile operation a success. Trying to achieve sustainable profitability, they
reworked product lines, machinery configurations and distribution
arrangements. We also made a major acquisition, Waumbec Mills,
with the expectation of important synergy (a term widely used in
business to explain an acquisition that otherwise makes no sense).
But in the end nothing worked and I should be faulted for not quitting sooner. A recent Business Week article stated that 250 textile
mills have closed since 1980. Their owners were not privy to any
information that was unknown to me; they simply processed it
more objectively. I ignored Comte's advice-"the intellect should
be the servant of the heart, but not its slave"-and believed what I
preferred to believe.
The domestic textile industry operates in a commodity business, competing in a world market in which substantial excess capacity exists. Much of the trouble we experienced was attributable,
both directly and indirectly, to competition from foreign countries
whose workers are paid a small fraction of the U.S. minimum
wage. But that in no way means that our labor force deserves any
blame for our closing. In fact, in comparison with employees of
American industry generally, our workers were poorly paid, as has
been the case throughout the textile business. In contract negotiations, union leaders and members were sensitive to our disadvantageous cost position and did not push for unrealistic wage increases
or unproductive work practices. To the contrary, they tried just as
hard as we did to keep us competitive. Even during our liquidation
period they performed superbly. (Ironically, we would have been
better off financially if our union had behaved unreasonably some
years ago; we then would have recognized the impossible future
that we faced, promptly closed down, and avoided significant future losses.)
Over the years, we had the option of making large capital expenditures in the textile operation that would have allowed us to
somewhat reduce variable costs. Each proposal to do so looked
like an immediate winner. Measured by standard return-on-investment tests, in fact, these proposals usually promised greater economic benefits than would have resulted from comparable

46

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

expenditures in our highly-profitable candy and newspaper
businesses.
But the promised benefits from these textile investments were
illusory. Many of our competitors, both domestic and foreign,
were stepping up to the same kind of expenditures and, once
enough companies did so, their reduced costs became the baseline
for reduced prices industrywide. Viewed individually, each company's capital investment decision appeared cost-effective and rational; viewed collectively, the decisions neutralized each other and
were irrational Gust as happens when each person watching a
parade decides he can see a little better if he stands on tiptoes).
After each round of investment, all the players had more money in
the game and returns remained anemic.
Thus, we faced a miserable choice: huge capital investment
would have helped to keep our textile business alive, but would
have left us with terrible returns on ever-growing amounts of capital. After the investment, moreover, the foreign competition
would still have retained a major, continuing advantage in labor
costs. A refusal to invest, however, would make us increasingly
non-competitive, even measured against domestic textile manufacturers. I always thought myself in the position described by Woody
Allen in one of his movies: "More than any other time in history,
mankind faces a crossroads. One path leads to despair and utter
hopelessness, the other to total extinction. Let us pray we have the
wisdom to choose correctly."
For an understanding of how the to-invest-or-not-to-invest dilemma plays out in a commodity business, it is instructive to look at
Burlington Industries, by far the largest U.S. textile company both
21 years ago and now. In 1964 Burlington had sales of $1.2 billion
against our $50 million. It had strengths in both distribution and
production that we could never hope to match and also, of course,
had an earnings record far superior to ours. Its stock sold at 60 at
the end of 1964; ours was 13.
Burlington made a decision to stick to the textile business, and
in 1985 had sales of about $2.8 billion. During the 1964-85 period,
the company made capital expenditures of about $3 billion, far
more than any other U.S. textile company and more than $200-pershare on that $60 stock. A very large part of the expenditures, I
am sure, was devoted to cost improvement and expansion. Given
Burlington's basic commitment to stay in textiles, I would also
surmise that the company's capital decisions were quite rational.

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

1997]

47

Nevertheless, Burlington has lost sales volume in real dollars
and has far lower returns on sales and equity now than 20 years
ago. Split 2-for-1 in 1965, the stock now sells at 34-on an adjusted
basis, just a little over its $60 price in 1964. Meanwhile, the CPI
has more than tripled. Therefore, each share commands about
one-third the purchasing power it did at the end of 1964. Regular
dividends have been paid but they, too, have shrunk significantly in
purchasing power.
This devastating outcome for the shareholders indicates what
can happen when much brain power and energy are applied to a
faulty premise. The situation is suggestive of Samuel Johnson's
horse: "A horse that can count to ten is a remarkable horse-not a
remarkable mathematician." Likewise, a textile company that allocates capital brilliantly within its industry is a remarkable textile
company-but not a remarkable business.
My conclusion from my own experiences and from much observation of other businesses is that a good managerial record
(measured by economic returns) is far more a function of what
business boat you get into than it is of how effectively you row
(though intelligence and effort help considerably, of course, in any
business, good or bad). Some years ago I wrote: "When a management with a reputation for brilliance tackles a business with a reputation for poor fundamental economics, it is the reputation of the
business that remains intact." Nothing has since changed my point
of view on that matter. Should you find yourself in a chronicallyleaking boat, energy devoted to changing vessels is likely to be
more productive than energy devoted to patching leaks.
D.

An Owner-Based Approach to Corporate Charity10

A recent survey reported that about 50% of major American
companies match charitable contributions made by directors
(sometimes by a factor of three to one). In effect, these representatives of the owners direct funds to their favorite charities, and
never consult the owners as to their charitable preferences. (I wonder how they would feel if the process were reversed and shareholders could invade the directors' pockets for charities favored by
the shareholders.) When A takes money from B to give to C and
A is a legislator, the process is called taxation. But when A is an
officer or director of a corporation, it is called philanthropy. We
continue to believe that contributions, aside from those with quite
10

[Divided by hash lines: 1987; 1981 (reprinted 1988); 1981; 1990-93; 1993.]

48

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

clear direct benefits to the company, should reflect the charitable
preferences of owners rather than those of officers and directors.
On September 30, 1981 Berkshire received a tax ruling from
the U.S. Treasury Department that, in most years, should produce
a significant benefit for charities of your choice.
Each Berkshire shareholder-on a basis proportional to the
number of shares of Berkshire that he owns-will be able to designate recipients of charitable contributions by our company. You'll
name the charity; Berkshire will write the check. The ruling states
that there will be no personal tax consequences to our shareholders
from making such designations.
Thus, our . . . owners now can exercise a perquisite that,
although routinely exercised by the owners in closely-held businesses, is almost exclusively exercised by the managers in more
widely-held businesses.
In a widely-held corporation the executives ordinarily arrange
all charitable donations, with no input at all from shareholders, in
two main categories:
(1) Donations considered to benefit the corporation directly
in an amount roughly commensurate with the cost of the donation;
and
(2) Donations considered to benefit the corporation indirectly
through hard-to-measure, long-delayed feedback effects of various
kinds.
I and other Berkshire executives have arranged in the past, as
we will arrange in the future, all charitable donations in the first
category. However, the aggregate level of giving in such category
has been quite low, and very likely will remain quite low, because
not many gifts can be shown to produce roughly commensurate
direct benefits to Berkshire.
In the second category, Berkshire's charitable gifts have been
virtually nil, because I am not comfortable with ordinary corporate
practice and had no better practice to substitute. What bothers me
about ordinary corporate practice is the way gifts tend to be made
based more on who does the asking and how corporate peers are
responding than on an objective evaluation of the donee's activities. Conventionality often overpowers rationality.
A common result is the use of the stockholder's money to implement the charitable inclinations of the corporate manager, who
usually is heavily influenced by specific social pressures on him.
Frequently there is an added incongruity; many corporate manag-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

49

ers deplore governmental allocation of the taxpayer's dollar but
embrace enthusiastically their own allocation of the shareholder's
dollar.
For Berkshire, a different model seems appropriate. Just as I
wouldn't want you to implement your personal judgments by writing checks on my bank account for charities of your choice, I feel it
inappropriate to write checks on your corporate "bank account"
for charities of my choice. Your charitable preferences are as good
as mine and, for both you and me, funds available to foster charitable interests in a tax-deductible manner reside largely at the corporate level rather than in our own hands.
Under such circumstances, I believe Berkshire should imitate
more closely-held companies, not larger public companies. If you
and I each own 50% of a corporation, our charitable decision making would be simple. Charities very directly related to the operations of the business would have first claim on our available
charitable funds. Any balance available after the "operations-related" contributions would be divided among various charitable interests of the two of us, on a basis roughly proportional to our
ownership interest. If the manager of our company had some suggestions, we would listen carefully-but the final decision would be
ours. Despite our corporate form, in this aspect of the business we
probably would behave as if we were a partnership.
Wherever feasible, I believe in maintaining such a partnership
frame of mind, even though we operate through a large, fairly
widely-held corporation. Our Treasury ruling will allow such partnership-like behavior in this area [...]
I am pleased that Berkshire donations can become owner-directed. It is ironic, but understandable, that a large and growing
number of major corporations have charitable policies pursuant to
which they will match gifts made by their employees (and-brace
yourself for this one-many even match gifts made by directors)
but none, to my knowledge, has a plan matching charitable gifts by
owners. I say "understandable" because much of the stock of
many large corporations is owned on a "revolving door" basis by
institutions that have short-term investment horizons, and that lack
a long-term owner's perspective [...]
Our own shareholders are a different breed .... [A]t the end
of each year, more than 98 % of our shares are owned by people
who were shareholders at the beginning of the year. This longterm commitment to the business reflects an owner mentality
which, as your manager, I intend to acknowledge in all feasible

50

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW
