
book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 35

Lessons Learned

35

I didn’t know how to reply to this, so I said nothing at all. Talking about
trading, even the dangers of it, wasn’t worrying me. It was making me want
to get back to the office to make some trades.
“I am glad you are telling me all this,” I told him. “In your opinion, is it
better to trade stocks or something else instead?”
He shook his head. “No. You can trade forex. What you trade doesn’t
matter. Whether you trade it with discipline is what makes the difference.” And he gave me some advice that I wish I had listened to much
more carefully.

CRAIG’S TEN-MILLION-DOLLAR LESSON
ME: You said that at first you were not successful at trading. But John told
me that you had a trade on the Euro against the Japanese Yen that Anderson took for you.
CRAIG: That’s true. That one trade made ten million dollars for the firm.
ME: John told me it was five million.
CRAIG: No, that’s not correct. Anderson at first bought five million Euros
on the trade—but we made a little over ten million dollars on the trade
when I finally got out. I knew that the Euro was falling back to a solid
point of support on the charts, and I knew that the economic outlook for
the Eurozone economy was much brighter than it was for Japan, which
was still in a huge economic slump and had set interest rates at an unbelievably low point. After a brief move downward, the EUR/JPY was
ready to pop upward. I had been doing my homework, calling around to
other young traders that I knew, and we were all convinced that there
was no way the currency pair could break and stay below 119.00. This
was late September 2002. I didn’t have any secret information, but I was
convinced that I was right.
ME: How did you know you were right?
CRAIG: Mostly it was my own research. Besides what I’ve already told
you, I called some analysts around Wall Street, asked them for their
opinion on the British Pound against the Yen, the Swiss Franc against
the Yen, and the Euro. Everyone was telling me that there was going
to be a sharp sell-off that would end soon. They sent me some charts
that confirmed what I already suspected—119.00 was a technically
important barrier. Price had a hard time breaking above it in the first
place. In fact, in the first week of 2002, nine months before, price had
hit that same level and fallen back 300 points in just a few days. It
took nine months and two weeks to finally break above it. By then it

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 36

36

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

was the last week of September, and price had risen to 122.00, and on
that day that Anderson sat down next to me, price was nearly exactly
at 119.00.
ME: And that’s how you knew that you should buy?
CRAIG: Oh, heck yes. For sure. I wanted to put my own money in this
trade. I told Anderson all this. He didn’t say a word for the entire time.
Just listened to me make a speech. He didn’t even ask any questions. I
love that man. As soon as I finished, he took my keyboard and made the
first trade (see Figure 5.1).
ME: So you bought it right at exactly 119.00?
CRAIG: Well, Anderson did, yes. And then I bought more after that at
119.50. Five million more Euros worth. And then ten million more at
120.00. And then again and again until I had put five hundred million in
the trade. I was so sure of the trade that with any pullback, even slight
ones, I added to the winning position.
ME: Then what happened? When did you exit the trade?
CRAIG: I closed it about two months later. It immediately moved about
300 pips in my direction, and I felt like the smarted guy in the world.
Then it backed off a bit and bounced around in October and most
of November. Then in the first few days in December, it skyrocketed.
My positions were worth millions of dollars, and I nearly threw up on
December 2, 2002. It moved 200 pips upward, breaking all resistance.
I didn’t sleep for four days for more than a couple of hours at a time. I

FIGURE 5.1

Craig’s first trade.

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Lessons Learned

Page 37

37

glued my face to the charts at work and called in for quotes around
the clock.
ME: Why were you so concerned?
CRAIG: I couldn’t stand to see all that money in profits and not take it. I
had sat on my hands with a trade that was up by a million dollars or so,
and then all of a sudden, every trade moved into ridiculous superprofitability. Never before had I seen that much money in one place. I understood that if the currency pair fell down again, I would lose all that
money. It was nearly the end of the year and I was thinking about what
kind of bonus I could get for having done a ten-million-dollar trade. I
had taken some other trades during this whole period—lots of shortterm trades, and all of those netted out at breakeven. This was my
huge winner.
ME: So you closed it?
CRAIG: Yes. Super yes. They stood up and gave me a round of applause on
the floor that day. Everyone except for Anderson.
ME: This must have felt really good. My first trade was a winner, too. I remember that feeling. Why didn’t Anderson applaud you? Didn’t this
trade make him a ton of money, too?
CRAIG: Oh, yes, I am sure he looked good for having hired me. But he understood that I had just cut off a huge position that was totally profitable, that had taken me months to build.
ME: Seems greedy to me.
CRAIG: Getting the most out of your best trades is not greed. It’s being
smart. You let your worst trades run to a loss. Why not let your best
trades run into mad, psychotic profitability?
ME: You have a point. Did this one go up even further? Did you regret closing it?
CRAIG: You bet I regretted it. I had let my emotions ruin the trade. I had
picked 131.00 as my profit target—with a round number, and a point of
support or resistance that the pair had stopped at in 1997, 1998, and
1999. If it got that high, it would be the first time in three years that it
reached that level. It would stop there for sure.
ME: Did it get there?
CRAIG: Damn right it did. If I had held on, I could have made a lot more
on that trade. I would have had to hold it for four more months, but I
would have made an additional thirty million dollars on this trade
alone. Forget a round of applause. I would have been promoted to
managing director or something wild like that. It would have been a
monster trade. I really stepped on my own foot on that one. Ride your
profits, Harry. That’s the lesson here. Learn to ride your profits (see
Figure 5.2).

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 38

38

FIGURE 5.2

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Craig learns to ride his profits.

ME: I’ve got to ask this again—if you had a profit target picked already,
then why did you not keep it?
CRAIG: I reacted before I thought about what I was doing. In a furious moment of insanity, I pushed buttons on my keyboard, letting my heart do
all the trading.
ME: But in the end, when it was all settled, this was an awesome way to
start your job. First few months on the job and you had made the firm
ten million bucks.
CRAIG: That’s the other thing. Making money on my first trade at the firm
was probably the worst thing that I could have done.
ME: Huh? Why?
CRAIG: As I learned quickly, it turned me into a cocky son of a gun.
ME: What’s so wrong with that? You made millions for Ernest Wellington,
and you had barely been hired.
CRAIG: And I thought that I could keep making that much money every
time I traded.
ME: You couldn’t?
CRAIG: Oh, no. I could not. Not even close. I lost on my next 13 trades. All
of them.
ME: Unlucky 13!
CRAIG: Luck had nothing to do with it. This was all purposeful implosion
of my trading capital. In the next 13 trades, in January 2003, I lost the
ten million. And then some. By February, I had dug myself a fourteenmillion-dollar hole.

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Lessons Learned

Page 39

39

ME: What?
CRAIG: Yep. I got bold when I should have sat on my profits. Think about
how I made the money in the first place: I planned a trade using all
sorts of research. I planned the entry with knowledge of important support and resistance areas. I didn’t put all my trading capital into the
first position. Instead, I built it up over time. It took me over two
months of research to put the trade together. I’d been piecing together
my plan for weeks before I ever sat at the trading desk at Ernest
Wellington. That’s why I was so confident about it. The planning that I
put into it.
ME: And the other trades?
CRAIG: I kept buying and selling the EUR/JPY. I thought it had some magical quality—that it had been built just for me and was my new best
friend. So I took oversized positions, trying to buy it up to 131.00, but I
couldn’t stay in the positions for long because I was trading huge
amounts of capital from the start, instead of building the position over
time. I had no idea what I was doing.
ME: Sounds like you were trying to get back the position you had before
you closed it.
CRAIG: Right. But I couldn’t buy the pair at 119.00 anymore! When
I closed the big trade, I lost the right to hold the EUR/JPY at a superduper discounted price. So when I started trading again, I wanted
to get all that lost profit, and took monster-size positions. What a
mistake.
ME: Why didn’t you just go back to planning big, long-term trades all over
again?
CRAIG: Right. I should have done the same preparation all over again. But
I was angry that I had not made as much money as I wanted! I was upset
and greedy and wanted more. So I started trying to learn short-term
trade, so that I didn’t have to wait so long to get my lost profits back.
And then I met my mentor. The greatest trader in the world taught me
that the fear of missing out was the second greatest mistake that I could
ever make.
ME: And the first?
CRAIG: Believing my own B.S. Believing that I actually knew how to trade.
I didn’t know anything then. I proved it when I lost more than I had
gained in just a few weeks.
ME: Did you get it all back? Could you climb out of that hole?
CRAIG: Oh, yes. The year 2003 was great by the end. But it was my most
difficult year.
ME: Can you tell me about that?
CRAIG: Some other time, yes. There were some awesome trades that year.

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 40

40

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

CRAIG GETS ANGRY
Craig stopped talking about his trading at that point. He was obviously still
upset about his huge mistake in his first month. The regular charismatic
Craig had turned a bit angry, even, and I could imagine how disappointed
in himself he must have been. He expressed his determination that I should
never make a similar mistake, and I assured him that I absolutely would
not. I decided that before I traded again, I would request a withdrawal of
$500 from my forex trading account, so that I could pay off the iPod purchase for my wife and make sure that I realized some of the profit. It felt
like the right decision from the moment I made it. I told Craig that I
planned to do this.
“You will be so happy you did. You are doing what it took me a long
time to learn to do. You are taking your gains. Good for you.” This got him
smiling again. He then changed the subject: “John Murphy told me that you
two are conspiring to get him an appointment with Anderson about some
deal.”
I nodded. “That’s part of it. My end of the promise.”
“Well, if you can work that out, it will be quite a coup.”
By telling me that I was going to have to work it out, Craig let me know
that if I wanted to conspire to get John and Anderson together, I was on my
own. That didn’t bother me.
“That would be a sizable legal deal,” Craig said before he bit down on
his sandwich. “Might even keep John at the firm.”
I didn’t know what to say—was John in danger of losing his job? That
was news to me, certainly, and I wasn’t going to spend any time delving
into that problem. Maybe that’s why John was so excited about getting a
meeting with Anderson to do the work on the forex fund.
“Well, keeping him at the firm seems like a good idea to me,” I said.
“Really? Is that what John told you?”
“No. I just thought it sounded like the right thing to say.”
“So John didn’t tell you,” he said.
“Tell me what?” Now I was more interested.
“He wants to leave the firm and come down and work with me.”
This made sense. If John got the deal to do the forex fund work, he
could meet Anderson—and then he would be right in line for a job on the
trading floor. I said this to Craig.
“Not really.”
I was confused. “Why not? He would know Anderson; he could get to
know him better.”
“But then Anderson would lose an attorney he really likes, assuming
he gets to know John. And who knows what kind of trader John would be.

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Lessons Learned

Page 41

41

He’s my good friend, but honestly he’s not passionate enough, too straight
around the collar, a bit too organized for trading as a career.”
“Too organized?”
“Too organized, too methodical. Not enough feeling. Anderson won’t
like that. John has to plan out every move that he makes. He used to make
four-color calendars for our study groups in law school. He is a planning
maniac. It could help him be a good trader in some ways, but Anderson
won’t go for it. In five minutes, Anderson knows if he wants to hire you or
not. All the things that he won’t like about John, Anderson will understand
immediately. He reads people instantly. While you’re still trying to think of
something smart to say, you’ve already been hired or not. That’s why I
haven’t introduced John to Anderson yet.”
This was bringing up more and more questions. “But wouldn’t John already know this about himself? Haven’t you spoken to him about it?”
“Oh, yes,” he replied, finishing off his sandwich, at which point he
started looking around for something, as if this conversation had brought
to mind a forgotten task. He pushed back from the table a little bit, and
bent down to grab what looked like a drink coaster from his briefcase. He
shoved it in his shirt pocket and forgot about it.
He continued: “I talked with John about it. I told him that he was going
to have to let it go a bit, become a bit more of a risk taker. He promises he
can do it, but I can tell he just wants to make the switch because of the
money. Like I said before, Anderson will be able to figure that out before
John barely opens his mouth.”
I shook my head. How could a lawyer’s salary not be enough? “He’s got
to be making plenty of money at the firm.”
“How much do you think he makes?” Craig asked.
“I don’t know. Over one hundred.”
He nodded. “John made more than one hundred his first year with the
firm. He’s making at least two hundred right now, and he is doing well
enough that he is clearly on the path to partner in a few more years—and
then he’ll make at least five hundred grand a year. That’s good New York
money.”
I had never thought about it. I had spent a lot of time thinking about
how much I made, but never very much about how much the attorneys in
the firm were pulling down. Of course I knew they were wealthy. More
than $100,000 per year meant wealthy to me. But I had no idea that the attorneys back at the office considered themselves so poor.
“That seems plenty to live on to me.”
“What? One hundred? two hundred? five hundred?”
“Yeah. Easily enough.”
Craig looked me squarely in the eye, and said, “A good trader could
make that in a month on the trading floor.”

book_c05.qxd

42

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 42

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

A month! I nearly spit up the sandwich that I had only taken a bite
from. A month of working on the trading floor for $100,000? Was that even
possible? Was I dreaming? I reached under the table and held my right leg
down, which was starting to bounce up and down from my nervousness. I
thought that I might pee in my pants right there. I wanted to laugh out
loud, scream, and throw up all at the same time. I had thought that $300
per day was good money. There was an entirely different league of traders
out there.
“I never knew,” I admitted.
Craig nodded. “From the moment I met you, I had the feeling you were
going to say that. You had no idea at all how much traders make. This is not
about the money for you, is it?”
I stopped at that moment. I could tell the truth, and he would think less
of me, or I could lie and he would continue to talk with me, and perhaps
even help me. Lying seemed like such a good idea at the moment. I said:
“No, it is about the money. Honestly.”
He laughed. “How could it be about the money if you never knew how
much we were talking about?”
I shrugged and decided to clarify this slight misunderstanding. “It’s
about the money in the sense that I need to do better at supporting my family. I am hungry for more. I didn’t know what ‘more’ was until I walked onto
the trading floor. I suppose you could tell me that those guys were making
the same salary I am, now that I think about it. Yeah, you could tell me that
those guys are all making forty-five grand a year, and I would be like, okay,
where do I sign up? Because for the first time in my career, when I walked
onto that floor, it wasn’t about exact dollar amounts. It was about potential. I could smell money there. It was being created by doing things that I
don’t understand, with people I don’t know, with computers I haven’t
learned to use. But I could sense that there was a huge amount of potential
for me to build something for myself as a trader. Not on the trading floor,
necessarily. But trading for myself at the least.”
Craig was just staring at me and listening. I could tell that he liked
what he was hearing. So I continued, “And I think that I imagined that
these men and women on the floor were way too unsophisticated to be
making as much as lawyers. They were . . . wild . . . down there on the trading floor.”
I laughed and so did Craig.
“But it didn’t matter to me—I knew they were making more money
than I was, or at least I was pretty sure about it. And I knew that they were
on a roller coaster ride at their job. Some of them looked like they were on
top of the world. Others looked like they needed barf bags. But they were
feeling something. Anything! The last time I felt anything at work was
when I handed a set of files to Herb Johnson’s secretary and accidentally
touched her where her bathing suit covers.”

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Lessons Learned

Page 43

43

We laughed. By now I knew that I was overstaying my welcome. I had
asked more questions than I can remember and write about here, and he
had happily answered all of them. He spent his time so willingly with me
that day that it seemed like he was paying me back for something that I had
done for him, which obviously was impossible.
“I know you gotta go,” I told him.
“Yes. I do. We’ve got some economic news coming out at two. Fomsee
interest rate decision.”
“Fomsee?”
He spelled it out: “F-O-M-C. Federal Open Market Committee. Alan
Greenspan and Company of the Federal Reserve make a decision on
whether to raise interest rates. This decision—even no decision—can
move the dollar 100 points in sixty seconds.”
That might not have sounded thrilling to any of the people sitting
around me. But now I considered trading my future, and I was determined
that as soon as I got back to the office I was going to log on at my desk, and
spend as much of my employer’s time as possible trying to find out what
the FOMC said about interest rates and how it moved the U.S. Dollar.
I thanked him for meeting with me.
He nodded and said that a few years before, someone had done the
same for him, and he owed it back. So that’s why I had the feeling that he
owed me something. Well, it wasn’t me, but it was someone else. Maybe it
had been Anderson?
We shook hands, and he started to leave. But before he left, he reached
into his coat pocket and reached for the drink coaster, but then hesitated.
He was thinking deeply.
“What’s up?” I asked.
“I have a card for you.” He was really thinking hard about this one.
“But I don’t know if I can give it to you.”
Was it a business card from the human resources people at Ernest
Wellington? Another contact? Craig’s mentor or friend? He was hooking
me up! Of course, I wanted to play it cool and not seem so anxious that I
scared him off.
“It’s okay if you can’t for right now,” I lied to him. I was probably willing to kill him right then and there for the card, but I knew that a homicide
was going to look bad on my employment record, and probably affect my
ability to get back to the office in time to trade again.
“Well,” he replied, “Technically, I shouldn’t give it to you right now. So I
won’t. Just know that when the time is right, I have a friend that I want you
to meet. He can help you. He helped me. I still have my job today because
of him.”
“Anderson?” I guessed.
He nearly choked on a laugh. “Oh, gosh, no. Not Anderson. Not anyone
at the firm. Someone else.”

book_c05.qxd

44

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 44

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I felt stupid for suggesting that Anderson was his secret mentor but realized that it didn’t matter. Now I had a plan and at least a view of the path
ahead. I couldn’t have the job interview today, or maybe tomorrow. But
maybe in a week or two. And the name on the card? I would know it soon
enough. Maybe I didn’t need it anyway. I was doing all right with my trading
already.
“I understand that now isn’t the right time. Hopefully, we can talk
again,” I suggested.
He agreed that we could meet again soon. Then he scribbled words on
a napkin, handed me the napkin, and it said:
Rule Number One: Don’t Become Cocky
While I stood staring at the words, Craig raced off to trade. Before he
left, he put cash on the table for the bill and said, “I’d stay longer, but I’m
one of the only guys on the floor up there that knows how to read that report in sixty seconds. Last month I banked over 200 points on this report.”
“200 points?”
“It’s not about the money. But it meant over a million in profits in the
first two hours after the minutes were released.”
Craig then rushed away. And I also wanted to get back to the office.
The FOMC interest rate decision was going to be out in 40 minutes, and I
needed to be ready.

book_c06.qxd

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 45

CHAPTER 6

A Turn for
the Worse

didn’t know it at the time, but Craig wasn’t just a good trader. John met
me when I returned to the office and explained it all.
“Craig is a Supertrader, with a capital S. He might be the best trader
under 40 years old down there. He personally makes more than $100,000
every month. For himself. That’s his cut. He could probably make a million
dollars for himself this week on this FOMC trading stuff. They love him
down there.”
“I’m surprised that he took the time to meet with me,” I said.
John shook his head. “I’m not. That’s the kind of guy he is. He helped
people put resumes together in law school and left his for last. He probably
walked away from some great trades today by talking to you. He eats lunch
at his desk every day.”
I looked at the napkin and showed it to John:
