
outperformed the overall market 63 percent of the time.
It has been even better, however, to invest in the cheapest stocks ranked on a price to book
value basis. In this case, buying the first quintile—Q1, or the cheapest 20 percent of
stocks—has been what Macquarie calls “a massive and consistent outperformer,” whatever the
state of the wider market. In view of this information, traders might do well to incorporate
price to book value into their fundamental selection criteria.
The need to hone stock-picking skills is obviously critical to the performance of any investor
or fund manager, and was brought home again recently when a leading fund reported the
results of their trading for the past week on October 18, 2010. The report mentioned that the
model portfolio returned 1.7 percent while the underlying index gained 6.7 percent. On
examining the fund’s portfolio, it turned out that although many of the stocks had been in the
right sectors and had appreciated nicely, all the gains were offset by some underperforming
stocks or “laggards.” Using the stock-screening procedure described below, these “laggards”
might well have been excluded from the start, and the performance of the fund would have
greatly improved. We shall take a closer look at two of them (151 Want Want and 828 Dynasty
Fine Wines) later in the chapter.
So how to go about it? The first step is to establish a database of all those shares one has
interest in and load them in a charting software program, such as TradeStation or MetaStock or
any one of the many others that are available.
Yahoo! Finance, Google Finance, and quite a few others provide stock prices and
fundamental data for free. One may also subscribe to a stock-screening service or use Internet
sites such as Yahoo! Finance or Financial Times (at
www.ft.com
), where it is possible to compare the price performance with other stocks in the same
sector. At
www.ft.com
, one may run a stock screen based on favorite parameters, including return on equity, P/E
ratios, or preferred price range, and it will screen all the stocks listed in major markets around
the world. It is even possible to use a screener that combines both fundamental and technical
analysis such as the one provided by Financial Visualizations (at
www.finviz.com
). In addition to the financial ratios the screener identifies stocks based on technical patterns
or specific candlestick formations.
It is assumed the reader has access to a charting program with a stock-screening function.
The example shown in
Figure 9.4
was done by the Explorer screen function in MetaStock, but RadarScreen in TradeStation
can do the screens as well.
FIGURE 9.4
Shows the result of the scan of 1,291 stocks at the close of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange on
November 16, 2010.

The database in
Figure 9.4
comprises about 1,300 of the most actively traded stocks on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
Roughly speaking, about one-third of the stocks are mainland companies listed on our local
bourse. A scan of these shares therefore provides an investor or trader with an opportunity to
select a stock that is tied in with the dynamic economies of China and/or Hong Kong.
Screening the stocks is a fairly simple procedure, and we find the following three methods in
MetaStock’s Explorer function most useful: Price and Volume Breakout, P and F Pattern Search,
and Long-Term Bullish/Bearish. (MetaStock is owned by Equis International and some functions
are under the prefix Equis.)
In
Figure 9.4
, MetaStock Explorer-Equis: Price and Volume Breakout displays securities where the price is
increased 5 percent and the volume is 50 percent above the 50-day moving average. A total of
24 stocks meet these criteria. The purpose is to spot stocks that are breaking out of a mediumterm trading range, or down from it, and then do an astro-screen of those stocks, as explained
later on.
In order to spot stocks that break out of a range, the P and F Pattern Search in the Explorer
can be useful as well—“P and F” meaning Point and Finger chart analysis. Usually, only a few
stocks show up in this scan, but when they do, it can be an indication the stock is moving higher
or reversing. Five stocks were on the list on November 16: 5 HSBC Holdings, 19 Swire Pacific A,
2828 Hang Seng H Share Index ETF, 330 Esprit Holdings, and 589 Ports Design, and all had
broken down technically. The weak P and F charts indicated the overall market might be subject
to more near-term selling pressure.
Stock investors may also consider using Equis: Long-Term Bullish, which identifies stocks over
their 200-day moving average, and Long-Term Bearish, which identifies stocks below their 200day moving average. As mentioned in an earlier chapter, 40 weeks, that is, 200 trading days, is
a widely followed moving average indicator, but here we are only concerned with the total

number of shares above and the total number below as a sort of sentiment indicator. As of
November 22, 2010, the number above, or bullish, was 780, while the number below, or
bearish, was 511. The ratio has shifted substantially since the onset of the recent correction,
but the reading may still be considered bullish and adds weight to the view that the decline is
corrective only, and the larger uptrend is still intact.
Incidentally, when it comes to financial statistics, Asia is still far behind the United States and
Europe in terms of the huge range of stock market statistics that is available in those places.
One would expect a stock exchange to provide reliable statistics and historical data for
independent research; however, for some Asian bourses, often the daily advance decline
numbers do not tally and therefore cannot serve as a reliable gauge of sentiment. Moreover,
the respective volume of advancing and declining stocks, VIX index, and daily data with no
opening price can only be obtained through data vendors.
The next step necessitates having access to an astrological software program such as AIR
Market Trader, Timing Solution, or Galactic Trader. These programs offer multi-search functions
based on the “first-trade” date and scan the companies according to certain astrological inputs.
These inputs include prevailing “good” planetary aspects, such as 60 degree sextiles, or 120
degree trines, and “bad” aspects such as 90 degree squares or 180 degree oppositions, and
sometimes 0 degree conjunctions as well. A number of simple models are provided with Timing
Solution, so the user doesn’t need to have extensive knowledge about astrology and may just
apply the good or bad screens to stocks, similar to applying the lunar-phased indicator. The
result of even a simple good or bad aspect scan can sometimes turn up “nuggets” in that the
scan can alert investors to a share that has the potential to start rallying before it actually
breaks out.
It should be noted that the “first trade” date charts used in multi-search are separate from a
company’s date of incorporation charts. Incorporation charts are drawn up when a company
starts its business, and may indicate something about the ongoing operations of the company,
such as changes in management, product releases, or other internal matters. First-trade charts,
on the other hand, are based on the date and time of the first trade on a stock exchange; that
is, when the company launches its initial public offering (IPO), and trading of its shares to the
public and institutions begins. The first-trade chart is very reliable, as the time is normally
always the same as the opening of trading. It used to be 10 a.m. in Hong Kong, but on March 7,
2011, it changed to 9:30 a.m. to be in line with other exchanges. The first-trade chart relates to
investor interest and concerns, and is the more important of the two charts. To find the dates
for a first trade database is a time-consuming job, which may deter some investors. Hopefully,
the following discussion will convince some it is worth the effort.
The first-trade database we are going to use for Hong Kong shares contains 850 stocks.
Unfortunately, for about 20 or so leading shares, including HSBC Holdings, there are no known
listing dates, so those stocks could not be utilized. It should also be noted that the total
database of 1,300 stocks mentioned earlier was formed by adding 450 other active stocks to
the 850 first-trade stocks.
Figure 9.5
shows the first scan.
Figure 9.6
shows the performance of the stock that was rated at the top of the scan, and which
outperformed the Hang Seng Index (
Figure 9.7
).
FIGURE 9.5

The first scan shows how stocks rate in a simple good/bad aspect program with the 10 highest
ranked first as of November 23, 2010. The top stock in the screen, 2728 Shinhint, already
appeared on the Price and Volume Breakout in early October, and again in early November.
Source: Sergey Tarassov at
www.timingsolution.com
.

FIGURE 9.6
2728 Shinhint daily chart (middle panel) and weekly chart (upper panel) at the close on
November 23, 2010. Considering that the Hang Seng Index dropped from a high of 25,000 in
early November to around 23,000 in the middle of the month, the stock has held up well and
appears to be consolidating before going higher.

FIGURE 9.7
Daily chart of Hang Seng Index as of December 1, 2010.
Source:
www.advancedget.com
(Note: original GET program is now sold by eSignal data service).

The third highest ranked stock in the scan, 833 Alltronics Holdings Ltd., has been moving up
sharply since early October, and may also be poised to resume its uptrend.
In
Figure 9.8
, Alltronics appeared frequently in the Price and Volume Breakout scans, but only after it
started its sharp uptrend. Since September, it showed up repeatedly in the “good/bad” astroscans, and investors could therefore be on alert that it might start rallying any time.
FIGURE 9.8
Daily chart (lower panel) and weekly chart (upper panel) of 833 Alltronics Holdings Ltd. as of
November 23, 2010.

However, the standout performer was a relatively obscure company called PacMOS
Technologies Holdings Limited. On October 19, 2010, and in the days that followed, it showed
up at or near the top of four different astro-scans, one of which is shown in
Figures 9.9
and
9.10

.
FIGURE 9.9
“Good/bad” astro-scan from October 19, 2010.

FIGURE 9.10
On October 29, 2010, PacMOS Tech. rocketed to the upside.

Being a penny stock with an erratic price history, PacMOS might not be a stock for
everybody, but it illustrates how an astro-scan can play an important role in trading, with the
caveat that sometimes the stocks that are “flagged” out in the “good/bad” scans do not make a
move for several weeks. For example, number four on the list (
Figure 9.9
), 102 Arnhold Holdings Ltd., only started to rally at the beginning of November, as shown in
Figure 9.11
.
FIGURE 9.11

Weekly chart (top) and daily chart (bottom) of 102 Arnhold Holdings Ltd. from November 23,
2010. The ribbon bar at the bottom shows the new moon (N), full moon (F), and quarter moon
(Q) phases (Section 1—Using Lunar Cycles in Trading). Note the quarter moon phase often
coincides with CITs.

In other cases, the selected stocks remain stagnant. However, those that do move often
outperform the market by a wide margin. A case in point is 2728 Shinhint, shown in
Figure 9.6
, which rose almost 10 percent on November 24, the day after the screen date.
The following is an example of a double screening method. Based on the list of a Price and
Volume Breakout scan in
Figure 9.4
, the next step is to rank these stocks with a good/bad astro-scan as shown in
Figure 9.12
.
FIGURE 9.12
Good/bad screen of the list of 24 stocks in the Price and Volume Breakout scan from
Figure 9.4
. Four of the stocks did not have first-trade date and four did not meet the scan criteria, so the
list comprises 16 stocks only.

Many of the stocks on the list bucked the downtrend in the market and continued to rally in
spite of the 10 percent decline in the Hang Seng Index during November 2010. Daily charts of
three of the stocks are shown in
Figure 9.13
for illustration.
FIGURE 9.13
Daily charts of 395 Sino Dragon (top), 319 China Metal (middle), and 592 Bossini (bottom) as
of December 4, 2010.

The five stocks at the bottom of the astro-scan in
Figure 9.12
did less well than the 10 top-ranked ones, indicating that the astro-scan proved helpful in
selecting the stocks with the best potential. It may of course be argued that just buying all the
stocks selected by the technical breakout screen would also have outperformed the market.
Perhaps so, but for investors who do not have the means to diversify to such a wide extent, the
second screening by astro-scan might be an ideal solution.
This brings us back to the portfolio with some underperforming stocks, among which were
151 Want Want and 828 Dynasty Fine Wines. In
Figure 9.14
, these stocks did in fact rally with the overall market in the first half of October, and
appeared initially to be well chosen.
FIGURE 9.14
Daily charts of 151 Want Want (top) and 828 Dynasty Fine Wines (bottom).

While the stocks have reasonably good fundamentals and seemingly good prospects for
growth, they declined quite sharply in October and were sold in a rebalancing of the portfolio.
Had the fund manager screened them beforehand using just the simple good/bad criteria, he
would have seen the stocks ranked poorly in August and again in September, as shown in
Figures 9.15
and
9.16
.
FIGURE 9.15
Astro-scan of 151 Want Want on August 9, 2010.

FIGURE 9.16
Astro-scan of 151 Want Want on September 29, 2010.

828 Dynasty Fine Wines also ranked low in several scans, the latest being at the end of
September 2010, as shown in
Figure 9.17
.
FIGURE 9.17
Astro-scan of 828 Dynasty Fine Wines on September 29, 2010.

To sum up, there is little doubt that the increasingly uncertain and volatile stock market
environment calls for more unorthodox methods in trading and particularly in selecting stocks.
The question is, will investors be prepared to try something different and somewhat esoteric?
Hopefully, this section has provided an in-centive.

CHOOSING THE BEST PERIODS FOR TRADING
The foregoing has dealt with some important tools to becoming a successful investor or trader.
One aspect that is almost never considered is how to choose the best periods for trading.
Traders use their skills to analyze the market, determine the best trade setups, and determine
when to enter and exit trades, but few pay any attention to their own astrological cycle. Most
people go through personal cycles of profit and loss, and perhaps more so those who are
engaged in trading or fund management. So why not sidestep some of the risky or adverse
periods and resume trading when there is a personal change in trend and a higher probability
of winning?
To begin with, what is meant by the “best periods for trading”? They are, simply put, those
periods when a person might benefit from favorable astro-harmonic aspects of his or her birth
chart or natal chart. In the case of a company, its natal chart is the date of incorporation.
However, to compile a date of incorporation chart for a company is difficult because it is hard
to obtain the precise time of incorporation of most companies. Thus, for the purpose of this
section, natal charts of a company are based on the first-trade charts, that is, the first day of
trading in the stock of a company on an exchange.
Adverse periods are those when the aspects are stressful or inharmonious to one’s natal
chart. For day traders and other professionals who trade frequently, it may be useful to know
when the planetary influences are in their favor and when they are not. Knowing the influence
of the planets could also be critical in situations where decisions have to be made about very
large investments, whether short-term or long-term. It is already common practice among
some traders to use prevailing stock market cycles to project likely change in trend dates, but
they might benefit as well from incorporating astro-forecasting techniques in their analysis
work.
Figure 9.18
is an example of a first-trade chart of 1010 PacMOS Technologies Holdings Ltd. The inner
wheel shows the horoscope of the natal chart, that is, the day of the first trade on February 18,
1994. The outer wheel shows the aspects of the transiting planets to the natal chart on October
29, 2010 when the company’s shares shot up sharply as shown in
Figure 9.10
.
FIGURE 9.18
1010 PacMOS Tech first-trade chart with transiting planets on October 19, 2010. The natal
Part of Fortune (POF) is augmented, being on angle and favorably aspected by natal Jupiter. The
chart shows how Jupiter and the Moon’s aspect to the POF helped trigger the huge move in the
price of the stock. A more detailed explanation of the importance of the Part of Fortune is
provided later in the chapter.
Source: SolarFire8, Astrolabe at
www.alabe.com
.

Although, in general, the subject of this chapter is financial astrology, the emphasis in this
section is more on learning natal (personal) astrology, so that a trader or investor may identify
those periods that are more fortuitous for him or her to trade. Many financial astrologers will
trade based on the analysis of transits to a company’s first-trade chart, but experience indicates
that the focus should be more on personally favorable periods rather than more generally
favorable periods for stock charts. The reason is simply that if one has unfavorable or hard
aspects, such as 90 degree squares, to planets in the “money houses,” or to planets ruling those
houses in one’s natal horoscope, it may result in losses in trading. One may pick a stock with
presumably good potential, but because of the hard aspects to one’s personal horoscope, one
may overlook something important or circumstances may suddenly change in unforeseen ways.
Trading during unfavorable transits should therefore be avoided. It is hoped that the following
introduction, albeit brief, will enable traders to learn some basic astrological techniques. These
techniques can help them analyze their birth charts so they can take advantage of the favorable
periods and curtail trading during unfavorable ones. Once the basics of natal astrology have
been mastered, many of the same principles can be applied to analyzing stock charts, although
the terminology and the rulership definitions differ. For easy reference, definitions of both
personal and financial rulerships are included in Appendixes 1 and 3.
It is of course possible that an investor or trader is not trading for himself but for an
organization, and where natal astrology does not apply to the same extent. In such a case, it
may be useful to analyze the first-trade chart on the basis of the introduction to astrology
provided in the following paragraphs. However, it is recommended that traders screen their
trades by the stock-selection method in the previous section, “How to Pick Winning Stocks.”
Astrology is, to quite a large extent, a mathematical discipline based on astronomy. Applied
properly, it will enable traders to quite accurately forecast periods of increased market volatility
and financial instability. Financial astrologers chart both intermediate and long-range trends,
reflecting the movement of the heavenly bodies and their influence on people on Earth. Some

may question how the planets, being so far away, can exert any influence on life on Earth, or
they may simply have no interest in astrology. Nonetheless, if they are willing to study the
subject a little more, they may be surprised at how often cosmic events or specific positions
and aspects between the planets correlate with terrestrial events.
It used to be that traders cared more about whether a methodology was acceptable and
logical than they did about the results. However, that appears to be changing, judging from the
great interest shown at recent seminars when speakers introduced more esoteric methods of
trading the markets. The next generation of traders seems more willing to try new approaches,
perhaps spurred in part by the more advanced trading software programs that are now
available.
Learning astrology, however, with all its strange symbols and terminology, can still be
intimidating. This section is an attempt to shorten the learning curve, so at least one aspect of
the craft can be applied. It will, of course, still take some effort, but users are almost certain to
gain an edge on the market and ultimately be amply rewarded.
In fact, a trader might not need to know that much about astrology to use some of these
methods. AIR Market Trader software has a module called Millennium Star Trax. Using this
program, a person may simply input his or her birthplace and date and time of birth, and the
program will calculate the likely future trend for certain areas of life, including financial areas. It
is also possible to produce a general forecast, showing periods that are likely to be harmonious
and those that may be stressful in histogram or line format.
However, to master the subject for maximum benefit, it is still necessary to learn the basics
of natal and financial astrology, and hopefully the following introduction will help traders gain a
quick insight into a subject that might otherwise easily take months of study.
Astrology can be baffling at first, because it involves a different kind of language or wisdom.
There are four parts to any birth chart: planets, signs, houses, and aspects. The astrological use
of planets, the house system, and the aspects has evolved since astrology’s earliest recorded
beginnings about 5,000 years ago. Archaeologists uncovered evidence that the Sumerians, as
early as 2900 b.c.e., built temples in the form of ziggurats, or terraced pyramids, to observe the
stars and planets. The Babylonians developed astrology further, as evidenced in their clay
tablets from around 500 b.c.e. The tablets contain lists of lunar and planetary observations that
were used, among others, to predict whether the most common commodities, barley, dates,
and sesame would prosper. The careful recording of prices indicates the Babylonians were
charting the markets and sought to predict future prices much like modern-day technicians do.
However, it was the Greeks who made the biggest contributions, through their refinement of
the house system and use of Ptolemaic aspects from Ptolemy’s book on astrology, Tetrabiblos.
Together, these developments enabled more accurate measurements and predictions to be
made.
There are many constellations in the sky, but by tradition, Western astrologers use the
tropical zodiac of the signs. Most are familiar with this zodiac, which begins each year at the
vernal equinox, the first day of spring on about March 21, at 0 degrees Aries. A horoscope, or
birth chart, is a diagram of the precise positions of the planets in the sky at the moment of
one’s birth. It is divided into 12 equal segments to reflect the 12 constellations of the zodiac.
One of the 12 zodiacal signs will be on the cusp of each house, that is, the point at which it
begins. In a horoscope, the Sun and planets are shown in the relevant zodiacal signs and houses
for the date and time of birth. The house system can be thought of as 12 areas of influence, and
its development has its origin in thousands of years of observation. Over the millennia, it was
found that certain areas of the constellation in the sky corresponded to different areas of life.
Figure 9.19
