
Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

549

amount of risk involved. Remember the law of percentages. Risk of capital loss is the most
important determinant in profiting. The net profit percentage of maximum drawdown describes
quickly the bottom-line performance of the system. Unfortunately, the optimizing software of
some commercial systems fails to include this factor and it must be calculated from other
reported statistics.

Measuring System Results for Robustness
When analyzing a system, we look at the system components, the profit, the risk, and the
smoothness of the equity curve. We want to know how robust our results are. Robustness simply
means how strong and healthy our results are; it refers to how well our results will hold up to
changing market conditions. It is important that our system continues to perform well when the
market changes because although markets trend and patterns tend to repeat, the future market
conditions will not exactly match the past market conditions that were the basis for our system
design.
Components
The most important aspect of the optimization and testing process is to be sure that all calculations are correct. This sounds simple, but it is surprising how often this is overlooked and computer program errors have led to improper calculations. The next aspect is to be sure that the
number of trades is large enough to make the results significant. The rule of thumb is between 30
and 50 trades, with 50 or more being the ideal. We have mentioned previously that the comparisons between in-sample and out-of-sample results should differ in performance but should not
materially differ in average duration of trades, maximum consecutive winners and losers, the
worst losing trade, and the average losing trade. We should also be aware of the average trade
result in dollars and the parameter stability. We could apply a student t test to the parameters and
their results to see if their differences are statistically significant, and we should test for brittleness, the phenomenon when one or more of the rules are never triggered. Once we are satisfied
that the preceding inspection shows no material problems, we can look at the performance statistics more closely.
Profit Measures
Remember that the point of practicing technical analysis is to make money—or profit. On the
surface, it seems as if this is a simple concept: If I end up with more money than I began with,
then the system is profitable. Actually, measuring and comparing the profitability of various
potential systems is not quite so straightforward. There are several ways in which analysts will
measure the profitability of systems. The major ways are as follows:
• Total profit to total loss, called the profit factor, is the most commonly used statistic
to screen for systems from optimization. It must be above 1.0, or the system is losing.
Although a high number suggests greater profits, we must be wary of overly high
numbers; generally, a profit factor greater than ten is a warning that the system has
been curve-fitted. As a measure of general performance, the profit factor only includes
profits and losses, not drawdowns. It, therefore, does not represent statistics on risk.

Download at www.wowebook.com

550

Part VIII System Testing and Management

• Outlier-adjusted profit to loss is a profit factor that has been adjusted for the largest
profit. Sometimes a system will generate a very large profit or loss that is an anomaly.
If the profit factor is reduced by this anomaly and ends up below 1.0, the system is a
bust because it depended solely on the one large profit. The largest winning trade
should not exceed 40% to 50% of total profit.
• Percentage winning trades is a number we use in the next chapter on the makeup of
risk of ruin. Obviously, the more winning trades there are, the less chance of a run of
losses against a position. In trend-following systems, this percentage is often only 30%
to 50%. Most systems should look for a winning trade percentage greater than 60%.
Any percentage greater than 70% is suspect.
• Annualized rate of return is used for relating the results of a system against a market
benchmark.
• The payoff ratio is a calculation that is also used in the risk of ruin estimate. It is a
ratio of the average winning trade to average losing trade. For trend-following systems, it should be greater than 2.0.
• The length of the average winning trade to average losing trade should be greater
than 1. Otherwise, the system is holding losers too long and not maximizing the use of
capital. Greater than 5 is preferable for trend-following systems.
• The efficiency factor is the net profit divided by the gross profit (Sepiashvili, 2005). It
is a combination of win/loss ratio and wins probability. Successful systems usually are
in the range of 38% to 69%—the higher the better. This factor is mostly influenced by
the win percentage. It suggests that reducing the number of losing trades is more effective for overall performance than reducing the size of the losses, as through stop-loss
orders.
For a system to be robust, we should not see a sudden dip in profit measures when parameters are changed slightly. Stability of results is more important than total profits.
Risk Measures
What happens if you find a system that has extraordinarily high profit measures? Chances are
you have a system with a lot of risk. Remember, high profits are good, but we must balance them
against any increased risk. Some of the major ways that analysts will measure the risk within
their system are as follows:
• The maximum cumulative drawdown of consecutive losing trades from peak equity
can also be thought of as the largest single trade paper loss in a trade. The maximum
loss from an equity peak is the most common usage. The rule of thumb is that a maximum drawdown of two times that found in optimizing should be expected and used in
anticipated risk calculations.

Download at www.wowebook.com

551

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

• The net profit to drawdown ratio is the same as net profit as a percentage of maximum drawdown. It is also called the recovery ratio, and it is the best method of initially screening results from optimization. In any system, it should be above 2.0.
• Maximum consecutive losses often affect the maximum drawdown. When this number is large, it suggests multiple losses in the future. It is imperative to find out what
occurred in the price history to produce this number if it is large.
• Large losses due to price shocks show how the system reacts to price shocks.
• The long est flat time demonstrates when money is not in use. It is favorable in that it
frees capital for other purposes.
• The time to recovery from large drawdowns is a measure of how long it takes to recuperate losses. Ideally, this time should be short and losses recuperated quickly.
• Maximum favorable and adverse excursions from list of trades informs the system’s
designer of how much dispersion exists in trades. It can be used to measure the
smoothness of the equity curve but also give hints as to where and how often losing
trades occur. Its primary use is to give hints as to where trailing stops should be placed
to take advantage of favorable excursions and reduce adverse excursions.
• The popular Sharpe ratio has severe problems when applied to trading systems. First,
it does not include the actual annual return but only the average monthly return. Thus,
irregularities in the return are not recognized. Second, it does not distinguish between
upside and downside fluctuations. As a result, it penalizes upside fluctuations as much
as downside fluctuations. Finally, it does not distinguish between intermittent and consecutive losses. A system with a dangerous tendency toward high drawdowns from
consecutive losses would not be awarded as high a risk profile as others with intermittent losses of little consequence.
Individual analysts will choose, and even create, the measure of risk that is most important
to their trading objectives. Some of the other measures of risk mentioned in the literature are as
follows:
• Return Retracement ratio—This is the average annualized compounded return
divided by MR (maximum of either decline from prior equity peak [i.e., worst loss
from buying at peak] or worst loss at low point from any time prior).
• Sterling ratio (over three years)—This is the arithmetic average of annual net profit
divided by average annual maximum drawdown; it is similar to the gain-to-pain ratio.
• Maximum loss—This is the worst possible loss from the highest point; using this
measure by itself is not recommended because it represents a singular event.
• Sortino ratio—This is similar to the Sharpe ratio, but considers only downside volatility. It is calculated as the ratio of the monthly expected return minus the risk-free rate
to the standard deviation of negative returns.

Download at www.wowebook.com

552

Part VIII System Testing and Management

Smoothness and the Equity Curve
Some analysts prefer to analyze risk in a graphic, visual manner. Two graphs commonly are used
as a visual analysis of a system’s performance: the equity curve and the underwater curve.
An equity curve chart is shown in Figure 22.2. It shows the level of equity profit in an
account over time. Ideally, the line of the equity profits should be straight and run from a low
level at the lower-left corner to a high level at the upper-right corner. Dips in the line are losses
either taken or created by drawdowns.
The common measure of smoothness is the standard error of equity values about the linear
regression trend drawn through those equity values. Smoothness of a system usually is affected
more by changes in the entry parameters or adjustments, such as filters. Because the majority of
price action has occurred by the exit, the exit parameters and stops have little effect on smoothness.
The second type of graph used to look at system performance is the underwater curve
chart. An example of this type of chart is shown in Figure 22.3. This displays the drawdown from
each successively higher peak in equity. It is calculated in percentages and gives a representation
not only of how much drawdown occurred, but also of how much time passed until equity recovered from that drawdown. As Figure 22.3 shows, the maximum percentage drawdown in the initial Nerves-of-Steel system was a little over 7%. This chart helps us to see that a major problem
with the system is not the size of the drawdowns but the time it takes for the system to recover. In
Box 22.2, we outline a method for improving the system.
Equity Curve Underwater(weekly) - X Weekly(01/07/00 16:00-07/30/10 16:00)
1
0
-1

DrawDown(%)

-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
11/10/02

10/10/04

9/10/06

8/10/08

7/11/10

FIGURE 22.3 Weekly underwater curve for Nerves-of-Steel in Box 22.1 example (weekly: January 7,
2000–July 30, 2010)

Download at www.wowebook.com

553

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

BOX 22.2 UPGRADE IN THE NERVES-OF-STEEL SYSTEM
Now it is time to upgrade our system, based upon the results of our initial testing. To
show the power of stop orders, at least in this instance, we institute several kinds of
stops to limit losses. This will not necessarily reduce drawdown, however. Sometimes it will increase drawdown because while the individual losses will be smaller,
the number of losing trades will increase. To see how the results can change by introducing new factors, a two-point protective stop and a 3.4% trailing stop once the
stock had gained 0.2 percent are added.
Some tabulated data from the second test is as follows:
Trades

All

Long

Short

Net profit
Gross profit
Gross loss
Profit factor
Number of trades
Percent profitable
Average trade net profit
Largest winner as a % of gross profit
Largest loser as a % of gross loss
Maximum consecutive losing trades
Average weeks in winning position
Average weeks in losing position
Buy-and-hold return
Return on account
Monthly average return
Standard deviation of monthly return
Sharpe ratio
Maximum drawdown (intraday)
Maximum trade drawdown
Net profit as a % of drawdown

$48,553
$57,266
($8,713)
6.57
300
82.33%
$161.84
3.46%
2.55%
3
1.15
1.39
154.27%
6,023.95%
$833.43
$721.39
0.62
($924)
($210)
6,023.92%

$28.944
$33,374
($4,430)
7.53
182
87.62%
$159.03
4.49%
5.01%
2
1.19
1.48

$19,609
$23,892
($4,283)
5.58
118
78.81%
$166.18
8.28%
5.18%
5
1.09
1.29

($570)
($210)
5,077.89%

($1587)
($200)
1,766.58%

Source: TradeStation

Look at how the system improves with the addition of the stops. The improvement is
so large that it is likely untrustworthy, especially because we have no idea as to whether
this performance will continue into the future. In reality, we would change each variable
and rule one by one to see the effect on results. Rather than go through each change individually, we show the results after all changes, for demonstration purposes.
continues

Download at www.wowebook.com

554

Part VIII System Testing and Management

continued

Figure 22.4 shows the new equity curve for the system. Notice how smooth the
curve is now and how it never was in the loss column. Because stop orders increase
the number of trades that are exited and then entered again, the turnover increased
from 74 to 300 trades and were not evenly divided between short and long positions
as in a pure reversal system. This gives us plenty of sample trades. Notice also that
the percentage of profitable trades increased significantly even with the higher
turnover. The profit per trade declined, of course, but was still reasonable enough to
cover any unforeseen expenses, and the profit factor, the total profit to loss increased
substantially. There were no extraordinary winners or losers, meaning that the system was not influenced by only one or two large trades, but the trades were only held
for a little more than a week, making the profits all short-term for tax purposes. The
largest improvement came in the return—a whopping 6,023.95% over the buy-andhold 154.27%. This gain came from reducing losses with the stops and shows how
the law of percentages can be fought successfully with capital risk management. The
higher turnover with less capital risk produced a higher average monthly return and
a standard deviation of less than the return, well below the standard of 5.0 times.
This accounts for the smoothed equity curve.
Equity Curve Detailed - X Weekly(01/07/00 16:00-07/30/10 16:00)
50000

40000

Equity($)

30000

20000

10000

0

12/7/01

11/7/03

10/7/05

9/14/07

8/14/09

12/22/2000-7/30/2010

FIGURE 22.4 Equity curve of Nerves-of-Steel with stops (weekly: January 7, 2000–July
30, 2010)

Download at www.wowebook.com

555

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

The underwater curve in Figure 22.5 shows the drawdown for the improved
Nerves-of-Steel system in percentage terms. This too improved except for one outlier in the late spring of 2002 when the percentage drawdown reached as low as 13%.
Otherwise, the drawdowns remained in the 2% to 6% range, a level that most traders
can live with.
Equity Curve Underwater(weekly) - X Weekly(01/07/00 16:00-07/30/10 16:00)
1
0
-1
-2
-3
DrawDown(%)

-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
-11
-12
-13
-14
2/23/03 10/31/04

10/1/06

8/31/08

7/18/10

FIGURE 22.5 Underwater curve for trailing stops (weekly: January 7, 2000–July 30,
2010)

Do not use this system as it stands in any stock. It is presented only as an example of the process of looking for parameters, variables, and rules in a system development.
However, we hope that you can see the process of developing a reliable and profitable system and some of the types of adjustments that can be applied to systems,
especially the use of stops, to improve performance and reduce risk. System development is a very difficult and time-consuming task.

Download at www.wowebook.com

556

Part VIII System Testing and Management

BOX 22.3 WHAT IS A GOOD TRADING SYSTEM?
In his book, Beyond Technical Analysis, Tushar Chande discusses the characteristics
of a good trading system. Chande’s Cardinal Rules for a good trading system are the
following:

• Positive expectation—Greater than 13% annually
• Small number of robust trading rules—Less than ten each is best for entry
and exit rules

• Able to trade multiple markets—Can use baskets for determining parameters, but rules should work across similar markets, different stocks, different
commodities futures, and so on

• Incorporates good risk control—Minimum risk as defined by drawdown
should not be more than 20% and should not last more than nine months

• Fully mechanical—No second-guessing during operation of the system

CONCLUSION
Throughout this book, we have looked at a number of technical indicators to guide our buying
and selling of securities in reaction to particular market conditions. In this chapter, we turned our
attention to mechanizing these reactions. A system is simply a plan or set of rules of when to buy
and sell securities. A system lets us determine a priori how we will react to particular market situations. Having a system in place helps us to follow a well-thought-out plan and prevents us
from haphazardly trading based on emotion.
Of course, our basic objective in creating a system is to make a profit. Although this sounds
like a straightforward goal, the goal of making a profit is not as simplistic as it sounds. Of course,
we test our system to see how well it performs. But—and this is an important but—just because
a system performs well using past, historical data in a trial situation does not guarantee that we
will have the same stellar results in future, real-time trading. The most basic reason for this performance differential is that the market never repeats itself exactly; the system is operating in a
different market environment than the one in which it was tested. There are also some system
design and testing issues of concern. The system designer must be careful about data choice and
not to overfit the data in the sample period. As we have seen in this chapter, even a system that
has a high net profit in a test period is not necessarily a system that will perform well in the
future. The system designer must consider a host of statistics about the system performance to

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

557

determine whether the system is suitable for future trading. By following the guidelines laid out
in this chapter, you should be ready to design systems and test them to determine their appropriateness for your trading situation.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the difference between a discretionary and nondiscretionary system.
2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of a nondiscretionary system?
3. How would you describe the discipline and mind-set necessary to develop and follow a
trading or investing system?
4. Your brother is a physician who does not have the time to manage his own money. Knowing that you have an interest in investments and have taken a class in technical analysis, he
asks you to develop a trading system for him. Before you agree to take on this job, you
want to make sure that he understands the concept of risk. How would you explain risk to
him, especially as it is related to using a system for investing?
5. After you explain the concept of risk to your brother, he still wants you to develop a trading system. In fact, he has done some reading and is convinced that a trend-following moving-average crossover system is the way to go. He even knows what stock he wants to trade
using the system—his favorite pharmaceutical company, High Profit Pharmaceuticals
(HPP). You do some initial investigation, and you think that HPP is currently in a trading
range. Explain to your brother why you think it would be unwise to attempt to trade HPP
using a moving-average crossover system at this point. (Be sure to explain the concept of a
whipsaw in your explanation.)
6. Your brother, eager to develop the “perfect” system to trade HPP, has developed a system,
tested it, and optimized it. His results show that he would have quadrupled his money last
year trading his system! He is ready to put the system in place to trade HPP this year,
expecting to quadruple his money. What questions would you have about his testing and
optimization procedures, and what warnings would you want to give him?
7. Two of your friends, Jennifer and Michael, have developed systems to trade IBM. During
the test period, Jennifer’s system had a net profit of $9,578, while Michael’s system had a
net profit of only $8,993. Explain why this information alone is not enough to determine
that Jennifer’s system is superior to Michael’s.

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

2 3

MONEY AND RISK MANAGEMENT

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be familiar with

• Definitions and measurements of risk as it relates to money management
• The martingale betting strategy
• Diversifiable versus correlated risk
• Methods for testing money-management strategies
• The use of various types of stops to manage risk
• Methods for determining the minimum capital needed for a system
• Methods for determining the percentage of capital to allocate toward one system
They [great traders] have all been humbled by the market early on in their careers.
This creates a definite respect for Mr. Market. Until one has this respect indelibly
engraved in their (sic) makeup, the concept of money management and discipline
will never be treated seriously. (Cooper, 2004)
Money management is the next and final step in portfolio design after having established a reliable system or systems. We have concentrated on the reward side of investment because that is
the more interesting and the part that most investors or traders find enjoyable. Unfortunately, the
reward side is only half of the portfolio equation. The other half is money management, a muchneglected aspect of portfolio management that should receive as much attention as the reward
side. We can refer to money management as the risk side of investment, the means of preventing
financial ruin. It is principally concerned with how to measure and manage risk of loss and,
therefore, how to utilize one’s capital most efficiently. In most aspects of investing, there is a
trade-off between reward and risk. Neither can be measured precisely, and the amount of risk to
