
392

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.5 Including or excluding your watch list contents from the patterns
search will save you time.

The fourth tab, Watch Lists (Figure 14.5) is extremely helpful, because
it lets you constrict a search to only symbols found within or without your
watch lists. For instance, if you wanted to seek patterns only for symbols
that you were already following, you would choose the radio button “In any
of my Watch Lists” (you would also check the checkbox titled Limit Patterns). This way, only symbols that you already follow would be displayed
in the resulting patterns module.
You may instead want to seek symbols that aren’t in any of your watch
lists. After all, you are looking for new opportunities, so you might want to
exclude those items you are following already, anyway. In this case, you
would click the “Not in any of my Watch Lists” radio button.
You might even choose something not quite so stark as total inclusion or exclusion; instead, you might want to include (or exclude) specific watch lists. In this case, you would click the third radio button,
which also includes a dropdown menu, to seek symbols that are already
in (or not in) the watch lists that you specify by clicking the checkboxes
beneath.
The final tab in the Find Patterns dialog box, Filters (Figure 14.6), can
also save you time by not bothering to show you symbols that you don’t

Pattern Recognition

393

FIGURE 14.6 You should restrict your search to seek only stocks you would consider trading anyway.

find interesting in the first place. It offers a number of parameters to refine
the search:

r Options Available: If this box is checked, only stocks for which
options are available will be presented. This is particularly valuable if
you are an options trader, but even if you are not, it will at least focus
the search on stocks that are traded widely enough to have options in
the first place.
r Average Volume: You can set a Min and Max level for the average
volume. The main benefit of this parameter is to set a Min amount so
that you are not looking at thinly traded stocks.
r Start Price: You can set a Min and Max for the price at the beginning of the pattern, which is probably not that important since it is the
ending price that is more crucial.
r End Price: If you want to avoid stocks that are out of a certain price
range (for instance, stocks less than $5), you can set Min and Max levels for the ending price of a stock.
r Exchange: By default, this setting is All, but if for some reason you
want to find stocks that trade only on the NYSE, American, or NASDAQ
stock exchanges, you can choose the appropriate checkboxes here.

394

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Doing a Pattern search is quick, easy, and intuitive. Most of the time,
you’ll probably need to use only a few of the parameters to construct the
search you want. Once you’re ready, just click OK.

WORKING WITH THE RESULTS
To see the symbols resulting from your search, you need to make sure the
Patterns: Symbols module is turned on. Figure 14.7 shows the two relevant
modules to this chapter, both at the top of the list. If there is a checkmark
next to a module name, then that module is available to you.
Assuming you used Symbols as the basis for your symbol sorting, you
will see a list similar to Figure 14.8. It resembles a watch list, in that you
can scroll up and down the symbols with the arrow keys to view all the
charts, and you can right-click any of the symbols to add it to a watch list.
The object of such an exercise is to find interesting trading opportunities
that would not have otherwise been known to you.
When you begin looking at the symbols, you will see blue lines drawn
on the charts (in addition to any drawn objects of your own). These lines
represent all the patterns found for the time period you have specified. In
many cases, you will see multiple patterns on the same stock, such as in
Figure 14.9. If you mouse over any particular line, it will display an information box telling you the pattern found, its start and end dates, and its
anticipated target.
Something else interesting and useful happens when you mouse over
a pattern line: a rectangle appears, showing the target zone. If the target is
bullish, the rectangle is tinted green; if the target is bearish, the rectangle

FIGURE 14.7 The top two modules in the list are relevant to this chapter.

FIGURE 14.8 The symbols resulting from your patterns search are shown in this
module.

FIGURE 14.9 If you decide to Show Patterns on Chart Symbol in the dialog box,
you will see blue lines automatically drawn on your charts showing any discovered
patterns.

396

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.10 The rectangle shows the anticipated range of the price move.

is tinted red. The rectangle is placed on the chart appropriate for the target
time range (which is the width of the rectangle) and the target price (which
is the height). Figure 14.10 provides a bearish example.
The important thing to keep in mind when you view historical patterns
is that the completion of a pattern typically happens when the price crosses
beneath the supporting trend line (for bearish patterns) or above the resisting trend line (for bullish patterns). In Figure 14.11, for instance, the pattern
was completed at a price of about $14.50 when the stock gapped down and
pierced its lower trend line. At that time, the prediction system called for
the stock to fall somewhere between $12.1188 and $13.3853 between the
dates of 11/20/2009 and 2/7/2010. As you can see, the price did indeed fall
within that date and price range, indicating a successful prediction.
We’ve seen a couple of bearish examples, so let’s look at some bullish
ones. Figure 14.12 shows a bullish projection (the green rectangle), calling
for a stock that was about $34 at the time of the signal to climb above

Pattern Recognition

397

FIGURE 14.11 This is an example of a successful bearish prediction.

$40. Mousing over the pattern shows us the name of the pattern (Triangle),
its direction (Bullish), its predicted price range, and its prediction period.
Because some time has passed since the pattern was predicted, we can
see the result, which was that the prediction succeeded. (Just to be clear:
some predictions succeed, and some do not; there is no such thing as a
100 percent reliable system.)
Of course, even when a price moves into its prediction rectangle, there
is no reason it will not keep going the same direction. Figure 14.13 illustrates that the price kept moving up after the time range of the rectangle. If
you were making use of this prediction in a real trade, you would probably
want to seriously consider closing the position once the price entered the
rectangle. After all, anything inside the rectangle is considered a success,
and there is no guarantee that the price will move into the upper boundary
of the projected price movement. (Indeed, there is no guarantee that the
rectangle will be penetrated by the prices at all.)
The pattern search engine isn’t meant to be a substitute for your own
thoughtful analysis; it is intended primarily as a source of ideas that you
might not have had without access to this tool.

398

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.12 Here is an example of a successful bullish prediction.

PATTERN FAILURES
It’s important to understand that plenty of patterns are not realized. Stocks
that are projected to have bullish moves might plunge in value, and bearish
projections might instead be faced with a soaring stock price. So, again,
the results from a patterns search should be viewed as nothing more than
a list of symbols to chart and consider on your own.

Pattern Recognition

399

FIGURE 14.13 There is no reason prices cannot move above their bullish projections or below their bearish ones.

Figure 14.14 illustrates a failed bullish prediction. The entire time span
has been traversed, but the price didn’t even come close to getting inside
the rectangle.
Figure 14.15 provides an even more interesting example, because not
only did the price not get into the rectangle but also it subsequently fell
away sharply once the projected time range had passed. This is a good

400

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.14 A failed bullish price projection.

illustration of why you should not simply hold on to a position based on a
hoped-for outcome. If you were to enter a position based on a projection,
and the time span passes entirely without the anticipated price being
realized, it’s probably time to move on (all other aspects of the chart being
equal).

GRIDS AND EXPORTING
Later, in Chapter 16, you learn about the Grid Charts feature, but it should
be noted here that you can right-click on any of the resulting symbols in
the Patterns module and choose to view them in grid mode. This can be

Pattern Recognition

401

FIGURE 14.15 The price fell away sharply after the predicted price movement
was not realized.

a helpful time-saver, since you’ll probably just want to thumb through the
resulting charts fairly quickly to see if any patterns catch your attention.
Figure 14.16 provides an example of what a quartet of charts with patterns
looks like in grid mode.
As mentioned before, the best way to use the results of a pattern search
is to examine the symbols yourself. You can do this directly from the

FIGURE 14.16 You can view four charts at a time in grid mode.

402

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.17 You can export all the symbols with patterns found in them to
your own watch list.

module, or you can move all the symbols to your own watch list. As shown
in Figure 14.17, the Patterns menu has a feature, Export Results to Watch
List, that lets you take all the symbols you have found and put them in the
watch list of your choice.
After you make this selection, you can either create a newly named
watch list for the symbols or click on an existing watch list to add the
symbols there (Figure 14.18).

FIGURE 14.18 Choose the destination for the symbols with patterns that have
been found.

Pattern Recognition

403

Pattern recognition is good for long-term patterns. If you would rather
focus on very short-term patterns, you might want to use the Candle
Patterns feature instead.

CANDLESTICK PATTERNS
The second style of pattern search available in ProphetCharts is candlestick patterns, which you can access at the bottom of the Patterns menu
(Figure 14.19). The number of patterns available is larger than the standard
pattern engine, but the signals are for a much shorter time horizon.
After you choose Find Candle Patterns, a dialog box like the one in
Figure 14.20 appears. There are several parameters on the first tab, general,
and their functions are similar to those on the General tab in the standard
Find Patterns box. The most important is the first checkbox, Find Symbols
With Patterns. You also will probably want to click the last checkbox, Show
Patterns on Charted Symbol, since otherwise there will be nothing different
about the chart.
As shown in Figure 14.21, there are dozens of candlestick patterns
tracked by the data engine. You can select all of them (with the Select All button) or handpick certain ones (by clicking Clear All and then
checking only those you want). When you are ready to execute the candlestick search, click OK, and the resulting symbols will very quickly be
displayed in the Candle Patterns module.
The patterns themselves span only one or two days, but their effects can be long-lived. Figure 14.22 shows a bearish engulfing pattern
(highlighted at the top of the chart), which preceded a slump of more than
50 percent in the price of the equity shown. As with regular patterns, mousing over a candlestick pattern yields the pattern name. Any of the symbols
from the Candle Patterns module will have at least one pattern (highlighted

FIGURE 14.19 Candlestick patterns can be found using the Candle Patterns
search feature.

404

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.20 The General tab for candlestick patterns is very similar to the
same tab in the standard pattern search dialog box.

FIGURE 14.21 All the major candlestick patterns are available in the search
engine.

Pattern Recognition

405

FIGURE 14.22 Mouse over the highlighted pattern to see its name.

with yellow) but may have many more, depending on how far in time you
executed the search.
Figure 14.23 shows a couple of highlighted patterns. The leftmost
one is a Bullish Harami, and the stock climbs about 25 percent after this
pattern is identified. Clearly, the price did not sustain itself after that point.
Take note that a key difference between the standard pattern search and

406

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 14.23 There is no time or price projection given with candlestick
patterns.

the candlestick style is that the former provides price and time projections,
whereas the latter simply tells you what candlestick pattern has been
found.
Finally, if you are using candlestick charts and have color bars turned
on, you may notice that several color combinations appear. These colors
have the following meanings:

r White with Black Outline: The stock closed at a higher price than
the candlestick’s opening price and also higher than the previous candlestick’s close.
r White with Red Outline: The stock closed at a higher price than the
candlestick’s opening price and at a price lower than the previous candlestick’s close.

Pattern Recognition

407

r Red: The stock closed at a lower price than the candlestick’s opening
price and also lower than the previous candlestick’s close.

r Black: The stock closed at a lower price than the candlestick’s opening
price and at a price higher than the previous candlestick’s close.
So there you have it—two powerful tools to find patterns that would
be impractical to locate manually. Equipped with this knowledge, you now
have a time-saving method for locating new trading opportunities, all built
within your charting program. In the next chapter, we will explore an entirely new kind of pattern—those within the realm of Fibonacci drawings.

CHAPTER 15

Fibonacci
Drawings

n all the many years I’ve been learning and performing technical analysis, there is no set of studies which has interested me more than those
of Fibonacci. In ProphetCharts, there are four kinds of Fibonacci studies available: retracements, fans, time zones, and arcs. In this chapter we
will explore each of these, as always, with actual examples from the recent
past. But first, let us learn a little about the namesake of these studies.

I

A BRIEF HISTORY LESSON
Leonardo of Pisa lived from 1170 to 1250, and he is regarded as perhaps
the greatest mathematician of the Middle Ages. His father, William, had the
nickname “Bonaccio,” which means good-natured, so Leonardo was subsequently known by the nickname of “Fibonacci” (short for filius Bonacci,
or the son of Bonaccio).
William worked in North Africa at a trading post, and even though his
home country of Italy had used the Roman numeral system for centuries,
he came into contact with traders who instead used the Arabic method
of numbers (which is what we use today—1, 2, 3, 4, and so forth, as opposed to numbers such as XI and MMC). Leonardo helped his father with
his work, and in the course of doing so, he became acquainted with and
enamored by the Arabic style of numbering, which seemed far more sensible and efficient than the Roman style. The world owes Leonardo a debt
of gratitude for helping to popularize this system of numbers, since it’s
408

Fibonacci Drawings

409

doubtful anyone today would appreciate having to use Roman numerals in
everyday life.
Another great contribution Leonardo made was with respect to his
writings related to what we today call Fibonacci numbers. This is a sequence of numbers which begins like this: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55,
89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987, 1,597. Each number is the sum of the two preceding numbers. These numbers have a variety of interesting properties,
including the fact that, as the sequence progresses, each number divided
by its preceding number approaches the mathematical figure phi (approximately 1.618033989), known as the golden ratio, which has a wide variety
of expressions in nature.
In the world of stock charts, the concepts put forth by Fibonacci are
manifested in drawn objects—retracements, time zones, arcs, and fans. We
will explore each of these. There are entire volumes written on the golden
ratio and Fibonacci numbers, including their relationship to nature. We will
focus on how these mathematical insights can make us better, more profitable traders.

THE FIBONACCI RETRACEMENT
By far the most popular and easiest to interpret Fibonacci study is the retracement. The retracement study is performed by drawing a line between
two extreme points on a graph (a significant high point and low point),
which then creates the drawing of a series of horizontal lines set at key
Fibonacci ratios (23.6 percent, 38.2 percent, 50 percent, 61.8 percent, and
100 percent). These ratios represent a certain proportion of the vertical
distance between the extreme high and low you have identified.
The impact of these levels on a financial chart can be profound, since
they represent significant areas of support and resistance. In many instances, you will see a stock price bounce off these lines until it penetrates
one of them, only to behave the same way with the next line. The predictive power of retracements is that you can anticipate levels of support and
resistance where prices will tend to cling.
To draw a retracement, you need to use the Fibonacci retracement
tool in the toolbar. All four Fibonacci tools are located at the right side of
the toolbar (Figure 15.1). They are, in order, the Retracement, Time Zones,
Arcs, and Fans. To draw a Fibonacci retracement study on a chart, you
would follow these steps:
1. Click on the Retracement icon in the toolbar. Your cursor will change

into crosshairs.

410

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.1 The four Fibonacci tools are located at the right side of the toolbar:
Retracement, Time Zones, Arcs, and Fans.

2. Find an extreme trough or peak in the chart and click on it to establish

one end of the reference line you are going to use.
3. Drag the mouse. As you do, the retracement lines will automatically be

displayed. Once you have found the other extreme for your reference
line, click the mouse again.
It should be stated early on that not all charts are Fibonacci-friendly.
Some charts perform better with Fibonacci studies than others. Luckily, there is a fairly easy way to determine whether a stock is Fibonaccifriendly, and that is to lay down the study and examine whether past price
behavior seems to comply with the study. If it does, chances are that it will
continue to do so.
To make this assessment, it’s valuable to understand the reference line
and its relationship to time on the chart. The reference line is the line drawn
between two extremes. Whichever of those two points is more recent creates a division between the before and after of the retracement. For instance, if you drew a line from January 1998 to March 2001, then the point
at March 2001 is the more recent one, and the part of the chart prior to
March 2001 would be before the study and the part after March 2001 would
be after the study.
The reason this is important to note is that it helps establish how good
the predictive power of the study is for that particular stock. The before
time is useful only insofar as determining how Fibonacci-friendly the stock
is, because the study could not have been laid down in this time period. In
other words, because the entire reference line could not have been drawn
until March 2001 had taken place, there would have been no Fibonacci
study in existence until that date, which means that it could not have been
used as a guide in trading.
After March 2001, however, the study could have been used, and that
time period is valid to consider how strong a predictor the study had been.
Study Figure 15.2, for instance. The reference line begins in autumn 1998
and ends in spring 2004. A thick vertical line has been drawn on this chart
to distinguish the area before the study (left of the line) and after the study
(right of the line).

Fibonacci Drawings

411

FIGURE 15.2 The areas highlighted with rectangles show just some of the many
instances where the price pauses or reverses based on the retracement level.

Rounded rectangles have been drawn on top of the chart to show areas where prices seem to cling to retracement levels. There are six clear
instances before the study where the prices did this, which indicates this
is a very Fibonacci-friendly chart. The eight highlighted areas to the right
of the line confirm that the predictive power of this study for this stock is,
as expected, quite strong. The conclusion is that, for this particular stock,
this retracement study has a lot of power, and it would be useful to leave
this study on the chart to anticipate future reversal points in the price
action.
Unlike the other drawn objects, which tend to be a single, simple line,
the Fibonacci studies draw relatively complex objects. In the case of a retracement, there are a number of pieces to the completed object. There
is the reference line, which you draw from one extreme to another. There
are the horizontal retracement lines, each of which can be the thickness
and pattern of your choice. And there are the price and percentage references that accompany each of the lines so you can see what price value and
percentage value each line has. You can control each of these elements to
achieve the appearance you want.

412

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 15.3 There are two extremes to drawing a retracement, and a dotted
line references the distance between these two points.

Figure 15.3 shows the lowest extreme of a Fibonacci retracement. You
can see the percentage (0.0 percent), the dollar price at that level ($1.65),
the horizontal line that constitutes the 0 percent level, and the dotted reference line, which extends diagonally.
Whether you want to see the reference line is up to you and is
controlled by the retracement preferences dialog box. Figure 15.4 shows a
stock with a retracement drawn and the reference line visible. The rounded
rectangles (which are drawn here for illustrative purposes and are not
normally displayed in the charting program) highlight the various turning
points in price that correspond to the retracement levels. Follow with
your eye the entire price move for this graph, and notice how powerful
the retracement levels are. You can appreciate what a good predictive tool
this can be if you look at all the turning and pausing points that follow the
reference line.
Figure 15.5 explicitly shows the motion from level to level with a series
of rectangles and arrows. Obviously, the price doesn’t move in a straight
line from one level to another. What it does do, though, is (1) bounce off,
(2) cling to, or (3) pierce each level. If you have a position in a stock, it pays
to carefully watch a chart as it nears a retracement level. Especially strong
(or weak, if moving downward) stocks will pierce the retracement without
hesitation. Otherwise, the retracement will represent a wall of support or
resistance to the price action, either repelling the price or at least stalling
it at that level.
