
From the April 2003 price low, U.S. Steel remained in a stable uptrend in its daily chart, which
meant that any pullback to the rising 20- or 50-period EMA, particularly if a reversal candle formed
at the level such as was the case in late September and October 2003, was a classic though generic
retracement buy setup.
However, the sharp impulse higher in late October and the respective pullback retracement to the
rising 20-period EMA in mid-November triggered the official Impulse Buy entry, which could also
be labeled a Bull Flag with similar parameters. Notice the strong up-swing in price that was
confirmed with a clean push to new highs in the 3/10 MACD Oscillator—this is the initial condition
that triggers an Impulse Buy setup.
A trader looks to buy shares when price retraces to the rising 20-period EMA, particularly if price
forms a reversal candle or breaks a short-term descending trendline. The trader would place a stop
tightly under the 20 EMA, though preferably in most cases under the rising 50-period EMA in the
context of a rising uptrend.
Though I did not draw a Fibonacci retracement grid, the respective Fibonacci retracement prices
from the $20.00 per share low of the impulse to the $25.00 high of the impulse rest at $22.83 for the
38.2 percent retracement, $22.24 for the 50 percent retracement, and $21.64 for the 61.8 percent
retracement. In this example, the best price to locate a stop for this trade with an entry at $22.50
would be either directly under the 61.8 percent retracement at $21.64 or under the rising 50-period
EMA just under $21.00 per share, which would place your stop safely under the 61.8 percent
Fibonacci retracement, rising 50-day EMA, and round number price value of $21.00, all of which

converge as expected support prices, though you would not want to continue holding long on a price
break under $21.00 per share.
In terms of entry, notice how price retraced in an ABC three-wave corrective fashion to the rising
20-period EMA support level. As price retraced to the 20-period EMA, two doji candles formed at
the support of the rising moving average. An aggressive trader would enter as close as possible to the
rising 20 EMA, and that entry is labeled on the chart with the letter A at $22.50 per share.
A conservative trader would demand that price rise upward off the 20 EMA and break the high of
the doji candles at $22.75, or break above the short-term falling trendline at $23.00. The conservative
entry is labeled on the chart with the letter C. Price officially broke and closed above both the doji
candle high and the falling trendline on November 24, 2003 at $23.20.
A conservative trader would play only for a retest of the prior swing high from early November at
$24.75 and may set a market or limit order to sell if price reached that prior high. However, an
aggressive trader would likely hold through the potential resistance in order to capture the full edge
possible from the trade setup.
Recall the momentum principle: it states that a new high is likely yet to come in price after a new
momentum and price high, not just a retest of a prior high. However, there are instances where price
will form a double-top and fail to overcome the resistance of the prior price high, thus a conservative
trader would be wise to exit there. An aggressive trader would monitor the price structure as it
approached the high, and hold on for a slightly larger target if price closed above resistance, as was
the case in U.S. Steel.
Look carefully after price rose above the $25.00 level in early December to note a negative
momentum divergence along with spinning top candles and a shooting star that closed just above
$26.00 per share. These chart developments are objective warning signs that price may be heading
lower soon in a standard downward retracement, at which time fade traders may be preparing to enter
a short-sale position to play for a quick retest of the rising 20-day EMA at $24.00 per share.
For reference, U.S. Steel continued higher after the end of the chart, and an aggressive trader would
have benefitted from that unexpected windfall profit, as price did not break or close under the lows of
the spinning top candles or shooting star candle, nor the rising trendline that began at the $23.00-pershare level that continued to $26.00. Remember, an aggressive trader desires to stay in a position for
as long as possible, and will exit when conditions and price structure dictate an exit, often in the form
not just of negative divergences or reversal candles, but a confirmed price break under a reversal
candle low or rising trendline.
The Impulse Sell trade is identical to the Impulse Buy trade, only the setup requires a downward
impulse in price, either from a downward break from a trading range or shorting the retracement up
after a downward impulse in the context of a confirmed downtrend.

Rules for the Impulse Buy Trade
An Impulse Buy seeks to capitalize on buying the initial pullback after price forms a new price and
momentum high after a sudden impulse swing in price. While the most common place to expect
support is the rising 20-period EMA, a trader can look to buy shares into a rising trendline or other
confluence support level.
1. Observe a clear impulse in price, which often consists of a string of powerful candles in
a row. Make sure the momentum oscillator also registers a new indicator high along with

the recent price impulse high, that can either originate from the break outside a trading
range or within the context of a confirmed or new uptrend.
2. Observe that price retraces downward to the rising 20-period EMA or other expected
support zone. You may also draw a Fibonacci Retracement grid from the impulse low to the
impulse high to obtain the retracement grid to fine-tune expected support. An impulse that
originates from a trading range may retrace to find support at the prior horizontal resistance
price, as prior resistance may become future support. For added confirmation, look for the
retracement phase to form an ABC corrective pattern.
3. An aggressive trader buys shares as soon as price touches the 20-period EMA or
alternate expected support price, while a conservative trader buys shares only after price
breaks above the high of a reversal candle or falling trendline that connects the highs of the
retracement period.
4. Traders place stops tightly under the 20-period EMA or more appropriately under the
50-period EMA in an uptrend, or under the prior support zone after a break from a trading
range. Traders may also draw a Fibonacci retracement grid to place a stop under the 61.8
percent retracement.
5. A conservative trader would target the most recent swing high only, exiting automatically
at that price, while an aggressive trader would expect price to make a new swing high
beyond that possible resistance level, and would sell if negative divergences formed and
price broke under a rising trendline or the low of a bearish reversal candle.

Rules for the Impulse Sell Trade
There is no structural difference between an Impulse Buy setup or an Impulse Sell setup. As a general
rule, prices tend to fall faster than they rise, so at times, a trader will need to act more quickly or
monitor positions more closely with an Impulse Sell trade, as price may hit or exceed a downside
sooner than expected when compared with an Impulse Buy trade.
1. Observe a clear impulse in price, which often consists of a string of powerful candles in
a row. Make sure the momentum oscillator also registers a new indicator low along with
the recent price impulse low that can either originate from the break down from a trading
range or within the context of a confirmed or new downtrend.
2. Observe that price retraces higher to the falling 20-period EMA or other expected
resistance zone. You may also draw a Fibonacci Retracement grid from the impulse high to
the impulse low to obtain the retracement grid to fine-tune expected resistance. An impulse
that originates from a trading range may retrace to find resistance at the prior horizontal
support price, as prior support may become future resistance. For added confirmation, look
for the retracement phase to form an ABC corrective pattern.
3. An aggressive trader sells shares short as soon as price touches the 20-period EMA or
alternate expected resistance price, while a conservative trader sells shares short only after
price breaks beneath the low of a reversal candle or rising trendline that connects the lows
of the retracement period.
4. Traders place stops tightly above the 20-period EMA or more appropriately above the
50-period EMA in a downtrend, or above the prior resistance zone after a break from a
trading range. Traders may also draw a Fibonacci retracement grid to place a stop above

the 61.8 percent retracement.
5. A conservative trader would target the most recent swing low only, exiting automatically
at that price, while an aggressive trader would expect price to make a new swing low under
that possible resistance level, and would buy to cover the short if positive divergences
formed and price broke above a rising trendline or the low of a bearish reversal candle.

USING MULTIPLE TIMEFRAMES TO ENTER AN
IMPULSE BUY TRADE
Traders who identify setups off the daily chart can benefit from precise execution into a trade setup by
studying the lower timeframe structure. In Figure 10.3, we had an Impulse Buy setup as price tested
the rising 20-day EMA at $22.50 per share after a clear impulse higher and retracement into support.
An aggressive trader would buy shares as soon as price touched the 20-day EMA at $22.50 and hold
to the target.
However, traders can take an extra step to gain perspective and assess the internal probabilities of
success by studying the intraday timeframe price structure. This insight allows a trader to enter at a
much more precise entry price while increasing confidence in a successful trade outcome, as well as
a more appropriate level to locate a stop-loss order.
Let us take the exact same parameters as in Figure 10.3, but then examine the structure of the 30minute intraday chart at the time of trade entry at $22.50 per share on November 20, 2003. This is
Step-Inside Analysis, and Figure 10.4 walks us inside the Impulse Buy setup to a much more precise
level.
FIGURE 10.4 “Step-Inside Analysis” in the Impulse Buy Entry in U.S. Steel: 30-minute chart—
November 2003

Figure 10.4 reveals the intraday structure through the duration of the Impulse Buy trade from the
daily chart of U.S. Steel. As a reference, the 20-day EMA at time of trade entry was $22.51, as
labeled with a horizontal line on the intraday chart. You can draw higher timeframe reference points,
such as moving averages or Fibonacci retracement prices, on to your intraday charts to see how price
reacts intraday to these levels.
In this example, the move in early November is the impulse high, and the move lower from
November 10 to 20 is the retracement phase prior to the buy signal in the Impulse Buy at the 20-day
EMA at $22.50. Look closely to see the ABC Elliott Wave correction, as labeled with the A Wave
lower that ended on November 12; B Wave higher that ended on November 14, and final C Wave
lower that ended on November 20.
The structure not just of the retracement swing becomes clearer, but also the lengthy multi-swing
positive momentum divergences and Rounded Reversal Price Pattern (also called a Saucer) that
ended with the horizontal support line at $22.50, which was the rising 20-day EMA. This is an
excellent lesson in how to identify structure on the lower timeframe that corresponds with an expected
support level from a higher timeframe (daily chart). Seeing the multi-swing positive momentum
divergence form intraday at the daily expected support from the 20-period EMA gives you added
confidence as a trader that you are doing the right thing by purchasing shares at the $22.50 level in
expectation for a trend reversal on the 30-minute chart to correspond with a move higher as you
expect on the daily chart.
Notice how conservative traders can pinpoint their exact entry by studying intraday price and
momentum structure in the context of the daily chart expectation. A trader who was hesitant about
purchasing shares aggressively at $22.50 could demand that the intraday price structure turn bullish,

or specifically, reverse officially into an uptrend on the intraday frame before entering.
Let us walk through the official steps as described in Chapters 1 and 9 in terms of an official trend
reversal. First, look for a multi-swing positive momentum divergence, which we can see was clearly
the case from November 19 forward; as price made new lows and supported at the $22.50 level, the
momentum oscillator clearly formed a series of higher lows. Then, early on the morning of November
21, price broke above both the 20- and 50-period EMAs for the first time since the B wave sudden
break. Price remained above the 20- and 50-period EMAs as these averages crossed bullishly into
the close of November 21.
Recall earlier from our discussion about the Cradle Trade setup: the sudden retracement into the
close on November 21 at the bullish crossover of the 20 and 50 EMA set up the Bullish Cradle Trade
officially at $22.80 per share. On the morning of November 24, price surged higher in a gap and
impulse higher to the $23.40 level. Look very closely at the 3/10 MACD Momentum oscillator to
recognize this new oscillator high, exceeding that of November 14, as a Kickoff, which signals a
likely reversal in trend.
Look even closer to see that the pullback to the 20- and 50-period EMA toward the end of the
session on November 24 was a tiny Impulse Buy trade setup. Yes, there can be smaller Impulse Buy
setups on the intraday frames within the context of a daily chart Impulse Buy—this is described as the
fractal component of the market. Bull flags can trigger setups for intraday traders during the Measured
Move portion of a daily chart Bull Flag, which is in essence what we have in this example of U.S.
Steel.
On November 25, price officially completed a full intraday trend reversal after forming a lengthy
positive momentum divergence, breaking above the 20/50 EMA levels, witnessing a bullish cross of
the 20/50 EMAs, forming a Kickoff signal in momentum, and forming a higher price high at $23.40,
higher price low at $22.90, then taking out the prior price high at $23.40 on November 25. Notice that
each subsequent new price high and new momentum high from November 24 forward generated a new
and successful Impulse Buy trade setup on each pullback to the 20- or 50-period EMA.
As price retested the visual chart high from the prior impulse at $24.60, a conservative trader
would exit the position established at the $23.00 level, locking in a quick profit and end to the daily
chart Impulse Buy trade. However, as we see on both the daily chart at this time and the 30-minute
intraday chart, odds favored a continuation move through the overhead resistance, meaning an
aggressive trader could have held shares through the prior price high at $23.00. The trader would then
monitor both the daily and intraday chart closely for any sign of reversal, which would emerge first in
the intraday chart in the form of a negative divergence, confirmed trendline break, or EMA trend
reversal. We see none of these structures forming, and in fact end the chart on November 26 with
price rising rapidly in a powerful confirmed trend impulse after forming a recent new momentum
high, which favors even higher prices yet to come.

MORE ABOUT MULTI-TIMEFRAME ANALYSIS
All of the principles and trade setups I have discussed in this book are applicable to traders of all markets on all timeframes.
The wise traders, however, will take the time to do the extra analysis on multiple timeframes to combine these principles
and setups.
Traders can practice this by predicting what will happen for the next likely swing in price on the daily chart and then play
out that prediction or thesis with precise execution tactics on the intraday timeframes. In other words, if a trader observes
an Impulse Buy setting up on the daily chart, he can then drop to monitor the intraday chart, such as the 60-minute, 30minute, or 15-minute chart to assess what the structure reveals to him, specifically in terms of trend continuity versus

reversal, momentum divergences present, or any established trading ranges or intraday support or resistance levels to
watch.
Furthermore, most traders are better off adopting a strict method of interpreting multiple timeframes rather than trying to
analyze all timeframes at once. If you are undisciplined in your multi-timeframe analysis, you will find that the weekly chart
is setting up a sell-signal while the daily chart shows price at a support zone, but the intraday charts reveal their own
conflicting or confusing signals. Analyzing all timeframes for a single trade is like having too many indicators on the chart at
once; you get so much information, but most of it conflicts and confuses you to the point where you take no position at all.
Specialize the core of your analysis on one timeframe, perhaps the daily chart, and then the moment you see a trade setup
or suspected opportunity, drop down either to the 60-minute (hourly) chart or the 30-minute chart to study afresh the
structure that appears before you on the intraday chart. Remember the context and your thought process from your
analysis on the intraday chart and note confirmations or conflicting signals. Take trades when the two timeframes align and
signal a safe pathway forward for price, and be risk averse when the timeframes conflict.
At times in your analysis, look at key levels to watch on the timeframe higher than your core frame, which might be the
weekly chart if you focus on the daily chart. Do not do in-depth analysis on the higher timeframe, but only note key price
levels, trend structure, and any insights from momentum you may derive.
You can think of your chosen timeframe as your home base upon which you do most of your chart work, and then your
lower timeframe as seen with a magnifying glass where you study closely and then execute your positions. This is similar to
a jeweler who first examines the characteristics of a diamond by holding in the hand, but then executes precise cuts on the
diamond only through a specialized magnifying glass. Your higher timeframe can be like climbing a mountain to see what is
going on around you, so that you can see the broader perspective you miss just by looking at the environment from your
back yard.
Traders who specialize on the daily chart can climb to see the higher perspective of the weekly or monthly chart, but only
as a guidepost for long-term trend and volatility structure. You want to be aware specifically if your daily chart calls for an
immediate buy signal that looks clear on the daily chart, but has a confluence resistance area overhead perhaps from the
20-week moving average and a prior price high from two years ago, neither of which you will be able to see on the daily
chart.
You might want to pause in entering your trade to make sure that buyers can clear above the higher timeframe resistance
before you put on a bullish trade. The buyers may not be able to overcome the sellers from the higher timeframe structure,
and thus you would endure a losing trade that you could have prevented had you taken at least a quick look at key levels to
watch on the higher timeframe.
Day traders might specialize on the five-minute chart and use the one-minute chart specifically for execution, in terms of
entering a trade setup observed on the five-minute chart only when price breaks a trendline on the one-minute chart, or
drop to the one-minute chart to see momentum divergences clearly that might not be so evident on the five-minute
structure. Intraday traders will always need to know of key levels to watch and structure from the daily chart, particularly if
price is about to test a major daily moving average or other well-known support or resistance price.
It's smart to gain experience with the principles and concepts that appear on one timeframe before incorporating your
findings into higher or lower timeframes. Remember, the principles, setups, and strategies work on all timeframes, so it is
just a matter of learning the principles and then applying them for enhanced execution of your trades. This will allow you to
find the lower and higher timeframes for any hidden levels of support or resistance you would have missed if you had only
analyzed your chosen timeframe.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
The Impulse Buy, Impulse Sell, and the Cradle Trades are only some of the many trade setups you can
discover and incorporate into your own personalized trading plan. When creating your own trade
setups, be sure you base them firmly on at least one of the three guiding price principles defined in
Chapters 1 through 3. From there, you can enhance your setup with the strategies and techniques
described in Chapters 4 through 7, specifically in regard to candlesticks, price patterns (more
numerous than this book can define), Fibonacci principles (that extend beyond simple retracements),
and Elliott Wave concepts (that appear on all timeframes).

If you can combine more than one price principle, you will increase your chance of a successful
trade outcome. Notice how the Cradle Trade incorporates elements from the Momentum Principle and
Trend Continuity Principle, namely in momentum divergences and weight of the evidence in assessing
a trend reversal. The Cradle Trade also incorporates the positive elements of precise stop-losses
from general retracement strategies with the larger target provided by trend reversal strategies.
Similarly, the Impulse Buy incorporates both the Momentum and Trend Continuity Principle as an
enhanced Retracement trading strategy. These two specific setups go beyond the basic definitions of
retracement, reversal, or breakout trades, and add parameters that must trigger before entering a
position. As you develop your experience as a trader, you will create your own setups from your past
trading performance and observations.
Treat each day as a learning experience. While we often learn more from our losing trades, be sure
to reinforce what you did right for your winning trades. Do more of what works for you personally,
and less of what does not; do not try to be a type of trader that you are not.
Seek strategies that align with your talents, skills, and market opportunities, as explained by Dr.
Brett Steenbarger in his essential reading for new traders entitled Enhancing Trader Performance
and his more specific book on coaching entitled The Daily Trading Coach. Read and re-read
Trading in the Zone by Mark Douglas, as he teaches how to think in terms of probabilities along with
how important it is to perceive the market not as a scary entity, but as an object of endless
possibilities. Knowing setups is only one part of the journey; incorporating them within a framework
of your own unique personality, talents, and skills is the next step.
Learn something new from all of your trades, especially the losing ones. Learn what went wrong
and if the loss was a result of standard probability in a good setup (the loss was not your fault), or if
your emotions degraded the edge of the opportunity (the loss was your fault).
I hope that I have broadened your awareness to foundation price principles and given you a solid
boost in your education as a trader. I hope also that you accept the challenge to think critically about
why you take the trades you do and why they have edge.
Use your new knowledge to base your decisions more on the chart structure as you understand it and
less from your emotions, though that is much more difficult than it seems. Seek to sustain the initial
excitement and motivation that you have or had as a new trader; if you feel as though you are losing
motivation as a trader, return to the feeling of wonder you had when you first began and recall the
thrill of your first profitable trade.
Keep moving forward, keep focused on the larger concepts beyond your next trade, and keep up
your motivation that will carry you through your learning curve and the bumpy patches along the road.
Every step brings you closer to your goal, and every day is a new day to achieve your lifelong goal of
becoming the most successful trader you can possibly be.
