
What Day Trading Is All About
Day traders try to fashion a career out of buying and selling stocks quickly
throughout the day. A certain amount of day trading is critical to maintaining
the liquidity of the stock market, because the techniques they use keep the
market moving. They’re known as institutional day traders — specialists and
market makers.

274 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Retail day traders, on the other hand, are a different bunch. They make
dozens or even hundreds of trades a day, but they also close out all their
positions at the end of each day. Retail day traders use technological developments that first became available in the late 1990s to get in on the action
that used to be the sole province of the institutional day traders.

Institutional day traders (market
makers and specialists)
Specialists, who may soon take on the title of market makers, are a critical
part of the New York and American stock exchanges. All are members of an
exchange either as an individual, a partnership, or part of a corporation.
They’re responsible for making markets in certain exchange-traded securities, maintaining inventories of the securities for which they’re responsible,
and making sure the market for those securities is orderly.
Market makers play a critical role in maintaining the liquidity and efficiency
of NASDAQ-listed stocks and stocks that are sold over-the-counter and not
listed in a particular market. They’re usually part of a brokerage firm or bank
that facilitates the buying and selling of stocks in these markets. A market
maker must be ready to buy and sell stock on a regular and continual basis.
More than 500 firms operate as NASDAQ market makers.
Specialists and market makers trade into and out of positions throughout the
day, often executing orders in a matter of seconds. We discuss these types of
traders in greater detail in Chapter 2.

Retail day traders
Retail day traders try to make money in a totally different way. The playing field of day trading opened for retail day traders in the late 1990s when
computer software was developed that enabled individual investors to have
direct access to securities markets in ways that previously were only technologically available to licensed and registered professionals. We talk more
about licensing and registration in Chapter 20. Today, regulators believe
retail day traders are responsible for about a third of NASDAQ’s trading
volume. Although stocks listed on the NASDAQ are a common choice for day
traders, the preferred trading platform for most day traders is the electronic
communications network, or ECN, because being connected to the markets in
this manner makes becoming the highest bid or lowest ask price easier than
doing so via directly trading on the NASDAQ (see Chapter 2). Since the NYSE
bought ARCA (an ECN), the difference between NASDAQ and listed stock
has shrunk, and we’re now seeing significant day trading volume on both
NASDAQ and NYSE stocks.

Chapter 17: The Basics of Day Trading
It’s all about access
Brokerage firms that promote day trading provide their customers with realtime links to the major stock markets and the NASDAQ system, which, in
turn, gives them information not readily available to average retail investors.
Brokerages also provide customers direct entry into their order-processing
systems. This direct access enables day traders to send their orders to a
particular market or market maker and to determine the order route — a
task that only licensed professionals previously were able to accomplish.
Although other online and traditional brokerage houses may provide realtime quotation information, they don’t offer their customers linkages to
markets and market makers. Instead, some have preset algorithms that determine where a customer’s order is routed for execution, which may or may
not be the cheapest way to go. Many times the algorithms are set based on
trading agreements among firms without regard to cost effectiveness.
Why does direct access matter so much? Speed and, again we say, speed!
Systems that provide more and more direct access give day traders the
opportunity to execute their trades within seconds. In addition, by using
a more direct route, traders can choose market makers whose bid or ask
prices look the best and fill their orders instantly.
Traders also can post bid or ask prices directly on an ECN, or they cancel
orders with the click of a button, all because they have direct access. When
establishing a position using a limit order through a traditional online broker,
traders must fill out another ticket to cancel their trades, and under those
circumstances, they can’t know whether their orders have been filled until
they receive a trade or cancel confirmation.
Day traders aren’t looking to make a large profit on one huge sale every day,
but instead they seek smaller profits on much more frequent changes in the
positions they establish during the day. Mere seconds are critical when you’re
trying to get in and out of a position, trying to make money on small stock
price differences that may be much less than a single point, which, in trading
lingo, translates to a dollar in the nontrading world. Although swing traders
and position traders seek profits of several points (dollars) with each position
they enter, day traders may exit their position after earning a profit of only
a few cents. Traders usually buy or sell at least 1,000 shares at a time, so 25
cents translates into a $250 profit for every 1,000 shares traded. Note: In only a
matter of seconds, what looked like a good price to a day trader can be lost.
By controlling where their orders are sent, day traders also gain better control over the costs of their trades. One of the ways that some traditional
brokers make money on trades they execute for customers is charging a fee
called a payment for order flow. These fees can be a penny or more per share
of stock, providing something of a kickback to the brokerage house and
enabling deep discount brokerages to charge smaller upfront commissions
that barely cover the cost of their trades. Although online discount brokers
send trades to particular markets or market makers through which they’ve

275

276 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
established trading deals, day traders have the inside information to select
the routes that give them the best prices.

Day-trading firms
In addition to direct access, day-trading firms provide (for a fee of course)
their customers with training in how to participate in this rapid-fire, pricesensitive buying and selling and then encourage their trainees to use their
strategies and their software. These firms developed proprietary software
and systems that day traders use to analyze and chart activity and execute
orders. This software usually is available only at on-site trading facilities or
downloadable to your computer rather than being used through Web sites.
Day trading through a Web site isn’t usually done, because the added seconds
it takes to download price information and then send back an order is likely
to result in the loss of your order to some other trader. Even when a trader
has high-speed Internet access, too much time can be spent waiting for pages
to load and sending orders. So to be successful, day traders need the instant
access they get through proprietary software.
Day-trading firms are organized in one of two ways — as traditional brokerdealers (day traders open accounts with the firm and trade using their own
accounts) or as proprietary trading firms (or a prop firm for short) that either
sell interest in the firms to traders who want to day trade or hire traders as
independent contractors. Typically, a proprietary trading firm is organized as
a limited liability company (LLC), which is a corporate structure used to minimize the legal exposure of the firm. LLCs are not a separate entity for tax purposes, but still enjoy many of the legal protections offered to C Corporations.
You can find a directory of proprietary trading firms at Traders Log (www.
traderslog.com/proprietarytradingfirms.htm). Some of these firms
offer stock trading, and others focus on futures and options trading.
As part owners or contractors rather than customers, day traders are associated with the firm, and as such, they can trade using a portion of the firm’s
capital. Most of these arrangements require traders to put up at least $25,000
to buy in. More often, however, the buy-in required is closer to $100,000.
This arrangement enables day traders to use much more leverage than traditional broker-dealer arrangements, where borrowing on margin is limited
to amounts held in individual traders’ accounts under Regulation T margin
requirements. We explain how margin accounts work in Chapter 14. In addition to buying into the LLC, traders for these firms also are required to get
a Series 7 license, and some firms require Series 55 and Series 63 licenses,
which we discuss in Chapter 20.

Chapter 17: The Basics of Day Trading

Understanding Account Restrictions
Regulation T is one of the key restrictions in the SEC arsenal of tools for controlling day trading. Rules related to the settlement of stock transactions and
borrowing from others to meet margin requirements also limit what day traders can do.

The Fed’s Regulation T:
Margin requirements
The world of day trading became much more restricted in August 2001 when
the SEC approved amendments to Regulation T that focus on pattern day
traders. Your broker and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)
consider you a pattern day trader whenever you buy and sell (or short and
cover) any security on the same day within a margin account four or more
times during any rolling five-day period. Days when the markets are closed —
Saturday, Sunday, and market holidays — are not included when calculating
the rolling five-day period.
After you’re designated a pattern day trader, you’re required to maintain a
minimum of $25,000 of equity in your margin account before you’re ever permitted to do any more day trading. For most day traders, that means having
at least $25,000 in cash at the end of every trading day. This limitation can
impact other investing activities in your account, so if you’re considering
day trading, be sure to talk with your broker to gain an understanding of the
impact that margin account minimums have on other stock transactions you
may want to make within your account.
After you’ve been designated as a pattern day trader and maintain the
$25,000 minimum in your margin account, you’re entitled to borrow up to
four times any amount you maintain in your margin account. For example, if
you maintain $50,000 in your account, this gives you up to $200,000 of daytrading buying power. But remember, this extra buying power is limited only
to intraday trades. If you hold positions overnight, you cannot take advantage of the day-trading margin when opening a position. You must adhere to
the traditional 50 percent initial margin requirements.
Typically, day traders are flat, or back into a cash position by the end of the
trading day for all day trades; otherwise, you risk a margin call (see Chapter
14). Whenever your day-trading activities result in a margin call, you have
five days to deposit cash or securities in your account to meet the call. If
you fail to meet the margin call, your account will be restricted to traditional
margin requirements.

277

278 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Although brokerage firms are not required to monitor whether day-trading
accounts fall below the $25,000 minimum throughout a given trading day,
customers must cover any losses incurred in their accounts from the previous day’s trades before they’re allowed to continue day trading. If a day
trader exceeds the four times-leverage rule during the day, a brokerage firm
can impose additional restrictions on the account to protect itself from additional risk and prevent any recurrences of such activities.
Members of FINRA are required to issue day-trading margin calls to pattern day traders who exceed their day-trading buying power. Traders then
have five days to meet these calls. Until a margin call is met, the day-trading
account’s buying power is restricted to traditional margin requirements,
which allows the day trader to leverage equity only two times. For example,
if a day trader has $50,000 of equity, but the account is restricted due to
exceeding buying power constraints, the day-trading buying power is only
$100,000. These stricter requirements begin on the trading day after buying
power is exceeded and stay in place until the trader either meets the call by
depositing the necessary cash or securities or until five business days have
passed. After five business days have passed and the day trader still has not
met the call, the day trader is limited to trading only on a cash-available basis
for 90 days or until the call is met.
Traders can’t meet the call and then just take the money right out again.
Funds deposited to meet the call must be left in the account for at least two
business days. Traders also can’t use cross-guarantees (guarantees from third
parties) for the margin call. The cash or securities must be deposited directly
in the account.

Settlement: No free rides
An official stock transaction is settled three days after the date of the trade,
meaning that day traders frequently are buying and selling stocks before
their transactions are officially settled. Day traders can’t free ride, meaning
they can’t buy a security and sell it an hour later without first having enough
funds to cover the settlement of the initial trade. If a trader buys a stock or
other security, he or she must have the funds to cover the initial trade even if
the security is sold for a profit within the same day.
A margin account with leverage of four times excess equity is what enables
day traders to get around this rule. To play within these rules, all the trader
needs to have is sufficient cash to pay for the shares or sufficient reserve in
his or her margin account. Brokers can restrict use of margin funds for three
days until a stock transaction is settled, but they’re not required to do so.
Before trading, be sure that you understand the restrictions your broker
imposes on margin accounts related to stock transaction settlements. The
settlement time for options is the next day, as opposed to the three-day

Chapter 17: The Basics of Day Trading
waiting period for stocks. To trade using options, funds must be in the
account before you place the trade or you’ll be stuck wiring funds around,
which can add plenty to the costs of your trading.

Strategies for Successful Day Trading
As mentioned throughout this chapter, day traders trade stocks in lots of
1,000 shares or more, putting large portions of cash at risk with every trade.
Although the profit potential is great, so is the risk of losing all your money
and maybe even owing money if you use borrowed cash in your margin
account.
Before you ever consider day trading, you need to understand the risks you’re
taking and how to control them. Otherwise, money can flow out of your
account very quickly. Studies show that it generally takes six months to learn
how to be a successful day trader, and during that learning curve, you can
count on losing money. Success rates of day traders range from 10 percent to
30 percent of those who try it. In other words, 70 percent to 90 percent of the
people who attempt day trading don’t succeed and frequently end their daytrading careers in debt. We explain more about risks in the “Risks Are High;
Rewards Can Be Too” section, later in the chapter, but first we need to review
some of the basic strategies that day traders use.

Technical needs
Number one on the list of things you need to become a day trader is a very
good computer and Internet setup. They’re necessary for successful day trading. Most traders have two or more monitors with a PC built to handle a large
number of data feeds at one time. Windows XP or Vista are the preferred platforms of day traders, because most of the trading platforms are written for
these environments and because they’re able to handle multiple monitors.
Daily computer maintenance is critical for day traders. Computer problems
are the last thing you want to experience in the middle of your trading day,
especially when buy positions are left open. You can lose a lot of money if
you’re waiting for your computer to reboot and a trade goes sour. Traders
recommend that you clear the cookies (files that Web sites send to your
computer when you’re using them) from your Internet cache on a daily basis
and that you defragment (reorganize your files so the computer runs more
efficiently) your computer at least once a week.
Another key step is finding an Internet service provider (ISP) that is reliable
and offers high-speed access to the Internet. Many traders have more than
one ISP lined up, so they have a backup in case the first one goes down.

279

280 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Again, you don’t want to lose even mere seconds when you’re in the middle
of your trading day, especially when you have open positions.

Trading patterns
Day traders make use of patterns seen in technical analysis that are similar to
the ones we discuss in Part III of this book. One common pattern that day traders look for is a price gap in a stock at the opening of the market. They find that
prices usually move in the same direction as the opening price gap during the
first few minutes that the market is open and then the market tends to reverse
and fill the gap (see Chapter 10). Trading that doesn’t fill the gap during the
first five to ten minutes can signal a dominant trend for the day for that particular stock. Some traders watch this action to find their targets for the day and
the directions they plan to play them. There is no consensus on this, of course.
Others believe early market moves give false signals and that using those
moves for planning your trading day can be dangerous.
Traders watch for many of the same patterns they find when looking for
breakout signals and signs of reversals (see Chapter 10). The key difference
is that a day trader looks for intraday signals, while longer-term traders
format their charts for longer periods of time.

Scalping
Scalping basically means you move in and out of a position for a very limited
profit in an extremely short time frame, usually just a few minutes or possibly only a few seconds. The scalper’s objective is to make profits of only
fractions of a point on any given trade, rather than the several points profit
that most traders seek. Day traders execute their trades in a much narrower
time frame, so scalpers look for only 10 to 25 cents per share, hoping to make
small gains as often as possible. When scalping with higher-priced ($100
or more per share) or faster-moving stocks, one point can be considered a
scalp.
For most stocks, scalping doesn’t pay if you trade fewer than 1,000 shares.
Here’s why: A 10-cent scalping profit on 1,000 shares is only $100, before
paying transaction fees or commissions. There will be little profit after fees
and commissions if you’re trading lots with fewer than 1,000 shares.

Trend traders
Not all day traders use the scalping technique. Some are trend traders.
Instead of jumping in and out of a trade for a fraction of a point, they look for

Chapter 17: The Basics of Day Trading
profits of at least one or two points and may stay in a position for minutes
or even as long as an hour. Trend traders make fewer trades than scalpers,
but seek higher profits per trade and may trade in blocks of less than 1,000
shares, because they can make a nice profit as trend traders with considerably less share volume. In fact, traders who look for more than a one-point
profit sometimes hold a stock for several hours, unless the stock is high
priced or its price is moving fast.

Risks Are High; Rewards Can Be Too
Reading about trading patterns and the high volume of stock trading, you’ve
probably already figured out for yourself that the risks are high. Within a
matter of minutes, trading in and out of stocks in 1,000-share blocks can be
costly whenever a stock quickly moves in a direction you weren’t anticipating.
In fact, the U.S. Senate investigated the risks of day trading after a shooting
spree at an on-site day-trading facility in Atlanta, Georgia, left nine people
dead in July 1999. The shooter, Mark Barton, was a chemist before getting
involved in day trading and losing $105,000 in just one month. He killed himself after the shooting spree.
Senate investigators found that the revenue of the 15 largest firms that
specialize in day trading for 1999 was $541.5 million, or 276 percent higher
than their revenue in 1997. Profits went up by more than $66 million, and by
1999, the 15 firms had opened 12,000 new accounts. Investigators also found
that the 4,000 to 5,000 most active traders were borrowing huge sums of
money and losing it. In that year traders paid an average of $16 per trade and
made an average of 29 trades per day. Using these statistics, investigators
concluded that a trader needed to make more than $111,000 a year in stock
market gains just to break even with that level of costs.
A second study, released in May 2004 by university professors who looked at
day traders on the Taiwan Stock Exchange, found that 82 percent of traders
lost money. Some may profit most days, but end up in a losing position after
calculating costs of operations.

