
CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

77

exist at that moment. This only means that nobody is agreeing to effect a
transaction at any price between those levels. Spreads and slippage are a natural part of the trading scene and are the result of agreements or refusal to
transact between market participants and thus are impossible to avoid.

PAPER TRADING
A FOREX demo account is basically a practice account that allows traders
to use virtual credits instead of real money, but with actual real-time price
feeds and conditions, on the FOREX market. It is important for every individual who wishes to invest in the currency markets to acquire a solid
grounding in basic financial concepts and to learn as much as possible
about technical and fundamental analysis. Then practice as needed to apply
this knowledge in a live situation to make sure that it is understood.
Paper trading (or demo trading) is often overlooked because most
traders are impatient to jump into the market and gain their first real-money
profits. However, nobody should be trading with real money until they have
at least obtained good results consistently in their demo account with realtime conditions (not only backtesting).
Of course, being able to get excellent results on paper trading will not
guarantee that you will have the same outcome when you are trading with
real money because the emotional part of trading doesn’t show up (or at
least not at the same level) until you are using real money. However, you
will be able to determine if your strategy or system works and gauge its
probabilities while you learn all the mechanical details of the platform.
This is very important because not every trading software system offers the
exact same features, and styles of trading allowed will differ a little from
one broker to another.
All retail brokers allow their potential customers to test their platforms,
some for a limited time and others with no limited. Precise knowledge of
the software is needed to be able to act as fast as possible and avoid making
mistakes. I have integrated a demo account into my AI software platforms
to help achieve a more realistic trading environment.
You also can experiment with various trading styles and different brokers in different time zones, test various systems simultaneously, and
define more precisely the trading style that suits you best. There also are
different styles of platforms. Some you can access directly online; others
need to be downloaded to your computer. Most of them integrate news
and charting packages in addition to the price feed, as well as a history

78

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

and reports of your trading activities. It is a good idea to try several of
them so that you can master all the different mechanics. For example,
some allow you to place contrary orders on the same currency pair,
whereas others use those contrary orders to close an existing position.
Some require a single margin or even no margin on two contrary positions, whereas others require a margin guarantee on both the long and
short trades. With certain platforms, you will be able to do a stop and
reverse with just one click by opening a contrary position of double the
value of your existing position or plan a detailed sequence of interdependent orders to be executed if the first condition is met, whereas others
won’t have this feature.
With my AI software, I have had the luxury of thousands of traders over
the years providing feedback as to what features they like and don’t like,
what enhancements increase the efficiency of the platform, etc. This has
allowed me to build what I believe to be the single best, most robust and
flexible trading station on the market. If you want to learn more about it,
you can visit www.JamesDicks.com.
The following are the basic questions you should ask before you
attempt to trade live with your own real money on any platform:
1. How do I to place a market order?
2. How do I place a pending order (buy/sell limit or buy/sell stop)?
3. How do I set a stop loss?
4. Are automated trailing stops available, and if so, are they on my side
or the server’s side?
5. Can the target profit and stop loss be set at the moment of the entry,
or do they have to be set afterwards?
6. Are the spreads on the platform fixed or variable, and if so, what is
the usual range?
7. What are the swaps (overnight interest) earned or paid on open
positions that last more than 24 hours?
8. What is the lot size that can be traded (standard, mini, micro,
or nanolots)?
9. Can partial lot sizes be used (e.g., 0.45 microlots, 1.2 lots, etc.)?
10. Does the broker offer the possibility of calling the dealing room
directly by phone if my Internet connection goes down?
11. Is live support available?

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

79

12. Are the trading history and reports clear enough to be used afterwards
for tax purposes? Although this is a responsibility of the trader, you
should be able to get manageable reports under the point of view
of accounting.

DISADVANTAGES OF DEMO TRADING
Most of the real circumstances of trading can be easily overlooked when
you are paper trading. Unless you commit yourself to treat your demo
account in the same way as you would a real-money account with the same
set of rules and discipline and a starting capital that is proportional to the
one you will be using when you switch to a real account, the following are
the most common pitfalls that you might face:
1. Careless handling of real risks. Losses that you may incur are not real
losses, so you won’t be able to learn to deal with your real emotions
when facing a loss.
2. No fear is involved. Whenever you start losing, and even if you get a
margin call on a demo account, you simply can start a new one all
over. So you won’t be able to learn how to handle the fear of losing,
which is a very powerful emotion in real trading.
3. No real commitment to develop a concise money management. Since
you can chose to trade with any huge amount, you could be tempted
to take excessive risks because, in the end, it is not real money, and
you could develop a bad habit that will continue when you start on a
live account.
4. You can develop greed. Given the great amounts that can be involved
in a demo account and the larger position sizes that you can trade
because of this, if you start making lots of money, you could become
greedy and be under its control.
To avoid those pitfalls, you must trade on a demo as if it were real money.
For example, if you are planning to start trading live with equity of $2,000,
open a demo account with that same amount of funds. Trading a higher
amount would be fun and boost your ego for a while, but it wouldn’t be
applicable thereafter to real life. Add to this the fact that you might lose
your sense of proportion and make huge mistakes afterwards.
Paper trading should be just for learning purposes. It’s also a good way
to test a system or strategy to see if it really works before going live with it
and losing your money. Keep in mind that if you are unable to produce

80

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

acceptable gains on a demo account, chances are that you won’t on a realmoney account either. The good part of a demo account is that you can
make all the mistakes you need to acquire experience and confidence,
which you then will be able to apply under real conditions.
FOREX demo accounts are also very useful for experienced traders,
who employ them to bring their trading strategies to perfection, test new
changes without risking funds, or practice a new system while evaluating
its results in total safety.

C

H

6

A

P

T

E

R

HOW TO KEEP YOUR
PROFITS
MONEY MANAGEMENT
A good understanding and handling of money management is the key to a
successful career as a FOREX trader. Although you don’t need to have a
master’s in economics and finance to be able to trade and earn a profitable
income from your trading activities, a certain degree of financial education
assuredly is an asset. This is why I am writing this book and what my organization really does. We provide education, training, and support. There are
simply not enough places to go to learn such things as trading the FOREX.
Actually, if primary education were even a little geared toward some sort of
basic financial education, maybe we would all be a little better off.
Understanding what lies beneath price movements, how the market is
structured, what the exchanges of foreign currencies are designed to satisfy
in the current economy of the world, why and how currency values change,
and how those changes affect overall political and economical stability is
basic knowledge that has to be acquired. In particular, a thorough understanding of the spread and bid and ask prices and how they interact and the
implications of trading on margin is needed to establish and implement a
sound set of rules for money management of your own trading account.
As you have seen before, the bid-ask spread is the difference between
the price at which a currency pair is offered to be sold and the price at
which it is actually purchased. If the ask or offer price is $10 and the bid is

81

82

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

$12, you get a $2 difference, which is the spread. When you are trading on
margin, you are buying and selling currency pairs for a much higher value
than the money you have in your account. The margin can be so small
because the exchange rates don’t usually move beyond 2 percent of their
value. This capability, or leverage, allows traders to obtain great profits in
a small time span, but this also represents a high risk. With proper money
management, you can effectively manage this risk.
If you want to invest in speculative activities, the most important thing
to consider is that you should only use risk capital, that is, money that you
don’t need for your daily expenses or other projects, money that you can
afford to lose should problems arise.
Never invest what you can’t afford to lose. If you don’t have the necessary starting capital all at once, set aside a small portion that you will dedicate solely to FOREX trading. In fact, even if you have a fair amount of
money available to assign to your trading, break it into equal portions, and
use only one portion at a time. In this way, if things go wrong, you still have
another portion to start over, and your risks are minimized. Trading is not
gambling. Despite the high leverages available, where you can risk all your
account and reap a handsome profit, this would be based on luck, and luck
is for gamblers. Trading is a business, and as such, it has to be undertaken
with clear goals and asset administration.
As soon as you decide to get into real-money trading, and assuming
that you have already spent a few months paper trading on a demo account,
you should carefully examine what your goals are, how much money you
can expect to earn based on your capital, and above all, whether your goals
are realistic. Make sure that your expectations are realistic and based on the
real experiences of people you can trust.
The first step in real-money trading should be to open a small test
account with little money thus little risk. Try a mini account or, better, a
micro account, where you can open positions and trade for 1 cent a pip.
This seem like a ridiculously small amount, but remember that you are still
learning, and you need to make sure that your profits are stable and consistent before increasing your capital and position sizes.
A final word about capitalization: Many people are attracted to
FOREX trading because it offers them the dream of starting a home-based
business and a chance to be their own bosses and quit a probably boring day
job. How many businesses can you start without initial working capital? If
you are thinking of getting a steady monthly income from your FOREX
activities, you have to prepare the ground very well from the start. Plan all
the steps to get to your goal because this will not happen overnight.
Remember, we’re not in this to be lucky but to be successful!

CHAPTER 6

HOW TO KEEP YOUR PROFITS

83

How much startup capital do I have? How much do I need for my living
expenses? How much time do I need to practice, learn, apply, and obtain
profits from my trading system in a consistent and steady manner? All this
has to be taken into account. Write down your plans and goals, with precise
schedules and numbers. Remember to be realistic in your expectations. A
high percentage of return is possible in some months but will not last over
time. A small and steady increase will last longer. Anything on the order of 2
to 5 percent a month is fairly possible to obtain with discipline and good
money management. This would represent about 0.1 to 0.25 percent daily
profits, which is achievable. Use the power of compounding: 5 percent a
month represents 60 percent a year, noncompounded, and 80 percent if you
compound the profits made monthly. Remember the rule of 72: 20 percent
doubles your investment in 3.6 years, and 40 percent doubles your investment
in 1.8 years. Pick a realistic return-on-investment goal for you, and stick to it.

A SIMPLE CALCULATOR
This is a simple calculator that you can build in any spreadsheet application
that will help you to determine the appropriate stops, targets, and riskreward management based on your specific plan and risk appetite. It is
composed of five variable cells, with their respective descriptions, where
you will introduce values based on different situations, and seven fixed formula result cells, with descriptions, that will give you the lot size for the
trade, the value per pip, the amount of maximum loss, and the price at
which to set the stops and targets for both short and long positions depending on the actual price that you will have entered above.
A
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
A8
A9
A10
A11
A12

Account
Risk %
Actual Price
SL (pips)
R/R
Trade Size (lots)
PIP Value
Max Loss
SL Buy
SL Sell
TP Buy
TP Sell

B
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10
B11
B12

1,000.00
2%
1.4500
50
1:5
0.04
$0.10
$20.00
1.4450
1.4550
1.4575
1.4425

84

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Let’s assume that you are working with columns A and B and cells A1
to B12. Column A is for the descriptions, as follows:
Account ⫽ account equity (not to confuse with account balance
because positions should be calculated with respect to the net
equity remaining in the account).
Risk % ⫽ risk percentage (which should be in a 1 to 3 percent range
as a maximum for ideal money management).
Actual price ⫽ the actual price of the currency pair.
SL ⫽ stop loss (the number of pips or points needed depending on
your strategy and time frame).
R/R ⫽ risk/reward (the ratio between risk and reward you would like
to apply to your trade. For example, 1:5 would be a reward that is
50 percent higher than the risk; that is, in the case of a 50-pip stop
loss, you would need a 75-pip target profit).
The remaining descriptions will have fixed formulas: Cells B6 to B12
won’t be changeable after the calculator is built.
Trade size ⫽ size (in lots, mini lots, or microlots; you can configure
the formula to show as integers or decimals at will). In the figure
shown, size is in microlots, namely, 0.04 lot, and the result is
obtained by multiplying the pip value by 10. The formula is the
next B cell (“Pip value”) divided by 10.
Pip value ⫽ value per pip on that particular currency pair for
the trade size (in the figure it is calculated with a fixed $10 per
standard lot, $0.10 per microlot). The formula is account
equity times risk percent divided by stop loss, or B1 times B2
divided by B4.
Max loss ⫽ maximum amount of loss expressed in U.S. dollars or
your deposit currency of choice. The formula is pip value
times stop loss, or B7 times B4. It also could just be account
equity times risk percent, or B1 times B2, which will give the
same result.
SL buy/sell and TP buy/sell ⫽ prices at which to set the stops and
target profits for both long and short positions. It is divided by
10,000 to get the last two digits of the decimal price in the
case of four-decimal currency pairs or by 100 in the case of JPY
two-decimal currency pairs. Formulas include

CHAPTER 6

HOW TO KEEP YOUR PROFITS

85

SL buy ⫽ B3 – (B4/10,000) ⫽ actual price – (SL/10,000)
SL sell ⫽ B3 ⫹ (B4/10,000) ⫽ actual price ⫹ (SL/10,000)
TP buy ⫽ B3 ⫹ [(B4/10,000) ⫻ B5] ⫽ actual price
⫹ [(SL/10,000) ⫻ R/R)]
TP sell ⫽ B3 – [(B4/10,000) ⫻ B5] ⫽ actual price
– [(SL/10,000) ⫻ R/R)]
In this way, you will only have to change the details of the first five B
cells and will immediately obtain the position size needed to open the next
trade. I also have money-management capabilities built into my AI software,
and you can access this calculator at www.JamesDicks.com.

PERCENTAGES TO RECOVER IN CASE OF LOSS
Maximum drawdown is the largest percentage drop in your account equity.
The following table shows the percentages of profit needed to recover your
trading account to breakeven based on different percentages of equity loss.
Percent of
Loss on Capital
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%

Percent Profit Needed
to Recover Up to Breakeven
11.11%
25%
42.85%
66.66%
100%
150%
233%
400%
900%

As losses increase, the percentage required to recover to breakeven
increases much faster because it grows geometrically.
This emphasizes the importance of a sound money management to
avoid huge drawdowns because it is very difficult to recover from big
losses. Respect for risk is one of the characteristics of professional traders.
And risks are controlled through proper money management.

86

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

MANAGING RISK
Every business or investment has some risks involved, including the risk of
loss. It is always possible that a trade will go wrong and turn against your
chosen direction. Being aware of risks can help to minimize them, although
there isn’t any guarantee that they can be eliminated.

EXCHANGE-RATE RISK OR EXTREME VOLATILITY
The FOREX is highly volatile, and changes in rates can be sudden and
totally unpredictable. You have to be prepared to cut your losses—and fast.
Correct timing is the key. Don’t let your positions run too far away. The
price can run up or down very quickly. It is better to close with a small loss
and try again later than to hope endlessly that the market will come back.

CREDIT RISK AND FOREX SCAMS
Be very cautious to check your broker’s background before signing up for an
account and especially before sending your money. Run away from any investment program that guarantees that you will make a big profit with little risk.
In the United States, brokers should be properly registered with the
Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and be a member of
the National Futures Association (NFA). In other countries, offshore brokers should be registered with an equivalent institution.
In addition, your broker should handle pricing with honesty. Since there
is no central marketplace and the broker is the one who establishes execution prices, you can only rely on the broker’s reputation and reliability.

COUNTRY RISK OR POLITICAL/ECONOMIC INSTABILITY
Countries that participate in the FOREX market can represent a risk when
they limit their currency flow. Choose to trade currency pairs that are
among the most liquid and free markets to be sure that you don’t get caught
in a bad trade. Lack of liquidity can be an obstacle to closing a position
because there is no counterpart at the moment to perform the exchange.
This is why exotic or seldom-traded currencies represent a high risk.

ELECTRONIC OR SYSTEM FAILURES
Besides risking that your own equipment could crash or a power outage could
block you from managing your open positions, sometimes the platform’s
server can fail. When this happens, you are unable to cancel or modify open
orders or enter new positions until the technical problem is solved. Be sure to
check whether your broker has alternatives, such as a phone dealing desk or a
mobile platform, to palliate this risk. Another issue is problems with a broker’s

CHAPTER 6

HOW TO KEEP YOUR PROFITS

87

data feed from the liquidity provider. Although such problems usually are
solved quickly, your orders could be slipped or closed at a price other than you
anticipate. While placing trades, always set a stop, even if it is a safety stop far
outside the market. In this way, if anything does happen to your trade, you still
have a level of protection.

LEVERAGE AND TRUE LEVERAGE
Usual leverage can be anything between 1:1 and 1:500. This refers to the
margin needed to secure a position. Thus 1:1 leverage would mean that
for opening a trade with 1 lot, you would need to have at least $1,000 for
the margin (more if the main currency is not the U.S. dollar), plus the
spread ⫻ $10, plus your stop loss ⫻ $10, plus maybe a little more room just
in case. At 1:500, you would need only 0.20 percent of the value of the lot
(or $200 to $300) plus the mentioned additions to open that same position.
True leverage is the full amount of your position divided by the amount
of money deposited in your trading account. However, true leverage is the
proportion of the overall position size. Indeed, if you open 1 lot with only
$300 in your account, you are using the full 1:500 true leverage. Now, if
you open a position that, including the spread and risk, totals $300, you
would be using 1:1 true leverage. This would be, for example, 300 units
(3 nanolots; pip value $0.01 per nanolot).
If you are using microlots (pip value $0.1), you would be using 1:10
true leverage. Should you open more positions, the total added value of
your trades would vary the leverage accordingly (3 positions at 1:10 ⫽ 1:30
true leverage), and the leverage will keep growing (which, in fact, is also
growing your risk) as you keep adding.
Let’s say that you don’t want to risk more than 2 percent of your
account, so you want to use 20 pips maximum risk per trade. On this same
$300 account, you can open a position of 3 microlots (3000 units) at 2 percent risk with a 20-pip stop. This will give you the above-mentioned 1:30
true leverage, which is a conservative ratio, and with any amounts, the risk
percentage doesn’t change (only the required stops and corresponding
position sizing should you need more or less than 20 pips). If you are risking 2 percent of your total equity, you will never lose more than 2 percent
of your total equity, independent of any leverage used.
If you want to raise your stops—let’s say that you need 60 pips, still at
2 percent risk—you would only open one microlot. Your position then will
