
The Education of Warren Buffett

17

observed about the companies and managers they visited. “That hour
each week,” Fisher said, “was the most useful training I ever received.”5
From these experiences, Fisher came to believe that people could
make superior profits by (1) investing in companies with above-average
potential and (2) aligning themselves with the most capable management. To isolate these exceptional companies, Fisher developed a point
system that qualified a company by the characteristics of its business and
its management.
As to the first—companies with above-average potential—the characteristic that most impressed Fisher was a company’s ability to grow
sales over the years at rates greater than the industry average.6 That
growth, in turn, usually was a combination of two factors: a significant
commitment to research and development, and an effective sales organization. A company could develop outstanding products and services but
unless they were “expertly merchandised,” the research and development effort would never translate into revenues.
In Fisher’s view, however, market potential alone is only half the
story; the other half is consistent profits. “All the sales growth in
the world won’t produce the right type of investment vehicle if, over
the years, profits do not grow correspondingly,” he said.7 Accordingly,
Fisher examined a company’s profit margins, its dedication to maintaining and improving those margins and, finally, its cost analysis and
accounting controls.
No company, said Fisher, will be able to sustain its profitability unless it is able to break down the costs of doing business while simultaneously understanding the cost of each step in the manufacturing process.
To do so, he explained, a company must instill adequate accounting
controls and cost analysis. This cost information, Fisher noted, enables a
company to direct its resources to those products or services with the
highest economic potential. Furthermore, accounting controls will help
identify snags in a company’s operations. These snags, or inefficiencies,
act as an early warning device aimed at protecting the company’s overall profitability.
Fisher’s sensitivity about a company’s profitability was linked with
another concern: a company’s ability to grow in the future without requiring equity financing. If a company is able to grow only by selling
stocks, he said, the larger number of shares outstanding will cancel out
any benefit that stockholders might realize from the company’s growth.

The Education of Warren Buffett

19

he explained, is to uncover as much about a company as possible from
those individuals who are familiar with the company. Fisher admitted
this was a catchall inquiry that he called “scuttlebutt.” Today we might
call it the business grapevine. If handled properly, Fisher claimed, scuttlebutt could provide the investor with substantial clues to identify outstanding investments.
Fisher’s scuttlebutt investigation led him to interview as many
sources as possible. He talked with customers and vendors. He sought
out former employees as well as consultants who had worked for the
company. He contacted research scientists in universities, government
employees, and trade association executives. He also interviewed competitors. Although executives may sometimes hesitate to disclose too
much about their own company, Fisher found that they never lack an
opinion about their competitors.
Most investors are unwilling to commit the time and energy Fisher
felt was necessary for understanding a company. Developing a scuttlebutt network and arranging interviews are time consuming; replicating
the scuttlebutt process for each company under consideration can be
exhausting. Fisher found a simple way to reduce his workload—he reduced the number of companies he owned. He always said he would
rather own a few outstanding companies than a large number of average
businesses. Generally, his portfolios included fewer than ten companies,
and often three to four companies represented 75 percent of his entire
equity portfolio.
Fisher believed that, to be successful, investors needed to do just a few
things well. One was investing only in companies that were within their
circle of competence. Fisher himself made that mistake in the beginning.
“I began investing outside the industries which I believed I thoroughly
understood, in completely different spheres of activity; situations where I
did not have comparable background knowledge.”8

JOHN BURR WILLIAMS
John Burr Williams graduated from Harvard University in 1923 and
went on to Harvard Business School, where he got his first taste of economic forecasting and security analysis. After Harvard, he worked as a
security analyst at two well-known Wall Street firms. He was there

20

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

through the heady days of the 1920s and the disastrous crash of 1929 and
its aftermath. That experience convinced him that to be a good investor,
one also needs to be a good economist.9
So, in 1932 at the age of 30 and already a good investor, he enrolled
in Harvard’s Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. Working from a
firm belief that what happened in the economy could affect the value of
stocks, he had decided to earn an advanced degree in economics.
When it came time to choose a topic for his doctoral dissertation,
Williams asked advice from Joseph Schumpeter, the noted Austrian
economist best known for his theory of creative destruction, who was
then a member of the economics faculty. Schumpeter suggested that
Williams look at the “intrinsic value of a common stock,” saying it
would fit Williams’s background and experience. Williams later commented that perhaps Schumpeter had a more cynical motive: The
topic would keep Williams from “running afoul” of the rest of the
faculty, “none of whom would want to challenge my own ideas on investments.”10 Nonetheless, Schumpeter’s suggestion was the impetus
for Williams’s famous doctoral dissertation, which, as The Theory
of Investment Value, has inf luenced financial analysts and investors
ever since.
Williams finished writing his dissertation in 1937. Even though he
had not yet defended it—and to the great indignation of several professors—he submitted the work to Macmillan for publication. Macmillan
declined. So did McGraw-Hill. Both decided that the book had too
many algebraic symbols. Finally, in 1938, Williams found a publisher in
Harvard University Press, but only after he agreed to pay part of the
printing cost. Two years later, Williams took his oral exam and, after
some intense arguments over the causes of the Great Depression, passed.
The Theory of Investment Value is a genuine classic. For sixty
years, it has served as the foundation on which many famous economists—Eugene Fama, Harry Markowitz, and Franco Modigliani, to
name a few—have based their own work. Warren Buffett calls it one of
the most important investment books ever written.
Williams’s theory, known today as the dividend discount model, or
discounted net cash-f low analysis, provides a way to put a value on a
stock or a bond. Like many important ideas, it can be reduced to a very
simple precept: To know what a security is worth today, estimate all the

The Education of Warren Buffett

21

cash it will earn over its lifetime and then discount that total back to a
present value. It is the underlying methodology that Warren Buffett
uses to evaluate stocks and companies.
Buffett condensed Williams’s theory as: “The value of a business is
determined by the net cash f lows expected to occur over the life of the
business discounted at an appropriate interest rate.” Williams described
it this way: “A cow for her milk; a hen for her eggs; and a stock, by
heck, for her dividends.”11
Williams’s model is a two-step process. First it measures cash f lows
to determine a company’s current and future worth. How to estimate
cash f lows? One quick measure is dividends paid to shareholders. For
companies that do not distribute dividends, Williams believed that in
theory all retained earnings should eventually turn into dividends.
Once a company reaches its mature stage, it would not need to reinvest
its earnings for growth so the management could start distributing the
earnings in the form of dividends. Williams wrote, “If earnings not
paid out in dividends are all successfully reinvested, then these earnings
should produce dividends later; if not, then they are money lost. In
short, a stock is worth only what you can get out of it.”12
The second step is to discount those estimated cash f lows, to allow
for some uncertainty. We can never be exactly sure what a company will
do, how its products will sell, or what management will do or not do to
improve the business. There is always an element of risk, particularly for
stocks, even though Williams’s theory applies equally well to bonds.
What, then, should we use as a discount rate? Williams himself is
not explicit on this point, apparently believing his readers could determine for themselves what would be appropriate. Buffett’s measuring
stick is very straightforward: He uses either the interest rate for longterm (meaning ten-year) U.S. bonds, or when interest rates are very low,
he uses the average cumulative rate of return of the overall stock market.
By using what amounts to a risk-free rate, Buffett has modified
Williams’s original thesis. Because he limits his purchases to those with
Ben Graham’s margin of safety, Buffett ensures that the risk is covered
in the transaction itself, and therefore he believes that using a risk-free
rate for discounting is appropriate.
Peter Bernstein, in his book Capital Ideas, writes that Graham’s
system is a set of rules, whereas Williams’s dividend discount model is a

22

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

theory; but “both approaches end up recommending the same kinds of
stocks for purchase.”13
Warren Buffett has used both, with stellar success.

CHARLES MUNGER
When Warren Buffett began his investment partnership in Omaha in
1956, he had just over $100,000 in capital to work with. One early task,
therefore, was to persuade additional investors to sign on. He was making his usual careful, detailed pitch to neighbors Dr. and Mrs. Edwin
Davis, when suddenly Dr. Davis interrupted him and abruptly announced they’d give him $100,000. When Buffett asked why, Davis
replied, “Because you remind me of Charlie Munger.”14
Charlie who?
Even though both men grew up in Omaha and had many acquaintances in common, they did not actually meet until 1959. By that time,
Munger had moved to southern California, but he returned to Omaha
for a visit when his father died. Dr. Davis decided it was time the two
young men met and brought them together at a dinner in a local restaurant. It was the beginning of an extraordinary partnership.
Munger, the son of a lawyer and grandson of a federal judge, had established a successful law practice in the Los Angeles area, but his interest in the stock market was already strong. At that first dinner, the two
young men found much to talk about, including securities. From then
on, they communicated often, with Buffett frequently urging Munger
to quit law and to concentrate on investing. For a while, he did both. In
1962, he formed an investment partnership much like Buffett’s, while
maintaining his law practice. Three very successful years later, he left
the law altogether, although to this day he has an office in the firm that
bears his name.
Munger’s investment partnership in Los Angeles, and Buffett’s in
Omaha, were similar in approach; both sought to purchase some discount to underlying value. (They also enjoyed similar results, both of
them outperforming the Dow Jones Industrial Average by impressive
margins.) It is not surprising, then, that they bought some of the same
stocks. Munger, like Buffett, began buying shares of Blue Chip Stamps in
the late 1960s, and eventually he became chairman of its board. When

The Education of Warren Buffett

23

Berkshire and Blue Chip Stamps merged in 1978, he became Berkshire’s
vice chairman, a position he still holds.
The working relationship between Munger and Buffett was not
formalized in an official partnership agreement, but it has evolved over
the years into something perhaps even closer, more symbiotic. Even before Munger joined the Berkshire board, the two made many investment decisions together, often conferring daily; gradually their business
affairs became more and more interlinked.
Today Munger continues as vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway
and also serves as chairman of Wesco Financial, which is 80 percent
owned by Berkshire and holds many of the same investments. In every
way, he functions as Buffett’s acknowledged comanaging partner and
alter ego. To get a sense of how closely the two are aligned, we have
only to count the number of times Buffett reports “Charlie and I” did
this, or decided that, or believe this, or looked into that, or think this—
almost as if “Charlie-and-I” were the name of one person.
To their working relationship, Munger brought not only financial
acumen but the foundation of business law. He also brought an intellectual perspective that is quite different from Buffett’s. Munger is passionately interested in many areas of knowledge—science, history,
philosophy, psychology, mathematics—and believes that each of those
fields holds important concepts that thoughtful people can, and should,
apply to all their endeavors, including investment decisions. He calls
them “the big ideas,” and they are the core of his well-known notion
of “latticework of mental models” for investors.15
All these threads together—financial knowledge, background in
the law, and appreciation of lessons from other disciplines—produced
in Munger a somewhat different investment philosophy from that of
Buffett. Whereas Buffett was still searching for opportunities at bargain prices, Munger believed in paying a fair price for quality companies. He can be very persuasive.

It’s far better to buy a wonderful company at a fair price than
a fair company at a wonderful price.16
WARREN BUFFETT

24

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

It was Munger who convinced Buffett that paying three times
book value for See’s Candy was actually a good deal (see Chapter 4
for the full story). That was the beginning of a plate-tectonic shift in
Buffett’s thinking, and he happily acknowledges that it was Charlie
who pushed him in a new direction. Both would quickly add that
when you find a quality company that also happens to be available at a
discounted price, then you’ve struck oil—or, in Berkshire’s case, the
next best thing: Coca-Cola (see Chapter 4).
One reason Buffett and Munger fit so well is that both men possess
an uncompromising attitude toward commonsense business principles.
Like Buffett, who endured poor returns in the insurance industry and
for a time refused to write policies, Charlie, in his function as CEO of
Wesco, refused to make loans when confronted with an unruly savings
and loan industry. Both exhibit managerial qualities necessary to run
high-quality businesses. Berkshire Hathaway’s shareholders are blessed in
having managing partners who look after their interest and help them
make money in all economic environments. With Buffett’s policy on
mandatory retirement—he does not believe in it—Berkshire’s shareholders will continue to benefit not from one mind but two long into the
future.

A BLENDING OF INFLUENCES
Shortly after Graham’s death in 1976, Buffett became the designated
steward of Graham’s value approach to investing. Indeed, Buffett’s name
became synonymous with value investing. It is easy to see why. He was
the most famous of Graham’s dedicated students, and Buffett never
missed an opportunity to acknowledge the intellectual debt he owed to
Graham. Even today, Buffett considers Graham to be the one individual, after his father, who had the most inf luence on his investment life.17
How, then, does Buffett reconcile his intellectual indebtedness to
Graham with stock purchases like the Washington Post Company (1973)
and the Coca-Cola Company (1988)? Neither passed Graham’s strict
financial test for purchase, yet Buffett made significant investments
in both.
As early as 1965, Buffett was becoming aware that Graham’s strategy
of buying cheap stocks was not ideal.18 Following his mentor’s approach

The Education of Warren Buffett

25

of searching for companies that were selling for less than their net working capital, Buffett bought some genuine losers. Several companies that
he had bought at a cheap price (hence they met Graham’s test for purchase) were cheap because their underlying businesses were suffering.
From his earliest investment mistakes, Buffett began moving away
from Graham’s strict teachings. “I evolved,” he admitted, “but I didn’t
go from ape to human or human to ape in a nice even manner.”19 He
was beginning to appreciate the qualitative nature of certain companies,
compared with the quantitative aspects of others. Despite that, however,
he still found himself searching for bargains, sometimes with horrible results. “My punishment,” he confessed, “was an education in the economics of short-line farm implementation manufacturers (Dempster Mill
Manufacturing), third-place department stores (Hochschild-Kohn), and
New England textile manufacturers (Berkshire Hathaway).”20 Buffett’s
evolution was delayed, he admitted, because what Graham taught him
was so valuable.
When evaluating stocks, Graham did not think about the specifics of
the businesses. Nor did he ponder the capabilities of management. He
limited his research investigation to corporate filings and annual reports.
If there was a mathematical probability of making money because the
share price was less than the assets of the company, Graham purchased
the company, regardless of its business or its management. To increase
the probability of success, he purchased as many of these statistical equations as possible.
If Graham’s teachings were limited to these precepts, Buffett would
have had little regard for him. But the margin-of-safety theory that
Graham emphasized was so important to Buffett that he could overlook
all other current weaknesses of Graham’s methodology. Even today,
Buffett continues to embrace Graham’s primary idea, the theory of
margin of safety. “Forty-two years after reading that,” Buffett noted,
“I still think those are the three right words.”21 The key lesson that
Buffett took from Graham was that successful investing involved purchasing stocks when their market price was at a significant discount to
the underlying business value.
In addition to the margin-of-safety theory, which became the
intellectual framework of Buffett’s thinking, Graham helped Buffett
appreciate the folly of following stock market f luctuations. Stocks have
an investment characteristic and a speculative characteristic, Graham

26

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

taught, and the speculative characteristics are a consequence of people’s
fear and greed. These emotions, present in most investors, cause stock
prices to gyrate far above and, more important, far below a company’s
intrinsic value, thus presenting a margin of safety. Graham taught Buffett that if he could insulate himself from the emotional whirlwinds of
the stock market, he had an opportunity to exploit the irrational behavior of other investors, who purchased stocks based on emotion, not logic.
From Graham, Buffett learned how to think independently. If he
reached a logical conclusion based on sound judgment, Graham counseled Buffett, he should not be dissuaded just because others disagree.
“You are neither right or wrong because the crowd disagrees with you,”
he wrote. “You are right because your data and reasoning are right.”22
Phil Fisher in many ways was the exact opposite of Ben Graham.
Fisher believed that to make sound decisions, investors needed to become
fully informed about a business. That meant they needed to investigate
all aspects of the company. They needed to look beyond the numbers and
learn about the business itself because that information mattered a great
deal. They also needed to study the attributes of the company’s management, for management’s abilities could affect the value of the underlying
business. They should learn as much as they could about the industry in
which the company operated, and about its competitors. Every source of
information should be exploited.

Appearing on the PBS show Money World in 1993, Buffett
was asked what investment advice he would give a money
manager just starting out. “I’d tell him to do exactly what I did
40-odd years ago, which is to learn about every company in
the United States that has publicly traded securities.”
Moderator Adam Smith protested, “But there’s 27,000
public companies.”
“Well,” said Buffett, “start with the A’s.”23

From Fisher, Buffett learned the value of scuttlebutt. Throughout
the years, Buffett has developed an extensive network of contacts who
assist him in evaluating businesses.

The Education of Warren Buffett

27

Finally, Fisher taught Buffett the benefits of focusing on just a few
investments. He believed that it was a mistake to teach investors that putting their eggs in several baskets reduces risk. The danger in purchasing
too many stocks, he felt, is that it becomes impossible to watch all the
eggs in all the baskets. In his view, buying shares in a company without
taking the time to develop a thorough understanding of the business was
far more risky than having limited diversification.
John Burr Williams provided Buffett with a methodology for calculating the intrinsic value of a business, which is a cornerstone of his
investing approach.
The differences between Graham and Fisher are apparent. Graham,
the quantitative analyst, emphasized only those factors that could be measured: fixed assets, current earnings, and dividends. His investigative research was limited to corporate filings and annual reports. He spent no
time interviewing customers, competitors, or managers.
Fisher’s approach was the antithesis of Graham. Fisher, the qualitative analyst, emphasized those factors that he believed increased the value
of a company: principally, future prospects and management capability.
Whereas Graham was interested in purchasing only cheap stocks, Fisher
was interested in purchasing companies that had the potential to increase
their intrinsic value over the long term. He would go to great lengths,
including conducting extensive interviews, to uncover bits of information that might improve his selection process.
Although Graham’s and Fisher’s investment approach differ, notes
Buffett, they “parallel in the investment world.”24 Taking the liberty of
rephrasing, I would say that instead of paralleling, in Warren Buffett
they dovetail: His investment approach combines qualitative understanding of the business and its management (as taught by Fisher) and a
quantitative understanding of price and value (as taught by Graham).
Warren Buffett once said, “I’m 15 percent Fisher and 85 percent
Benjamin Graham.”25 That remark has been widely quoted, but it is important to remember that it was made in 1969. In the intervening years,
Buffett has made a gradual but definite shift toward Fisher’s philosophy
of buying a select few good businesses and owning those businesses for
several years. My hunch is that if he were to make a similar statement
today, the balance would come pretty close to 50/50.
Without question, it was Charlie Munger who was most responsible for moving Buffett toward Fisher’s thinking.
