
8

1949 edition, p. 233.
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French, “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm Characteristics or Lower Propensity to Pay?” Journal of Financial
Economics, vol. 60, no. 1, April, 2001, pp. 3–43, especially Table 1; see
also Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton, Triumph of the Optimists (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 2002), pp. 158–161. Interestingly,
the total dollar amount of dividends paid by U.S. stocks has risen since the
late 1970s, even after inflation—but the number of stocks that pay a dividend
has shrunk by nearly two-thirds. See Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo, and
Douglas J. Skinner, “Are Dividends Disappearing? Dividend Concentration
and the Consolidation of Earnings,” available at: http://papers.ssrn.com.
9

504

Commentary on Chapter 19

the percentage of companies paying dividends (shown in the dark
area) has withered away:

FIGURE 19-1

Who Pays Dividends?
100%
90%

% of all U.S. stocks

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

1973–1977

1978–1982

1983–1987

1988–1992

1993–1998

1999

Annual averages
Never paid
Former payers
Payers

Source: Eugene Fama and Kenneth French, “Disappearing Dividends,”
Journal of Financial Economics, April 2001.

But Daddy Knows Best was nothing but bunk. While some companies put their cash to good use, many more fell into two other categories: those that simply wasted it, and those that piled it up far faster
than they could possibly spend it.
In the first group, Priceline.com wrote off $67 million in losses in

Commentary on Chapter 19

505

2000 after launching goofy ventures into groceries and gasoline, while
Amazon.com destroyed at least $233 million of its shareholders’
wealth by “investing” in dot-bombs like Webvan and Ashford.com.10
And the two biggest losses so far on record—JDS Uniphase’s $56 billion in 2001 and AOL Time Warner’s $99 billion in 2002—occurred
after companies chose not to pay dividends but to merge with other
firms at a time when their shares were obscenely overvalued.11
In the second group, consider that by late 2001, Oracle Corp. had
piled up $5 billion in cash. Cisco Systems had hoarded at least $7.5
billion. Microsoft had amassed a mountain of cash $38.2 billion high—
and rising by an average of more than $2 million per hour.12 Just how
rainy a day was Bill Gates expecting, anyway?
So the anecdotal evidence clearly shows that many companies

10

Perhaps Benjamin Franklin, who is said to have carried his coins around in
an asbestos purse so that money wouldn’t burn a hole in his pocket, could
have avoided this problem if he had been a CEO.
11
A study by BusinessWeek found that from 1995 through 2001, 61% out
of more than 300 large mergers ended up destroying wealth for the shareholders of the acquiring company—a condition known as “the winner’s
curse” or “buyer’s remorse.” And acquirers using stock rather than cash to
pay for the deal underperformed rival companies by 8%. (David Henry,
“Mergers: Why Most Big Deals Don’t Pay Off,” BusinessWeek, October 14,
2002, pp. 60–70.) A similar academic study found that acquisitions of private companies and subsidiaries of public companies lead to positive stock
returns, but that acquisitions of entire public companies generate losses for
the winning bidder’s shareholders. (Kathleen Fuller, Jeffry Netter, and Mike
Stegemoller, “What Do Returns to Acquiring Firms Tell Us?” The Journal of
Finance, vol. 57, no. 4, August, 2002, pp. 1763–1793.)
12
With interest rates near record lows, such a mountain of cash produces
lousy returns if it just sits around. As Graham asserts, “So long as this surplus cash remains with the company, the outside stockholder gets little benefit from it” (1949 edition, p. 232). Indeed, by year-end 2002, Microsoft’s
cash balance had swollen to $43.4 billion—clear proof that the company
could find no good use for the cash its businesses were generating. As
Graham would say, Microsoft’s operations were efficient, but its finance no
longer was. In a step toward redressing this problem, Microsoft declared in
early 2003 that it would begin paying a regular quarterly dividend.

506

Commentary on Chapter 19

don’t know how to turn excess cash into extra returns. What does the
statistical evidence tell us?
•

•

Research by money managers Robert Arnott and Clifford Asness
found that when current dividends are low, future corporate earnings also turn out to be low. And when current dividends are high,
so are future earnings. Over 10-year periods, the average rate of
earnings growth was 3.9 points greater when dividends were
high than when they were low.13
Columbia accounting professors Doron Nissim and Amir Ziv
found that companies that raise their dividend not only have better
stock returns but that “dividend increases are associated with
[higher] future profitability for at least four years after the dividend
change.” 14

In short, most managers are wrong when they say that they can put
your cash to better use than you can. Paying out a dividend does not
guarantee great results, but it does improve the return of the typical
stock by yanking at least some cash out of the managers’ hands
before they can either squander it or squirrel it away.
S E L L I N G L O W, B U Y I N G H I G H
What about the argument that companies can put spare cash to better use by buying back their own shares? When a company repurchases some of its stock, that reduces the number of its shares
outstanding. Even if its net income stays flat, the company’s earnings

13

Robert D. Arnott and Clifford S. Asness, “Surprise! Higher Dividends =
Higher Earnings Growth,” Financial Analysts Journal, January/February,
2003, pp. 70–87.
14
Doron Nissim and Amir Ziv, “Dividend Changes and Future Profitability,”
The Journal of Finance, vol. 56, no. 6, December, 2001, pp. 2111–2133.
Even researchers who disagree with the Arnott-Asness and Nissim-Ziv findings on future earnings agree that dividend increases lead to higher future
stock returns; see Shlomo Benartzi, Roni Michaely, and Richard Thaler, “Do
Changes in Dividends Signal the Future or the Past?” The Journal of
Finance, vol. 52, no. 3, July, 1997, pp. 1007–1034.

Commentary on Chapter 19

507

per share will rise, since its total earnings will be spread across fewer
shares. That, in turn, should lift the stock price. Better yet, unlike a dividend, a buyback is tax-free to investors who don’t sell their shares.15
Thus it increases the value of their stock without raising their tax bill.
And if the shares are cheap, then spending spare cash to repurchase
them is an excellent use of the company’s capital.16
All this is true in theory. Unfortunately, in the real world, stock buybacks have come to serve a purpose that can only be described as
sinister. Now that grants of stock options have become such a large
part of executive compensation, many companies—especially in hightech industries—must issue hundreds of millions of shares to give to
the managers who exercise those stock options.17 But that would jack

15

The tax reforms proposed by President George W. Bush in early 2003
would change the taxability of dividends, but the fate of this legislation was
not yet clear by press time.
16
Historically, companies took a common-sense approach toward share
repurchases, reducing them when stock prices were high and stepping
them up when prices were low. After the stock market crash of October 19,
1987, for example, 400 companies announced new buybacks over the next
12 days alone—while only 107 firms had announced buyback programs in
the earlier part of the year, when stock prices had been much higher. See
Murali Jagannathan, Clifford P. Stephens, and Michael S. Weisbach, “Financial Flexibility and the Choice Between Dividends and Stock Repurchases,”
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 57, no. 3, September, 2000, p. 362.
17
The stock options granted by a company to its executives and employees
give them the right (but not the obligation) to buy shares in the future at a
discounted price. That conversion of options to shares is called “exercising”
the options. The employees can then sell the shares at the current market
price and pocket the difference as profit. Because hundreds of millions of
options may be exercised in a given year, the company must increase its
supply of shares outstanding. Then, however, the company’s total net
income would be spread across a much greater number of shares, reducing
its earnings per share. Therefore, the company typically feels compelled to
buy back other shares to cancel out the stock issued to the option holders.
In 1998, 63.5% of chief financial officers admitted that counteracting the
dilution from options was a major reason for repurchasing shares (see CFO
Forum, “The Buyback Track,” Institutional Investor, July, 1998).

508

Commentary on Chapter 19

up the number of shares outstanding and shrink earnings per share.
To counteract that dilution, the companies must turn right back around
and repurchase millions of shares in the open market. By 2000, companies were spending an astounding 41.8% of their total net income
to repurchase their own shares—up from 4.8% in 1980.18
Let’s look at Oracle Corp., the software giant. Between June 1,
1999, and May 31, 2000, Oracle issued 101 million shares of common stock to its senior executives and another 26 million to employees at a cost of $484 million. Meanwhile, to keep the exercise of
earlier stock options from diluting its earnings per share, Oracle spent
$5.3 billion—or 52% of its total revenues that year—to buy back 290.7
million shares of stock. Oracle issued the stock to insiders at an average price of $3.53 per share and repurchased it at an average price of
$18.26. Sell low, buy high: Is this any way to “enhance” shareholder
value?19
By 2002, Oracle’s stock had fallen to less than half its peak in
2000. Now that its shares were cheaper, did Oracle hasten to buy
back more stock? Between June 1, 2001, and May 31, 2002, Oracle
cut its repurchases to $2.8 billion, apparently because its executives
and employees exercised fewer options that year. The same sell-low,
buy-high pattern is evident at dozens of other technology companies.
What’s going on here? Two surprising factors are at work:

18

One of the main factors driving this change was the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission’s decision, in 1982, to relax its previous restrictions
on share repurchases. See Gustavo Grullon and Roni Michaely, “Dividends,
Share Repurchases, and the Substitution Hypothesis,” The Journal of
Finance, vol. 57, no. 4, August, 2002, pp. 1649–1684.
19
Throughout his writings, Graham insists that corporate managements
have a duty not just to make sure their stock is not undervalued, but also to
make sure it never gets overvalued. As he put it in Security Analysis (1934
ed., p. 515), “the responsibility of managements to act in the interest of their
shareholders includes the obligation to prevent—in so far as they are able—
the establishment of either absurdly high or unduly low prices for their securities.” Thus, enhancing shareholder value doesn’t just mean making sure
that the stock price does not go too low; it also means ensuring that the
stock price does not go up to unjustifiable levels. If only the executives of
Internet companies had heeded Graham’s wisdom back in 1999!

Commentary on Chapter 19

•

•

509

Companies get a tax break when executives and employees exercise stock options (which the IRS considers a “compensation
expense” to the company).20 In its fiscal years from 2000 through
2002, for example, Oracle reaped $1.69 billion in tax benefits as
insiders cashed in on options. Sprint Corp. pocketed $678 million
in tax benefits as its executives and employees locked in $1.9 billion in options profits in 1999 and 2000.
A senior executive heavily compensated with stock options has a
vested interest in favoring stock buybacks over dividends. Why?
For technical reasons, options increase in value as the price fluctuations of a stock grow more extreme. But dividends dampen the
volatility of a stock’s price. So, if the managers increased the dividend, they would lower the value of their own stock options.21

No wonder CEOs would much rather buy back stock than pay dividends—regardless of how overvalued the shares may be or how drastically that may waste the resources of the outside shareholders.

20

Incredibly, although options are considered a compensation expense on a
company’s tax returns, they are not counted as an expense on the income
statement in financial reports to shareholders. Investors can only hope that
accounting reforms will change this ludicrous practice.
21
See George W. Fenn and Nellie Liang, “Corporate Payout Policy and
Managerial Stock Incentives,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 60, no. 1,
April, 2001, pp. 45–72. Dividends make stocks less volatile by providing a
stream of current income that cushions shareholders against fluctuations in
market value. Several researchers have found that the average profitability of
companies with stock-buyback programs (but no cash dividends) is at least
twice as volatile as that of companies that pay dividends. Those more variable earnings will, in general, lead to bouncier share prices, making the managers’ stock options more valuable—by creating more opportunities when
share prices will be temporarily high. Today, about two-thirds of executive
compensation comes in the form of options and other noncash awards;
thirty years ago, at least two-thirds of compensation came as cash.

510

Commentary on Chapter 19

KEEPING THEIR OPTIONS OPEN
Finally, drowsy investors have given their companies free rein to overpay executives in ways that are simply unconscionable. In 1997, Steve
Jobs, the cofounder of Apple Computer Inc., returned to the company
as its “interim” chief executive officer. Already a wealthy man, Jobs
insisted on taking a cash salary of $1 per year. At year-end 1999, to
thank Jobs for serving as CEO “for the previous 2 1/2 years without
compensation,” the board presented him with his very own Gulfstream
jet, at a cost to the company of a mere $90 million. The next month
Jobs agreed to drop “interim” from his job title, and the board
rewarded him with options on 20 million shares. (Until then, Jobs had
held a grand total of two shares of Apple stock.)
The principle behind such option grants is to align the interests of
managers with outside investors. If you are an outside Apple shareholder, you want its managers to be rewarded only if Apple’s stock
earns superior returns. Nothing else could possibly be fair to you and
the other owners of the company. But, as John Bogle, former chairman
of the Vanguard funds, points out, nearly all managers sell the stock
they receive immediately after exercising their options. How could
dumping millions of shares for an instant profit possibly align their
interests with those of the company’s loyal long-term shareholders?
In Jobs’ case, if Apple stock rises by just 5% annually through the
beginning of 2010, he will be able to cash in his options for $548.3
million. In other words, even if Apple’s stock earns no better than half
the long-term average return of the overall stock market, Jobs will land
a half-a-billion dollar windfall.22 Does that align his interests with those
of Apple’s shareholders—or malign the trust that Apple’s shareholders
have placed in the board of directors?
Reading proxy statements vigilantly, the intelligent owner will vote
against any executive compensation plan that uses option grants to
turn more than 3% of the company’s shares outstanding over to the
managers. And you should veto any plan that does not make option
grants contingent on a fair and enduring measure of superior results—

22

Apple Computer Inc. proxy statement for April 2001 annual meeting, p. 8
(available at www.sec.gov). Jobs’ option grant and share ownership are
adjusted for a two-for-one share split.

Commentary on Chapter 19

511

say, outperforming the average stock in the same industry for a period
of at least five years. No CEO ever deserves to make himself rich if he
has produced poor results for you.
A FINAL THOUGHT
Let’s go back to Graham’s suggestion that every company’s independent board members should have to report to the shareholders in writing on whether the business is properly managed on behalf of its true
owners. What if the independent directors also had to justify the
company’s policies on dividends and share repurchases? What if they
had to describe exactly how they determined that the company’s senior management was not overpaid? And what if every investor became
an intelligent owner and actually read that report?

CHAPTER 20

“Margin of Safety” as the
Central Concept of Investment

In the old legend the wise men finally boiled down the history of

mortal affairs into the single phrase, “This too will pass.”* Confronted with a like challenge to distill the secret of sound investment into three words, we venture the motto, MARGIN OF
SAFETY. This is the thread that runs through all the preceding discussion of investment policy—often explicitly, sometimes in a less
direct fashion. Let us try now, briefly, to trace that idea in a connected argument.
All experienced investors recognize that the margin-of-safety
concept is essential to the choice of sound bonds and preferred
stocks. For example, a railroad should have earned its total fixed
charges better than five times (before income tax), taking a period
of years, for its bonds to qualify as investment-grade issues. This
past ability to earn in excess of interest requirements constitutes the
margin of safety that is counted on to protect the investor against
loss or discomfiture in the event of some future decline in net
income. (The margin above charges may be stated in other ways—

* “It is said an Eastern monarch once charged his wise men to invent him a
sentence, to be ever in view, and which should be true and appropriate in all
times and situations. They presented him the words: ‘And this, too, shall
pass away.’ How much it expresses! How chastening in the hour of pride!—
how consoling in the depths of affliction! ‘And this, too, shall pass away.’ And
yet let us hope it is not quite true.”—Abraham Lincoln, Address to the Wisconsin State Agricultural Society, Milwaukee, September 30, 1859, in Abraham Lincoln: Speeches and Writings, 1859–1865 (Library of America,
1985), vol. II, p. 101.
512

“Margin of Safety” as the Central Concept of Investment

513

for example, in the percentage by which revenues or profits may
decline before the balance after interest disappears—but the underlying idea remains the same.)
The bond investor does not expect future average earnings to
work out the same as in the past; if he were sure of that, the margin
demanded might be small. Nor does he rely to any controlling
extent on his judgment as to whether future earnings will be materially better or poorer than in the past, if he did that, he would have
to measure his margin in terms of a carefully projected income
account, instead of emphasizing the margin shown in the past
record. Here the function of the margin of safety is, in essence, that
of rendering unnecessary an accurate estimate of the future. If the
margin is a large one, then it is enough to assume that future earnings will not fall far below those of the past in order for an investor
to feel sufficiently protected against the vicissitudes of time.
The margin of safety for bonds may be calculated, alternatively,
by comparing the total value of the enterprise with the amount of
debt. (A similar calculation may be made for a preferred-stock
issue.) If the business owes $10 million and is fairly worth $30 million, there is room for a shrinkage of two-thirds in value—at least
theoretically—before the bondholders will suffer loss. The amount
of this extra value, or “cushion,” above the debt may be approximated by using the average market price of the junior stock issues
over a period of years. Since average stock prices are generally
related to average earning power, the margin of “enterprise value”
over debt and the margin of earnings over charges will in most
cases yield similar results.
So much for the margin-of-safety concept as applied to “fixedvalue investments.” Can it be carried over into the field of common
stocks? Yes, but with some necessary modifications.
There are instances where a common stock may be considered
sound because it enjoys a margin of safety as large as that of a good
bond. This will occur, for example, when a company has outstanding only common stock that under depression conditions is selling
for less than the amount of bonds that could safely be issued
against its property and earning power.* That was the position of a

* “Earning power” is Graham’s term for a company’s potential profits or, as
he puts it, the amount that a firm “might be expected to earn year after year

514

The Intelligent Investor

host of strongly financed industrial companies at the low price levels of 1932–33. In such instances the investor can obtain the margin
of safety associated with a bond, plus all the chances of larger
income and principal appreciation inherent in a common stock.
(The only thing he lacks is the legal power to insist on dividend
payments “or else”—but this is a small drawback as compared
with his advantages.) Common stocks bought under such circumstances will supply an ideal, though infrequent, combination of
safety and profit opportunity. As a quite recent example of this condition, let us mention once more National Presto Industries stock,
which sold for a total enterprise value of $43 million in 1972. With
its $16 millions of recent earnings before taxes the company could
easily have supported this amount of bonds.
In the ordinary common stock, bought for investment under
normal conditions, the margin of safety lies in an expected earning
power considerably above the going rate for bonds. In former editions we elucidated this point with the following figures:
Assume in a typical case that the earning power is 9% on the
price and that the bond rate is 4%; then the stockbuyer will have
an average annual margin of 5% accruing in his favor. Some of the
excess is paid to him in the dividend rate; even though spent by
him, it enters into his overall investment result. The undistributed
balance is reinvested in the business for his account. In many cases
such reinvested earnings fail to add commensurately to the earning power and value of his stock. (That is why the market has a
stubborn habit of valuing earnings disbursed in dividends more
generously than the portion retained in the business.)* But, if the
picture is viewed as a whole, there is a reasonably close connection
