measured from $1.18 of Wave 4.
After completion of the five impulse waves, prices start to weaken into the formation of an
A-B-C correction. The projection of the decline is calculated as follows:
Projection using Wave A and Wave B
1.618 of Wave A measured from Wave B
2.382 of Wave A measured from Wave B
Projection using Wave B
1.62 of Wave B measured from Wave B
2.62 of Wave B measured from Wave B

APPLICATION OF ELLIOTT WAVE ANALYSIS
The Elliott Wave Principle enables traders to formulate a suitable trading strategy as the market
progresses. It provides a tool to effectively monitor the position of the market relative to the
trend and the probable target of the market’s movements.
The wave principle works better if it is applied to market averages and blue-chip stocks that
are supported by active turnover. Generally, it is not practical to apply wave analysis to thinly
traded stocks or penny stocks if such stocks have no transactions or supporting volume. When
turnover starts to dwindle to practically zero and prices stay dormant for weeks, there is no
possible way to do any counting because no transactions are being done and there will only be
a horizontal line. It is not practical to get bogged down in detailing every small wave or in
pinpointing each of the corrective counts. It is a common mistake to try to count every move,
which not only overcomplicates the matter, but may lead to deep confusion.
When reviewing the count of waves, count the broadest swings first. If the counts total 5, 9,
or 13, the pattern is an impulse wave pattern. Then dissect the waves to see if a fit can be
made. If the broad swings total 3, 7, or 11, the pattern is a corrective wave pattern.
An Elliott Wave pattern is easier to understand if seen as a set comprising an impulse swing
of five waves and a corrective swing of three waves. Each pattern can be a part of another cycle
or can form part of an expanded cycle.
Figure 4.31
shows the basic pattern.
FIGURE 4.31
A rudimentary cycle pattern of Elliott Waves, comprising an impulse pattern of five waves, 1-23-4-5, and an A-B-C correction running counter to the impulse waves. In the impulse pattern,
there are two corrections, or countertrend waves, Wave 2 and Wave 4, and in the correction
pattern, there is one countertrend wave, Wave B.

Wave analysis often becomes complicated when it comes to analyzing the corrective
patterns of Wave 2, Wave 4, or Wave B, especially if such patterns are of a complex nature,
consisting of more than three waves. The difficulty arises in determining whether the market is
in a trend or in a corrective mode, and whether the corrections are completed.
There is a guideline generally used to determine when a market is making a correction. If the
market is making an A-B-C correction, prices will often make attempts to overlap the prior

section as illustrated in
Figure 4.32
. Prices move to new levels beyond A and retrace their movements to overlap into the prior
range of Wave A. If prices move beyond the extreme of Wave B, that will be a confirmation that
the correction should be complete and prices should continue their prior trend. As corrections
are countertrends, the prior trend in a downward correction will be an upward trend, and in an
upward correction, the prior trend will continue in a downward trend. (See
Figure 4.32
.)
FIGURE 4.32
Two typical A-B-C corrective patterns. In a downward correction, prices make a new low below
Wave A and then reverse their movement upward to overlap into the range of Wave A. In an
upward correction, prices make a new high above Wave A and then make a downturn to
overlap into the range of Wave A. If prices move beyond the extreme of Wave B, it indicates the
correction should be complete.

The overlap guideline is a valuable clue to identifying price direction. It enables a trader to
identify when the market is in a corrective phase, and combined with other trading tools, it may
help plan a trading strategy so that when the correction is complete and the trend resumes, the
trader is ready to enter the market. We would want to be in a trade when there is a trend.
Coupled with the application of Fibonacci Retracement and Fibonacci Projection, the guideline
should give a good indication of the levels at which prices will find support and resistance, and
where trade entries and exits could be considered.

CONCLUSION
The basic tenet of Elliott Wave Theory is that market movements are based on crowd behavior.
Market movements occur as a series of impulse and corrective waves, and these movements
can occur in predictable cycles. A bullish swing will be corrected by a bearish swing. The bullish
swing will consist of five waves, three waves up and two waves down, and the bearish swing
will consist of three waves, two waves down and one wave up. The sum of the waves in the
entire cycle will be eight waves. Impulse waves refer to the waves in the bullish swing, and are
numbered as 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. And corrective waves refer to the waves in the bearish swing, and
are numbered as A, B, and C. Impulse waves are waves that move in the direction of the main
trend, and corrective waves are waves that move in the opposite direction of the main trend.
Impulse waves can be further broken down into another set of minor impulse waves, and
likewise, corrective waves can be further broken down into another set of minor corrective
waves. The cycle can be repeated as it expands or contracts in accordance with different time
frames. All such impulse and corrective waves adhere to the rules of the theory.
Elliott Wave Theory can be used effectively when applied, as described in this chapter, to a
suitable trading strategy in which risk can be minimized. One difficulty is in identifying the
count, and recognizing whether waves are impulse waves or corrective waves. Another
problem is in determining which phase of the market the prices are moving in according to the
theory, in order to predict the next probable direction and target. Counting every wave can be
subjective, but if the trader can identify the direction of the primary wave, he can still make a
profitable trade. Here are several guidelines that may help traders to count the waves.
The first guideline is for getting the counts right. Getting the right count may be made more
difficult by a complex structure comprised of impulse waves and corrective waves of major
waves, minute waves, and subwaves, and so on. Traders, therefore, should try to identify the
counts on a best-effort basis. Traders should avoid getting bogged down in trying to identify
every exact count and being too concerned about getting the wrong count. Wave counting has
a high degree of subjectivity. The best approach to wave counting is to determine the primary
count so as to get the bigger picture. Doing a wave count of the longer time frame, that is,
weekly, is a good way to find out the state of the market. This will protect the trader’s position
even if he gets the count wrong in the daily time frame.
The second guideline is for locating trades that have less risk in accordance with the primary
trend, and avoiding trades that have greater risk. For example, picking trades at the end of the
fifth impulse wave or the beginning of a corrective Wave C can lead to huge losses.
The third guideline is for learning to differentiate impulse waves from corrective waves.
Corrective waves frequently tend to overlap. In an A-B-C correction, Wave C will exceed the low
of Wave A, and when Wave C moves back into the range of Wave A, it has made an overlap
movement. When Wave C rallies beyond the peak of Wave B, the correction is deemed
completed. In an impulse wave pattern, Wave 1, Wave 3, and Wave 5 should not overlap each
other and should comply with these three rules:
1. Wave 2 cannot go below the beginning of impulse Wave 1.
2. Wave 3 cannot be the shortest wave of the three waves.
3. Wave 4 should not overlap impulse Wave 1.
If Wave 2 goes below Wave 1, then the uptrend is invalidated. And if the retracement of
Wave 4 overlaps Wave 1, it also violates the rules of the impulse waves. Wave 3 can be equal to

Wave 1, or Wave 3 can be equal to Wave 5, but Wave 3 cannot be the shortest of the three
waves. This rule is probably derived from the observation that, in a strong market move, the
second upward wave (Impulse Wave 3) appears frequently to be the strongest of the three
waves. But when Wave 1 is extended in a strong trend, Wave 3 will equate with Wave 5. And
also when Wave 5 is extended in a strong trend, Wave 3 will equate with Wave 1. The
understanding of these rules will help to distinguish trending waves from corrective waves.
The fourth guideline is for checking the slopes of the three impulse waves (Wave 1, 3, and 5).
They will generally be steeper than the slopes of the corrective waves (Wave 2 and 4). In a
bearish reversal of a major market correction, A-B-C, the slopes of Wave A and Wave C will be
steeper than that of Wave B. In their steep declines, Wave A and Wave C will also show strong
impulse waves and Wave C will be the strongest of the three waves in the corrective waves. To
distinguish the impulse waves from the corrective waves, it is helpful to look at the slope of the
relative waves.
The fifth guideline is for looking at the overbought or oversold values of the Elliott Wave
Oscillator (EWO), which is popularly used to check Wave 4. EWO is a 34-period price moving
average subtracted from the 5-day price moving average. The difference is plotted as a
histogram. The concept of EWO is that the highest/lowest point of the oscillator is related to
the bullish/bearish Wave 3 of the swing. When price is in an upswing, Wave 3 should be
reflected by the highest point of the oscillator, and when price is in a downswing, Wave 3
should be reflected by the lowest point of the oscillator. The correction of Wave 4 should be
over when Wave 4 crosses above the zero line in an upswing, and the correction of Wave 4
should be over when Wave 4 crosses below the zero line in a downswing.
Lastly, in an impulse wave pattern, the patterns in Wave 2 and Wave 4 will alternate. That is,
if Wave 2 has a simple pattern, then Wave 4 will probably have a complex pattern. This
knowledge will help traders to locate Wave 2 and Wave 4. In Wave 1, Wave 2 should be greater
in time and price than any correction within Wave 1. In Wave 3, Wave 4 will also be greater in
time and price than any correction within Wave 3.
Since the publication of the Elliott Wave Theory in 1938, research and development of the
theory has continued. The theory has also been expanded by the development of computerized
programs that count the waves based on interrelated Fibonacci ratios. For example, it has been
learned that both Wave 5 and Wave C can end in a diagonal triangle pattern or in an expanding
triangle pattern. Whether or not a computerized count can do the job, the aim of the trader in
using Elliott Wave Theory is find those waves that work best for him in his trading strategy.

APPENDIX: RATIOS AND WAVE RELATIONSHIP
The following are popular Fibonacci ratios applied to a five-wave structure, listed here for easy
reference:
Fibonacci
Wave Relationship
Ratios
0.382

(1) Correction of Wave 2 to Wave 1
(2) Correction of Wave 4 to Wave 3

0.618

(1) Correction of Wave 2 to Wave 1
(2) Correction of Wave 4 to Wave 3
(3) Projection of Wave 3 if Wave 1 is extended
(4) Projection of Wave 5 on the distance from the beginning of Wave 1 to
Wave 3

0.786

(1) Correction of Wave 2 to Wave 1
(2) A-B-C correction of five-wave structure

1.000

(1) Projection of Wave 3 to Wave 1
(2) Projection of Wave 5 (non-extended), which is equal to the non-extended
wave of either Wave 1 or Wave 3

1.618

(1) Projection of Wave 3 to Wave 1 if Wave 1 is non-extended
(2) Projection of extended Wave 5 on the distance from the beginning of Wave
1 to Wave 3

2.618

(1) Projection of extended Wave 3 if Wave 1 is not extended

The following are popular Fibonacci Ratios applied to a three-wave structure:
Fibonacci
Wave Relationship
Ratios
0.382

(1) Retracement of Wave B to Wave A in a zigzag
(2) Retracement of Wave C to Wave A in a zigzag

0.500

(1) Retracement of Wave B to Wave A in a zigzag

0.618

(1) Retracement of Wave B to Wave A in a zigzag
(2) Retracement of Wave C to Wave A in a zigzag
(3) Projection of Wave C to Wave A in a flat or irregular flat

1.000

(1) Projection of Wave C to Wave A in a zigzag
(2) Projection of Wave C to Wave A in a flat or irregular flat
(3) Retracement of Wave B to Wave A in a flat

1.618

(1) Projection of Wave C to Wave A in a zigzag
(2) Projection of Wave C to Wave A in a flat

2.618

(1) Projection of Wave C to Wave A in either a zigzag or an elongated flat

CHAPTER 5

Volume

Volume represents the number of stocks transacted between buyers and sellers during a
specified period, as shown in
Figure 5.1
. The period may be one day, one week, or one hour. The specified length of the period
depends on the analyst. If we wish to arrive at a short-term view of the market, the price and
volume should be analyzed daily or even hourly. On the other hand, a longer-term analysis
would require a longer time frame. To determine the trend of volume, a running record should
be maintained to compare the daily volume with previous figures. However, there is no
standard rule as to the requisite number of days that should be used. Volume is generally
plotted as a histogram below the corresponding price action.
FIGURE 5.1
The daily volume of the stock is shown in the bottom window. Note the huge placement of
shares in October 2009, which suppresses the scale of the rest of the daily plots, making them
difficult to read.

BASIC VOLUME PLOTS
One approach to determining the volume trend is to plot two average lines of volume, a fastand a slow-moving average. This has the advantage of showing a potential change in trend
when the fast average line crosses above the slow average line. (See
Figure 5.2
.)
FIGURE 5.2
The histogram bars of the volume in the lower window are plots of the 2-day average, while
the red line represents the 10-day average.

Another method is to plot a comparison of the longer-term average to a shorter-term
average by percentage, as shown in
Figure 5.3
.
FIGURE 5.3
The volume is plotted as a percentage ratio between its 2-day average and 10-day average.

READING VOLUME
Volume is not always easily deciphered. Is the market trying to tell us something when an
exceptionally low volume occurs in a single day, or when an exceptionally high volume was
transacted recently? A single volume bar by itself will not be meaningful. Volume is always
analyzed in conjunction with the price movement of a stock as it develops with the market’s
changing activity. Volume is the key to evaluating price directional movement and shows the
market’s ability to facilitate trade. It serves as a gauge of the strength of market development
and shows when such money-flow is either increasing or slowing down.
Under normal market conditions, volume tends to expand and contract with the price trend;
the movement of price and volume should be similar progression. During the upward price
movement, volume should expand; and during the downward price movement, volume should
contract. We use volume to assess the strength and health of the prevailing trend. The specific
number of a single volume bar is not important and the interpretation of volume should not be
based only on a single daily bar. Volume should be studied in perspective with its recent action.
Volume as an indicator will often be more meaningful when average volume is used (see
Figure 5.4
).
FIGURE 5.4
The middle window shows the plots of the 2-day and 10-day averages. The bottom window
shows the plots of the percentage ratio of the 2-day and 10-day averages. Notice that the
expansion and contraction of volume move in line with the price trend.

The use of volume as an indicator is more reliable when it refers to heavy turnover stocks.
Volume of secondary securities with little or no trading volume will not provide reliable clues.
Volume is the indicator of the market’s ability to facilitate trade. Even in a bullish market, if
volume is decreasing, then the likelihood of a continuing uptrend is in question. A market that
is not facilitating trade will not survive for long.
Volume is a combination of activity by buyers and sellers. Thus, all markets tend to seek to
trade at an accepted price level that maximizes volume. If a market is not allowing trade at such
price level, it will seek a new level that will provide better trading. Thus, if the price movement
is relatively static and volume continues to decline, the chances are that the market will break
out of that region in search of new activity. (See

Figure 5.5
.)
FIGURE 5.5
Prices try to make a second thrust toward the 50-day average line but the attempt is not
supported by sufficient volume. Instead, prices break the support line accompanied by heavy
volume.

Market change offers both risk and opportunity. The important point is to identify market
change as it is developing. By using volume as an added tool, a trader can anticipate market
behavior in the early stages of change. When movements of volume and price are not
progressing in similar order, it warns of a probable change of trend. The firmness of the stock
trend is expected to weaken when advancing price is accompanied by diminishing volume, as
decreasing volume indicates a rejection of higher prices. And when declining price is
accompanied by a trend in increased volume, it indicates an overhang of selling pressure. The
trend is expected to be strong when advancing price is accompanied by a trend in increasing
volume. Often, a low point in volume indicates a quiet market or an imminent turning point in
the market. If the volume trend does not expand while the price trend is rising, it is an
indication that the price movement is approaching a resistance level. As long as the volume
trend continues to expand with the upward price trend, it can be assumed that further
advances in prices are likely.
Normally, volume will diminish in a declining market and expand in an advancing market. In
Elliott’s wave principle, volume pattern at Wave 2 will be less than that of Wave 1, and volume
at Wave 4 will be less than that of Wave 3. Volume of Wave 3 will be higher than volume at
Wave 1. Volume at Wave 5 can be lower than that of Wave 3, indicating the termination of the
overall wave movement. If the volume at Wave 5 is greater than that of Wave 3, it indicates
that Wave 5 will likely be extended.
Figure 5.6
and
Figure 5.7
show examples of the relationship between the volume patterns and price movements.
FIGURE 5.7
Price breaks upward from a line formation with increasing volume.

FIGURE 5.6
This chart shows the support of volume at every rally of the price until the final phase when it
gives an early warning of trend weakness with declining volume. Prices begin to trade narrowly
in a sideway market with low volume. A reversal of the uptrend finally occurs when prices dip
downward with increasing volume.

Volume increases as the price rallies and decreases as the price pulls back into a
consolidation pattern. When the price breaks upward away from its consolidation, buyers start
buying heavily, as indicated by the increase in volume. When volume starts to decline as price
continues its upward move, it gives a warning that a topping of the price is near. When price
breaks downward with increasing volume, it signals the end of the upward price trend.
Volume is useful to confirm whether a current move is likely to continue or is merely a false
start. In general, most market participants are bullish and are aggressive buyers. The stock
market is an active battleground where a constant battle is going on between the buyers and
sellers. Volume analysis may often provide clues as to who is gaining the upper hand.

MONEY-FLOW INDICATOR
Besides plotting the volume data to monitor the correlation of price and volume, nowadays,
with the ease of computers, various oscillators have been developed to quantify the
relationship between price and volume. These indicators are generally called money-flow
indicators. There are many of them. The main purpose of price volume indicators is to
segregate the total volume into positive volume and negative volume, which may reveal a new
condition of the market when derived from certain calculations with the price. A money-flow
indicator can be used as a stand-alone indicator, but it is better to combine it with another
price-derivative trading system.
Figure 5.8
shows a simple money-flow indicator called volume zone oscillator (VZO). VZO is easy to
understand.
FIGURE 5.8
Volume zone oscillator shows a drastic drop on the day of the announcement of a substantial
placing of stocks, which causes the price to open with a downward gap. However, prices
subsequently recover and rally back to the previous high.

VZO was developed by Walid Khalil and David Steckler. Details of the indicator and how to
use it are stated in the May 2011 issue of Technical Analysis of tocks & Commodities magazine
and in the IFTA Journal, 2008 edition. The original formula, together with its proposed trading
method, is also described in the articles.
Certain modifications have been made to VZO as it is shown in the example, including the
addition of the scale factor to allow the plotting of daily percentage change of moving average
volume. This allows readers to understand the relationship of volume and the concept of
positive volume as represented by VZO. VZO is positive when the closing price is greater than
the previous closing price. A moving average line is also added to let readers see the bigger
picture of the money-flow trend. Readers may remove the plot of the daily percentage change
of moving average volume when they are familiar with the overall concept.
Reading VZO is just like reading any momentum oscillator. Its main functions include signals
for trade entries and exits. The indicator is basically divided into four zones. The market is
positive when VZO stays above the 50 percent level and negative when it is below 50 percent.
When the market is trending positively, the indicator will fluctuate between 50 and 70 percent,

the bullish zone. And when the market is trending negatively, it will fluctuate between 50 and
30 percent, the bearish zone. In a trading market, VZO will generally move between its 30 and
70 percent lines. The market is deemed to be overbought when it is above 70 percent, and in
an extreme overbought condition when it is above 80 percent. On the contrary, the market is
deemed to be oversold when it is below 30 percent, and in an extreme oversold condition
when it is below 20 percent. Signs of weakness or strength in the market are sometimes
reflected in the divergence between the indicators and price movements.
The horizontal percentage lines serve as the signal lines. When VZO crosses from below the
30 percent line to above, a trade entry is indicated, and when VZO crosses from above the 70
