
BOX 7.2 NEUROCHEMISTRY AFFECT ON HUMAN THINKING
Neurotransmitters affect emotion and behavior. At present there have been discovered over 108 different neurotransmitters that interact, stimulating and inhibiting the
activities of each other. “Five of these neurotransmitters act throughout most of the
brain: Histamine, serotonin, dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and
acetylcholine.” (Peterson, 2007 [Inside the Investor’s Brain: The Power of Mind
Over Money], p. 48) “Additionally, local actions of opiods, norepineprhine, stress
hormones, and omega-3 fatty acids affect behavior and decision making. And if that
weren’t enough, common medications, street drugs, and foods also should be considered for the neural effects on judgment.” (Peterson, p. 50)
“Many pathological mood states (such as depression, mania, anxiety, and obsession), neurological conditions (such as Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease), and impulse-control disorders (such as kleptomania, compulsive shopping,
and pathological gambling) are known to affect financial decision making: depression is associated with risk aversion, mania with investing overconfidence, anxiety
with “analysis paralysis,” and compulsions with overtrading. Interestingly, the financial symptoms of these illnesses can be reduced by medications.” (Peterson, p. 47)

HOW DOES HUMAN BIAS AFFECT DECISION MAKING?
Remember, the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH) suggests that enough investors are acting
rationally at any particular point in time to make it impossible for a technical analyst to profit
from security mispricing due to the emotions of the uninformed players. However, the field of
behavioral finance has defined numerous ways in which investors act less than rational. These
biases are common not just to the occasional investor or uninformed public but to professionals
as well. Just look at how many professional securities analysts were caught in the late 1990s

Download at www.wowebook.com

93

Chapter 7 Sentiment

stock market euphoria. These were not stupid, irrational people, but their inherent biases, those
common to all humans, overcame their ability to reason, and they became caught up in the optimism of the time, to tragic effect.

BOX 7.3 INVESTORS ARE THEIR OWN WORST ENEMIES
From Zweig (2007)
• Everyone knows that you should buy low and sell high—and yet, all too
often, we buy high and sell low.
• Everyone knows that beating the market is nearly impossible—but just about
everyone thinks he can do it.
• Everyone knows that panic selling is a bad idea—but a company that
announces it earned 23 cents per share instead of 24 cents per share can lose $5
billion of market value in a minute-and-a-half.
• Everyone knows that Wall Street strategists can’t predict what the market is
about to do—but investors still hang on every word from the financial pundits
who prognosticate on TV.
• Everyone knows that chasing hot stocks or mutual funds is a sure way to get
burned—yet millions of investors flock back to the flame every year. Many do
so though they swore, just a year or two before, never to get burned again.
…our brains often drive us to do things that make no logical sense—but make
perfect emotional sense.

Those who study behavioral finance attribute some of the biased behavior of financial market players to crowd behavior. These researchers have found that crowd opinions are formed by
several biases. People tend to conform to their group, making the taking of an opposite opinion
sometimes difficult and dangerous. People do not like rejection or ridicule and will stay quiet to
avoid such pressure. People often meet hostility when going against a crowd. Another bias is that
people gain confidence by extrapolating past trends, even when doing so is irrational, and, thus,
they tend to switch their opinions slowly. Also, people feel secure in accepting the opinions of
others, especially “experts,” and tend to believe the establishment will take care of them.
Understanding that investor emotion and bias affect investment decisions is important for
two reasons. First, understanding the links between emotions, investment behavior, and security
prices can help the technical analyst profit by spotting market extremes. Second, technical analysts must remember that they are subject to the same human biases as other investors. This set of
human biases is so strong that even those who recognize them still are affected by them and must
constantly fight against them. Successful traders and investors often say that the worst enemy in
investment is oneself. Technical analysts hope to profit from understanding how human bias can
cause people to pay prices greater than the intrinsic value for a stock, but if they are not careful,
their own biases may cause them to do the same.

Download at www.wowebook.com

94

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

For example, the behavioral finance principle of “representation” suggests that people
often recognize patterns where they do not actually exist. Although it is the technical analyst’s
strategy to attempt to recognize patterns, an analyst must be certain not to “see” patterns that do
not really exist. Therefore, an investor or trader must not only understand our human foibles but
must also find a way to either fight against them or avoid them.
At times, emotional excess leads to extraordinary rises in prices (and sometimes to extraordinary declines, called crashes or panics). These periods of extraordinary price increases,
whether in the stock market, gold, or tulip bulbs, are called bubbles. During a bubble, stock market returns are much higher than the mean, or average, return. Bubbles are part of that fat tail
mentioned in the discussion of the nonrandomness of prices in Chapter 4, “The Technical Analysis Controversy.” Although bubbles occur infrequently, they occur considerably more often than
would be expected under an ideal random walk model.
For the current discussion, the existence of bubbles is proof that prices are not always determined rationally; emotion can get hold of the market and, through positive feedback, run prices far
beyond any reasonable value before reversing. This type of bubble is visible in Figure 7.1. During
the late 1990s, security prices were rapidly increasing. By 2000, security prices were extremely high,
especially in the technology sector. The price earnings ratios for many companies were at record
highs. For some companies, the price earnings ratios were infinite because there were no earnings at
all. In fact, investors would have to assume that earnings would grow at an astounding 100% per year
for 20 years to justify the stock prices using traditional stock valuation models. According to investment analyst David Dreman, “This seems to be a classic pattern of investor overreaction” (Dreman,
2002, p. 4). Nevertheless, the bubble occurred, indicating that investors of all kinds can become blind
to reality when greed and other psychological biases influence decision making.

1,434
1,280
1,140

1,020
911
813
726
648
579
517
462
412
368
328

1991

1992 1993

1994 1995

1996 1997 1998

1999 2000

2001

2002

2003 2004

2005

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 7.1 The late 1990s bubble (S&P 500 Index: 1990–2004)

Download at www.wowebook.com

95

Chapter 7 Sentiment

BOX 7.4 BOOKS ON THE HISTORY OF MANIAS AND PANICS
A number of excellent books have been written about the manias and panics that
characterize the financial markets. For further information about this phenomenon,
you can read the following:
Ahamed, Liaquat. Lords of Finance: The Bankers Who Broke the World. New
York, NY: Penguin, 2009.
Allen, Fredrick Lewis. Only Yesterday. New York, NY: First Perennial Classics,
2000.
Amyx, Jennifer. Japan’s Financial Crisis: Institutional Rigidity and Reluctant
Change. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Bruner, Robert F. and Sean D. Carr. The Panic of 1907: Lessons Learned from the
Market’s Perfect Storm. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2009.
Galbraith, John K. A Short History of Financial Euphoria. New York, NY: Penguin House, 1994.
Kindlelberger, Charles P. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
Crises. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005.
Mackay, Charles. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds.
Petersfield, Hampshire, UK: Harriman House, 2003.
Reinhard, Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009.
Sobel, Robert. Panic on Wall Street: A History of America’s Financial Disasters.
New York, NY: Macmillan, 1968.
Wicker, Elmus. Banking Panics of the Guilded Age. UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2008.

CROWD BEHAVIOR AND THE CONCEPT OF CONTRARY OPINION
The art of contrary thinking may be stated simply: Thrust your thoughts out of a rut.
In a word, be a nonconformist when using your mind.
Sameness of thinking is a natural attribute. So you must expect to practice a little to
get into the habit of throwing your mind into directions that are opposite to the obvious.
Obvious thinking—or thinking the same way in which everyone else is thinking—
commonly leads to wrong judgments and wrong conclusions.
Let me give you an easily remembered epigram to sum up this thought:
When everyone thinks alike, everyone is likely to be wrong. (Neill, 1997, p. 1)

Download at www.wowebook.com

96

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

When individuals think by themselves, they can be very logical and reasonable, but when joined
with a crowd, they tend to let certain cognitive biases affect their decision making. History is
replete with examples of financial manias, those periods when, in retrospect, the crowd of
investors became overly irrational. During those periods, the irrationality is met with a new hysteria, the belief that “things are different this time.” We have seen this emotional excess just
recently in the Internet stock-price bubble in the late 1990s and in the real estate bubble in the
early 2000s. At those times, it was very difficult to argue, much less invest, against the prevailing
trend of emotion. Too many were making too much money regardless of their reasoning. Of
course, such times eventually reverse and return to normal and often decline to an opposite
excess. Not believing that they are personally caught in a mania, when prices reverse, people
blame others for their own irrationality. Denying their own responsibility for being duped by the
emotions of the crowd, they demand new laws be passed to prevent “evil” corporations or government laxity or fads as derivatives from causing another bubble. Such behavior is not limited to
financial markets. Manias occur in politics, religion, philosophy, education—almost every
human endeavor. They are often man-made, as in either the Tulip Bulb mania or as in politics
through propaganda and “spin.” The Theory of Contrary Opinion is an attempt to teach individuals how to recognize and profit from such excesses in emotional fervor and to look at all sides
of a belief before committing to it or rejecting it.
A “crowd” thinks with its heart (that is, is influenced by emotions) while an individual thinks with his brain. (Neill, 1997, p. 3)
Contrary opinion is a “way of thinking…It is more of an antidote to general forecasting
than a system for forecasting. In a few words, it is a thinking tool, not a crystal ball” (Neill, 1997,
p. 9). To be a contrarian, an investor must sell (be pessimistic) when the overall market mood is
grossly optimistic and buy (be optimistic) when most investors are pessimistic and in a panic.
Although this might sound easy enough, the problem with implementing a contrarian strategy is
that it is indefinite. Remember that one of the basic tenets of Dow Theory is that prices trend.
When prices are trending upward, we want to be in a long position, riding the trend. The goal of
understanding sentiment is to discern when that trend is losing energy and will reverse. Therefore, the task of the contrarian player is to find a way in which to quantify which direction the
majority of market players is headed and to question whether there is enough remaining energy
to keep the market moving in that direction. Remember that so long as players still have money
to invest in the market, their optimism will drive prices higher. It is only when players are fully
invested that their optimism will not be accompanied by security purchases. At this point, the
market is at an excess, and the trend often ends. To quantify these excesses, the technical analyst
uses publicly available data to construct indicators of emotional excess. Now that we have
looked at some of the theoretical underpinnings, let us look at how these sentiment indicators are
typically constructed and evaluated.

HOW IS SENTIMENT OF UNINFORMED PLAYERS MEASURED?
A top in the market is the point of maximum optimism, and a bottom in the market is
the point of maximum pessimism. (Davis, 2003, p. 9)

Download at www.wowebook.com

97

Chapter 7 Sentiment

Sentiment indicators are data series that give the technical analyst some feeling for how much
prices are at an excessively emotional level. With that information, potential future reversals in
trend can be better anticipated. Generally, sentiment indicators are more useful in analyzing markets than individual issues. Individual issue prices have their emotional component, of course,
but ways to measure that component are much less reliable than those of measuring overall market sentiment. Therefore, we focus our discussion on indicators that reflect overall market optimism.
Remember, we are interested in the two broad categories of players—the uninformed and
the informed. Most sentiment indicators focus on the uninformed. These uninformed players are
usually wrong at major market turns. Therefore, if we know what the uninformed are doing, we
have a clue about what not to do. On the other hand, some sentiment indicators attempt to measure the action of informed players, who generally are accurate in their assessment of market
prospects. These indicators are based on watching professional traders and corporate insiders
and following their lead.
Fear and greed are not mirror images of one another. Emotional excess is often the sharpest
at market bottoms when panic has occurred. On the other hand, optimism can last for a long
while. Most sentiment indicators are, therefore, useful in determining market bottoms when the
fear reaches its highest level. These indicators can often be deceiving on the rise in prices, however, because the extreme in greed, the converse of fear in markets, will place them at high levels
during which the market will continue to rise. A sell signal generated by a specific sentiment
indicator is, thus, less likely to be as valid as a buy signal.

Sentiment Indicators Based on Options and Volatility
To glean some information about what uninformed traders are doing, analysts often consider
option trading activity and volatility measures. Option trading can be a sign of market speculation, and volatility can be an indication of the anxiousness of market players. Let’s look at some
of these measures.
Option Trading and Sentiment
Traditionally, odd lot statistics were reliable indicators of the sentiment of uninformed, small
investors. That small investors, who did not have enough capital to purchase round, 100-share
lots, were heavily buying stocks was an indication that the uninformed public was overly optimistic. When small, uninformed investors were highly pessimistic, they would short sell odd
lots. The odd lot figures represented a measure of uninformed, public speculation, which tended
to be highest at market turning points.
Today, listed options data has replaced the old odd-lot figures as one of the best measures
of public speculation. A call option is an option to buy an asset, usually a stock or commodity, at
a fixed price for a specific period. A put option is an option to sell an asset at a fixed price for a
specific period of time. Some options, by expanding on the basics of time and price, can become
very complex. However, the standard call and put option is the most widely traded and has the
highest volume of any option type. The option market, by its very nature, is a speculative market.

Download at www.wowebook.com

98

Part II Markets and Market Indicators

It depends on leverage for maximum gains, and positions can close worthless on the expiration
of options. As such, it has become a speculative vehicle for the uninformed public.
Let us look at how the options market can measure sentiment. Let us assume that Jerry
thinks that the price of stock XYZ will increase above its current level of $20 per share. Jerry can
purchase a call option in which he has the option to buy 100 shares of XYZ at a price of $20 per
share anytime in the next three months. The option price and premium—say, $2 per share—is
much less than the outright purchase price of the stock. If the price of XYZ rises above $20, Jerry
can exercise his option and purchase shares at the guaranteed, and now very favorable, $20. If
instead, the price of XYZ declines or remains flat during the three-month period, Jerry will allow
the option to expire and he will lose his investment. Thus, the option market gives Jerry, an uninformed player, a way to speculate about the movement of the price of a stock by paying a small
fee for the option. When investors think that stock prices will rise, they speculate by purchasing
call options. When investors are bearish, they speculate by purchasing put options. When
investors are very bullish, they buy out-of-the-money call options—those that have a striking
price above the current stock price—because they trade at very low prices.
Owners will exercise their call options when they correctly project price increases and
their put options when they correctly anticipate price decreases. When investors incorrectly predict market moves, exercising their options is unprofitable. If the owner of an option does not
exercise the option by the expiration date, then the option expires worthless.1
Because the purchase of a call represents one who believes the stock market will rise and a
put reflects a bearish opinion, the ratio of calls to puts represents the relative demand for options
by speculators and, thus, is a hint as to their disposition toward the market. The more call buyers
relative to put buyers, the more optimistic are the speculators.
Using Put/Call Ratios to Gauge Sentiment
There are several ways to calculate a ratio between puts and calls. Some have used a ratio of the
average premium paid for calls versus the average premium paid for puts. In theory, the premium
represents the anxiousness of the option buyer and the reticence of the option seller. Statistically,
however, this has not been reliable for indicating sentiment. Some analysts have added the price
of all options traded each day multiplied by the volume of each trade to arrive at a dollar volume
ratio between calls and puts. Not only does this calculation require accurate data and significant
computing power, but the information provided by this calculation also has not seemed to be particularly useful. Others have calculated a ratio based on the open interest in calls and puts. Unfortunately, this has also turned out to be a mediocre indicator of contrary opinion.

1. It has long been thought that most options expire worthless, indicating that most people purchasing options have incorrectly predicted the direction of market moves. However, recent research indicates that more are exercised than had been
thought. In the November 2004 issue of Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities, Tom Gentile reports on a study
of 30 years of option data conducted by Alex Johnson of the International Securities Exchange who found that only 30%
of options expire worthless. Roughly 10% are exercised, and the remaining 60% are closed through offsetting transactions. The percentage expiring worthless, nevertheless, is large and still suggests that many option buyers are uninformed.

Download at www.wowebook.com

99

Chapter 7 Sentiment

The final, simplest, and most consistent method of calculating puts to calls is to calculate a
ratio of the total volume of puts traded in a day versus the total volume of calls (McMillan,
1996). For the stock market, the raw volume statistics as well as the ratio are available in
Microsoft Excel format on the Web site of the Chicago Board Options Exchange
(www.cboe.com), known as the CBOE, the largest options exchange in the world according to
the Futures Industry Association. One unique way of measuring option-player sentiment is the
International Securities Exchange (ISE) Sentiment Index. The ISE (www.ise.com) is the largest
electronic options exchange in the United States, and offers trading in over 2,000 equity, ETF,
index, and foreign exchange products. Their Sentiment Index, based on the idea that investors
will often buy call and put options to express their market view of a stock, uses opening long
position volume only. Because they are not considered representative of true market sentiment
due to their specialized nature, firm trades and market markers are excluded from the calculation.
Option volume ratios have changed over the 35 years that options have been traded in
exchanges. It is, thus, imperative to smooth the raw volume data using moving averages to
reduce the effect of this long-term relationship change. Ned Davis Research, Inc.
(www.ndr.com), using the ISE Sentiment Index, discovered a technique to take advantage of
short-term stock market moves. They calculated a ratio of the 13-day simple moving average to
the 20-day simple moving average of the index. When the ratio rose above 1.02, a buy signal was
generated, and when the ratio declined below 0.98, a sell signal was generated. Figure 7.2 displays and summarizes the results of these signals. They are high-turnover signals with an average
of 12.5 trades per year.
Daily Date 5/17/201 - 7/16/2010

S&P 500 Index versus ISE Put/Call Volume
1875
1800
1725
1650
1575
1500
1425
1350
1275
1200
1125
1050
975
900
825
750
675
600
525
110
109
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
95
94
93
92

[S588]

Profitable Trades:
Gain/Annum:
Buy-Hold Gain/Annum:
Latest Signal 6/01/2001=1070.71
