
Download at www.wowebook.com

601

Appendix A Basic Statistics

return, return beyond what we expect based upon the CAPM. Fund managers are sometimes said
to be “searching for alpha.”
Geometrically, we can see the Treynor and Jensen measures in Figure A.8. Suppose that
you use the Treynor and Jensen measures to rank two investments, X and Y. It is possible that
investment X will have the highest Treynor measure but the lower Jensen alpha. However, in
most cases, the ranking will be the same. There is some irony in the fact that the two performance
measures based on the CAPM’s beta don’t bear the name of Sharpe, who developed the CAPM.
16

Fund ABC
14
12

}

Return (%)

Rm
10

Jensen
1.4%

8
6
4

Rf
2
0

Beta

FIGURE A.8 Treynor and Jensen performance measures

Geometrically, the Sharpe measure would look similar to the Treynor measure line drawn
in Figure A.8. The difference is that standard deviation would be used in place of beta on the xaxis.
A relatively new (developed in 1994 by J.P. Morgan Co.) measure that is used to summarize risk, especially at the overall firm level, is Value-at-Risk, known as VaR. Banks commonly
use this measure, and it is even used for regulatory purposes. VaR tells us in one simple number
the maximum loss that will occur (with 95% confidence under normal conditions) over a given
period, such as one day. Because no one can foresee the future, the phrase “will occur” is based
on certain assumptions. Let us say a certain investment firm is holding various U.S. and foreign
stocks. Consider the risk along three dimensions: the risk of holding U.S. equities, the risk of
holding foreign stocks, and the exchange rate risk. With VaR, you would analyze the variability
in these three components (you could divide it more finely into more components) and the correlations between them. You would then roll all this information into a complex computer program
that would perform the VaR calculation and give you one number as the result. For example, the
VaR might be $3.6 million, meaning that there is less than a 5% chance that the firm would suffer a one-day loss greater than $3.6 million. Due to the complexity of the calculations, this measure would normally only be used by financial institutions.

Download at www.wowebook.com

602

Part IX Appendices

ADVANCED STATISTICAL METHODS
Some researchers have applied some very sophisticated statistical techniques to investment analysis. It is beyond the scope of this book to go into detail concerning some of these advanced methods. However, we try to provide a qualitative understanding of some of the major techniques.
We used the term “time series” earlier in this appendix. It merely refers to data for which
we have observations in consecutive periods. Time series modeling refers to statistical techniques for analyzing time series data.
When a researcher begins to analyze a given time series, the first question to ask is usually
this: “Is the series stationary?” You can think of stationary as being generally stable, with some
degree of structure. Stock prices are usually nonstationary because they are usually trending up
or down, or fluctuating with trends.
Earlier in this appendix, we talked about how returns are often used rather than prices.
Returns are often stationary. The stationarity of returns is a major advantage. It is not possible to
make statements that are very meaningful about a nonstationary series. Stationarity is tested
using what is called a unit root test. If the series has a unit root, it is not stationary. Therefore,
you hope to be able to reject the hypothesis that the series has a unit root.
It is possible for two series to both be nonstationary but for some mathematical (linear)
combination of the two series to be stationary. If this occurs, we say that the two series are cointegrated. Cointegration analysis techniques have been applied in several areas of finance, but
there is probably great potential for additional applications of this method.
Major buzzwords in the finance academic community over the past 10 to 15 years are the
acronyms ARCH and GARCH. Because ARCH is a subset of GARCH, we focus just on it.
GARCH stands for generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity. This sounds
extremely complicated, and it is to some degree. However, the basic idea behind it is simple—
ordinary regression breaks down when you analyze many financial time series because the
volatility of the series changes over time.
When the volatility (you can think of this as the standard deviation of stock returns, for
example) of a series is not constant (not precisely constant, but at least generally constant or consistent), we say it is heteroscedastic. If we think of periods like that before and soon after the
market crash of 1987 or the Internet bubble of the late 1990s, it is easy to imagine that volatility
changes over time.
Methods such as ARCH and GARCH are used to estimate volatility. There are three major
reasons why volatility estimates have increased in importance, as follows:
• The use of options contracts has increased dramatically in the past few decades. The
key input into option pricing models is an estimate of the asset’s volatility.
• There have been significant periods of changing volatility over the past few decades.
Examples are the stock market crash of 1987, the Asian financial crisis of 1997, the
Russian moratorium of government debts, the financial insolvency of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998, the World Trade Center attack in 2001, the
accounting manipulations of Enron and other companies in 2002, and the 2008–2009
financial crisis.
• There has been increased use of VaR, which requires volatility estimates.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Appendix A Basic Statistics

603

One other term you may encounter is maximum likelihood. With maximum likelihood,
you work backward from the observed data to make inferences about the probability distribution
that produced those outcomes. You try to find the distribution that was most likely to be the
source of the outcomes. Maximum likelihood techniques can be applied to many different statistical problems. It can even be an alternative to least squares in performing regression.

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The term artificial intelligence (AI) refers to using computers to mimic intelligent processes
found in the natural world. Researchers in AI have often overestimated their ability to produce
intelligent behavior or thought processes with machines. However, AI has definitely had some
success and will probably continue to exert greater impact on our society in the future. You only
have to look at the latest robotic devices in an electronics store to glimpse some of the potential.
We only briefly describe three of the major developments in AI: expert systems, neural networks,
and genetic algorithms.
To build an expert system, you need a cooperating expert. An expert system tries to model
the thinking process of someone who is an expert on a particular subject. For example, programmers might interview a doctor at length, trying to build various rules for decision making. For
example, the doctor might say that the first thing to do is take the patient’s temperature. If the
patient has a fever, you proceed along one set of steps. If the patient does not have a fever, you
proceed along another set of steps. As you can imagine, the list of steps would be extremely long
to diagnose many different illnesses. Some steps might lead to a dead end, where the system
would indicate that a doctor would need to be consulted; the situation would be beyond the capability of the expert system. If you had an expert investor like Warren Buffett, you could potentially build a system that would mimic his stock selection process. However, researchers have
found that it is extremely difficult to encode the decision-making process of many experts.
Experts often seem to have a sixth sense in many situations that cannot be modeled.
The basic idea behind neural networks is to model, in a computer program, the network of
neurons that continually “fire” in our brains, causing us to sense, think, feel, and act. A neural
network consists of an input layer, an output layer, and some hidden layers in between. The
designer of the neural network decides how many layers should be between the input and output
layers and how the layers interact. In an investments application, company financial and stock
price data might be inputs, while buy/sell decisions would be outputs. Critics have complained
that neural networks are too much like a black box. You put in certain inputs and get out certain
outputs, but it is not very clear what is happening in the middle. This criticism does have some
validity; building a neural network is done more by trial and error than referring to an architectural or engineering blueprint. Defenders of neural networks counter that it is possible to dissect
a neural network and uncover the inner structure.
Genetic algorithms (GAs) derive their name from the fact that they mimic certain genetic
processes such as mutation. GAs are optimization algorithms. They try to maximize or minimize
what is referred to as “fitness.”
Problems are mapped into strings of 1s and 0s. For example, let us consider stock selection
strategies. Positions 1 and 2 in the string might correspond to quartiles of ROE. A value of 00

Download at www.wowebook.com

604

Part IX Appendices

might mean that you pick stocks that are in the lowest quartile of ROE for a given group of
stocks. Similarly, values of 01, 10, and 11 would represent the other three quartiles. If we continued this scheme for other variables, we might be able to say that a certain string (pattern of 1s
and 0s) would mean that we select stocks that are in the highest quartile of ROE, highest quartile
of EPS growth, lowest quartile of P/E ratio, highest quartile of relative price strength, and so on.
Genetic algorithms typically start with a randomly generated population of strings. The
strings then undergo various genetic operations, such as mutation and crossover (where two
strings swap tails), and the population gradually evolves. The evolution is driven toward higher
values of fitness. In an investing application, fitness could be the return earned from pursuing a
certain strategy.
There are two major hurdles in using GAs: (1) mapping your problem into a string, the
process of problem representation, can be difficult; and (2) sometimes, particularly in investing
applications, seemingly obvious fitness values (called “fitness functions”) can produce poor
results because the system evolves toward a solution driven by uncommon quirks in the test data.
New refinements to the basic technique, such as genetic programming, may lead to useful
applications in the investing world.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the difference between descriptive and inferential statistics.
2. The monthly closing prices for VLO and TSO for the year 2005 are given in Table A.2.
(The closing prices are adjusted for stock splits and dividends.)
TABLE A.2

Monthly Closing Prices for VLO and TSO
VLO

TSO

Date

Adj. Close*

Volume

Adj. Close*

Volume

3-Jan-05
1-Feb-05

25.89
35.49

6,327,590
11,433,242

31.71
36.78

1,156,805
1,283,473

1-Mar-05
1-Apr-05
2-May-05
1-Jun-05
1-Jul-05
1-Aug-05
1-Sep-05

36.5
34.14
34.24
39.47
41.3
53.2
56.48

14,312,645
19,363,771
15,281,285
11,828,418
11,438,900
18,753,469
24,614,095

36.87
37.79
43.48
46.39
48.09
57.69
67.12

1,496,781
1,944,952
1,586,209
1,481,663
1,213,225
1,948,447
3,366,504

3-Oct-05
1-Nov-05
1-Dec-05

52.57
48.1
51.6

23,972,552
17,303,419
11,718,461

61.04
55.07
61.55

3,137,700
2,545,585
1,698,647

Source: http://finance.yahoo.com

Download at www.wowebook.com

Appendix A Basic Statistics

605

a. Calculate the monthly return for each of these stocks.
b. Calculate the following for each of these stocks:
i. Arithmetic mean of the monthly returns
ii. Median monthly return
iii. Geometric mean monthly return
c. Explain why the mode is not a meaningful statistic for this data set.
3. Calculate the standard deviation of the monthly return for both VLO and TSO using the
data provided in Question 2. Explain how the standard deviation relates to risk.
4. What is the correlation coefficient for VLO and TSO? Explain what the correlation coefficient means.
5. Plot the monthly returns using TSO as the dependent variable and VLO as the independent
variable.
a. Calculate the least-squares regression line.
b. What is the r-squared for the regression line? How is this number interpreted?
c. If the monthly return for VLO was 3.4%, given the regression equation, what would
be your best estimate of the monthly return for TSO?

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

A P P E N D I X

B

TYPES OF ORDERS AND OTHER
TRADER TERMINOLOGY

In the second half of this book, we cover strategies and tactics that can be used with technical
analysis systems and patterns. Many of these strategies require knowledge of trading terms and
how to tell a broker in trader language what to do. Here are some of the common terms used universally in the markets:
All or None (AON) Execute the entire order or none of it, but not some fraction.
Ask The price at which a seller is willing to sell.
Bid The price at which a buyer is willing to buy.
Day Order An order that, if not executed, expires at the end of the day. Most orders are assumed
to be day orders unless otherwise specified.
Downtick A downtick is the opposite of an uptick in that the next previous different price was
above the current price.
Fill or Kill (FOK) Execute an order immediately and completely, or cancel it.
Good ‘Til Canceled Order (GTC) or Open Order An order that remains in effect until executed or cancelled. It usually has a time limit of several days to up to a month, at which time it
must be renewed.
Immediate or Cancel (IOC) An order that must be executed immediately or it becomes void.
Leaves The unexecuted balance of an order.
Limit, Limited Order, or Limited Price Order An order to execute a stated amount at a specific or better price.
Liquidity The ability of the market to absorb a reasonable amount of transactions with a minimum effect on prices.
Long As opposed to short, a position of ownership. “I am long 100 shares of XYZ” means I own
100 shares of XYZ. “I am going long” means I am buying.
Market on Close (MOC) Execute at the close as near to the last sale as possible.
607

Download at www.wowebook.com

608

Part IX Appendices

Market Order An order to execute a stated amount at the bid or offer price currently available
in the marketplace. All orders are assumed to be market orders unless otherwise stated.
Not Held The broker is not “held” to the transactions on the tape. He can “work” the order.
Odd Lot Usually fewer than 100 shares.
Offer The price at which a seller is willing to sell.
Opening Only or OPG An order to be executed on the opening only and if not executed to be
cancelled. This is valid for market and limit orders.
Pegged Market An order is pegged to buy on the best offer and sell on the best bid.
Pull Back An order to withdraw a current bid or offer.
Quote The highest bid and the lowest offer in a given market at a given time, sometimes including the volume at the bid and offer—usually called a “quote in size.”
Relative Allows the customer to enter a more aggressive price than the current market price, and
have the entered price stay within a fixed interval to the market should prices deteriorate.
Round Lot Usually 100 shares.
Scale An order to execute in increments—to sell into a rising market or buy into a declining
market.
Scale Order A specific order to scale a specified amount at specific price variations.
Seat A membership in an exchange.
Short One has sold the security and owes it to the lender. “I am short 100 shares of XYZ” means
I have borrowed and sold 100 shares of XYZ and at some time must buy it back and return it to the
lender. “I am going short” means I am selling the security in anticipation of its price declining.
Short Covering Buy stock to return stock previously borrowed to make delivery on a short sale.
Short Sale A sale of a security that is not owned, usually entered in anticipation of a decline in
price. A short sale, because the security is not owned but must be delivered to the buyer, requires
that the security be borrowed (usually arranged by the broker) and at some time returned. When
the security is “covered” with a “buy to cover” order, the security is returned, and the profit or
loss in the position is determined by the difference between the price at which the security was
bought and sold. Sometimes, the broker cannot borrow the stock, for a multitude of reasons, and
the order to sell short will be denied.
Stock Ahead Other orders at the same price were placed on the book earlier and are ahead of the
current order. Precedence for orders is based on when they were placed. These earlier orders may
be executed without execution of the current order.
Stop Limit Order A stop order that becomes a limit order once the stop price is reached.

Download at www.wowebook.com

609

Appendix B Types of Orders and Other Trader Terminology

Stop Order An order to execute once a price reaches a certain level away from current price. A
stop order becomes a market order once the specified price is reached. It may not be executed at
the stop price. An example is “Buy 100 shares XYZ at 52 stop.” Presumably, XYZ is trading
below 52 currently, and the order states that should the price reach 52, then enter a market order
to buy 100 shares. This type of order is principally used as protection against a sudden decline (a
sell stop). For example, say you own 100 shares of XYZ at 50 and believe it will rise. To protect
yourself from a major loss, you place a “sell 100 shares XYZ at 48 stop” to sell out your position
at 48 or below when 48 is reached. Thus, if you are correct and XYZ rises, you profit, but if XYZ
declines, you limit your loss to approximately two points. A stop order can also be entered if
there is no current position, but if the analyst believes that a certain price is crucial and wants to
enter a position once that price is reached. The stop order is the most important order of all orders
because it can either enter a potential winning position or limit one’s risk.
Time in Force The time limit for the order to be entered or cancelled.
Uptick or Plus Tick A term used to designate that the last price is above the next earlier price.
A Zero Plus Tick is a term that designates the last price that is the same as the next earlier price
but still above the last different price. Short sales of stocks usually must be executed on an
uptick, though this rule may change soon. ETF short sales do not require an uptick, and neither
do any futures markets. A downtick is the opposite of an uptick in that the next previous different
price was above the current price.
VWAP The Volume Weighted Average Price for a stock. VWAP is calculated by adding the dollars traded for every transaction in that stock and dividing the total shares traded. It is used by
institutions to measure the effectiveness of executions and as a target for daily executions.

AN ORDER TICKET
An order ticket, whether on the Internet or on the broker’s desk pad, usually includes the
following:
Contract Description:
Underlying
Exchange
Security Type: Stock, Option, Future, Future Option, Warrant, Cash, Index, Bond
Currency
Expiration Date
Strike Price
Option Type: Call/Put

Download at www.wowebook.com

610

Part IX Appendices

Action:
Buy/Sell
Order Description:
Order Type: Limit, Stop, Stop Limit, Market, MOC, MOO, IOC, FOK, AON, and so on.
Quantity
Limit Price
Stop Price
Time in Force:
Day/GTC
Good after Time
Expiration Date and Time
Regular Trading Hours Only?
Many other conditions can be added, depending on the complexity of the order, and not all the
categories mentioned are necessarily required. They depend on the type of security and what the
trader desires to do.

Download at www.wowebook.com

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aby, Carroll D. J. Point & Figure Charting: The Complete Guide. Greenville, SC: Traders Press,
Inc., 1996.
Achelis, Steven B. Technical Analysis from A to Z. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Afolabi, M. O., and O. Olude. “Predicting Stock Prices Using a Hybrid Kohonen Self Organizing Map (SOM).” Proceedings of the Fortieth Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, (2007): 48.
Ahamed, Liaquat. Lords of Finance: The Bankers Who Broke the World. New York, NY: Penguin,
2009.
Alexander, S. “Price Movements in Speculative Markets: Trends or Random Walks.” Industrial
Management Review 2 (1961): 7–26.
Allen, Fredrick Lewis. Only Yesterday. New York, NY: First Perennial Classics, 2000.
Alphier, James. “The Tragic Neglect of the Old Masters.” Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities 6, no. 10 (1988): 395–396.
———, and B. Kuhn. “A Helping Hand from the Arms Index.” Technical Analysis of Stocks &
Commodities 5, no. 4 (1987): 142–143.
Amyx, Jennifer. Japan’s Financial Crisis: Institutional Rigidity and Reluctant Change. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Anderson, John A. “Point and Figure Charting: A Computational Methodology and Trading Rule
Performance in the S&P 500 Futures Market.” Working paper, Queensland University of
Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, undated.
Angell, George. Winning in the Futures Markets: A Money-Making Guide to Trading, Hedging
and Speculating. Revised Edition. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1990.
Antonacci, Gary S. “Modern Portfolio Theory in Managed Futures, Part 2.” Technical Analysis
of Stocks & Commodities 5, no. 4 (1987): 239–241.
611

Download at www.wowebook.com

612

Part IX Appendices

Appel, Gerald, and Fred Hitschler. Stock Market Trading Systems: A Guide to Investment Strategy for the 1980s. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1980.
Appel, Gerald. Technical Analysis: Power Tools for Active Investors. Short Hills, NJ: FT Press,
2005.
Arms, Richard W., Jr. Profits in Volume. 2nd ed., New York, NY: Marketplace Books, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 1998.
———. The Arms Index: An Introduction to the Volume Analysis of Stock and Bond Markets.
Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1989.
Arnold, Tom, John Earl, David North. “Are Cover Stories Effective Contrarian Indicators?”
Financial Analysts Journal 63, no. 2 (2007): 70-75.
Aronson, David R. “Moving-Window Correlation Stability and Its Use in Indicator Evaluation.”
Journal of Technical Analysis (formerly The Market Technicians Association Journal),
Spring 1992.
———. Evidence-Based Technical Analysis: Applying the Scientific Method and Statistical
Inference to Trading Signals. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006.
Aspray, Thomas E. “Payoff Index.” Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities 6, no. 3 (1988):
115–118.
Ayres, Leonard P. Turning Points in Business Cycles. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1940.
Bachelier, Louis. “Theorie de la speculation.” Thesis, Annales Scientifiques de l’École Normale
Superieure, 1900. I I I–17, 21–86. Translated by Cootner (ed.) as “Random Character of
Stock Market Prices.” (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1964: 17–78 or Haberman S.,
and Sibett T. A. (eds.) as “History of Actuarial Science.” (London: VII, 1995: 15–78).
———. “Theorie des probabilities continues.” Journal des Mathematiques Pures et Appliquees,
1906.
