uffett agreed to sample the new “Cherry Coke,” then in the testing phase. “He sort of became a Cherry Coke fiend,” Keough said. Indeed, Buffett began to drink about five bottles of the stuff a day (Pepsi was gone; it vanished) and would scribble an occasional note to Keough exclaiming his rather boyish delight. He stocked the office with potato chips and what a visitor described as “thousands” of bottles of Cherry Coke. 22 When Keough ran into Buffett—at a 1986 White House reception—he thought his old neighbor unchanged: “a personable guy who loved life.” 
 Buffett reached his psychic peak at the annual meetings of Berkshire Hathaway. In the early years in Omaha, only a handful of shareholders had attended these meetings, which had been held in the cafeteria of its National Indemnity subsidiary. As a trickle of holders began to come from out of town, Buffett switched the meetings to the basement of a hotel, the Red Lion. Then the trickle became a tide. In 1986, Buffett rented the mausoleum-shaped pink-marble Joslyn Art Museum. Shareholders, clutching copies of his reports, descended on Omaha like birds of spring—Buffett groupies, money men, Graham disciples, New York bankers, retirees now rich and young investors aspiring to be rich. They came in suits and shirtsleeves; they came from the East, the South, the West Coast. While most annual meetings attract virtually no one (for the reason that most are a waste of time), attendance at Berkshire’s was 450. After the meeting, Buffett shooed them to the Furniture Mart, where Mrs. B unloaded a couple of oriental rugs for $10,000. 23 
 The meeting itself was a sort of Bartles & Jaymes gathering. Tables were set up with coffee urns and tubs filled with cans of Cherry Coke, the company’s “official drink.” Ninety-five percent of the shareholders had been in the stock for at least five years 24 —a level of devotion unique on Wall Street—and most had the vast bulk of their savings in this one stock. The investors, then, were unusually beholden to it, and to its high priest. They were a sect, a cult of which Buffett was the object. They noted his every gesture and casually offered remark as though it were suitable for framing. They felt a vicarious brilliance, as if they deserved a bit of the credit—if not for being geniuses, then for having found one. The cult had its own dogma (“Graham-and-Dodd” investing), and its members had the felt superiority of true believers. 
 There was James Lake, a metallurgical engineer from Tucson who had read Graham and Dodd, and Ronald Melton, who ran an insurance firm in Pocatello, Idaho, and Michael O’Brien, a photographer from Austin who had met Buffett on assignment, read his letters, and bought the stock. Then there was Thad McNulty, a Jacksonville money manager who so revered the man from Omaha that he brought his wife—to celebrate their wedding anniversary. 
 It was a faith healing, too, for Tim C. Medley, a Jackson, Mississippi, financial planner. His wife drawled in astonishment, “You’re going to spend $1,000 to go all the way to Nebraska to hear a man talk ?” Medley only owned one share. “Maybe I’m a little crazy about this,” he admitted, “but if you practice a faith, you go to the church. Buffett energizes me.” 
 Medley caught his first sight of Buffett in an archway of the Joslyn. Buffett was greeting investors in a blue blazer and gray slacks. His hair was tousled and his belt was worn thin from notch marks. He could have been a high school basketball coach: a “plain man” of whom Medley was in awe. 
 As Buffett and Munger went to the podium, the crowd settled into a reverential silence. A quart of Cherry Coke stood on the dais like a sacrament. Buffett raced through the formal business of the meeting and opened the floor to questions. He deadpanned that anyone who had to leave early should do so while Munger—not Buffett—was talking. Then the two of them embarked on a rambling, uncut version of the annual reports, taking questions on Berkshire and on business in general for hours. 
 Munger played the dour sidekick. He sprinkled his remarks with references to “the civilization,” which he seemed to feel was in peril. He said at one meeting: “The intelligence in this room is remarkable.” But he did not go in for the meetings’ carnival aspect. Adulation struck him as unseemly. 25 
 Buffett ate it up. He cracked joke after joke, and as he panned the crowd his eyebrows seem to waltz about his forehead. He loved seeing the same faces—people he had known for years, people he had made rich beyond all dreams, people such as the humble Doc Angle, who was now worth $15 million. 26 Buffett told a friend that he felt as if he were painting a vast, open picture that everyone he knew could admire. 27 This messianic attachment to Berkshire explains why he was unwilling to sell even a single share, and also, perhaps, why he turned the meetings into a ritual. He talked about inflation, Mrs. B, and management. He took questions on investing, Cap Cities, and Ben Graham. Now and then, he would respond with a story that was concise and to the point, yet so easy on the ear that one imagined the speaker to be sitting back in his rocker on a lazy summer’s afternoon. 
 One time, when Buffett was speaking off-the-cuff to a group at Cap Cities, he was asked what techniques he recommended to managers. He launched into a tale about a stranger in a small town. The fellow wanted to get acquainted with folks, so he went over to the village square and saw an old-timer with “kind of a mean-looking German shepherd.” Buffett continued: 

 He looked at the dog a little tentatively and he said, “Does your dog bite?” The old-timer said, “Nope.” So the stranger reached down to pet him and the dog lunged at him and practically took off his arm, and the stranger as he was repairing his shredded coat turned to the old-timer and said, “I thought you said your dog doesn’t bite.” The guy says, “Ain’t my dog.” 28 

 The moral for managers: It’s important to ask the right question. 
 Buffett was forever dropping these little “pearls,” even in small, private settings. One Saturday, Steven Gluckstern, a touted but reluctant prospect for Buffett’s insurance company, flew in for an interview. It was a bitter-cold Omaha morning. Gluckstern, who had read Buffett’s press notices, was nervous about what he would be like in person. Buffett greeted him in a flannel shirt and khaki pants, and immediately put him at ease. He didn’t really interview him. He talked to him, in conceptual terms, about risk-taking. “Hey, Steve,” he said, “you know, when you go into a poker game, you look around, there is always one patsy. If you look around and you can’t tell who the patsy is, that’s ’cause it’s you.” 29 
 This was Buffett’s way of warning him not to broker risks he didn’t understand. Gluckstern felt his host was like the author of those annual letters—dropping one-liners which, in context, seemed highly meaningful. He accepted on the spot. 
 One thinks of the young Warren who had stood in the corner at fraternity parties, taking the other fellows’ questions, or who had sat in the Brandts’ Manhattan living room with cronies at his feet. “Jesus and the apostles,” Roxanne Brandt had called them. Then he had been entirely private. Though now he was also a public person, he was surrounded by apostles still. 
 In Buffett’s case, this usual distinction between private and public was blurred. His friends were also his apostles. They called on him regularly for advice and counsel. Stan Lipsey turned to Buffett for advice on how to disentangle himself from a girlfriend. Richard Rainwater, the Texas financier, went to him for periodic “reality checks.” In 1986, Buffett urged Rainwater, then at a crossroads, to stay away from anything even remotely unseemly; a few extra dollars weren’t worth it, he warned. Rainwater found it memorable when, a short while later, some of Wall Street’s leading lights were dragged away in handcuffs. Jack Byrne spoke of Buffett as though he were some sort of national treasure. “Some people who know Warren don’t share him,” Byrne complained. “I deserve some credit for sharing him.” 
 Every odd year, Buffett’s inner circle—the so-called Graham group—convened at a resort. In the beginning, it had just been Buffett and a bunch of investment pals—very stag and very cheap. At the second meeting, in Palm Beach, Florida, a bellhop was so ticked off by one of their chintzy tips that he heaved it against a door. 30 Another time, the ultrarich Sandy Gottesman hooked up with the group at the airport, expecting to fly first-class. But no one else was; Gottesman stammered something about his secretary having made a mistake and switched to coach. 31 
 More recently, the seminars had gotten tonier and less inbred. They met in places like Scottsdale, Arizona, Sun Valley, Idaho, and on board the Queen Elizabeth 2 . Also, Buffett invited spouses and friends—such as Carol Loomis and Tom Murphy—who were not narrowly financial. One time, the group went rafting on the Colorado River, whereupon the patrician Key Graham was moved to remark, “I have never had my ass this wet in my life.” 32 
 Buffett considered these retreats with friends to be especially enjoyable times, and rather private ones. He was extremely fond of his friends, as they were of him. Yet the gatherings had a reverential aspect not wholly dissimilar from the annual meetings. These few dozen friends, though highly successful on their own, willingly regrouped under Buffett’s mantle—almost in celebration of him. The guest list was Buffett’s: only he decided who could come. One longtime member said, “There is a palpable desire of people to be seated at the same table with him. You get the feeling—will he sit at my table?” Peter Buffett, a young musician, sensed that his father’s friends yearned to be in his company. Relaxing in his studio beneath a picture of John Lennon and Yoko Ono, Peter likened them to a group of talented but lesser musicians with his Beatles idol. Ed Anderson, a charter member, regarded Buffett as “a sort of miracle man.” While Buffett’s demeanor at these get-togethers was unassuming, there was a sense in which these private friends—some of them, at least—were a more familiar form of the “audience” that Buffett had with public shareholders. 
 Most of Buffett’s older friends also were his shareholders. This set him at the curious remove of being responsible for many of his friends’ and family members’ wealth. They talked about Buffett, and about the stock, obsessively. Indeed, at every step of the way, they agonized over it. Marshall Weinberg, Buffett’s stockbroker friend, urged a client to wait for a better price when Berkshire was at $77, and repeated this counsel at $105. 33 Henry Brandt, another longtime Buffett pal, was forever polling fellow disciples about the outlook for Berkshire. At $1,700, he panicked and sold his wife ’s stock. 
 Conceptually, selling was at odds with the reason for owning Berkshire—which was to let Buffett manage the money, rather than to make such calls oneself. But the stock’s rise was so out of the realm of ordinary experience that people lost their nerve. Keith Wellin, the president of Reynolds Securities, had bought some Berkshire at $40, and a little more at $43. When it went to $50, he decided to wait for the price to fall. He waited … and waited. He finally bought some more at $3,000 a share. 
 Weinberg, a friend for decades, obsessively analyzed the possible financial consequences to himself of Buffett’s dying. How much would the stock go down—$1,000 a share? $2,000? And Weinberg was hardly alone. It was as if Buffett’s health were merely a financial concern. Witness the exchange at an annual meeting: 

 QUESTIONER : 
 I’m thinking of making a purchase of Berkshire but I’m concerned about something happening to you, Mr. Buffett. I cannot afford an event risk. 

 BUFFETT : 
 Neither can I. 34 

 The blurring of Buffett’s roles extended to his family. In writing his annual letters he envisioned that he was writing to Roberta, his adored younger sister. But when he was with Roberta, he kept her at a respectful distance. Roberta, who lived in California, was conscious of not wanting to intrude on her brother, and she took care to be succinct when she asked him a question. 
 She found his answers “wonderful,” but she couldn’t adopt “the usual format,” as she would with “regular people.” She was acutely aware of “interrupting,” Roberta explained. “He wants to get back to what he’s thinking about. It’s like a cloud of concentration, a physical cloud, is surrounding him.” 
 Buffett acknowledged that he had public and private personas—or, as he put it, that he was an introvert at home and an extrovert on the road. 35 This division was mirrored, in a rough sense, by his two female companions. Susie was Buffett’s first lady in more public settings, such as the Graham group seminars, or the Berkshire annual meetings, or with their scores of friends in New York and California. 
 Susie herself was extremely outgoing. Though she had moved into a tonier apartment in San Francisco, she did not spend much time there. When one of her kids or a friend needed help, or if someone was sick or even dying, Susie would simply pick up and move in for weeks on end. When Bella Eisenberg, a friend in Omaha and an Auschwitz survivor, wanted to revisit the camp site, Susie thought nothing of hopping on a plane with her. She traveled widely, including (owing to her interest in population control) to such removes as India, Turkey, and Africa. As Susie said, she lived “in the sky.” 36 She also looked after people in San Francisco, where she took an AIDS patient into her home. But the connective tissue in her later, nomadic life was not home or routine but being on loan to people who needed her—including her husband. “The mystery,” one of Buffett’s associates remarked, “is that he is still madly in love with her.” 
 Astrid, his partner in Omaha, was quite private—as Buffett was when in Omaha. She spent her mornings at the local zoo, working on the plant life, and usually could be found there in jeans and a sweatshirt, digging in the dirt. She and Buffett didn’t socialize much. When Buffett was at home, he hung out in his “pit,” a small, private space off the living room, formerly the family sunroom, where he kept his papers and books and had a large TV. For meals—breakfast included—he often grabbed a ham sandwich or ate vanilla ice cream out of the container. Their quiet companionship suited Astrid, whose upbringing had been so unsettled. Once, at a holiday gathering, Warren’s sister Doris bluntly asked Astrid how it was going. She blushed and said Warren was “the most wonderful man to live with.” 
 Buffett’s hunger for solitude, and its offshoot, simplicity, was palpable on the fourteenth floor of Kiewit Plaza—what he wryly termed the “world headquarters” of Berkshire Hathaway. Though it was now a Fortune 500 company, Buffett’s corporate staff in the mid- to late eighties totaled merely eleven people: two secretaries, a receptionist, three accountants, the trader, a treasurer, an insurance manager, Gladys Kaiser (his longtime assistant), and the boss. Berkshire had no lawyers, no strategic planners, no public relations or personnel people—no support staff such as guards, drivers, messengers, or consultants. There were no rows of analysts tethered to cathode ray tubes—none of the sacred totems of the modern corporate village. 
 This spartan style was part of a deliberate effort to minimize what Buffett termed “institutional dynamics.” 37 he had hired a floor of traders, they would have found something to trade; lawyers, no doubt, would have found someone to sue. 

 A compact organization lets all of us spend our time managing the business rather than managing each other. 38 

 For a Wall Street investment banker, the trek to this citadel of capitalism was not easily forgotten. John Otto, a Bear Stearns man, got his first shock at the Red Lion. Otto had come with a client who was selling a company in the natural gas business. When he told the hotel doorman they were going to Berkshire Hathaway, the fellow gave him a blank stare. When they did manage to find Kiewit Plaza, Otto was surprised to see a “five-and-dime building” opposite a pizzeria. There was no sign, either outside or in the lobby, indicating that it was the domicile of Warren Buffett, Inc. 
 Buffett greeted his visitors in Kmart-style shoes. After a little small talk, he beckoned Otto’s client to make his pitch. Now Buffett’s features became totally concentrated. He pursed his lips and furrowed his brow, practically driving the thickets of his eyebrows into his spectacles. After listening for ninety minutes or so, Buffett began to ask some questions. The economics of natural gas are complicated; regulation is involved; there are legal issues, social issues. Otto had sent Buffett a package of information, and Buffett knew it cold. As the client divulged new material, he recalculated the economics on the run. Otto noticed that he had not brought notes with him; he had no minions running in and out to prop him up with data. It was all solo . After three or four hours, Buffett made an offer, subject to some fact-finding. Otto was stunned again—executives do not make offers on the basis of a single session. (Ultimately, the deal fell through.) 
 This ability of Buffett’s to cut through the clutter suggests a certain genius. Buffett focused so exquisitely on his object, and his simplicity was a counterpart to that genius. He recognized that layers of added executives—though each might be bright, earnest, well-intentioned, etc.—would blur his focus. Much of the “work” they might “accomplish” would be unnecessary work. (A Buffett aphorism: “That which is not worth doing is not worth doing well.”) 39 He did not like protracted decision-making or drawn-out and contentious bargaining. His negotiating style was to seek or propose offers on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. And once he made a decision he did not reverse it. 
 Buffett and Bill Scott alone handled the investing—a job that at other firms was divided among scores of traders and analysts. Scott was not even full-time; he left the office at three to practice in a polka band. In any case, Buffett did the research, and Buffett made the decisions, in sweet solitude (consulting by telephone, of course, with Munger). By contrast with this one-and-a-half-man band, the Harvard University endowment, which had roughly the same size portfolio, had a staff of more than one hundred. 
 Buffett’s Kiewit coworkers were little more than a backdrop—unobtrusive, robotlike, and unerringly dependable. According to daughter Susie, “All of the people in that office are the same. They don’t talk. They just do their work.” 
 The most essential one to Buffett was Gladys Kaiser, his secretary and assistant. She kept intruders at bay and brushed off inquiries in a flat monotone. 
 The treasurer, Verne McKenzie, a native of Fremont, Nebraska, with a wispy frame and steely blue eyes, typified the staff’s loyalty. McKenzie had never—not once since the 1960s—asked Buffett for a raise. “If I ever felt I wasn’t making enough and he didn’t agree, then I must have been wrong,” McKenzie said dryly. (In the sixties and seventies, Buffett paid him skimpily. But by 1986, McKenzie was making $198,000.) 
 In all the time since the early seventies, when McKenzie had returned from New Bedford to Omaha, Buffett had never raised his voice in McKenzie’s presence. Nor had he given McKenzie an inkling of his inner thoughts. “I wouldn’t talk if I thought it would hurt him,” McKenzie noted, “but Warren is such a private person I don’t think it’d be possible.” 
 There was no intellectual peer among this trusty crew—no one who might break Buffett’s sweet seclusion. He was cheerful with the staff, but not talkative, as he was with his pals. Save for when he had a visitor, he lunched alone, often sending a secretary to McDonald’s (“Quarter Pounder with cheese and french fries”). Buffett had talked to his sons about joining him, but he simply had no place for an understudy. Munger said it was lucky that the heads of Berkshire’s operating units, such as See’s Candy, did not work in the same office. Close up, comparing oneself to Buffett would be “hard on the human ego.” 40 His intensity was better at a distance. 
 The one time that Buffett took an apprentice, he hired Daniel Grossman, a young tennis star who had grown up in Omaha and gotten an M.B.A. at Stanford. Grossman would not discuss the experience, but according to colleagues, he seemed to have been overwhelmed. Most likely, Buffett was a remote mentor. He seemed to converse only when he had a purpose . “The motor was always running,” a lawyer in Omaha said of Buffett. “There had to be an analytical content.” 
 What Buffett expected from the relationship with Grossman isn’t clear. Peter said, “It was the first attempt at my dad’s passing stuff to the next generation. It was just botched. He didn’t know how to do it.” Buffett did not assign projects to staffers or work with them. “If Dan was hoping to watch how he worked and to learn from it—that’s not what happens there,” Buffett’s daughter noted. “You can’t watch it. It’s in his head.” Most of what “happened there” was Buffett thinking and reading. * Grossman ultimately quit and became a successful investor in California. 
 In 1986, Buffett departed from form and bought a used Falcon aircraft. As corporate jets go, this one was modest (it cost $850,000), but it was the type of corporate frill that he had long criticized. He kiddingly disclosed its purchase in tiny letters in the annual report and damned it as “very expensive” and a “luxury.” 41 However uncomfortable he was with the idea of the jet, he loved the jet itself. Nor was it really a departure, since it extended the isolation of Kiewit Plaza to the air. As Buffett explained to a pal, he had been traveling more, and other passengers had begun to recognize him. Often they had tried to feel him out on the market—an intrusion he abhorred. 42 
 Buffett’s eccentricities, though the stuff of a gifted investor, worked against him as a manager. He was better with abstractions than with operational detail, better with numbers than tangible problems, too jealous of his independence to be intimately involved with others on a daily basis. 
 And by 1986, he was managing a huge conglomerate—certainly a role he had never aspired to. Buffett tried to offset his managerial shortcomings by restricting his role at World Book , See’s Candy, and such to a very few big decisions. 43 † He liked to say that one didn’t need a big “circle of competence”—but it was important to know where the “perimeter” was. 44 And Buffett was unusually aware of his own limitations. As applied to managing, he picked the chorus line but didn’t attempt to dance (no “advice” on carpets for Mrs. B). Where other managers often created problems by interfering, Buffett’s native genius for simplicity averted them. 
 Buffett did not require his various unit managers to forecast their earnings. (Computer models of such things were deceptive: they lent the future an air of “false precision.”) 45 He did not schedule meetings. (Chuck Huggins, the president of See’s Candy, didn’t set foot in Omaha for twenty years.) Nor did Buffett attempt to impose a Berkshire corporate “culture” from above. At Scott Fetzer, the Harvard-trained Ralph Schey used the full panoply of modern business tools: budgeting, planning, and so on. Mrs. B used … well, other methods. But Schey and the Blumkins appreciated Buffett for an identical reason—he allowed them to run their businesses nearly without strings. 
