Entries
If you're playing trading ranges (bounces off lower and upper channel lines that form resistance or
support), only enter the near strong support of one channel line and at least plan to take some profits
near the likely strong resistance around the opposite channel line unless you're using a trailing stop.
If you're a momentum trader who enters trades on breakouts past resistance levels, enter only after a
strong resistance level is decisively broken (based on personal judgement that will improve with
experience), and plan to take at least partial profits near the next strong resistance level.

Exits: Use Trailing Stops to Protect and Maximize Gains
Though your initial plan should be to exit near likely resistance, remember that you have the option of
using a trailing stop.
Instead of fixed stop losses, use trailing stop loss orders whenever possible because they give you
the best of both worlds, the protection of a regular stop loss without the limitations of a fixed exit
point. Until price retraces and hits the trailing limit, you ride the move as high as it goes. Once your
trailing stop is above your entry point, the only question is how much you'll profit. As part of our
drive to maintain a high rrr, we try to get even better than 1:3 rrrs when we can. Using trailing stops
allows us to get those extra gains. These big winners help compensate for losing trades and for
winners in which you were forced to exit with minimal gains to avoid a loss.
It isn't always practical to use a trailing stop when you begin a trade. In these cases, you simply
change the switch from a fixed to a trailing stop loss once the trade has moved a certain number of
pips in your favor, at minimum so that your loss would be less than your initial fixed stop loss.

ENTRIES AND EXITS: SINGLE VERSUS MULTIPLE
Because s/r levels occur over areas or zones rather than precise points, selecting entry, exit, and stop
loss points can be stressful because you're never sure if you're right. To lower the risk and stress
level, many find it helpful to enter and exit positions in stages.
For example, if your planned position is two mini account lots, you could take profits on one lot at a
more conservative price, and leave the other lot to continue with a trailing stop loss (defined in
Chapter 2).
If your trailing stop loss is set to trigger at no worse a position than your first exit point, you at least
lock in a smaller profit as a worst-case scenario. This first exit should bring profits on that first lot
that are at least equal to the loss risked by your trailing stop, thus allowing a 1:1 rrr on that lot. Set
your trailing stop so at worst it triggers at your initial exit and you lock in at least a modest profit and
a 1:1 rrr on the trade. If price continues to run higher, the second lot gives you added returns though

not as much as if you'd let both lots run with a trailing stop once the first exit. Safety usually comes at
a cost of lower returns.
Taking partial profits not only eases stress levels, it also helps build your confidence while you are
learning and finding a trading method and style that works for you.
Unlike stock brokers, forex brokers' fees are based on spreads (number of pips between bid and
ask). That means they make money on your trading volume (the amount of currency you trade) rather
than your trading frequency, so you pay no extra for partial exits and entries. How often you use these
will depend greatly on your confidence in a given exit or entry point. When you're very confident
about a trade, you're more likely to keep the full position open until you hit your planned exit point.

RISK-REWARD RATIOS (RRRS)
Favorable rrrs are another key part of good RAMM. We seek 1:3 risk-reward ratios (aka 3:1 rewardrisk ratios, same thing) or better, though we will certainly consider trades with 1:2 rrrs, as shown
next. In other words, we seek trades where the entry point (which is near strong support of course) is
ideally at least three times farther away from the profit-taking point (near resistance) than it is from
the stop loss. That way your winning trades bring gains triple the size of your losses. That allows you
to be profitable with an achievable winning trade percentage of just over 25 percent.
By all means, try strategies that seek lower rrrs and higher winning ratios, and these may be a better
fit for those needing frequent wins. At times, market conditions will almost force us to accept lower
rrrs. However, be cautious with such approaches until you've made those strategies work in practice
accounts and then with small positions. Start out by trading less frequently and only when your loss is
smaller than your likely gain if you're right.

Example: How 1:3 RRRs Make Winners Out of Losers
Here's an illustration of the math:
Assumptions
You have $20,000 in trading capital. You will follow good RAMM practice and not risk more
than 1 to 3 percent of that on any given trade, in this case, $200.
You place 10 trades with a stop loss that risks no more than $200 on average, 1 percent of capital
risked per trade on average, $1,000 total capital risked. So, you could lose 10 straight trades and
still have $19,000 or 95 percent of your capital.
Trade selection criteria
You enter trades only when the distance in pips from your planned entry to stop loss (see setting
stop losses) does not risk more than $200 on average.
You will only take trades that offer a minimum of 1:3 rrr. In other words, if our stop loss is hit,
we lose $200. If our sell limit is hit, we earn at least about $600.
1:3 rrr: Profitable with over 25 percent winning trades

As long as you're right more than 27.5 percent of the time, you'll be profitable. The only question is
whether your ego can handle that many losses. That's a function of your sensitivity and ego. If
you're humble and mature enough to focus on your profits, you'll be fine. Hey, a baseball player
with .275 batting average is a good hitter.

This ideal of 1:3 rrr can often be found when markets or at least an individual currency pair are at
the start of a trend reversal or at either extremes of a wide trading range.
However, the rest of the time, such opportunities may be much harder to find. Usually they are still
available, and you need to spend more time searching for these optimal situations rather than trading.
That's fine; better to trade less often to take only the lowest risk and highest yielders that don't require
any special skill level or information sources. That's how we trade like a great beginner and make
money without the advantages of the big institutions.

Example: How 1:2 Risk-Reward Ratios Make Winners Out of Losers

If you can't find compelling opportunities offering 1:3 rrr (that can happen in certain markets) and you
feel confident about the trade, then a 1:2 rrr will be acceptable and may often be a more realistic
criterion under the circumstances. If your winning trades bring gains double the size of your losses,
you can still be profitable with an achievable winning trade percentage of under 35 percent.
A 1:2 rrr allows you to find more trade opportunities because resistance need only be twice as far
from the entry point as the stop loss rather than three times as far. There are legitimate reasons to take
trades that offer only a 1:2 rrrr. For example:
Sometimes that's as much as the market is offering and you spot a setup with high odds of
success, so you accept a lower rrr rather than miss a likely profit.
Sometimes you're too late in spotting what would have been a 1:3 rrr with a very strong trend that
still has room to run, so you accept a later, less optimal entry with a lower rrr because you're
particularly confident that the trade will be profitable.
If you're still using a practice demo account and want the experience of the trade.
Alternatively, you can choose to stand aside until you find a 1:3 rrr trade, which is especially wise
if you've reason to be especially risk averse. For example:
You've recently graduated to trading real money and want your first few months to show a net
profit. Your trading capital is limited and you need the gains from your winners to far exceed your
losses from losing trades.
Here's the math:
Assumptions
The same assumptions and trade criteria apply, except the rrr changes to 1:2.
Trade selection criteria
You enter trades only when the distance in pips from your planned entry to stop loss (see setting
stop losses) does not risk more than $200.
You will only take trades that offer a minimum of 1:2 rrr. In other words, if our stop loss is hit
we lose $200, if our sell limit is hit we earn $400.
1:2 rrr: Profitable with a bit less than 35 percent winning trades

What started out as a planned 1:3 rrr often becomes a 1:2 or less if you're using a trailing stop loss
order that gets triggered if the trade starts to move against you. That's fine. Though it makes sense to
aim for a 1:3 rrr level, markets aren't always that cooperative, and we'll take what's available. More
on the value of using trailing stops later.

Applying 1:3 RRR: An Example
Here's an illustrated example (see Figure 5.3).
FIGURE 5.3 URUSD Daily Chart, July 28 to August 11, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

On August 11, 2011, we see an opportunity to enter near strong support of the 38.2 percent Fib at
1.4110. These Fib lines were drawn for the longer-term uptrend from January 9 to May 1, 2011, not

shown here.
We can set a reasonable stop loss order at the recent low of August 4 and 5 around 1.4060 for a
maximum loss of 70 pips. Strong resistance is formed by a combination of the upper descending
channel line drawn from May 1, 2011, and the 23.6 percent Fib line converging around 1.4410, but
we'd prefer a more conservative profit target below the closing price of August 9 around 1.4340. Do
we have a 1:3 rrr? Here's the math:
Enter August 11, 2011 at

1.4130

Stop loss order set at August 4 low of

1.4060

Maximum loss 70 pips

0.0070

Profit-taking exit via sell stop order

1.4340

August 11 entry via buy limit order

1.4130

Planned gain 210 pips three times planned loss 0.0210

So, we have our 1:3 rrr. Figure 5.4 shows how it worked out on August 15.
FIGURE 5.4 EURUSD Daily Chart, July 28 to August 16, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

If we had stayed with a fixed sell limit order at 1.4340, we would have made out 210 pips. Sounds
great, and it would be. However, most of us would be kicking ourselves for missing so much of the
move, which peaked below 1.4480 for another 140 pips gain. An exit around there would have given

you a roughly 1:5 rrr.
But there's no way you'd have known and been able to play that, right? Actually, there is. All you
had to do was use a trailing stop instead and ride the move higher while locking in most of the
profits. Others who are more conservative might have taken partial profits and let the rest run with a
trailing stop. This brings us to our next point.

Acceptable RRR Can Vary with Market Conditions
Consider market conditions when deciding whether to use a more aggressive 1:2 rrr. In a strongly
trending market (up or down), more justification exists for loosening your standards and accepting a
lower rrr if the trade is in the direction of the strong trend and you risk missing the trade altogether.

More on Stop Loss Orders: An Example of Using ATR to Gauge
Volatility and Place a Fixed or Trailing Stop Loss Order
We refer to the above example.
In Figure 5.5, we show the same EURUSD daily chart showing the daily candle for the entry date of
the trade on August 11, but this time we include an ATR, which shows that over the past 14 days or
daily candles, the average price range was about 210 pips. Those interested in how ATR is
calculated can look it up online.
FIGURE 5.5 EURUSD Daily Chart, July 24 to August 11, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

In this example, we based our stop losses on the other factors mentioned previously. However, if
we wanted to lower the chances of getting stopped out of the trade in exchange for the risk of more
loss if the trade turned against us, we could have set the stop loss at a distance 50 percent or more of
the ATR, 105 pips, beneath the entry point, or some different percentage of ATR.
The point here is that there are different ways to determine how far away you set your stop loss. In
the previous example, we used the recent lows as a guide though we could have used ATR instead.
Much depends on factors like your risk appetite, market conditions, and confidence in the trade. For
example, if you've caught a pullback to strong support in an overall strong uptrend, you might have
more confidence that this uptrend will resume and allow a wider stop loss to avoid getting stopped
out by random price movements. When you're less confident, you might keep stops tighter.

IF YOU FAIL TO PLAN, YOU PLAN TO FAIL
Planning each and every trade is another aspect of RAMM that separates the professionals from the
amateurs. The benefits more than justify the work. Writing out a plan:
Insures that you go through the full planning process, particularly if you prepare a trading plan
form (like that shown in Table 5.1) that reminds you of each step in the planning process.
Forces you to articulate the pros and cons of the trade, helping you decide if you should take it or
not. You go into the trade clear on why it should work, what could go wrong, and what you're

risking.
Leaves you a written record of your thinking and results from which to learn from what you've
done right and wrong, and spot repeated mistakes or chronic weaknesses that need to be
addressed.
Makes it easier to keep track of your profits and losses.
Let's look at these benefits in more depth.
Table 5.1 Sample Trade Plan Form For Trade Illustrated in Figure 5.3

To insure that you actually use the ideas taught in this book and learn from both your winning and

losing trades, you need to write a plan for every trade that includes such basics as the following.

What's Your Rationale for Taking This Trade?
First, consider the basics that determine whether you've got a favorable risk-reward ratio of at least
1:2, preferably 1:3.

S/R
How strong are the s/r points where you plan your entries and exits?

RRR
Based on the strong s/r points near your planned entry and exit and the needed distance from your
entry to your stop loss (to avoid it being triggered by random price movements), does it appear to
offer an adequate rrr of at least 1:2 or better, 1:3?
To determine that rrr, in addition to your likely entry and exit, you need to know the distance from
your entry point to your stop loss. So, think through where you'll place your initial stop loss and why.

Entry and Exits: Stop Loss
Where are you placing your initial stop loss and why? How do you know it's far enough from your
entry point so it won't get hit by random price moves? Recent highs and lows? Or an estimate of
average volatility per candle? How large a move would you define that? Based on what? ATR or a
visual inspection of recent volatility? Is the planned exit two to three times further from your entry
point than your stop loss to allow for a safe stop loss yet still have a 1:3 rrr?

Trend Strength
Assuming your rrr is acceptable, is the trend or trading range likely to continue? How strong is the
trend if there is one? What's your evidence for that trend strength? Do the underlying fundamentals
look like they'll continue to fuel the continuation in the trend that you need to reach your planned exit
near strong resistance?

Other Fundamental and Technical Evidence Pros and Cons
What fundamentals are fueling the move?
What technical or fundamental evidence suggests the trade won't work?
Why do you believe the balance of evidence favors the trade?
What new fundamental or technical evidence might cause you to exit or add to your position?

Scenarios or Decision Trees
If the trade moves in your favor, when would you switch from your original stop loss to a trailing stop
to lock in gains or minimize losses?
If trading multiple lots, at what point would you take partial profits? Would you let the whole

position ride? Are there possible news events or other fundamental factors, which if announced,
would cause you to alter your plan? Are there any planned news announcements (central bank rate
statements, U.S. monthly jobs reports, a meeting expected to resolve a major geopolitical crisis, etc.)
that could change your opinion of the trade and cause you to exit or to add to your position?
The mere act of writing it forces you to examine whether the analysis and RAMM of each trade is
sound. The collected trading plans become your trading journal, one of the most important learning
tools you'll have.
You'll need two kinds of plans:
1. A plan for each individual trade. The collection of these forms your trading journal.
2. An overall trade business plan that covers your goals, trading methods, performance
monitoring, feedback methods, etc.

No. 1: Plan Every Trade and Record It in a Journal
You know how they say that those who don't learn from the past are destined to repeat it? So, learn
from your trading mistakes and correct moves. Keep records of your trade plans, review the trade
afterward, and note why it did or didn't work and what that tells you about what you need to do to
avoid the same mistake or ensure that you repeat the successful trade.
All the theory you'll learn about TA and fundamental analysis, trader psychology, and RAMM is
worthless unless you can implement it. A written trading plan for each trade, stored in a trading diary,
is one of the most effective means of doing that because it:
Serves as a checklist to see that you've taken all of the analytical and RAMM steps needed.
Forces you to think through the trade rationale (the balance of fundamental and technical pros and
cons) and RAMM, so you can develop a step-by-step method for deciding whether a trade
provides the right combination of low risk and high potential yield.
Provides a record of your methods for later review so you learn from what you did right and
wrong. Combined with each written trade plan and post-trade analysis you record, it forms a
trading diary or journal. You'll want to review these trades periodically. This kind of review is
especially valuable when (not if) you hit a losing streak and are figuring out what you're doing
wrong. You can examine the common denominators of your winning and losing trades. Include
screenshots of the relevant charts at the times of entry and exit. They provide a complete visual
picture of the technical evidence, and they take less time to create than a written description. I
often print these and scribble notes all over them as I notice things I didn't catch the first time. If
you don't have screen capture software, you can get it free online.8
Provides a personal database to identify mistakes, strengths, weaknesses, shows what kinds of
trades and trading styles work or don't work for you, and highlights which produce less stress,
more fun, and are better suited for your personality.
Becomes a tool for knowing what kind of trader or investor you are. There many different ways
to trade or invest. One of the prime keys to success is to find the methods and styles that fit you
rather than adapting to a given way of trading.
When using a prepared trade plan form as shown in Table 5.1, this can serve as a checklist to
insure you consider and record each aspect of the planning process.
The basic form can include cross-references to more detailed notes than possible on this form.

I've always been a big fan of including screenshots of the charts, so I have a picture of the
scenario before and after and can scribble notes right on the chart.
Table 5.1 is an example of how the trade example from the previous Risk-Reward Ratios section
would be recorded in your trading journal.

Explanation of Columns
Columns 0 and 1 are for reference. Most of the others are self-explanatory, just there to remind you to
consider essential elements of RAMM.
Columns 9, 11, and 12 are meant to reference separate pages where there would be enough room to
include your thoughts and where most of your thinking will be recorded and reviewed later for what
you did wrong or correctly.
Column 9 is Comments Rationale for Entry. There isn't room in this column for your comments, so
you'd put in a reference number of some page in a separate journal where you could include the full
rationale for the trade like the answers to the sample previous questions.
For example, you could enter these comments:
Why you believe there is enough room for a 1:3 rrr.
Whether this trade is going with a longer-term trend, and if not, why you believe the counter
move is worth trading.

Sample Trade Rationale as Recorded in Journal
Here's what I recorded, referring to the scenario shown in Figure 5.6.
Column 9: COMMENTS, RATIONALE FOR ENTRY
I'm going long the EURUSD, trading with the daily trend (my chosen time frame, I usually trade
based on daily charts) but I'm going against the longer-term trend on the weekly or monthly
charts. I wouldn't normally do this but am making an exception here because I have a chance to
enter at 1.4130, above what I believe is a strong support level comprised of the 38.2 percent Fib
level at 1.4110, and a price support level of 1.4060 that was tested and held twice (on August 4
and 5) within the prior seven trading sessions. Placing an initial stop loss there, my maximum
loss is 70 pips. As shown, this allows a likely rrr of between 1:2 and 1:3.
There is no significant resistance until at least the 1.4340 level, the closing price on August 8
(175 pips from my entry point, a better than 1:2 rrr).
After that, the next significant resistance is at minimum around 1.4340, based on the opening and
closing prices of August 9 and 10. That allows for a 210 pip gain for a 1:3 rrr.
Neither of these resistance levels are especially strong, so if there are any positive EURUSD
developments, they could easily be reached and exceeded.
There is potential for even greater rrr. No strong resistance at all until the area around 1.4410
where two kinds of strong resistance converge: the 23.6 percent Fib level and the descending
upper channel line dating back to the first week of May.
There are reasons not to take this trade.
Long-term fundamentals are mostly “risk off,” that is, not supportive of this trade. Given that the
planned duration is 1 to 2 weeks only, long-term fundamentals are less important than the short-

term technical picture noted previously. U.S. credit rating downgrade and ongoing EU crisis.
However, short-term fundamentals have had little direct impact on this pair, given that the
fundamentals of the underlying economies of the EUR and USD stink, so predicting multiday
moves for the pair based on these has been a waste of time. We don't make trade decisions based
on these. Besides, we suspect the Chinese are buying the EUR on dips.
Overall technical picture for risk assets like stocks and the EURUSD as represented by the
Standard & Poor's 500 Index (S&P 500) daily and weekly charts for this period is bearish and
not supportive of long EURUSD positions (this pair tends to rise and fall with this index). The
index is in a downtrend on daily and weekly charts during this period.
FIGURE 5.6 EURUSD Weekly Chart, January 2, 2011, to August 14, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.
