
4
1

2

FIGURE 20.2

Diagonal leading or ending (in upward trend)

Download at www.wowebook.com

483

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

Truncation
Occasionally, the fifth wave fails to exceed the end of the third wave. This phenomenon is shown
in Figure 20.3. Elliott referred to this as a “failure.” Nevertheless, a truncated fifth wave will still
have five subwaves.

3
5

4

1

2

FIGURE 20.3

Truncated fifth in an uptrend

Corrective Waves
Corrective waves are unquestionably the most difficult to interpret. They can appear in many different configurations and pattern combinations. Richard Swannell and Robert Prechter have both
contributed to our current understanding of corrective waves. Swannell has tested price data,
searching for waves, and Prechter has interpreted Elliott’s original work with some modifications. The following information about corrective waves comes from the work of these two analysts.
Corrective waves commonly occur in three subwaves (A-B-C). The direction of corrective
waves is either sideways, as in a trading range, or sharply opposite to the prevailing trend of the
impulse wave. Corrective waves are generalized into three categories for descriptive purposes:
zigzags, flats, and triangles.

Download at www.wowebook.com

484

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

Zigzags
The single A-B-C correction in Figure 20.4 is an example of a zigzag correction. Generally, in a
simple zigzag, wave A is an impulse, leading diagonal, or zigzag; wave B is any corrective pattern; and wave C is an impulse, ending diagonal, or zigzag. If wave A is a diagonal, wave C is not
an ending diagonal.
In addition to this simple, single A-B-C correction, a zigzag correction can occur as a more
complex double or triple zigzag pattern. The second correction pictured in Figure 20.4 shows the
more complex double zigzag. Double and triple zigzags use different nomenclature for their
descriptions. The double zigzag, for example, is two simple zigzags joined by a wave X. As
shown in Figure 20.4, W and Y are often used to designate each simple zigzag wave within the
double zigzag. When another simple zigzag is added to a double zigzag, a triple zigzag forms.
The added simple zigzag is referred to as wave Z; the intervening wave is labeled XX. Fortunately, for interpretive purposes, triple zigzags are rare.

X
c

b

B

a

a

b
b

c

A

W

a

c

Y

C
Single

FIGURE 20.4

Double

Single zigzag corrective pattern

Swannell (2003) provides the following characteristics for actual double zigzags:
• Wave W is a zigzag.
• Wave X is any corrective pattern other than an expanding triangle.
• Wave X is smaller than wave W.
• Wave Y is a zigzag.
• Wave Y is equal to or larger than wave X.
Triple zigzags continue with the same pattern as double zigzags; thus, wave XX is smaller
than both wave Y and Z. Prechter points out that zigzags characteristically have a 5-3-5 combination of subwaves.

Download at www.wowebook.com

485

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

Flats
Sideways patterns are called flats. Flats behave very similarly to zigzags except that rather than
sharp upward or downward corrections to the prevailing trend, they move sideways, and their
subwaves generally overlap. The characteristics for flats are the same as for zigzags except that
• Wave B is not a triangle, retraces wave A by at least 50%, and is less than twice the
length of wave A.
• Wave C overlaps wave A at some point.
The A-B-C pattern in Figure 20.5 shows a simple flat pattern. In addition to this single AB-C pattern, flats can occur as a double or a triple. Double and triple flats have the same nomenclature as double and triple zigzags. Just like triple zigzags, triple flats are rare. The
characteristics of the double and triple flats are similar to their zigzag counterparts except for the
necessary adjustments needed to produce a sideways pattern. Thus, common characteristics of
these multiple flat patterns are as follows:
• Waves W, X, and XX can be any corrective pattern except a triangle, a double, or a
triple.
• Waves Y and Z can be any corrective pattern except a double or triple.
• Wave X retraces at least 50% of wave W.
• Wave Y is greater than wave X unless it is a triangle.
• Wave XX retraces at least 50% of wave Y.
• Wave Z is not a zigzag if wave Y is a zigzag.
• Wave Z is greater than wave XX.

X
c

B
b
a
a

b
b

Single
A

FIGURE 20.5

a

Double
C

c
W

c
Y

Single and double flat corrective patterns

Download at www.wowebook.com

486

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

Prechter points out that flats characteristically have a 3-3-5 combination of subwaves. Elliott, he
argues, considered the sideways patterns as possibly including a combination of zigzag and flat,
one followed by the other in a complex corrective wave. These were called doubles and triple
threes. The method of designating each pattern is the same as the method used previously for
double and triple sideways patterns.
Triangles
The Elliott wave triangle is identical to the standard triangle pattern we discussed in Chapter 15,
“Bar Chart Patterns,” with the exception that it is limited to five waves (A-B-C-D-E). Prechter
points out that triangles have a 3-3-3-3-3 combination of minor waves. The Elliott wave triangle
can be either a converging or a diverging triangle.
The rules for a converging triangle are as follows:
• Wave A is a zigzag or a flat.
• Wave B is only a zigzag.
• Waves C and D can be any corrective pattern except a triangle.
• Waves A, B, C, and D move within the bounds of the channel lines between A to C
and B to D.
• Bounds converge (one might be horizontal), and the intersection of the bounds occurs
beyond the end of wave E.
• Wave E can be a zigzag or a converging triangle.
• Either wave A or B is the longest wave.
• Wave E ends in the range of wave A.
• Wave E moves within or closes within the bounds.
Expanding triangles, although relatively rare, have generally the same rules. The exceptions are
that for the expanding triangle
• Wave B is smaller than wave C but more than 40% of wave C.
• Wave C is smaller than wave D but more than 40% of wave D.
• The intersection of the bounds occurs before the formation of the triangle.
• Wave E is longer than wave D.
• Wave E ends outside the territory of wave A.
• Either wave A or B is the shortest wave.

Guidelines and General Characteristics in EWT
In addition to rules, guidelines exist within EWT. While the rules are inviolate, EWT guidelines
are less definite and will not occur at all times.

Download at www.wowebook.com

487

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

Alternation
Alternation is an EWT guideline. Alternation refers to the common occurrence of one type of
corrective wave occurring in wave 2 and a different type of correction occurring in wave 4. In
other words, the types of corrective waves tend to alternate. If wave 2 is a flat, for example, wave
4 will likely be some other type of corrective wave, such as a zigzag or a triangle. The guideline
of alternation can also occur in a corrective wave when, for example, the first part of a double is
a zigzag and the second part is a flat, as shown in Figure 20.6.

Corrective Patterns
Often Alternate
Flat

Zigzag

FIGURE 20.6

Example of two corrective patterns alternating in an uptrend

Equality
At least two of the three impulse subwaves in a five-wave sequence are often equal in length.
Usually equality exists between wave 1 and wave 5, especially when wave 3 is extended. However, if wave 1 or wave 5 is extended, the remaining two will tend toward equality.
Channeling
Channels, similar to those we discussed in Chapter 14, “Moving Averages,” are used in conjunction with EWT. To construct a channel for a five-wave impulse, draw a line between the end of
wave 1 and wave 3; then draw a parallel line through the end of wave 2. Price will tend to oscillate within this channel.

Download at www.wowebook.com

488

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

Sometimes, wave 4 falls short of the lower channel line, as shown in Figure 20.7. When
this occurs, draw a new line from the end of wave 2 to the end of wave 4. This line will be steeper
than the original lower channel line. Then draw another parallel line running through the end of
wave 3. This will give a rough approximation of where wave 5 should end. A throw-over occurs
when wave 5 exceeds this second channel line and usually denotes excessive emotion in the market and possibly an extended fifth wave.

5

Channel 2

3

4

Channel 1
1

2

FIGURE 20.7

Channeling drawn between wave ends in an uptrend

Projected Targets and Retracements
How can EWT be used to project prices? In the next section, we discuss Fibonacci ratios and
their use in projection. Because of the importance of Fibonacci numbers, we devote an entire
section to their use. Right now, we mention a few other methods.
Some analysts use the channeling method for projections. These channels are useful
because all price movement should lie within the channel. Prechter, however, mentions that two
guidelines for target projections are available in addition to the channeling method. The first
occurs in wave 4. The extent of the larger wave 4 correction should be no further than the end of
wave 4 of lesser degree. In other words, the larger wave 4 should not break through the end of the
minor wave 4 in the larger wave 3 preceding the larger wave 4. The fourth wave target is shown
in Figure 20.8.

Download at www.wowebook.com

489

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

Figure 20.9 illustrates a projection that occurs at the end of wave 5 extensions. When wave
5 extends, the corrective wave that follows is steep and often ends either at the minor wave 2 of
the extended wave 5 or at the end of wave 4. In other words, the corrective wave following an
extended wave 5 often corrects all or most of the extended wave 5 move.
From his screening of actual patterns, Swannell (2003) reports that the most accurate patterns for predicted results are the triangle and ending diagonal. Their consistent behavior after
their completion gives results accurate enough to be almost 90% dependable.
Other means of estimating target prices have been proposed. Hill, Pruitt, and Hill (2000),
for example, estimate that in impulses, the target for wave 3 is 50% of wave 1 added to wave 1,
and the target for wave 5 is 100% of wave 1 added to wave 1. Their estimates of retracements are
based on the length of wave A, the first correction wave. If wave A corrects 25% to 35% of the
prior impulse wave, it will likely be only a single wave correction. If wave A corrects 35% to
50%, the correction will likely be a three-wave correction, and if wave A corrects 50% to 75%, it
will likely be a five-wave correction. Any reaction more than 75% suggests a possible trend
change.
The most common methods of determining targets and replacements use multiples of the
Fibonacci ratios. We now turn our attention to the derivation of these numbers.

5
3
v

Arrow at iv
Points to Target for
Fourth Wave

1

iii
iv

4

i
ii

2

FIGURE 20.8

Fourth wave target estimate in an uptrend

Download at www.wowebook.com

490

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

5

ii

4
Target Zone

FIGURE 20.9

Extended fifth wave estimated target in an uptrend

Alternatives to EWT
As would be expected with a theory that is so difficult to apply, many analysts have differing
opinions about Elliott rules and guidelines. Most of these analysts stick with the general principles of impulse waves and corrective waves and their five-wave and three-wave subdivisions, but
the application of other observations in the specific waves and interpretations of Elliott can
sometimes cause quite differing results.
In his book, Mastering Elliott Wave, Glenn Neely (1990) takes the reader from the most
simple wave construction through an extremely lengthy set of rules that encompass his theory of
how waves unfold. In doing so, the reader learns by practice how to set up an Elliott wave chart
using the Neely method of dots rather than bar charts, how to determine monowaves and their
larger patterns, and other nomenclature and idiosyncrasies of Elliott analysis.
Zoran Gayer, a student of the Neely school of Elliott analysis, has developed a sophisticated approach called bifurcation. This method is an offshoot of chaos theory, where motion
goes from erratic to organized, just as prices go from consolidation to trending. In Elliott terms,
this would equate to going from corrective waves to impulse waves. Zoran, as he is known, calls
them directional and nondirectional moves. Directional moves are those that do not correct more
than 61.8%. The bifurcation points are not necessarily the extreme high or low of a wave but can
occur when the price action changes tone and direction, such as at the end of wave 3 in conventional Elliott labeling. The method becomes complicated and requires close study. Past Zoran
commentaries can be seen at www.safehaven.com/archive-11.htm.

Download at www.wowebook.com

491

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

As with all the preceding methods, the assumptions underlying the market structure are
that prices are determined by patterns of human nature and sentiment. Elliott believed that sentiment rose and fell in fits and starts that could be identified and labeled with his wave structure.
That these fits and starts followed a mathematical sequence such as the Fibonacci sequence came
as no surprise to Elliott.
However, Elliott’s hypothetical structure has been analyzed by others who have used different growth structure models, even assuming that the controlling mathematics are still the
Fibonacci ratios. Tony Plummer (2003), for example, hypothesizes that the growth curve of
nature as well as sentiment in markets is a three-wave process influenced by shock. Shock need
not be exogenous. It can be just the sudden realization that the markets have changed direction.
Thus, the three-wave sequence consists of the first wave changed by natural causes and its natural completion in a normal growth curve, then a flat period as the new circumstances are evaluated, and finally the realization that the trend has changed and a second directional move. The
entire cycle is composed of a zigzag up of three legs and a zigzag down, three separate cycles
within the longer cycle, as illustrated in Figure 20.10. Using this method, Plummer maintains
that he has been able to integrate Fibonacci, cycle analysis, and EWT into a simpler and more
easily understood method of recognizing structure in the markets.

B
3

1
A
C
2

Note the similarity to the Elliott five-wave impulse.
Note also the cyclical nature of the lows.

FIGURE 20.10 Plummer cycle three waves X three waves

Using EWT
Although the theory of market structure is interesting, the point in technical analysis is to use
these theories to make profits. With Elliott analysis, this is difficult. The application of the rules

Download at www.wowebook.com

492

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

always seems to have exceptions, the description of waves often can only be determined after the
fact, and the means of projecting into the future are suspect. This is not to say that the theories do
not have value. They do, and at certain instances they can be profitably utilized. To do this, the
analyst must be fully trained in Elliott analysis and be patient enough to wait for an opportunity
that is clearly within the realm of the implied Elliott structure. Because Elliott analysis is not easily computerized, its practical interpretation needs other technical tools before any profitable signals can be derived.
Steven Poser (2003) is correct in stating that too many Elliott analysts attempt to pick the
top and bottom of moves rather than take a piece out of the middle. They overanalyze the waves
and generally become overwhelmed by minutia. He suggests that at least two other technical
methods must confirm any Elliott wave expectation. Other suggestions are to determine the
period in which the analyst is most interested and analyze the next higher and lower degree
waves to establish the context within which trading or investing will occur. Establish key price
levels, he says, such as targets, retracement levels, and important reversal points based on the
Elliott analysis, and use other indicators such as moving averages and oscillators to confirm
action signals. For example, he looks for momentum confirmation in wave 3 and divergences in
wave 5. More important, he argues, the analyst must be aware of the behavior of the market especially at certain juncture points. The Elliott Wave Theory is a model of behavior, a useful means
of understanding the position of the market within itself, not a mechanical system of forecasting.
Connie Brown (1994, 1999), who worked for Prechter for a few years and is now a professional trader and adviser, has devised oscillators to confirm waves within an Elliott context. She
simplifies Elliott’s basic rules into a five-wave pattern, where waves 1, 3, and 5 are impulses:
• Wave 2 might not break below the origin of wave 1.
• Wave 3 cannot be the shortest wave, but it does not necessarily have to be the longest.
• Wave 4 cannot overlap the termination of wave 1.
Rather than becoming obsessed with the smaller threes and fives and other patterns, Brown
claims that getting a feel for the rhythm in the market is more important. By compressing the
scale in a chart, the smaller, less-important details become obscure, and attention then focuses on
the market rhythm. Professional expertise is not needed to make money from this pattern. To
determine the Elliott five-wave pattern, Brown begins at the middle of a pattern where the largest
price move occurred and looks forward and backward (uncovering price action by widening the
distance between her thumbnails that are covering price action before and after the large price
move). She then uses Fibonacci ratios, Gann time, and price projections combined with oscillators based on the RSI and her composite index to estimate price projections and give action signals.

THE FIBONACCI SEQUENCE
Certain numbers and number sequences are of special interest in wave theory. Of particular
importance are the Fibonacci sequence and the related golden ratio.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

493

Fibonacci
Leonardo Pisano, better known by his nickname Fibonacci, was born in 1170 in Pisa, Italy.
Fibonacci’s father, Guilielmo Bonacci, was a public notary, working for the interests of the merchants of the Republic of Pisa. Because of Guilielmo’s work, Fibonacci traveled with his family
extensively through Northern Africa and the Mediterranean as a child. At a young age, Fibonacci
was exposed to the mathematical and accounting systems of the various merchants with which
his father worked. In his writings, Fibonacci recalls learning the mathematical and accounting
systems of India, Egypt, Syria, Greece, Sicily, and Provence.
Around the age of 30, Fibonacci ended his travels and returned to Pisa. There he wrote a
number of important texts that played an important role in reviving ancient mathematical skills.
Copies of his books Liber abaci (1202), Practica geometriae (1220), Flos (1225), and Liber
quadratorum (1225) still exist today. Other books written by Fibonacci, such as his book on
commercial arithmetic, Di minor guisa, have been lost.
The writings of Fibonacci are credited with bringing the Hindu-Arabic decimal place
mathematical symbols that we use today to Western Europe. Many of his works dealt with pricing issues faced by merchants. He is thought to have invented present value analysis of cash
flows in contracts and a method for expressing investment returns. In addition, he solved a number of complex interest rate problems (Goetzmann, 2003). Fibonacci was likely the world’s
greatest mathematician in his time. Although his work formed the basis of our decimal system,
and he laid the groundwork for financial mathematics, he is unfortunately remembered today
almost exclusively for a small portion of his life’s work—his numerical sequence.

The Fibonacci Sequence
Fibonacci derived the sequence by answering the question of how many rabbits can be produced
over a year from an original pair, in an enclosed space, when all pairs give birth each month to a
new pair that in turn can breed in two months. The sequence of pairs occurs in the following
manner by month: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, and 144. These are called Fibonacci numbers. Fibonacci numbers are simply a sequence in which the last number is added to the previous
number to arrive at the next number. For example, 5 plus 3, the previous number, produces 8, the
next number; next, 8 plus 5 produces 13, the next number. This sequence can continue to infinity.

The Golden Ratio
There are a number of reasons why this sequence is of interest to mathematicians and scientists.
One reason is the relationship that the sequence has to the “golden ratio.” Except in the very low
numbers, the ratio of any number in the sequence to the next lower number is 1.618 (e.g., 144/89
= 1.61798); the ratio of any number in the sequence to the next highest number approaches 0.618
(e.g., 55/89 = 0.61798). The number 1.618, known as the golden ratio, and its reciprocal of
0.618, possess many interesting properties. For example, it is the only number that when added
to 1 is the same as 1 divided by itself. Another fascinating fact is that 1.618 multiplied times
0.618 = 1. There are many more strange relationships between .618 and whole numbers; see Box

Download at www.wowebook.com

494

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

20.1 for a demonstration of the “mystery” of this number. Mathematicians use the Greek letter
phi to refer to this ratio.
The golden ratio has been of interest at least since the pyramids were built and likely long
before. Buildings built in proportion to the golden ratio were thought to be most pleasing to the
eye. The Parthenon and the Washington Monument, for example, have dimensions based on the
golden ratio. Not until relatively recently, in terms of the history of civilization, was the golden
ratio derived mathematically through the Fibonacci sequence.
