
PART FIVE

216

Controlling Exposure

Holding stocks over the weekend frightens risk-conscious traders,
but the strategy is even more profitable than overnight positions taken
during the midweek. Why does it work so well? Consider all the weekend
warriors looking for new stocks to buy when the market opens on Monday
morning. Their furious hunt increases the odds that a broad audience will
discover the issue and bid up prices as soon as the new week begins. In fact,
this is one reason for the classic turnaround Tuesday bias. It goes something
like this: Public traders come pouring into the market on Monday, chase
F I G U R E

9.3

Urban Outfitters sets up a low risk overnight opportunity after it carves out a two-month, 120-minute cup and
handle breakout pattern. Price surges above resistance (1) at the opening bell on July 29 and pulls back in a
sharp reversal. The stock finds its low quickly and spends six hours creeping higher in a steady uptick, but it
doesn’t remount resistance. Observant traders can get on board just prior to the close and catch every penny of
the next morning’s breakout.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

CHAPTER 9

Position Management

217

prices to higher levels, and then sit back, waiting to get paid off. The next
morning (Tuesday) comes, and those positions are targeted aggressively
until the weaker hands cry uncle and exit the market.
Lower your overnight risk by examining price history and noting
how often the instrument gaps compared to the broad market. This simple
analysis gives the survivalist trader an important edge with overnight
positions because many charts have a gap signature that shows a consistent pattern in the trend direction, or vice versa. When this analog
review points to unexpected risk in holding overnight, take an early exit
and reenter the next day.
Train yourself to press positions in trending markets and defend
them in sideways markets. It might sound obvious, but overnight positions
incur less risk when long in a strong market or short in a weak one. It also
makes sense to extend the holding period in a trending market and to
become a rapid-fire day trader in a sideways market. Of course, it’s logical
that rangebound markets support fewer overnight holds and tighter
stop losses. Alternatively, it’s time to get more aggressive when a market,
sector, or instrument starts to run. In the real world, 80% or more of your
annual profits will come in just 20% of your trading days. This means you
need to be in the market, and stay there, when prices start to trend higher
or lower.
Reduce position size if you’re nervous about overnight risk. You can
also take partial profits just prior to the close and carry a free trade into the
next day. Then, if the market opens flat or favorably, you have the option
of adding back into your position. On the flip side, doing nothing is often
the best strategy when the market moves against your overnight position.
A major purpose of opening volatility is to shake out weak-handed traders
and investors, but this time of day often prints the least favorable exit
prices. In fact, adverse openings often present an opportunity to add to
positions, but two things must happen first. First, the newly bought shares
must be part of a predetermined plan that’s building the position over
time and at different price points. Second, the opening levels must not
violate the pattern that got you into the trade in the first place.
Trading books tell us to look for follow-through on the session after
a financial instrument closes near its high or low. They even publish
impressive statistics to support this classic profit-building technique. The
problem is, it just doesn’t work anymore. Computer programs have killed
the strategy, even with short positions, because algorithms can turn the
strongest trends on a dime and trap overnight trend followers. So, rather
than lose sleep, just resign yourself to the fact you’re going to get beat up

PART FIVE

218

Controlling Exposure

from time to time when a great overnight play doesn’t pay off as expected.
Don’t let those losses stop you from holding overnight positions because
your equity curve over the course of weeks or months should prove the
value of this meat-and-potatoes strategy. Yes, terrible things can and will
happen to your overnight positions, but it’s more likely they’ll work out
just as expected. Since all trading relies on odds management, the real issue
is how overnight positions perform on average over time. In other words,
a percentage of overnight positions will suffer from exposure to shocks
and adverse news events, but natural trend development should outweigh
those losses and support profitability as long as traders apply a rigorous
stop loss strategy.

End of Day Checklist
Here’s a common scenario. The equity market is winding down toward
the closing bell. You’re sitting on a bunch of stocks but don’t know which
ones to dump and which ones to hold overnight. It’s the perfect time to
ask 10 questions to determine your exposure heading into the close:
1. Did you buy in quiet times or wild times? It’s better to buy
stocks that are relatively quiet that day, in hopes of catching a big
move in the following session. This makes them less vulnerable
to profit taking or a reversal. Alternatively, if you’ve jumped into
an active trend, it’s harder to predict where price will open the
next day. In fact, you have about the same odds of making and
losing money. The bottom line: it’s never a good idea to hold
overnight on a 50-50 coin flip.
2. Did you miss your first exit? Profitable exits come in cycles. In
other words, your position will move into a point of maximum
profit that’s easy to miss if you get too greedy. It then drops away
from that price while the intraday clock ticks toward the closing
bell. Holding overnight lets the stock recycle, so you get another
shot at the exit you missed the first time around.
3. Is the market closing with pressure on the upswing or downswing? Look at the 60-minute index futures. Do the 5-3-3 Stochastics rise or fall into the closing bell? Falling Stochastics
suggest the market will open weaker in the following session,
while a rising indicator predicts higher prices when you wake
up the next day.

CHAPTER 9

Position Management

219

4. What day of the week is it, and what’s on the calendar? Look
for reversals or whipsaws on turnaround Tuesday and continuation of Tuesday’s trend on Wednesday. A strong close on
Friday should yield a strong open on Monday, except after an
expiration week, when Monday’s session often reverses Friday’s close. Pull up the schedule for the following day and see
how many economic reports will hit the wires just before the
opening bell. Consider how that data might impact current
sentiment.
5. Who’s getting hurt in the current session? The diabolical market
puts its target on a different back each day. That’s why rallies and
selloffs rotate across diverse sectors in a typical week of trading.
Look for sectors to recover after two down days or to sell off after
two up days. If those cycles run contrary to your positions in
the final hour, dump them and look for opportunities that match
other rotational events.
6. What is your holding period for the position? Stick with your
trading plan. Did you set a holding period and profit target when
you bought or sold short? If so, don’t allow that day’s noise to
interfere with your strategy. In particular, don’t base your exit
or hold decision on the current profit or loss, as long as your
reasons for getting into the trade remain intact.
7. Which companies are reporting earnings after the closing bell?
Get out of the way if your stock, or a leader in a related sector,
is scheduled to report earnings after the close. Trading is never
about gambling or “taking a shot.” It’s about assuming risk when
you have an edge and the odds are in your favor. Absolutely no
one can predict the market’s reaction to a single earnings report
with any degree of accuracy.
8. What total size should you carry overnight? Decide how much
risk you can handle and still get a good night’s sleep. Consider
how much danger there is in the market at the specific time, and
apply an overnight collar. Are you trading in quiet conditions or
an environment where everyone is walking on pins and needles?
For obvious reasons, take home smaller size in periods of higher
volatility.
9. Why is your position ending the day at that particular price?
Stocks move around for many reasons. Most of the time they’re
reacting to high noise levels (passive) rather than buying or
selling pressure (active). The best ones move in your direction
because they’re active, or against your direction because they’re

220

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

passive. Consider adding to passive movement against your
position if it fits your risk tolerance.
10. What should you buy or sell right now to balance your
exposure? Consider new stocks to take home. These might
include a favorite play selling off into support or a hot rocket
that’s faded after a morning run. The trick is to find bargains and
not stocks that other traders have already tapped out.

10

C

H

A

P

TE

R

Mastering the
Intraday Market

T

he survivalist trader needs accurate feedback on open positions to
take advantage of directional movement and to guard against traps,
rinse jobs, and other unwelcome surprises. The best way to accomplish
this daunting task is by observing and managing exposure continuously
in the intraday markets. While watching every tick isn’t a viable option
for many traders, it’s the preferred management route whenever possible.
The remote strategies outlined in Part Four offer a useful alternative to
folks with real lives away from the financial markets or commitments that
keep them from the ticker tape.
In the real world, some positions will behave very well, while others
go haywire and fall apart. This duality forces the trader to establish an
adaptive profile that denotes the prechosen exposure and risk associated
with all open positions. This macro control mechanism needs to match
external market conditions which in turn require constant adjustment
through position choice, share size, and holding period. The adaptive
profile is far more important in a successful market strategy than any
221

222

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

individual trade. The financial markets cycle through phases of danger or
opportunity. It’s the trader’s job to identify the current phase and adapt, in
real time if possible, by applying the right collar for that particular market.
Collars signal when to let profits run, and when it’s the worst thing you can
possibly do. They also define the right stock, futures contract, or currency
pair to trade at any point in time. For example, it makes perfect sense to
play volatile small caps when the collar is loose and the market is printing
money but to stick with blue chips when opportunity is low and predators
lurk in every dark shadow.
Adaptive profiling establishes the collar placed on each day’s market
activity. This refers to the aggressive or defensive posture based on volatility, sentiment, and current positioning of the index futures. In a nutshell,
the survivalist trader needs to be aggressive in times of greatest opportunity and defensive in times of greatest danger. This is one of the more
subtle aspects of intraday strategy, because it demands a central theme
that changes from day to day. Part Six will address this aspect of position
management in greater detail.

Ready, Set, Go
You’ve reviewed the trade setup a dozen times, calculated reward:risk,
and found the perfect moment to enter the market. With a slight adrenaline rush you hit the magic button and open a position. Now what do
you do?
First, digest feedback from the fill report. With a market order,
your entry might show slippage and demand a recalculation of trade
assumptions. So, if you get filled more than a few ticks away from expectations, reconfirm risk tolerance and recalculate the intended exit in case
things go wrong. Next, take a second look at the charts to confirm that
you made the right choice. We often see things differently when sitting on
the sidelines, as opposed to being in the heat of battle with real money at
risk. Finally, set a physical stop if that’s part of your trading plan. If not,
target the price or specific conditions under which you’ll exit the position
without hesitation.
Take your losses manually, whenever possible. This builds discipline because the action accepts responsibility for the trade. It also
acknowledges how your stop loss points to an evolving calculation and
not a fixed number. Update this mental escape hatch as each price bar

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

223

modifies your assumptions, goals, and emotional state, getting out immediately when price hits the level where the trade proves to be wrong. The
failure swing that demands your exit might turn out to be a whipsaw, but
don’t delay action in an effort to find out the truth. A trade can always be
reentered after a shakeout, but each position must stand on its own merits.
This unbending rule requires a fresh analysis and revised targets for each
entry. Keep in mind that subsequent trades often fail because the initial
shakeout actually signaled a legitimate change in trend. If a weekend
evaluation suggests you’re getting shaken out of good positions too often,
then it’s time to revise your stop loss strategy so that trades are given more
room to run.
Intraday charts sketch feedback in real time. Watch price action and
anticipate how individual bars on 15-minute and 60-minute charts will
close. Pay close attention to how buy and sell ticks affect the curvature
of surrounding Bollinger Bands and evolving Stochastics. Watch out for
thrusting candles that break through the top or bottom band, signaling a
momentum peak. Look for small but significant gaps between candles at
key price levels. Find the spot where the pattern says the bars should eject
into a profit or break down into a loss. Then see if the buy-sell order flow
matches your expectations. Measure the market’s pulse through 5-3-3 Stochastics. When a notable surge of buying or selling pressure doesn’t push
price firmly in your favor, it may signal hidden supply or demand that
will eventually trigger a reversal.
Use position scaling to address changing risk. Take partial profits
when trades stretch toward profit targets ahead of schedule. Reduce size
when price action gets erratic or external forces make prediction more difficult. Double or triple up when patterns fire on all cylinders or unexpected
news lends support to an open position. In other words, trade larger when
you’re getting clear signals, and reduce size when forces are in conflict.
Each position has a right size, regardless of account capital. This risk
level shifts as price bars add fresh data into the trade feedback loop. Load
up during winning streaks and supportive markets because performance
implies reduced risk. Lighten up and wait for better times when you’re
experiencing drawdowns or reversals of fortune. Inexperienced traders
expose themselves to risk because they think total buying power must
be committed to each position. These folks will survive a lot longer in
the financial markets if and when they just learn to trade well, and stop
worrying about making money. In the real world, profits come automatically when we take the time to become proactive managers of our open
positions and apply the right collar to each trading day.

224

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

Tape Reading
You can’t become a successful trader without mastering the fine art of tape
reading. That revelation could be a shock after the countless hours you’ve
spent studying the charts and probing the indicators. Of course, you can
trade without the tape, but you do so at your own risk because the charts
paint pretty pictures that trigger perfectly wrong signals. Meanwhile,
the flow of buying and selling pressure, as it unfolds on the ticker tape,
exposes forces that remain hidden to charting purists. In a nutshell, those
impulses uncover the real activities of market players, as opposed to the
smoke and mirrors being fed to the trading public. In a word, the tape
never lies.
When students ask me for a seminar on tape reading mastery, I
usually tell them to sit down, pull up a notepad, and watch the numbers
wiggle around for a few decades. They think I’m kidding, but I’m not. Literally, it can take 10 years or more of staring at the shifting numbers to
decipher the games played by Wall Street and other market participants.
However, it’s worth the considerable effort because, once you’ve learned
to read the tape, you have a lifetime edge over less observant traders.
Here’s a tape trick to get a read on the crowd’s excitement level.
Place a 30- or 60-day moving average of volume next to the real-time daily
volume on your watch lists. The few issues that pace above their moving
averages signal impending range expansion for that session. This sideby-side analysis works best when macro influences aren’t moving the
broader tape. For example, a stock trades over 50% of its 60-day average
volume in the first hour of the trading day although it’s stuck in a narrow
range. You’re staring at an actionable signal that could yield a major rally
or selloff by the closing bell.
Veteran trader Larry Pesavento points out a powerful tape reading
tool called the “opening price principle.” Through years of observation,
he discovered how the opening tick frequently serves as a pivot through
an entire session. This comes into play in many ways but is most useful
when price returns to retest the opening level, from above or below. To
use this tool, draw a trendline across the opening prices on the S&P 500
and Nasdaq-100 index futures or their related funds. When price action
retraces back to those levels during the intraday session, watch closely for
a breakout, breakdown, or reversal, using those swings as trading signals
for individual equities.
In Figure 10.1, the opening price comes into play five sessions in a
row on the Nasdaq-100 Trust (previously the Powershares QQQ Trust).
Price tightens into narrow range (1) for nearly two hours on the first

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

F I G U R E

225

10.1

Nasdaq-100 Trust opening price.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

day, with the opening price marking the center pivot of a triangle that
breaks to the downside in a steady selloff. The fund gaps down (2) on the
second day, selling off into the lunch hour and then bouncing higher. The
recovery stalls just a few cents from the opening price, which now marks
resistance, and drops like a rock in the close. Price opens marginally lower
(3) in the third session and zooms higher in a trend day that never retests
the opening level. Whipsaws (4) hit the market on the fourth day, with
upswings reversing at the opening price twice during the volatile session.
The last day yields another downtrend (5) as selling pressure slams the
market right at the opening bell. Note how the opening price comes within
eight cents of marking the daily high.

226

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

Tape readers pay close attention to the relationship of current price
to the daily range. Real-time quotes refer to this ratio as the “% in range.”
This simple number can track the progress of a huge basket of financial
instruments in just a few seconds. For example, there’s an hour to go and
the market is down. Most of your watch list is scraping the bottom third
of the daily range, but one or two stocks are popping near 100% on the %
in range quote. These leadership issues are breaking to new highs while
the rest of the list is doing nosedives with the broad market. Guess what?
You’ve just uncovered a bullish divergence for momentum plays into the
close or an overnight hold, in anticipation of a morning reversal.
A simple display that shows only the last price traded and the
bid-ask spread provides most of the data needed to read the ticker tape.
The time and sales screen is helpful but not essential to your task, and I’d
avoid the Level II screen entirely because it’s just a distraction. There’s a
misconception that tape reading and technical analysis are separate but
equal paths to market mastery. In truth, the effectiveness of your tape
observations comes from identifying critical chart levels where buyers
and sellers clash, with one side or the other finally taking control. When
you uncover one of these contested levels, sit back and watch as the battle
unfolds, understanding it might rage for hours or end in a few minutes.
Look for a defense of the boundary and if there’s enough excitement to
overcome it. Decide whether the bulls or bears seem more determined
and in control of the tape. What doesn’t happen during these conflicts is
just as important as what does happen. For example, price lifts into a key
resistance level, where sellers should be attacking the bid and attempting
to trigger a reversal. Minutes pass, but no selling pressure emerges. This
lack of activity yields a bullish divergence, telling the tape reader that
bears have stepped aside for whatever reason, allowing bulls to trigger a
breakout and much higher prices.
The most basic order flow manipulates price against crowd emotions.
Simply stated, the ticker tape knows the chart better than you do. In a
typical scenario, professionals and their program algorithms keep one eye
on stocks and the other on cross-market forces. They push prices into and
through support-resistance levels to test the waters and see how much
volume is generated by their activity. Feedback loops then come into play,
with a notable reversal when a specific level can’t be broken and a directional “pile-on” momentum when greed or fear triggers a breakout or
breakdown.
Filter the ticker tape’s message through the most popular intraday
technical tools. For example, the following extremes points to trend days

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

227

in which the tape reader needs to avoid swing reversal strategies because
support and resistance levels are unlikely to hold.
• NYSE TICK probing greater than 1,000 or less than –1,000
repeatedly
• Advance/decline greater than 1,500 or less than –1,500 on both
exchanges
• Advance/decline greater than 2,000 or less than –2,000 on one
exchange
• Up/down volume in both exchanges greater than 4:1 or less than
1:4
