
82

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

run high after long rallies and selloffs, with the airwaves and Web world
dominated by weak-handed opinions driven by greed or fear. Long-cycle
relative strength filters out mindless chatter during these periods, telling
the survivalist trader whether the ticker tape supports or refutes the emotional table pounding.
Avoid long positions when the long-cycle indicator is pressed above
the upper line and turning over because the downturn may signal a
decline lasting for six to eight weeks at a minimum. Alternatively, you
can often time new entry with great precision after stocks have fallen to
support, gone limp, and the long-cycle indicator turns higher from the
oversold line.

Reading the Buy-Sell Swing
Relative strength and weakness expose the buy-sell swing. In the real
world, there are a finite number of buyers and sellers for a single financial
instrument at any point in time. Whenever this supply-demand equation
gets out of balance, the buy-sell swing emits actionable data by carving
out cyclical peaks and valleys. In the simplest terms, it’s how markets get
pushed into overbought or oversold technical conditions. Once dislocated,
these forces move back into balance when one of two things happens:
(a) supply is replenished on one side, or (b) demand is depleted on the other
side. From the trader’s viewpoint, this equation is vitally important for two
reasons—long positions take on increased risk in an overbought market,
while short positions take on increased risk in an oversold market.
The trading strategy utilized to enter and exit positions must align
with relative location within this buy-sell cycle. In other words, buying
weakness in an oversold market makes sense, while chasing the downside
is foolish. Alternatively, loading up on hot stocks in an overbought market
is a good way to get clobbered, while taking long-side profits reduces
risk. Cycle length complicates the trader’s process of alignment because
the buy-sell swing exists in many time frames. For example, there are
major oscillations that follow the monthly calendar as well as 90-minute
impulses driven by the index futures. Effective management of these
cyclical variables separates the mediocre trader from the truly outstanding
performer.
Traders need to know which buy-sell cycles are at work at a given
point in time, even if they don’t understand their origins or persistence.

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

83

To accomplish this task, use a 5-3-3 Stochastic to track daily oscillations
lasting four to seven days and 60-minute oscillations lasting five to ten
hours. The 60-minute version works extremely well in pinpointing the
two- to three-day buy-sell swings that characterize a typical five-day
trading week. This is perhaps the most important cycle for swing traders
to understand because their livelihoods depend on it.
In Figure 4.3, Celgene oscillates higher and lower in a narrow trading
range over a two-week period. At the same, time, 5-3-3 Stochastics swings
back andforth in half-cycles that measure between three and eleven hours.
A few of these swings trigger wide range movement, while the rest of
them yield little more than directionless noise. In all cases, though, you
F I G U R E

4.3

Celgene swings.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

84

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

can see which side is at bat and which side is playing the field, trying
to keep runs from being scored. Finally, note how Stochastics oscillations
that hit overbought or oversold levels tend to trigger longer lasting counterswings than those that reverse in the middle of the indicator’s range.
Now consider this common scenario: A stock rallies into a closely
watched breakout level, noses above resistance, and then reverses sharply.
Invariably, the buy-sell swing on the 60-minute pattern then shifts to the
downside, with sellers in firm control. These folks now have one to one and
a half days (five to ten hours) to push prices lower and break a few more
support levels. Other traders flip to the chart because it’s just turned up
on a breakout or relative strength scan. However, the Stochastics rollover
indicates that it’s time to stand aside and just watch the setup. The sell
swing carries through into the next session with a lower opening, followed
by a narrow sideways pattern. This compression causes the buy-sell swing
to shift back to the buy side, signaling that a short-term low has finally
been struck.
Sidelined traders now have an opportunity to reconsider the breakout
trade. They examine the price pattern for clues about the strength or
weakness of the impending buy swing, with the pullback’s depth providing the focal point of the analysis. If the stock is ready to break out “for
real,” it will often print a relatively high pivot on the final downswing, with
price holding above the 38% retracement of the last upswing. In addition,
the upturn will start at or above an intermediate moving average, like the
50-bar EMA. With these types of data in hand, more aggressive traders
scale in, while more conservative traders wait it out and buy after price
rallies above the high of the last upswing.
Of course, trade entries don’t always work out as expected because
relative strength indicators can hit one extreme or the other and just stay
there for extended periods. In addition, conflicting market cycles, or cycles
that stick around too long, will force traders to buy too late or sell too early
on a regular basis. In the final analysis, it comes down to performance
over time—i.e., does trade alignment with the buy-sell swing make or
lose money over time? Frankly, this misunderstood tool can enhance your
bottom line dramatically and give you something to think about during
the trading day aside from what market gurus are saying or what other
players are doing with their money.
This points out yet another advantage of utilizing the buy-sell
swing in your daily workflow. Successful trading requires detachment
from the endless market noise. The best way to gain this inner authority is to have an archetype for market structure, like pattern cycles and

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

85

the buy-sell swing, so ingrained into your fevered brain it can overcome the siren call of nonsense that flows out of Wall Street and the financial media.

Identifying Reversals and Counterswings
Most of us can trade well when the market is moving in one direction.
The problem starts when price action reverses, and we have to decide
whether to hold on, lighten up, or get out of our open positions. The skill
in recognizing which path to take when the ticker tape stops cooperating
often means the difference between a healthy profit and a painful loss.
In a typical scenario, we buy with the intention of holding a stock for a
few days or weeks. We’ve done our homework, and the first move goes
in our favor, as expected. We’re now enjoying a small profit and feeling
pretty good about our trading expertise. However, we’re also sitting
ducks because the market moves in continuous waves of trend and countertrend activity. In other words, for every notable action, there’s usually a
notable reaction. This two-sided mechanism provides a diabolical method
to shake traders out of good positions before they get the chance to pocket
their hard-earned gains.
Learn to anticipate counterswings before they happen. This foresight
will give you more time to measure the danger and to execute an appropriate response. In this regard, here are 10 ways to identify reversing
markets before they turn your winners into losers:
1. Look for daily trends to reverse after three bars in either direction.
This follows the classic strategy outlined in The Taylor Trading
Technique, published in 1950.
2. Wrap Bollinger Bands around your bars, and watch for spikes
that piece the top or bottom band by more than 75% of the bar’s
length. This thrust signals a market that will likely reverse in the
next one or two bars.
3. The odds for a reversal increase on Tuesday, especially after a
trend carries over from the prior week. Reduce risk by dumping
positions into that day’s open. Better yet, get out Monday
afternoon and save yourself the trouble.
4. More reversals take place after a financial instrument hits a new
high or low than at any other time. In swing trading lore, these

PART TWO

86

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

are called “2B reversals,” a phrase coined by Victor Sperandeo in
his 1991 book Trader Vic: Methods of a Wall Street Master.
5. Volatility usually stalls ahead of a reversal. Watch out for markets
that stop going up or down and then congest into tight trading
ranges.
6. Beware of a high volume blowoff. A market will reverse as soon
as everyone who wants to buy or sell comes off the sidelines and
gets into the action.
7. Drop down a time frame and look for reversals in the shorterterm patterns. These tops and bottoms flag potential turnarounds
in longer-term time frames.
8. Get familiar with classic candlestick reversals. Look for hammers
and dojis at key support or resistance. Watch out for dark cloud
cover after a big rally. Stay alert for a harami reversal after a big
bar in either direction.
9. Rallies and selloffs tend to occur in threes before yielding to
major reversals. Each primary wave should be separated by a
pullback or congestion phase. The last wave tends to trigger the
most technical divergences.
10. A big gap against an active trend, known as a hole-in-the-wall,
signals that direction has changed in a single bar. Don’t wait
for confirmation when the instrument gaps the wrong way and
doesn’t fill before the closing bell.

Ideal Time versus Ideal Price
As I noted earlier in this chapter, there’s often a conflict between price
and time. For example, the market gives you a perfect price to go long or
short but then forces you to wait longer than expected before the position
eases into a profit. Or, you find a great setup that’s already moved off a
tradable low, forcing you to enter at a greater point of risk. Traders tend
to become hardwired to just one of these two alternatives, so you need to
know which will align best with your unique market approach.
Don’t underestimate your emotional baggage when the hunt for
the perfect price steps into a high volatility environment. Buying the dip
in a falling market demands a strong stomach and a positive attitude,
while selling short in a rising market can induce floods of paranoia and

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

87

self-doubt. Frankly, the majority of traders can’t handle the mental burden
that comes with either of these countertrend price-sensitive strategies.
At the other end of the spectrum, perfect timing requires continuous
stalking of potential trades to ensure that entry signals don’t get overlooked. Get up to make a sandwich or walk the dog, and you can easily
miss the most profitable opportunity of the day. Average loss will also
be greater in a time-sensitive strategy, because logical stops need to be
placed farther away from entry points. In addition, this approach wrestles
with the elusive concept of opportunity-cost. Realistically, many of our
perfectly timed entries will be misfires in which the instruments just chop
back and forth, failing to pay off. The profitable swing, when it finally
comes, will also be weaker than expected in many cases, earning a little
cash for the trader but failing to bring in the big bucks.
To sum up, trading by price reduces risk but requires more patience.
Trading by time takes higher risk in hopes of a faster profit. Let’s see how
this works with two examples.
In Figure 4.4, Wyeth posts a double bottom pattern (1) near 42
and starts to head higher. It rallies above the 50 and 200-day EMAs (2)
in July and surges to 49, where the uptrend runs out of gas. Traders
who missed the rally watch the subsequent pullback for a buy signal that
gives them a second-chance opportunity. The ideal price comes when the
stock breaks six-day support and gaps down into the moving averages
(3), which also marks the 38% retracement of the June into August rally.
Price surges higher in the following session, breaking a two-week down
trendline and filling the gap (4). This buying spike triggers the ideal
time to enter the trade, even though it’s a point above the ideal price entry.
A second ideal time arrives a few weeks later when the stock completes
a month-long inverse head and shoulders pattern (5) and breaks out
above 49.
Each time- and price-based entry signal works like a charm in this
example. The selloff ends exactly at moving average support, the trendline
breakout yields an immediate price surge, and the inverse H&S breakout
triggers a wide range rally bar followed by a steady six-week uptrend. Of
course, many things could have gone wrong with both price and time. In
the real world, the decline didn’t have to stop at support, the trendline
breakout could have failed, and short sellers might have faded the inverse
H&S breakout. Those common risks warn us to utilize aggressive trade
management techniques whether our entries are time or price based.
You’re right if this sounds like secret code for placing a stop loss as soon as

PART TWO

88

F I G U R E

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

4.4

Wyeth pullback.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

positioned and then following the tape to ensure that price action follows
your expectations.
The Applied Materials rally in Figure 4.5 illustrates just about everything that can go wrong in a price- versus time-based strategy. Things start
out well enough when the stock breaks above 200-day EMA resistance
at 17 (1) and then pulls back to test the moving average (2), signaling a
price-based entry. It breaks down for one day and then surges higher,
triggering a “failure of a failure” buy setup, which offers a nearly perfect
time-based entry. Price consolidates for five sessions near the rally high
and then breaks out (3), issuing another time-based entry. A few weeks
later, the rally stalls out, and the stock sells off into the convergence (4)

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

F I G U R E

89

4.5

Applied Materials whiplash.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

of 50- and 200-day EMA support. This natural buy level yields 12 days of
whipsaws that trigger one false signal after another. Finally, price pulls
out of the chaos (5), triggers another time-based entry, and rallies up to 19.
Everything then falls apart once again, giving way to another month of
stop killing volatility.
The chaotic price action when the stock dropped into support warned
traders to get out immediately and move on to another opportunity. Unfortunately, our natural impulse is to keep throwing money at whipsaws,
hoping that something finally “sticks.” This self-defeating persistence
illustrates the high level of discipline required to execute a profitable
price- or time-based strategy. In a nutshell, the trade outcome depends on

PART TWO

90

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

specific tape behavior associated with perfect price or perfect time. Market
movement that strays from your expectations yields a notable divergence
that needs to be measured for its impact on reward:risk and used as an
excuse to exit the trade if required.

The Real World: Reading Between the Lines
It’s the third week of June, and simple technical analysis isn’t giving you
all the answers you need to make the trade.
In Figure 4.6, the rally off the March 2009 lows had made significant
progress by the beginning of June, when the S&P 500 finally struck
F I G U R E

4.6

Calendar events overrule supply and demand.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

91

the 200-day EMA from below (1). Resistance at this line in the sand
then kicked into gear, stalling the upside and dropping the index into a
two-week sideways pattern (2). Bullish analysts were tripping over themselves at that time, pounding the table about the major recovery and predicting that higher prices would soon follow. The index then dropped out
of the trading range on June 15 (3), which happened to be the Monday
of triple witching options expiration. Selling pressure continued through
Wednesday, with a small bounce into expiration Friday (4). In hindsight,
the expiration selloff made perfect sense in light of highly bullish sentiment that anticipated the immediate resumption of the three-month
rally. In other words, overeager buyers had big targets on their backs
during expiration, with Max Pain dynamics kicking into gear and ensuring
that bullish call positions expired worthless by Friday’s close.
Sellers took control after the weekend, generating a two-day decline
that dropped the S&P 500 index through the 50-day EMA and into a fourweek low (5). Revitalized bears were now hoping to draw blood, with the
index down more than 5% in the prior week and the downdraft undercutting moving average support. However, they had forgotten to take a
deep breath and a long look at the calendar. As it turned out, the selloff
had run into positive seasonality, generated by end of quarter window
dressing. In other words, the deteriorating technicals might have to
wait while institutions scooped up a basket of top-performing stocks
in an effort to massage their quarterly performance numbers. Who
needs fundamentals or technicals when a sales pitch and a big bonus
are at stake?
It would also have been a great time for bears to consider a few
aspects of window dressing that far outweigh the price charts:
• The event comes out of nowhere, so it’s often futile to pay
attention to momentum indicators and use them to manage trade
decisions.
• Markup doesn’t care about price positioning, so a moving average
or a trendline won’t stop the speeding train.
• It affects a random selection of stocks, with a number of powerful
rallies and a broad basket of small gainers.
• The influence peaks on the next to last trading day of the quarter,
even though the financial media generally ignore the event until
the final monthly session.
• Price action will show few pullbacks, if any, during markup rallies,
denying easy entry to latecomers and disbelievers.

92

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

• It’s often a one-day affair that disappears as quickly as it begins,
but price holds onto its gains into the new month.
• The first session of the new month continues the positive
influence, with the same institutions picking up favored plays for
the new quarter.
• Sentiment turns sharply to the negative on the second trading day
of the quarter as supply and demand resume control of the tape.
Staying with Figure 4.6, the S&P 500 turns the corner at the 50-day
EMA, perks up, and takes off in a 2% rally on the fourth trading day
(6) prior to quarter’s end. The positive vibes continue for a few more
sessions, but the index makes little further progress. A funny thing then
happens. The index ticks higher through the first hour on the first day
(7) of the new quarter but then turns tail and closes near its daily low
in a harami reversal. Observant traders correctly recognized this was
a bearish divergence because a positive seasonal influence had failed
to show up on schedule. In fact, convergence-divergence relationships
between seasonality and expected price behavior are just as powerful
as chart-driven relationships and just as predictive of short- to intermediate-term market direction. In this case, the failure of the market to
rally when it was supposed to issued a warning signal that sellers were
getting ready to retake control of the ticker tape.
This bearish scenario unfolded in the next session with a nasty selloff
that dropped the index back under round number support at 900 (8).
The ugly close below the 50-day EMA revived battle-weary short sellers,
bringing them into the market and triggering more downside in the next
three sessions. The third selloff day violated six-week support at 880
(9) and completed a bearish first failure pattern, which marks the first
100% retracement of a prior rally wave. In addition, many exchangetraded funds carved out ominous looking head and shoulders patterns
that broke down in the two sessions after the S&P 500 completed the
downswing. Indeed, the bearish dominoes were falling, one by one, with
the broad market setting up for a major correction. But for the second
time in a month, short sellers forgot to keep one eye on the calendar and
the other on the exit button.
The second consolidation day after the selloff (10) also marked the
Friday before options expiration. With bearish sentiment taking firm
control after the weeklong decline, short selling and the put/call ratio
were escalating rapidly. In other words, bears had just placed major
targets on their backs heading into expiration week. No, figuring out
which side of the market will get targeted during expiration isn’t rocket

CHAPTER 4

Relative Strength

93

science. All that’s needed is a reality check of the unpleasant feeling
in the pit of your stomach heading into the first day of the week. Are
you afraid the market is falling apart and your long positions will bury
you? Are you upset because you’re not long enough and convinced the
market is headed for a moon shot? Flip over this soul-searching if you’re
net short.
There’s little argument that short sellers are a nervous bunch who are
overly sensitive to every ripple of the ticker tape, scared to death they’re
staring at the first wave of a major squeeze. Ironically, that’s exactly how
they should have felt on the morning of Monday, July 13, the first day
of expiration.
Figure 4.7 illustrates how the market took off like a rocket that day (1),
squeezing short sellers into oblivion. The head and shoulders patterns
didn’t help, as one exchange-traded fund after another remounted

F I G U R E

4.7

Expiration short squeeze.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

94

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

its broken neckline and lifted out of obscurity. Adding insult to injury,
the S&P 500 rally never stopped at 50-day EMA resistance, which is
a natural turning point and entry level for new short sales. Calendarobservant traders had a great opportunity to predict this unusual
slingshot in advance. Monday’s rally had been powerful, but turnaround
Tuesday had the power to drop prices back under the moving average
and give short sellers another chance to pull down the market. However,
note how sellers failed to turn the ticker tape that day (2), despite a first
hour downdraft. The slow-motion recovery into the closing bell signaled
a bullish divergence because the index didn’t reverse on a seasonally
favorable day to reverse. Yes, this is the exact opposite dynamic of
bearish price action on the first day of July. More importantly, it yielded
an actionable signal that the rally out of nowhere wasn’t done yet. The
broad market then took off in two more trend days (3), posting highly
bullish 90:10 up:down volume readings on both major exchanges.
In the market’s diabolical way of doing things, the summer correction anticipated by so many technicians and analysts had turned
quickly into a major breakout, helped along at every turn by overriding
seasonal influences that overruled tape action, technical analysis, and
common sense.
