
24
The Locomotive
New York City and Omaha • 1958–1962

Warren and Susie seemed like ordinary people. They kept a low profile. Their house was large but not
ostentatious. It had a log cabin in the backyard for the kids. The back door was never locked; neighborhood
children wandered in and out. Inside the house, the Buffetts clickety-clacked on their different tracks at
gathering speed. As Susie added stop after stop to her local schedule, Warren headed out on a nonstop trip to
Dollar Mountain.
Until 1958, his straightforward route was to buy a stock and wait for the cigar butt to light. Then he usually
sold the stock, sometimes with regret, to buy another he wanted more, his ambitions limited by his
partnerships’ capital.
Now, however, he was managing more than $1 million in seven partnerships plus Buffett & Buffett and his
personal money,1 which let him operate on a different scale. His network of business pals like Stanback,
Knapp, Brandt, Cowin, Schloss, and Ruane had grown by the addition of Munger; the two of them ran up
outrageous—by their standards—phone bills every month. Munger had introduced him to his friend Roy
Tolles, a lanky former Marine fighter pilot who wore a constant placid smile and kept the thoughts inside his
quick mind to himself—except for the occasional barbed zingers he had a way of throwing out, which made
people “want to keep a few Band-Aids around,” as one friend put it. Buffett, like Munger, could parry and
riposte with the best, and added Tolles to his collection. This knack for signing up volunteers to his cause had
created a large, if loosely organized, support structure. Warren more or less automatically Tom-Sawyered
these supporters, hived off into several cells, into helping his interests, which had grown so fast that he could
no longer carry out every detail of them by himself.
The days when Warren simply sat in his study at home, picking stocks out of Security Analysis or the
Moody’s Manuals, were gone. Increasingly, he began to work on large-scale, lucrative projects that required
time and planning to execute—even more so than buying up the shares of National American insurance.
These projects would sometimes evolve into complicated, even dramatic episodes that would absorb his
attention for months, or occasionally years, at a stretch. Sometimes several of these investing projects
operated simultaneously. Already preoccupied to the point that he was barely present to his family much of
the time, this expansion of scale would exacerbate that tendency, while binding him more tightly to his
friends.
The first of these complicated episodes involved a company called Sanborn Map. It published minutely
detailed maps of power lines, water mains, driveways, building engineering, roof composition, and emergency
stairwells for all the cities of the United States, maps that were mainly bought by insurance companies.2 The
business was no winner, its customer base slowly shrinking as insurers merged. But its stock was cheap at $45
per share, since Sanborn’s investment portfolio alone was worth $65 per share. To get hold of that investment
portfolio, however, Warren needed not just money from his partnerships but also help from other people.
Beginning in November 1958, he put more than one-third of the partnerships’ assets into Sanborn. He bought
the stock for himself and for Susie. He had his aunt Alice, his father, his mother, his sisters, all buy it. He
passed the Sanborn idea along to Cowin, to Stanback, to Knapp, and to Schloss. Some people got in on it as a
favor from him. He took an override—a percentage of the profits—from others as a way of leveraging his
capital. To get more shares under his control, he added Don Danly, his pinball-and-pilferage pal from high
school; his father’s best friend, Vic Spittler; Dottie’s husband, Homer Rogers; and Howard Browne, the head
of Tweedy, Browne and Reilly, the brokerage firm where Tom Knapp worked. He also put Catherine

Elberfeld and Anne Gottschaldt, the aunt and mother of his friend Fred Kuhlken, into the stock. Since he had
still not brought Gottschaldt and Elberfeld into a partnership, this strongly suggested that he thought Sanborn
was a sure thing. Eventually he controlled enough of Sanborn’s shares to be elected to the board.
In March 1959, Warren took one of his regular trips to New York, staying out on Long Island at Anne
Gottschaldt’s little white colonial house. By now she and her sister had adopted him as a sort of surrogate
son, as if to replace the long-dead Fred. Warren kept spare sets of underwear and pajamas at her house, and
Gottschaldt made him hamburgers for breakfast. On these journeys, he always set out with a list of between
ten and thirty things he wanted to accomplish. He would go to the Standard & Poor’s library to look up some
information. He would visit some companies, visit some brokers, and always spend time with Brandt, Cowin,
Schloss, Knapp, and Ruane, his New York City network.
This particular trip was lengthy, about ten days. He had sit-downs with prospects for the partnership and
another important appointment: his first meeting as a board member at Sanborn Map.
Sanborn’s board consisted almost entirely of insurance-company representatives—its biggest customers—so
it operated more like a club than a business, except that the board meeting wasn’t followed by a round of
golf. None of the board members owned more than token amounts of stock.3 At the meeting, Warren
proposed that the company distribute the investments to the shareholders. But since the Depression and
World War II, American businesses treated money as a scarce commodity to be hoarded and husbanded. This
way of thinking had become automatic, its underlying premise unexamined, even though the economic
justification for it had long disappeared. The board responded to the idea of separating the investment
portfolio from the map business as preposterous. Then, toward the end of the meeting, the board broke out
the humidor and passed around cigars. While they smoked, Warren sat fuming. “That’s my money paying for
those cigars,” he thought. On the way back to the airport, he took pictures of his children out of his wallet
and looked at them to bring his blood pressure down.
Frustrated, Warren decided that he would take the company away from Sanborn’s undeserving board on
behalf of the other shareholders. They deserved it more. Therefore, Buffett’s group—Fred Stanback, Walter
Schloss, Alice Buffett, Dan Cowin, Henry Brandt, Catherine Elberfeld, Anne Gottschaldt, and some of the
others—kept buying. Warren also used new money coming into the partnerships. He had Howard put a
number of his brokerage clients into Sanborn. Warren was probably doing his father a financial favor, even as
he tightened his grip on the company.
Before long, people friendly to Warren, including the famous money manager Phil Carret, who had bought
Greif Bros. and Cleveland’s Worst Mill after hearing of these stocks through Warren, had corralled about
24,000 shares. Once they had effective control, Warren decided it was time to act. The stock market was
high, and he wanted Sanborn to unload its investments at an opportune time. Booz Allen Hamilton, the
company’s strategic consultants, had already submitted a plan to do this,4 but the sticking point was taxes. If
Sanborn sold the investments, it would have to pay a tax bill of about $2 million. Warren offered a solution
similar to the Rockwood & Co. tax trick of swapping the investments, tax-free, for stock.
Another board meeting took place at which nothing happened except for more of the investors’ money going
up in cigar smoke. For a second time Buffett rode back to the airport looking at pictures of his kids to calm
himself down. Three days later, he threatened to call a special meeting and take control of the company
unless the directors took action by October 31.5 His patience had run out.
Now the board had no choice. It agreed to split the two businesses. Even so, the issue remained of how to
deal with the tax. One of the insurance men said, “Let’s just swallow the tax.”
“And I said, ‘Wait a minute. Let’s—“Let’s” is a contraction. It means “let us.” Who is this us? If everyone
around the table wants to do it per capita, that’s fine, but if you want to do it in a ratio of shares owned,
and you get ten shares’ worth of tax and I get twenty-four thousand shares’ worth, forget it.’ He was talking
about swallowing two million dollars’ worth of tax just because he didn’t want to go to the trouble of doing
the share buyback.6 I remember the cigars getting passed around. I was paying for thirty percent of every

one of those cigars. I was the only guy not smoking cigars. They should have paid for a third of my bubble
gum.”
In the end, however, the board capitulated. Thus, through force of energy, organization, and will, early in
1960 Warren won the fight. Sanborn made a Rockwood-type offer to shareholders, exchanging a portion of
the investment portfolio for stock.7
The Sanborn deal set a new high-water mark: Buffett could use his brains and his partnerships’ money to
alter the course of even a stubborn and unwilling company.
***
During this episode, as Buffett traveled back and forth to New York and worked on the Sanborn project,
figuring out where to get the stock he needed for control, how to make the board fall in line, and how not to
swallow the tax, all the while looking for other investment ideas, his mind whirled with the thousands of
numbers that clicked and spun inside his head. At home, he would disappear upstairs to do his reading and
thinking.
Susie understood his work as a sort of holy mission. Still, she tried to get him out of his study and into the
family’s world: scheduled outings, vacations, dinners in restaurants. She had a saying: “Anyone can be a
father, but you have to be a daddy too.”8 Yet she was talking to someone who’d never had the kind of daddy
to which she was referring. “Let’s go to Bronco’s,” she would say, and stuff a gang of neighborhood kids into
the car for a burger run. At the table, Warren would laugh when something funny happened and would
appear engaged, but he rarely spoke. His mind could have been anywhere.9 On vacation once in California,
he took a bunch of kids to Disneyland one night and sat on a bench reading while the kids ran wild and had a
grand time.10
Peter was now almost two, Howie five, and Little Sooz—who occupied her own pink checked-gingham
kingdom with a canopy bed up a separate flight of stairs—six and a half. Howie tested his parents with
destruction to see how much it took to get a reaction from them. He picked on Peter, who was slow to start
talking, prodding him as if he were a science experiment to see how he would respond.11 Little Susie policed
them both to keep things under control. She started figuring out ways to get back at Howie, once telling him
to stick holes with a fork around the bottom of a milk carton. While Howie was enjoying the sight of milk
spurting all over the kitchen table, she ran upstairs, crying, “Mommmmmm, Howie’s being bad again!”12
Warren simply turned to Susie to cope with their son’s explosive energy. And Howie remembers that his
mother almost “never got angry, and was always supportive.”13
Susie juggled all this while playing the part of the standard-issue upper-middle-class wife circa 1960:
appearing every day in her trademark look, a tailored dress or pantsuit, often in sunshine yellow, and a
lacquered bouffant wig; taking perfect care of her husband and family; becoming a community leader; and
gracefully entertaining her husband’s business associates as if this required no more effort than tossing a
Swanson TV Dinner into the oven. Warren let her hire help, and soon a series of au pairs took up residence in
an airy, light-filled room with its own bath on the second floor. Letha Clark, the new housekeeper, assumed
some of the burden. Susie often started her day around noon by hosting a charity luncheon. After school, she
shuttled Little Susie to Blue Birds. She would always describe herself as a simple person, but she steadily
added layers of complexity to her life. She was setting up a group called the Volunteer Bureau14 to do office
work and teach swimming at the University of Omaha. “You, too, can be a Paul Revere” was its motto,
invoking an image of one individual saving an entire nation through his (or her) daring and self-sacrificing
deeds.
Susie—like Paul Revere—was impatient to mount and ride;15 she dashed back and forth between family
obligations and the growing number of people who wanted her attention. Many of these were disadvantaged

or traumatized in some way.
Her closest friend, Bella Eisenberg, was an Auschwitz survivor who had made her way to America and
Omaha after the camp was liberated. She thought of Susie as someone you could call at four o’clock in the
morning when the demons got hold of you.16 Another, Eunice Denenberg, was only a child when she found
her father after he hanged himself. Rarest of all among well-off white families, the Buffetts had black friends,
including the most intimidating pitcher in baseball, Bob Gibson, and his wife, Charlene. Being a star athlete
meant little in 1960 if you were black. “Those were the days when white people wouldn’t be seen with black
people in Omaha,” says Buffett’s childhood friend Byron Swanson.17
Susie reached out to everyone; in fact, the more troubled the person, the more willingly she helped. She took
a deep interest in the personal lives of people she barely knew. Warren recalls an incident when he left her on
line at a concession stand during a football game. By the time he returned from the men’s room a few
minutes later, the woman standing on line next to Susie was saying to her, “Now, I’ve never told anybody
this before in my life…” as Susie listened, appearing fascinated. Almost everyone she met glowed under this
kind of attention and felt touched by the encounter. But even with her closest friends, Susie nearly always
took care not to share her own problems.
She played the same role of ministering angel with her own family, above all with her sister. Dottie, who was
musical like Susie, had founded the Opera Guild, and remained the beauty of the family, but seemed vacant
and, as one person put it, “valiantly unhappy.” She maintained a pleasant surface but told Susie that she
never cried because if she ever started, she would never stop. Homer, her husband, appeared frustrated that
he could not penetrate his wife’s cocoon. Still, the Rogerses kept up their vigorous social schedule, and at
night, amid the drinks and merriment, their two young sons roamed underfoot. At times, Homer punished
them harshly or Dottie teased Billy cruelly—so Susie mothered her nephews along with her own children.
She also helped the senior Buffetts, who were saddled with both Howard’s health issues and his ideology.
Just as the rest of America had caught up to his level of paranoia about Communism, Howard leapfrogged
ahead. By the late Eisenhower years, Americans felt their country, grown soft and fat in its prosperity, was
losing the arms race and were haunted by the frightening image of Premier Nikita Khrushchev banging his
shoe on a table at the United Nations and thundering “We will bury you.” All 180 million Americans duckedand-covered in air-raid drills, the youngest crouched under their elementary-school desks. More than one
billion people were now living under Communism in almost twenty countries around the globe. The rapid
advance of Communism over such a broad swath of the world stunned much of the nation. Howard joined a
newly formed group, the John Birch Society, which combined paranoia about Communism with what he
described as concern for the “moral and spiritual problem of America, which would be with us even if
Communism were stopped tomorrow.”18 He covered his office walls with maps showing the menacing red
advance of Communism. He and Doris helped bring the Christian Anti-Communist Crusade to Omaha19 and
threw themselves behind a movement of ideological conservatives that was coalescing around Arizona
Senator Barry Goldwater. Howard was respected as a philosophical purist among the libertarian-leaning wing
of the Republican Party, but anyone associated with the Birchers attracted both alarm and ridicule. After he
went to the local press to defend his Birch membership, people increasingly wrote him off as an eccentric.
That Omaha snickered at his revered father was painful to Warren.
But his anxiety on Howard’s behalf had even more to do with eighteen months of mysterious symptoms that
doctors could not seem to diagnose despite a trip to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.20 Finally, in
May of 1958, Howard had been told he had colon cancer that required immediate surgery.21 Warren had
been upset by the diagnosis, but angered by what he considered its inexcusable tardiness. Since then, Susie
had shielded him from the details of his father’s illness.22 She gave him head rubs and kept up the household
schedule. She also devoted herself to propping up Leila during Howard’s surgery and long recuperation. She
did all of this cheerfully; not only that, she seemed to thrive as the calm, soothing presence on whom
everyone could depend in this crisis. She helped her older children understand the illness and saw that all of
them, including little Peter, visited their grandfather regularly. Howie watched college football in the
afternoons with Howard, who would sit in his recliner and switch sides repeatedly during games, cheering for

whichever team was losing. When Howie asked him why, he said, “They’re the underdogs now.” 23
Throughout his father’s ordeal, Warren used business as a distraction. He kept his head buried in American
Banker or the Oil & Gas Journal except for brief interludes when he wandered into the kitchen for some
popcorn or a Pepsi from the wooden crates that only he was allowed to touch.
Yet somehow, despite Howard’s distress and illness, the quiet, withdrawn man who was the Warren Buffett
his family saw became a presence in public no matter what was going on at home. He displayed an authority,
an almost electric charge of energy, that radiated to an audience. “He just used to ooze that stuff wherever he
went,” says Chuck Peterson.24 The man who had so impressed Charlie Munger talked constantly and
convincingly about investing and the partnerships; he raised money as fast as he could talk—but not as fast
as he could invest.
Munger listened to Buffett’s investing and money-raising exploits on their almost-daily phone calls,
wondering at the natural salesmanship that enabled Buffett to promote himself so well. His trips to New York
became more frequent now that Henry Brandt prospected for him. Cash poured into the partnerships’
coffers, 1960 a watershed year. Warren’s aunt Katie and uncle Fred put nearly $8,000 into Buffett
Associates early in the year. Another $51,000 came into Underwood, partly through Chuck Peterson’s
connections. Then, “Chuck said to me, ‘I’d like you and Susie to come to dinner and meet the Angles.’ Well,
I didn’t know them. He said they’re both doctors, and real smart people.”
Carol and Bill Angle lived across the street from Peterson. Bill Angle, a cardiologist, was a whimsical man
who would stay up all night in the winter, spraying water around his front yard and making impeccably glazed
snowmen, frosty replicas of his chubby self, standing next to frozen “ponds.” His wife specialized in pediatric
research.
“We picked them up and there were six of us in the car. We headed over to the Omaha Country Club. Carol
Angle was a very good-looking woman, and smart. All during dinner, she couldn’t take her eyes off me. I
mean, she was just fascinated. I was going crazy, talking about everything in the world and trying
desperately to impress her. And she was just taking in every word.”
After the presentation, which Peterson recalls as typically persuasive, “we left the country club and drove
back. All the way in the car she still couldn’t take her eyes off me. We dropped the Angles off. And I said to
Chuck, ‘I made quite an impression tonight.’ He said, ‘No, dummy. She’s deaf. She’s reading your lips.’
Since I couldn’t stop talking, she couldn’t stop looking at me.”25
But he certainly had made an impression, for afterward the Angles hosted a dinner at the Hilltop House for a
dozen doctors they knew, at which Bill Angle suggested that they form a partnership and each chip in
$10,000. One doctor asked, “What happens if we lose all our money?” “Bill Angle gave him this disgusted
look. And he said, ‘Well, then we form another partnership.’”
The Emdee partnership, Buffett’s eighth, was launched on August 15, 1960, with $110,000. The twelfth
doctor, the one who worried about losing all his money, did not join.
There were other skeptics. Not everyone in Omaha liked what they heard about Warren Buffett. His
secretiveness put people off. Some thought the young hotshot wouldn’t amount to anything, and believed the
authority he radiated was unearned arrogance. Some resisted the idea of a nobody succeeding without
kowtowing his way to the top. One member of a prominent Omaha family was lunching with half a dozen
people at the Blackstone Hotel when Buffett’s name came up. “He’ll be broke in a year,” the man said. “Just
give him a year and he’s gone.”26 A partner at Kirkpatrick Pettis, which Howard’s firm had merged with in
1957, said time after time, “The jury’s still out on him.”27
That fall, the already frothy stock market took off on a tear. The economy had been slogging along in a mild
recession, and the country’s mood was dark because the Soviets seemed to be winning the arms and space
races. But when John F. Kennedy won the presidency in a squeaker of an election, the pending change in

administrations to a man from a vigorous young generation uplifted the nation. In one of his early speeches,
Kennedy set out a goal: sending a man to the moon and back. The market shot up, and once again
comparisons were made to 1929. Warren had never ridden out a speculative market, yet he remained
unruffled. It was as if he had been waiting for this moment. Instead of pulling back, as Graham might have
done, he did something remarkable. He went into overdrive raising money for the partnerships.
He put Bertie and her husband, his uncle George from Albuquerque, and his cousin Bill into Buffett
Associates, the original partnership. Wayne Eves, his friend John Cleary’s partner, got on board too. And he
finally put Fred Kulhken’s mother and aunt, Anne Gottschaldt and Catherine Elberfeld, into the partnership.
Their presence suggested that he felt the timing was not just highly propitious but also safe.
Three more people went into Underwood. Waiting for a cab in the rain after attending one of Ben Graham’s
lectures in New York, Warren met Frank Matthews Jr., son of the former Secretary of the Navy before whom
Vanita Mae Brown had once claimed to be married to Warren—Matthews became a partner.28 Warren set
up Ann Investments, his ninth partnership, for a member of another prominent Omaha family, Elizabeth
Storz. He put Mattie Topp, who owned the fanciest dress shop in town, along with her two daughters and
sons-in-law and $250,000, into the tenth, Buffett-TD.
Legally, he could take on only a hundred partners without having to register with the SEC as an investment
adviser. As the partnerships burgeoned, he started encouraging people to team up informally and come in as a
single partner. Eventually he would put people into pools, combining their money himself.29 He later
described the tactic as questionable—but it worked. His compulsion to get more money, to make more
money, drove him on. Warren was on fire, shuttling back and forth to New York at a frantic pace. He began
to suffer from stress-related back pain. It often worsened when he was on an airplane, and he tried all sorts of
things to alleviate it—everything but staying home.
By now his name was passed along like a secret. Invest with Warren Buffett to get rich. But the routine had
changed. By 1960 it took at least $8,000 to get in the door. And he no longer asked people to invest with him.
They had to bring it up. It had to be their idea. People not only would have no inkling what he was doing,
they had to put themselves in this position.*20 It converted them into enthusiasts for Buffett, and reduced the
odds of their complaining about anything he did. Instead of asking a favor, he was granting one; people felt
indebted to him for taking their money. Making people ask put him psychologically in charge. He would
come to use this technique often, in many contexts, for the rest of his life. Along with getting him what he
wanted, it seemed to soothe his persisting fears of being responsible for other people’s fates.
Though his insecurity was rampant as ever, his success and Susie’s care and tutoring had given him a bit of
polish and flair. He was starting to appear powerful, not vulnerable. Plenty of people were happy to ask him
to invest for them. Buffett formed the eleventh and last of his partnerships, Buffett-Holland, on May 16,
1961, for Dick and Mary Holland, friends he had met through his lawyer and partner Dan Monen. When
Dick Holland decided to invest in the partnership, members of his family pressured him not to do it. Buffett’s
abilities were apparent to him, Holland says, even though in Omaha people were still “laughing up their
sleeves” at Warren’s ambitions.30 Yet in 1959 the partnerships had outperformed the market by six percent.
In 1960 they leaped to nearly $1.9 million in assets by beating the market by twenty-nine percent. Even more
impressive than any single year’s profits was the compounding power of repeated growth. A thousand dollars
invested in Buffett Fund, the second partnership, was now worth $2,407 four years later. Invested in the Dow
Jones Industrial Average, it would have been worth just $1,426.31 More important, he accomplished this
higher return while taking less risk than the market as a whole.
And Buffett’s fees, reinvested, had by the end of 1960 earned him $243,494. More than thirteen percent of
the partnerships’ assets now belonged to him alone. Yet even as his share of the partnerships increased, he
had made the partners so much money that they were no longer simply happy; many regarded him with awe.
Bill Angle, his partner in Emdee, was foremost among them. He Tom-Sawyered himself into becoming
Warren’s “partner” in building a gigantic model train set with an HO gauge track on the third floor of the
Buffetts’ house, which had been a ballroom in a former life and was now the family attic. Warreny, the boy
