
hadn't told me what I would be paid, nor had I asked, because I knew,
for reasons that shall soon emerge, that investment bankers didn 't like
to talk about money.
Days passed. I knew nothing about trading and, as a result, next to
nothing about Salomon Brothers, for Salomon Brothers is, more than any
other on Wall Street, a firm run by traders. I knew only what I had
read in the papers, and they said that Salomon Brothers was the world's
most profitable investment bank. True as that might be, the process of
landing a job with the firm had been suspiciously pleasant. After some
initial giddiness about the promise of permanent employment, I became
skeptical of the desirability of life on a trading floor. It crossed my mind
to hold out for a job in corporate finance. Had it not been for the
circumstances, I might well have written to Leo (we were on a first-name
basis) to say I didn't want to belong to any club that would have me so
quickly for a member. The circumstances were that I had no other job.
I decided to live with the stigma of having gotten my first real job
through connections. It was better than the stigma of unemployment.
Any other path onto the Salomon Brothers trading floor would have been
cluttered with unpleasant obstacles, like job interviews. (Six thousand
people had applied that year.) Most of the people with whom I would
eventually work were badly savaged in their interviews and had grisly
stories to tell. Except for the weird memory of Salomon's assault on the
British throne, I had no battle scars and felt mildly ashamed.
Oh, all right, Iconfess. One of the reasons I pounced on the Salomon
Brothers opportunity like a loose ball was that I had already seen the
dark side of a Wall Street job hunt and had no desire to see it again. As
a college senior in 1981, three years before the night I got lucky in St.
James's Palace, I applied to banks. I have never seen men oh Wall Street
in such complete agreement on any issue as they were on my application.
A few actually laughed at my resume. Representatives from several
leading firms said I lacked commercial instincts, an expensive way, I
feared, to say that I would spend the rest of my life poor. I've always
had difficulties making sharp transitions, and this one was the sharpest.
I recall that I couldn't imagine myself wearing a suit. Also, I'd never met
a banker with blond hair. All moneymen I'd ever seen were either dark or
bald. I was neither. So, you see, I had problems. About a quarter of the
people with whom I began work at Salomon Brothers came straight from

college, so passed a test that I failed. I still wonder how.
At the time, I didn't give trading so much as a passing thought. In this I
wasn't unusual. If they'd heard of trading floors, college seniors
considered them cages for untrained animals, and one of the great shifts
in the 1980s was the relaxing of this pose by the most expensively
educated people in both America and Britain. My Princeton University
Class of 1982 was among the last to hold it firmly. So we didn't apply to
work on trading floors. Instead we angled for lower-paying jobs in
corporate finance. The starting salary was about twenty-five thousand
dollars a year plus bonus. When all was said and done, the pay came to
around six dollars an hour. The job title was "investment banking
analyst."
Analysts didn't analyze anything. They were slaves to a team of
corporate financiers, the men who did the negotiations and paper work
(though not the trading and selling) of new issues of stocks and bonds
for America's corporations. At Salomon Brothers they were the lowest
of the low; at other banks they were the lowest of the high; in either
case theirs was a miserable job. Analysts photocopied, proofread, and
assembled breathtakingly dull securities documents for ninety and more
hours a week. If they did this particularly well, analysts were thought
well of by their bosses.
This was a dubious honor. Bosses attached beepers to their favorite
analysts, making it possible to call them in at all hours. A few of the very
best analysts, months into their new jobs, lost their will to live normal
lives. They gave themselves entirely over to their employers and worked
around the clock. They rarely slept and often looked ill; the better they
became at the jobs, the nearer they appeared to death. One extremely
successful analyst working for Dean Witter in 1983 (a friend I envied at
the time for his exalted station in life) was so strung out that he
regularly nipped into a bathroom stall during midday lulls and slept on the
toilet. He worked straight through most nights and on weekends, yet felt
guilty for not doing more. He pretended to be constipated—in case
someone noticed how long he had been gone. By definition an analyst's
job lasted only two years. Then he was expected to go to business school.
Many analysts later admit that their two years between college and
business school were the worst of their lives.
The analyst was a prisoner of his own narrowly focused ambition. He

wanted money. He didn't want to expose himself in any unusual way. He
wanted to be thought successful by others like him. (I tell you this only
because I narrowly escaped imprisonment myself, and not by choice. And
had I not escaped, I surely wouldn't be here now. I'd be continuing my
climb up the same ladder as many of my peers.) There
was one sure way, and only one sure way?, to get ahead, and everyone
with eyes in 1982 saw it: Major in ecomomics; use your economics degree
to get an analyst job on Wall Street; use your analyst job to get into the
Harvard or Stanford Business Schiool; and worry about the rest of your
life later.
So, more than any other, the question tlhat my classmates and I were
asking in the fall of 1981 and the spring of 1982 was: How do I become a
Wall Street analyst? Over time this qiuestion had fantastic
consequences. The first and most obvious was ai logjam at the point of
entry. Any one of a number of hard statistics cam be enlisted to
illustrate the point. Here's one. Forty percent of the tlhirteen hundred
members of Yale's graduating class of 1986 applied tco one investment
bank, First Boston, alone. There was, I think, a sense iof safety in the
numbers. The larger the number of people involved, tHie easier it was for
them to delude themselves that what they were dosing must be smart.
The first thing you learn on the trading floor is that when large numbers
of people are after the same commodity, be it a sstock, a bond, or a job,
the commodity quickly becomes overvalued. Unfortunately, at the time, I
had never seen a trading floor.
The second effect, one that struck me at the time as tragic, was a
strange surge in the study of economics. AVt Harvard in 1987 the course
in the principles of economics had forty :sections and a thousand
students; the enrollment had tripled in ten yeairs. At Princeton, in my
senior year, for the first time in the history of th«e school, economics
became the single most popular area of concentration. And the more
people studied economics, the more an economiics degree became a
requirement for a job on Wall Street.
There was a good reason for this. Ecomomics satisfied the two most
basic needs of investment bankers. Firstt investment bankers wanted
practical people, willing to subordinate their educations to their careers.
Economics, which was becoming an everr more abstruse science,
producing mathematical treatises with no obwious use, seemed almost

designed as a sifting device. The way it was itaught did not exactly fire
the imagination. I mean, few people would claim they actually liked
studying economics; there was not a trace off self-indulgence in the act.
Studying economics was more a ritual satcrifice. I can't prove this, of
course. It is bald assertion, based on what ^economists call casual
empiricism. I watched. I saw friends steadily drained of life. I often
asked
otherwise intelligent members of the prebanking set why they studied
economics, and they explained that it was the most practical course of
study, even while they spent their time drawing funny little graphs. They
were right, of course, and that was even more maddening. Economics was
practical. It got people jobs. And it did this because it demonstrated
that they were among the most fervent believers in the primacy of
economic life.
Investment bankers also wanted to believe, like members of any
exclusive club, that the logic to their recruiting techniques was airtight.
No one who didn't belong was admitted. This conceit went hand in glove
with the investment bankers' belief that they could control their
destiny, something, as we shall see, they couldn't do. Economics allowed
investment banking recruiters to compare directly the academic records
of recruits. The only inexplicable aspect of the process was that
economic theory (which is, after all, what economics students were
supposed to know) served almost no function in an investment bank. The
bankers used economics as a sort of standardized test of general
intelligence.
In the midst of the hysteria I was suitably hysterical. I had made a
conscious decision not to study economics at Princeton, partly because
everyone else was doing it for what sounded to me like the wrong
reasons. Don't get me wrong. I knew I'd one day need to earn a living.
But it seemed a waste not to seize the unique opportunity to stretch
your brain on something that genuinely excited you. It also seemed a
waste not to use the rest of the university. So I landed in one of the
least used departments on campus. Art history was the opposite of
economics; no one wanted it on his resume. Art history, as an economics
major once told me, "is for preppy girls from Connecticut." The chief
economic purpose of art history was clandestinely to lift the grade-point
averages of the economics students. They dipped into my department for

a course a term, which appeared on their resumes as only one component
of that average. The idea that art history might be self-improving or
that self-improvement, as distinct from career building, was a legitimate
goal of education was widely regarded as naive and reckless. And as we
approached the end of our four years in college, that is how it seemed.
Some of my classmates were visibly sympathetic toward me, as if I were
a cripple or had unwittingly taken a vow of poverty. Being the class
Franciscan had its benefits, but a ticket onto Wall Street wasn't one.
To be fair, art was only the start of my problems. It didn't help that I
had flunked a course called "Physics for Poets" or that my resume listed
bartending and skydiving as skills. Born and raised in the Deep South, I
had never heard of investment bankers until a few months before my
first interview. I don't think we had them back home.
Nevertheless, Wall Street seemed very much like the place to be at the
time. The world didn't need another lawyer, I hadn't the ability to
become a doctor, and my idea for starting a business making little
satchels to hang off the rear ends of dogs to prevent them from
crapping on the streets of Manhattan (advertising jingle: "We Stop the
Plop") never found funding. Probably the real truth of the matter was
that I was frightened to miss the express bus on which everyone I knew
seemed to have a reserved seat, for fear that there would be no other. I
certainly had no fixed idea of what to do when I graduated from college,
and Wall Street paid top dollar for what I could do, which was nothing.
My motives were shallow. That wouldn't have mattered, and could even
have been an advantage, if I had felt the slightest conviction that I
deserved a job. But I didn't. Many of my classmates had sacrificed the
better part of their formal educations for Wall Street. I had sacrificed
nothing. That made me a dilettante, a southern boy in a white linen suit
waltzing into a war fought mainly by northeastern prep school graduates.
In short, I wasn't going to be an investment banker anytime soon. My
moment of reckoning came immediately after the first interview of the
1982 season, with the Wall Street firm of Lehman Brothers. To get the
interview, I had stood in six inches of snow with about fifty other
students, awaiting the opening of the Princeton University career
services office. All through the winter the office resembled a ticket
booth at a Michael Jackson concert, with lines of motley students
staging all-night vigils to get ahead. When the doors finally swung open,

we rushed in and squeezed our names onto the Lehman interview
schedule.
Although I wasn't ready to be an investment banker, I was, in a funny
way, prepared for my interview. I had memorized those few facts widely
accepted by Princeton undergraduates to be part of an investment
banking interview survival kit. Investment banking applicants were
expected to be culturally literate. For example, in 1982 at least, they
had to be able to define the following terms: commercial banking,
investment banking, ambition, hard work, stock, bond, private placement,
partnership, and the Glass-Steagall Act.
Glass-Steagall was an act of the U.S. Congress, but it worked more like
an act of God. It cleaved mankind in two. With it, in 1934, American
lawmakers had stripped investment banking off from commercial banking.
Investment bankers now underwrote securities, such as stocks and
bonds. Commercial bankers, like Citibank, took deposits and made loans.
The act, in effect, created the investment banking profession, the single
most important event in the history of the world, or so I was led to
believe.
It worked by exclusion. After Glass-Steagall most people became
commercial bankers. Now I didn't actually know any commercial bankers,
but a commercial banker was reputed to be just an ordinary American
businessman with ordinary American ambitions. He lent a few hundred
million dollars each day to South American countries. But really, he
meant no harm. He was only doing what he was told by someone higher up
in an endless chain of command. A commercial banker wasn't any more a
troublemaker than Dagwood Bumstead. He had a wife, a station wagon,
2.2 children, and a dog that brought him his slippers when he returned
home from work at six. We all knew never to admit to an investment
banker that we were also applying for jobs with commercial banks,
though many of us were. Commercial banking was a safety net.
The investment banker was a breed apart, a member of a master race of
deal makers. He possessed vast, almost unimaginable talent and ambition.
If he had a dog, it snarled. He had two little red sports cars yet wanted
four. To get them, he was, for a man in a suit, surprisingly willing to cause
trouble. For example, he enjoyed harassing college seniors like me.
Investment bankers had a technique kno^vn as the stress interview. If
you were invited to Lehman's New York offices, your first interview

might begin with the interviewer asking you to open the window. You were
on the forty-third floor overlooking Water Street. The window was
sealed shut. That was, of course, the point. The interviewer just wanted
to see whether your inability to comply with his request led you to yank,
pull, and sweat until finally you melted into a puddle of foiled ambition.
Or, as one sad applicant was rumored to have done, threw a chair through
the window.
Another stress-inducing trick was the silent treatment. You'd walk into
the interview chamber. The man in the chair would say nothing. You'd say
hello. He'd stare. You'd say that you'd come for a job interview. He'd
stare some more. You'd make a stupid joke. He'd stare
ana snajce nis nead. You were on tenterhooks. Then he'd pick up a
newspaper (or, worse, your resume) and begin to read. He was testing
your ability to take control of a meeting. In this case, presumably, it was
acceptable to throw a chair through a window.
/ want to be an investment banker. Lehman Brothers is the best. I want
to be rich. On the appointed day, at the appointed hour, I rubbed two
sweaty palms together outside the interview chamber and tried to think
only pure thoughts (half-truths), such as these. I did a quick equipment
check, like an astronaut preparing for lift-off. My strengths: I was an
overachiever, a team player, and a people person, whatever that meant.
My weaknesses: I worked too hard and tended to move too fast for the
organizations I joined.
My name was called. Lehman interviewed in pairs. I wasn't sure I stood
much of a chance against one of these people, much less two.
Good news. Lehman had sent to Princeton one man and one woman. I
didn't know the man. But the woman was a Princeton graduate, an old
friend I hadn't expected to see. Perhaps I would survive.
Bad news. As I walked into the cubicle, she didn't smile or otherwise
indicate that she knew me. She later told me that such behavior is
unprofessional. We shook hands, and she was about as chummy as a boxer
before a fight. She then retired to her corner of the room, as if waiting
for the bell to ring. She sat silently in her blue suit and little bow tie.
Her accomplice, a square-shouldered young man of perhaps twenty-two,
held a copy of my resume.
Between the two of them they had two years of investment banking
experience. The greatest absurdity of the college investment banking

interview was the people the investment banks sent to conduct them.
Many of them hadn't worked on Wall Street for more than a year, but
they had acquired Wall Street personas. One of their favorite words was
professional. Sitting stiffly, shaking firmly, speaking crisply, and sipping
a glass of ice water were professional. Laughing and scratching your
armpits were not. My friend and her accomplice were exhibit number one
in the case against becoming a professional. One year on Wall Street and
they had been transmogrified. Seven months earlier my friend could be
seen on campus wearing blue jeans and a T-shirt that said dumb things.
She drank more beer than was healthy for her. She had been, in other
words, a fairly typical student. Now she was a bit player in my Orwellian
nightmare.
The young man took the seat behind the cold metal desk and began to
fire questions at me. Perhaps the best way to describe our encounter is
to recount, as best as memory will allow, what passed for our
conversation:
SQUARE YOUNG MAN: Why don't you explain to me the difference
between commercial banking and investment banking?
ME (making my first mistake by neglecting to seize the chance to praise
investment bankers and heap ridicule on the short work hours and
Lilliputian ambition of commercial bankers): Investment bankers
underwrite securities. You know, stocks and bonds. Commercial bankers
just make loans.
SQUARE YOUNG MAN: I see you majored in art history. Why? Aren't
you worried about getting a job?
ME (clinging to the party line of the Princeton art history department):
Well, art history interested me most, and the department here is
superb. Since Princeton doesn't offer any vocational training, I don't
believe that my choice of concentration will make much difference in
finding a job.
SQUARE YOUNG MAN: Do you know the size of U.S. GNP?
ME: I'm not sure. Isn't it about five hundred billion dollars?
SQUARE YOUNG MAN (casts a meaningful glance at the woman who I
thought was my friend): More like three trillion. You know we interview
hundreds of people for each position. You're up against a lot of
economics majors who know their stuff. Why do you want to be an
investment banker?

ME (obviously, the honest answer was that I didn't know. That was
unacceptable. After a waffle or two, I gave him what I figured he
wanted to hear): Well, really, when you get right down to it, I want to
make money.
SQUARE YOUNG MAN: That's not a good reason. You work loag hours in
this job, and you have to be motivated by more than just money. It's
true, our compensation is in line with our contribution. But frankly, we try
to discourage people from our business who are too interested in money.
That'sail.
That's all? The words ring in my ears. Before I could stop it from
happening, I was standing outside the cubicle in a cold sweat listening to
the next candidate being grilled. Never for a moment did I doubt the
acceptability to an investment banker of a professed love of money. I
had thought that investment bankers made money for a living, dhe way
Ford made cars. Even if analysts were not paid as well as the older
investment bankers, I had thought they were meant to be at least a tiny
bit greedy. Why did the square young man from Lehman take offense at
the suggestion? A friend who eventually won a job with Lehman Brothers
later explained. "It's taboo," he said. "When they ask you why you want
to be an investment banker, you're supposed to talk about the
challenges, and the thrill of doing deals, and the excitement of working
with such high-caliber people, but never, ever mention money."
Learning a new lie was easy. Believing it was another matter. From then
on, whenever an investment banker asked for rny motives, I dutifully
handed him the correct answers: the challenge; the people; the thrill of
the deal. It was several years before I convinced myself that this one
was remotely plausible (I think I even fed some variant of it to the
Salomon Brothers managing director's wife). That money wasn't the
binding force was, of course, complete and utter bullshit. But inside the
Princeton University career services office in 1982 you didn't let the
truth get in the way of a job. I flattered the bankers. At the same time
I seethed at their hypocrisy. I mean, did anyone, even in those innocent
days, doubt the importance of money on Wall Street other than people
from Wall Street when talking to people from elsewhere?
Seething was soothing. I needed soothing, since when I graduated from
Princeton, I had no job (Salomon had rejected me sight unseen). In the
following year, while running through three different jobs, I managed to

demonstrate that I was as unemployable as the bankers had found me. I
didn't ever doubt I got what I deserved. I just didn't like the way I had
gotten it. I did not learn much from my stack of Wall Street rejection
letters except that investment bankers were not in the market for
either honesty or my services (not that the two were otherwise related).
Set questions were posed to which set answers were expected. A
successful undergraduate investment banking interview sounded like a
monastic chant. An unsuccessful interview sounded like a bad accident.
My Lehman interview was representative not just of my own experience
but of thousands of interviews conducted by a dozen investment banks
on several dozen college campuses from about 1981 onward.
Still, the tale has a happy ending. Lehman Brothers eventually went
belly up. A battle between the traders and the corporate financiers
caused the firm to collapse in early 1984. The traders won, but what was
left of the august house of Lehman wasn't worth living in. The senior
partners were forced to go hat in hand to Wall Street rival Shearson,
which bought them out. The name of Lehman Brothers was forever stnick
from the business cards of Wall Street. When I read the news in The
New York Times I thought, Good riddance, which I admit wasn't a deeply
Christian response. Whether Lehman's misfortune was directly related
to its unwillingness to admit it was out to make money, I do not know.
Chapter Three
Learning to
Love\bur
Corporate
Culture
He who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being a man. —
Samuel Johnson
I REMEMBER almost exactly how I felt and what I saw my first day at
Salomon Brothers. There was a cold shiver doing laps around my body,
which, softened and coddled by the regime of a professional student,
was imagining it was still asleep. With reason. I wasn't due at work until
7:00 A.M. , but I rose early to walk around Wall Street before going to
