
CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

F I G U R E

297

12.6

Schlumberger reentry.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

day later, triggering a failure of a failure buy signal. The trader reenters the
position (2), placing a stop loss (4) under the low of the recovery bar. The
bounce holds firm this time, and the primary trend resumes control, lifting
price up and over the July high.

298

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

Many traders never jump back into losing positions, despite fresh
entry signals, because they’re licking their wounds after getting stopped
out. It’s difficult to execute the new trade, psychologically, because getting
it wrong the first time undermines their confidence. However, the best
opportunities often come right after you take an orderly loss because you
weren’t really wrong in the first place, just a little too early. Not surprisingly,
this is a common occurrence in our modern market environment.
Taking opportune profits can be difficult as well because greed
clouds awareness when it’s time to pull the trigger. Simply stated, traders
are market timers. This clock sensitivity demands a quick exit when price
fulfills the goal visualized in the initial analysis, a.k.a. the profit target.
Markets are constantly banging up against old highs, old lows, and piles
of debris from past battles between bulls and bears. Prices react quickly
to these pivot points, often triggering major spikes and sharp reversals.
Traders gain tremendous discipline by selling blind into a profit target.
This survivalist approach lets them take advantage of the crowd’s
excitement at the same time the odds are favoring a reversal. It also frees
them from the position so they can move on to the next opportunity.
Ironically, the next trade often shows up when the instrument just
dumped turns tail, retraces to a support or resistance pivot, and then issues
a fresh entry signal.
As you gain experience applying your exit tactics, you discover that
trends appear drawn to magnetic “hotspots” before they change direction.
This pattern structure, once understood, provides a lifetime edge that lets
you plan the exit in advance and resist the thrill of the moment. A perfect
example is the tendency of a trending price to surge into a major support
or resistance level rather than creep into it.
How do you protect profits in case price fails to reach the profit
target or reverses ahead of schedule? The best method is to fall back on
the trailing stop loss strategy as soon as the position starts to accelerate
toward the profit target. You can do this in one of two ways:
• Place the trailing stop 10, 15, or 20 cents behind advancing price
and keep it in place until it gets hit, or the profit target is reached.
• Set up an exit order behind the current price and watch bid-ask on
the market depth screen. Hit the button when price drops 10, 15,
or 20 cents off the high.
Holding period guides the profit side of the exit equation as well.
Always seek the profit target that matches your time in the market. In other

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

F I G U R E

299

12.7

Gap fills offer reliable price levels to take blind exits on profitable positions. SanDisk prints five notable gaps
(1-2-3-4-5) over a seven-month period. The October gap (4) takes over three months to fill, while the February
gap (5) takes just one week. Four of the five gaps trigger notable reversals at or close to the fill levels (A-B-D-E).
Only September’s big hole (3) fails to reverse completely, giving way to another downtrend. Even so, the stock
still bounces over three points after filling that gap (C).

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

words, trade the most profitable move from your entry to the target within
the time frame you’re long or short the stock, currency pair, or futures
contract. This lets you apply both a time- and price-based exit strategy to
your winners. The time-based exit strategy requires little interpretation.
Focus on your holding period’s time window rather than the price action.
Exit the trade immediately when price hits the profit target at the right
time. Exit the trade before price hits the profit target if the window starts

300

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

to close. The overriding goal with a time-based strategy is to find the best
price available within the chosen window of opportunity.
Stocks love to fill old gaps, and they’ll sometimes wait months or
years to do it. With this in mind, it’s sound practice to look for significant
gaps the current trend might be approaching and to then exit the trade
when price surges into the fill level. Afraid you’ll miss a chunk of the
move despite the gap barrier? If so, run a trailing stop behind the position
when it fills the gap so you’ll get taken out on the first reversal. However,
a blind exit is always the best strategy when the gap transits a wide percentage range, because these big holes are especially hard for opposing
trends to overcome and will likely trigger intermediate reversals.
The two-phased (1-2) setup can really mess with our heads when it
comes to a sound exit strategy. Here’s a common scenario. We enter a long
position when price rallies out of a bull flag and then realize the buying
impulse will complete a cup and handle pattern as soon as it trades into
the flag high. Seeing this larger-scale pattern, we fail to book the considerable profit we’ve earned as a result of the flag breakout in hopes of
catching the C&H breakout. This is a bad strategy. A much better plan is to
take profits blindly when the position hits large-scale resistance and then
watch from the sidelines, treating the cup and handle as a separate opportunity requiring its own buy signal. The good news is, if the pattern falls
apart, we’ve already taken a chunk of the evolving rally and put it into our
pockets.
Rapid price bar expansion also yields great exit signals. However,
it’s tough psychologically because our first instinct when riding an accelerating trend is to pat ourselves on the back and to think about doubling
or tripling the position. However, it makes more sense to cash out quickly
because these phenomena trigger adverse technical signals (overbought,
oversold, standard deviation) that can induce sharp and sometimes violent
counterswings. Personally, I’d rather put that money in my pocket and
thank my lucky stars rather than worry about giving back every penny on
a sudden reversal.
A little Fibonacci goes a long way in finding a profitable exit as
well. For example, a correction in a downtrend is often followed by a
bounce that reaches 62% of the last selloff leg. This will give you a magic
number to exit a long trade after buying a falling knife, but take the
additional step of confirming your exit by looking for cross-verification
in broken tops, filled gaps, and violated moving averages. These convergence points add predictive power to Fib levels and pinpoint where
selling pressure is most likely to reexert its primary influence. Taking

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

F I G U R E

301

12.8

Use Fibonacci retracement levels to exit trades after finding cross-verification through other technical tools.
Las Vegas Sands recovers from a brutal bear market decline, rallying 10 points in less than two months. The
rally stalls in May and reverses at the 62% selloff retracement, which also marks the exact fill level of the
November 6 gap. The subsequent pullback eventually retraces more than half of the recovery rally before the
uptrend finally resumes.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

profits using standard retracements and nothing else can be difficult from
a psychological standpoint because “fuzzy math” is telling you to get
out when you’re sitting on a profit in a rising market. However, it isn’t a
huge leap of faith after you locate other barriers converging at the same
price level.
Exit planning must deal with the good, the bad, and the ugly. In other
words, keep a profit protection strategy to exit winning trades, a stop loss

302

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

strategy to get out of bad ones, and a fire drill in case disaster strikes.
You’ll need all three tactics ready to go in every trade, because anything
can happen after you hit the order button. In particular, you need a detailed
plan to deal with unexpected bad news or a shock event. Visualize different panic scenarios and practice your intended response over and over
again in your head. A panic exit relies on common sense. Simply stated,
if you can beat the rest of the crowd out of the burning theater, then act
immediately. If you can’t, use the pre- and postmarkets, intraday counterreactions, and scaling strategies to exit at the best available prices. Of
course, the market can do anything it wants after bad news hits, and you
may have no choice but to accept a large and painful loss. Take comfort in
knowing that sudden and sometimes devastating losses are a cost of doing
business as a trader.

Final Thoughts on Risk Management
Survivalist traders know how to find good opportunities every day. When
one play doesn’t work out, their transition into the next one is automatic
and painless because attention is focused squarely on translating ideas
into profits. When it comes to trading successfully, internal process is
more important than pattern recognition. Clearly, there’s a ton of material
sitting on the financial bookshelves about patterns, indicators, and trading
systems. Unfortunately, market technicians, not working traders, write the
majority of these curve-fitting tutorials. In the real world, the ticker tape
rarely responds in a logical manner to the structural elements of technical
analysis, so the working trader has no choice but to exercise a predefined
set of internal control mechanisms, better known as risk management, that
are independent of the price chart.
In truth, we can ride trends only when there are trends to ride. No,
this isn’t meant to sound like a Zen koan. Simply put, the majority of
market players spend too much time looking for and seeing trends that
don’t exist. Given this limitation, taking profits after a single price thrust
rather than attempting to ride a trend for five or ten points is usually the
best course of action. Realistically, those bigger, juicier returns just aren’t
possible until the working trader overcomes two major issues. Paradoxically, these bullet points illustrate why the real issue isn’t risk management
at all.

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

303

First, traders get stuck in all kinds of trend relativity errors, like those
discussed ad nauseam in The Master Swing Trader. For example, a pattern
might predict the next point but be completely wrong about the next five
or ten points. In fact, that’s the most likely scenario because the reliability
of predictions drops off a cliff as a function of time. Second and more
importantly, riding trends demands a level of risk tolerance that makes
most traders extremely uncomfortable. It’s common sense that, in order to
take five or ten points out of the market, we need to risk two to four points
at a time on routine counterswings. With most members of the trading
community already undercapitalized and unprofitable, this requirement
is well beyond their financial or emotional capacity.
As I’ve noted throughout this text, taking a timely exit, whether
through a stop loss or willpower, has a major role to play in effective risk
management. This begs the question, “Why haven’t you placed stops,
mental or physical, to keep your current winners from turning into losers,
or your current losers from turning into disasters?” Your failure to act
reflects the biggest problem I know with risk management techniques, i.e.,
they do absolutely no good if you refuse to apply them. When it comes
right down to it, the real secret is, there are no secrets when it comes to risk
management. It’s just an issue of applied discipline, rather than chasing a
magical Holy Grail that doesn’t exist.
To be frank, you already know exactly what needs to be done with
your position choices, trade executions, and exposure profiles. It’s just a
question of shaking off your unconscious desire to fail, waking up from
the dead, and finally doing it.

Mastering the Survivalist Trade
How do you know if you’re making progress on the road to long-term
profitability? Of course there’s an obvious answer to this question—just
check your financial results. There’s little doubt you’re doing well if you’re
booking consistent profits. But raw capital production might not be the
best way to judge your growth because the road to profitability has many
detours in which the monthly statement isn’t the best measure of results.
For example, skill development is far more important than short-term
profits when we go through learning curves, drawdowns, and other roadblocks. So, if dollars and cents don’t tell us what we need to know, what

304

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

does? To answer that question, here are 10 characteristics that reflect solid
progress on the road to market mastery:
1. Money management becomes your lifeline, and your strategies
start to revolve around its core. Risk control becomes a key aspect
of every position. You finally accept the fact that controlling losses
has a greater impact on your bottom line than chasing gains.
2. You develop your own strategies rather than relying on books,
gurus, or other people’s opinions. You notice how you’re finding
more opportunities than you have time to trade while flipping
through the charts. You look forward to the trading day with a
growing sense of confidence and empowerment.
3. You feel more like a student than a master of the markets. You
learn new things each day and can’t wait to apply them in real-life
scenarios. You listen closely to everything you hear, trying to pick
up hints and concepts that will improve your performance. You
expand your studies into everything market-related, including
economics, fundamentals, and balance sheets.
4. You stop visiting stock boards and chat rooms because they don’t
add anything to your performance. You realize that everyone has
ulterior motives. You develop a healthy skepticism about companies, institutions, and other traders. You realize that no one is
really interested in your success except you.
5. You become more private in your discussions about the market
with family and friends. You understand that opinions count
only when they’re backed up by hard cash. You never talk about
your positions or ask others what to do with them.
6. Trading starts to feel like any other successful profession. Your
average profits get bigger while your losses get smaller. You experience fewer drawdowns that drain your capital and undermine
your confidence. The trading day gets a little boring, but you
actually prefer the lack of emotional highs and lows.
7. You grade your performance each day and recognize when
actions do not meet your rising standards. You notice how
certain times of the day are particularly dangerous or rewarding
for your trading style. You keep a mental diary that notes your
strengths and weaknesses in stark detail.
8. You never cut corners in your analysis, no matter how tired or
exhilarated you feel at the end of the day. You set aside time to
review your results, download fresh data, and uncover themes

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

305

for the next session. You don’t trade at all when nonmarket
matters keep you from finishing your nightly preparation.
9. You watch all types of markets, even those you’re not trading
at the time. You realize the next opportunity might come from
anywhere, and you want to be prepared. You also understand
your interests will change over time, so you want to be ready for
the next big thing.
10. You keep detailed records and update them on a regular basis.
You look at your profits and losses with complete detachment
and a keen eye for self-improvement. You don’t “conveniently”
forget those trades you’d rather not think about.

