
have been poisoned by the devil; the waters of the wells, the standing corn in the fields,
and the fruit upon the trees. It was believed that all objects of touch were poisoned; the
walls of the houses, the pavement of the streets, and the very handles of the doors. The
populace were raised to a pitch of ungovernable fury. A strict watch was kept for the
devil's emissaries, and any man who wanted to be rid of an enemy, had only to say that
he had seen him besmearing a door with ointment; his fate was certain death at the hands
of the mob. An old man, upwards of eighty years of age, a daily frequenter of the church
of St. Antonio, was seen, on rising from his knees, to wipe with the skirt of his cloak the
stool on which he was about to sit down. A cry was raised immediately that he was
besmearing the seat with poison. A mob of women, by whom the church was crowded,
seized hold of the feeble old man, and dragged him out by the hair of his head, with
horrid oaths and imprecations. He was trailed in this manner through the mire to the
house of the municipal judge, that he might be put to the rack, and forced to discover his
accomplices; but he expired on the way. Many other victims were sacrificed to the
popular fury. One Mora, who appears to have been half a chemist and half a barber, was
accused of being in league with the devil to poison Milan. His house was surrounded, and
a number of chemical preparations were found. The poor man asserted, that they were
intended as preservatives against infection; but some physicians, to whom they were
submitted, declared they were poison. Mora was put to the rack, where he for a long time
asserted his innocence. He confessed at last, when his courage was worn down by torture,
that he was in league with the devil and foreign powers to poison the whole city; that he
had anointed the doors, and infected the fountains of water. He named several persons as
his accomplices, who were apprehended and put to a similar torture. They were all found
guilty, and executed. Mora's house was rased to the ground, and a column erected on the
spot, with an inscription to commemorate his guilt.
While the public mind was filled with these marvellous occurrences, the plague
continued to increase. The crowds that were brought together to witness the executions,
spread the infection among one another. But the fury of their passions, and the extent of
their credulity, kept pace with the violence of the plague; every wonderful and
preposterous story was believed. One, in particular, occupied them to the exclusion, for a
long time, of every other. The Devil himself had been seen. He had taken a house in
Milan, in which he prepared his poisonous unguents, and furnished them to his emissaries
for distribution. One man had brooded over such tales till he became firmly convinced
that the wild flights of his own fancy were realities. He stationed himself in the marketplace of Milan, and related the following story to the crowds that gathered round him. He
was standing, he said, at the door of the cathedral, late in the evening, and when there
was nobody nigh, he saw a dark-coloured chariot, drawn by six milk-white horses, stop
close beside him. The chariot was followed by a numerous train of domestics in dark
liveries, mounted on dark-coloured steeds. In the chariot there sat a tall stranger of a
majestic aspect; his long black hair floated in the wind--fire flashed from his large black
eyes, and a curl of ineffable scorn dwelt upon his lips. The look of the stranger was so
sublime that he was awed, and trembled with fear when he gazed upon him. His
complexion was much darker than that of any man he had ever seen, and the atmosphere
around him was hot and suffocating. He perceived immediately that he was a being of
another world. The stranger, seeing his trepidation, asked him blandly, yet majestically,

to mount beside him. He had no power to refuse, and before he was well aware that he
had moved, he found himself in the chariot. Onwards they went, with the rapidity of the
wind, the stranger speaking no word, until they stopped before a door in the high-street of
Milan. There was a crowd of people in the street, but, to his great surprise, no one seemed
to notice the extraordinary equipage and its numerous train. From this he concluded that
they were invisible. The house at which they stopped appeared to be a shop, but the
interior was like a vast half-ruined palace. He went with his mysterious guide through
several large and dimly-lighted rooms. In one of them, surrounded by huge pillars of
marble, a senate of ghosts was assembled, debating on the progress of the plague. Other
parts of the building were enveloped in the thickest darkness, illumined at intervals by
flashes of lightning, which allowed him to distinguish a number of gibing and chattering
skeletons, running about and pursuing each other, or playing at leap-frog over one
another's backs. At the rear of the mansion was a wild, uncultivated plot of ground, in the
midst of which arose a black rock. Down its sides rushed with fearful noise a torrent of
poisonous water, which, insinuating itself through the soil, penetrated to all the springs of
the city, and rendered them unfit for use. After he had been shown all this, the stranger
led him into another large chamber, filled with gold and precious stones, all of which he
offered him if he would kneel down and worship him, and consent to smear the doors and
houses of Milan with a pestiferous salve which he held out to him. tie now knew him to
be the Devil, and in that moment of temptation, prayed to God to give him strength to
resist. His prayer was heard - he refused the bribe. The stranger scowled horribly upon
him - a loud clap of thunder burst over his head - the vivid lightning flashed in his eyes,
and the next moment he found himself standing alone at the porch of the cathedral. He
repeated this strange tale day after day, without any variation, and all the populace were
firm believers in its truth. Repeated search was made to discover the mysterious house,
but all in vain. The man pointed out several as resembling it, which were searched by the
police; but the Demon of the Pestilence was not to be found, nor the hall of ghosts, nor
the poisonous fountain. But the minds of the people were so impressed with the idea that
scores of witnesses, half crazed by disease, came forward to swear that they also had seen
the diabolical stranger, and had heard his chariot, drawn by the milk-white steeds,
rumbling over the streets at midnight with a sound louder than thunder.
The number of persons who confessed that they were employed by the Devil to distribute
poison is almost incredible. An epidemic frenzy was abroad, which seemed to be as
contagious as the plague. Imagination was as disordered as the body, and day after day
persons came voluntarily forward to accuse themselves. They generally had the marks of
disease upon them, and some died in the act of confession.
During the great plague of London, in 1665, the people listened with similar avidity to
the predictions of quacks and fanatics. Defoe says, that at that time the people were more
addicted to prophecies and astronomical conjurations, dreams, and old wives' tales than
ever they were before or since. Almanacs, and their predictions, frightened them terribly.
Even the year before the plague broke out, they were greatly alarmed by the comet which
then appeared, and anticipated that famine, pestilence, or fire would follow. Enthusiasts,
while yet the disease had made but little progress, ran about the streets, predicting that in
a few days London would be destroyed.

A still more singular instance of the faith in predictions occurred in London in the year
1524. The city swarmed at that time with fortune-tellers and astrologers, who were
consulted daily by people of every class in society on the secrets of futurity. As early as
the month of June 1523, several of them concurred in predicting that, on the 1st day of
February, 1524, the waters of the Thames would swell to such a height as to overflow the
whole city of London, and wash away ten thousand houses. The prophecy met implicit
belief. It was reiterated with the utmost confidence month after month, until so much
alarm was excited that many families packed up their goods, and removed into Kent and
Essex. As the time drew nigh, the number of these emigrants increased. In January,
droves of workmen might be seen, followed by their wives and children, trudging on foot
to the villages within fifteen or twenty miles, to await the catastrophe. People of a higher
class were also to be seen, in waggons and other vehicles, bound on a similar errand. By
the middle of January, at least twenty thousand persons had quitted the doomed city,
leaving nothing but the bare walls of their homes to be swept away by the impending
floods. Many of the richer sort took up their abode on the heights of Highgate,
Hampstead, and Blackheath; and some erected tents as far away as Waltham Abbey, on
the north, and Croydon, on the south of the Thames. Bolton, the prior of St.
Bartholomew's, was so alarmed that he erected, at very great expense, a sort of fortress at
Harrow-on-the-Hill, which he stocked with provisions for two months. On the 24th of
January, a week before the awful day which was to see the destruction of London, he
removed thither, with the brethren and officers of the priory and all his household. A
number of boats were conveyed in waggons to his fortress, furnished abundantly with
expert rowers, in case the flood, reaching so high as Harrow, should force them to go
further for a resting-place. Many wealthy citizens prayed to share his retreat, but the
Prior, with a prudent forethought, admitted only his personal friends, and those who
brought stores of eatables for the blockade.
At last the morn, big with the fate of London, appeared in the east. The wondering
crowds were astir at an early hour to watch the rising of the waters. The inundation, it
was predicted, would be gradual, not sudden; so that they expected to have plenty of time
to escape, as soon as they saw the bosom of old Thames heave beyond the usual mark.
But the majority were too much alarmed to trust to this, and thought themselves safer ten
or twenty miles off. The Thames, unmindful of the foolish crowds upon its banks, flowed
on quietly as of yore. The tide ebbed at its usual hour, flowed to its usual height, and then
ebbed again, just as if twenty astrologers had not pledged their words to the contrary.
Blank were their faces as evening approached, and as blank grew the faces of the citizens
to think that they had made such fools of themselves. At last night set in, and the
obstinate river would not lift its waters to sweep away even one house out of the ten
thousand. Still, however, the people were afraid to go to sleep. Many hundreds remained
up till dawn of the next day, lest the deluge should come upon them like a thief in the
night.
On the morrow, it was seriously discussed whether it would not be advisable to duck the
false prophets in the river. Luckily for them, they thought of an expedient which allayed
the popular fury. They asserted that, by an error (a very slight one) of a little figure, they

had fixed the date of this awful inundation a whole century too early. The stars were right
after all, and they, erring mortals, were wrong. The present generation of cockneys was
safe, and London 'would be washed away, not in 1524, but in 1624. At this
announcement, Bolton, the prior, dismantled his fortress, and the weary emigrants came
back.
An eye-witness of the great fire of London, in an account preserved among the Harleian
MSS. in the British Museum, and recently published in the Transactions of the Royal
Society of Antiquaries, relates another instance of the credulity of the Londoners. The
writer, who accompanied the Duke of York day by day through the district included
between the Fleet-bridge and the Thames, states that, in their efforts to check the progress
of the flames, they were much impeded by the superstition of the people. Mother Shipton,
in one of her prophecies, had said that London would be reduced to ashes, and they
refused to make any efforts to prevent it. [This prophecy seems to have been that set forth
at length in the popular Life of Mother Shipton :-"When fate to England shall restore A king to reign as heretofore, Great death in London
shall be though, And many houses be laid low."]
A son of the noted Sir Kenelm Digby, who was also a pretender to the gifts of prophecy,
persuaded them that no power on earth could prevent the fulfilment of the prediction; for
it was written in the great book of fate that London was to be destroyed. Hundreds of
persons, who might have rendered valuable assistance, and saved whole parishes from
devastation, folded their arms and looked on. As many more gave themselves up, with
the less compunction, to plunder a city which they could not save.
The prophecies of Mother Shipton are still believed in many of the rural districts of
England. In cottages and servants' halls her reputation is great; and she rules, the most
popular of British prophets, among all the uneducated, or half-educated, portions of the
community. She is generally supposed to have been born at Knaresborough, in the reign
of Henry VII, and to have sold her soul to the Devil for the power of foretelling future
events. Though during her lifetime she was looked upon as a witch, she yet escaped the
witch's fate, and died peaceably in her bed at an extreme old age, near Clifton in
Yorkshire. A stone is said to have been erected to her memory in the church-yard of that
place, with the following epitaph :-"Here lies she who never lied; Whose skill often has been tried: Her prophecies shall still
survive, And ever keep her name alive."
"Never a day passed," says her traditionary biography, "wherein she did not relate
something remarkable, and that required the most serious consideration. People flocked
to her from far and near, her fame was so great. They went to her of all sorts, both old
and young, rich and poor, especially young maidens, to be resolved of their doubts
relating to things to come; and all returned wonderfully satisfied in the explanations she
gave to their questions." Among the rest, went the Abbot of Beverley, to whom she
foretold the suppression of the monasteries by Henry VIII; his marriage with Anne

Boleyn; the fires for heretics in Smithfield, and the execution of Mary Queen of Scots.
She also foretold the accession of James I, adding that, with him,
"From the cold North, Every evil should come forth."
On a subsequent visit she uttered another prophecy, which, in the opinion of her
believers, still remains unfulfilled, but may be expected to be realised during the present
century:-- "The time shall come when seas of blood Shall mingle with a greater flood.
Great noise there shall be heard--great shouts and cries, And seas shall thunder louder
than the skies; Then shall three lions fight with three, and bring Joy to a people, honour to
a king. That fiery year as soon as o'er, Peace shall then be as before; Plenty shall
everywhere be found, And men with swords shall plough the ground.'
But the most famous of all her prophecies is one relating to London. Thousands of
persons still shudder to think of the woes that are to burst over this unhappy realm, when
London and Highgate are joined by one continuous line of houses. This junction, which,
if the rage for building lasts much longer, in the same proportion as heretofore, bids fair
to be soon accomplished, was predicted by her shortly before her death. Revolutions -the fall of mighty monarchs, and the shedding of much blood are to signalise that event.
The very angels, afflicted by our woes, are to turn aside their heads, and weep for hapless
Britain.
But great as is the fame of Mother Shipton, she ranks but second in the list of British
prophets. Merlin, the mighty Merlin, stands alone in his high pre-eminence -- the first and
greatest. As old Drayton sings, in his Poly-olbion :-"Of Merlin and his skill what region doth not hear? The world shall still be full of Merlin
every year. A thousand lingering years his prophecies have run, And scarcely shall have
end till time itself be done."
Spenser, in his divine poem, has given us a powerfid description of this renowned seer-".......who had in magic more insight Than ever him before, or after, living wight.
"For he by words could call out of the sky Both sun and moon, and make them him obey;
The land to sea, and sea to mainland dry, And darksome night he eke could turn to day-Huge hosts of men he could, alone, dismay. And hosts of men and meanest things could
frame, Whenso him list his enemies to fray, That to this day, for terror of his name, The
fiends do quake, when any him to them does name.
"And soothe men say that he was not the sonne, Of mortal sire or other living wighte, But
wondrously begotten and begoune By false illusion of a guileful sprite, On a faire ladye
nun."
In these verses the poet has preserved the popular belief with regard to Merlin, who is
generally supposed to have been a contemporary of Vortigern. Opinion is divided as to

whether he were a real personage, or a mere impersonation, formed by the poetic fancy of
a credulous people. It seems most probable that such a man did exist, and that, possessing
knowledge as much above the comprehension of his age, as that possessed by Friar
Bacon was beyond the reach of his, he was endowed by the wondering crowd with the
supernatural attributes that Spenser has enumerated.
Geoffrey of Monmouth translated Merlin's poetical odes, or prophecies, into Latin prose,
and he was much reverenced, not only by Geoffrey, but by most of,the old annalists. In a
"Life of Merlin, with his Prophecies and Predictions. interpreted and made good by our
English Annals," by Thomas Heywood, published in the reign of Charles I, we find
several of these pretended prophecies. They seem, however, to have been all written by
Heywood himself. They are in terms too plain and positive to allow any one to doubt for
a moment of their having been composed ex post facto. Speaking of Richard I, he says :-"The Lion's heart will 'gainst the Saracen rise, And purchase from him many a glorious
prize; The rose and lily shall at first unite, But, parting of the prey prove opposite. * * * *
But while abroad these great acts shall be done; All things at home shall to disorder run.
Cooped up and caged then shall the Lion be, But, after sufferance, ransomed and set
free."
The sapient Thomas Heywood gravely goes on to inform us, that all these things actually
came to pass. Upon Richard III he is equally luminous. He says :-"A hunch-backed monster, who with teeth is born, The mockery of art and nature's scorn;
Who from the womb preposterously is hurled, And, with feet forward, thrust into the
world, Shall, from the lower earth on which he stood, Wade, every step he mounts, kneedeep in blood. He shall to th' height of all his hopes aspire, And, clothed in state, his ugly
shape admire; But, when he thinks himself most safe to stand, >From foreign parts a
native whelp shall land."
Another of these prophecies after the event tells us that Henry VIII should take the power
from Rome, "and bring it home unto his British bower;" that he should "root out from the
land all the razored skulls;" and that he should neither spare "man in his rage nor woman
in his lust;" and that, in the time of his next successor but one, "there should come in the
fagot and the stake." Master Heywood closes Merlin's prophecies at his own day, and
does not give even a glimpse of what was to befall England after his decease. Many other
prophecies, besides those quoted by him, were, he says, dispersed abroad, in his day,
under the name of Merlin; but he gives his readers a taste of one only, and that is the
following :-"When hempe is ripe and ready to pull, Then Englishman beware thy skull."
This prophecy, which, one would think, ought to have put him in mind of the gallows, the
not unusual fate of false prophets, and perchance his own, he explains thus:-- "In this
word HEMPE be five letters. Now, by reckoning the five successive princes from Henry
VIII, this prophecy is easily explained: H signifieth King Henry before named; E,

Edward, his son, the sixth of that name; M, Mary, who succeeded him; P, Philip of Spain,
who, by marrying Queen Mary, participated with her in the English diadem; and, lastly, E
signifieth Queen Elizabeth, after whose death there was a great feare that some troubles
might have arisen about the crown." As this did not happen, Heywood,. who was a sly
rogue in a small way, gets out of the scrape by saying, "Yet proved this augury true,
though not according to the former expectation; for, after the peaceful inauguration of
King James, there was great mortality, not in London only, but through the whole
kingdom, and from which the nation was not quite clean in seven years after."
This is not unlike the subterfuge of Peter of Pontefract, who had prophesied the death and
deposition of King John, and who was hanged by that monarch for his pains. A very
graphic and amusing account of this pretended prophet is given by Grafton, in his
Chronicles of England. There is so much homely vigour about the style of the old
annalist, that it would be a pity to give the story in other words than his own. [Chronicles
of England, by Richard Grafton; London, 1568, p. 106.] "In the meanwhile," says he, "the
priestes within England had provided them a false and counterfeated prophet, called Peter
Wakefielde, a Yorkshire man, who was an hermite, an idle gadder about, and a pratlyng
marchant. Now to bring this Peter in credite, and the kyng out of all credite with his
people, diverse vaine persons bruted dayly among the commons of the realme, that
Christe had twice appered unto him in the shape of a childe, betwene the prieste's handes,
once at Yorke, another tyme at Pomfret; and that he had breathed upon him thrice,
saying, 'Peace, peace, peace,' and teachyng many things, which he anon declared to the
bishops, and bid the people amend their naughtie living. Being rapt also in spirite, they
sayde he behelde the joyes of heaven and sorowes of hell, for scant were there three in
the realme, sayde he, that lived Christainly.
"This counterfeated soothsayer prophecied of King John, that he should reigne no longer
than the Ascension-day next followyng, which was in the yere of our Lord 1211, and was
the thirteenth yere from his coronation; and this, he said, he had by revelation. Then it
was of him demanded, whether he should be slaine or be deposed, or should voluntarily
give over the crowne? He aunswered, that he could not tell; but of this he was sure (he
sayd), that neither he nor any of his stock or lineage should reigne after that day.
"The king hering of this, laughed much at it, and made but a scoff thereat. 'Tush!' saith
he, 'it is but an ideot knave, and such an one as lacketh his right wittes.' But when this
foolish prophet had so escaped the daunger of the Kinge's displeasure, and that he made
no more of it, he gate him abroad, and prated thereof at large, as he was a very idle
vagabond, and used to trattle and talke more than ynough, so that they which loved the
King caused him anon after to be apprehended as a malefactor, and to be throwen in
prison, the King not yet knowing thereof.
"Anone after the fame of this phantasticall prophet went all the realme over, and his name
was knowen everywhere, as foolishnesse is much regarded of the people, where wisdome
is not in place; specially because he was then imprisoned for the matter, the rumour was
the larger, their wonderynges were the wantoner, their practises the foolisher, their busye
talkes and other idle doinges the greater. Continually from thence, as the rude manner of
