
A : It has I think because I understand how the mind works and
the way it processes information. Then I could use that information
to adjust and adapt myself as a trader.

302


SURFING FOR PROFITS

Q.: How does the mind work? What does the mind do that helps
you make yourself a better trader?

A : Well, I think always having a plan and being organized pro-
duces discipline. If you're able to do the same thing over repeti-
tively, I think that helps. Also, there are different ways of processing
information by remembering the good moments and forgetting the
bad moments, as well as having clarity of mind to know when to be
more alert or when to pull back. As a person, if you're getting ner-
vous about a position what should you do in that moment? There
is a psychology to that. You need to do something because once
you start getting nervous you stop thinking clearly, so maybe your
cognitive action is to close half you position. That’s what psychol-
ogy has been able to teach me—to be able to manage myself. Like
when you said, what do you do when you have several down days
in row? Well, my psychology has taught me that I don’t reflect on
that. I look at the situation with the logic of what’s happened over
the last several years. Namely, that I am successful more times
than I am not. I focus on that rather than letting my mind go
astray.

LESSONS FROM ASHKAN BALOUR
Trend Is Continuous but Turn Happens Only Once

Sometimes someone makes an observation that seems so obvious
that you have a “V-8” moment, slapping yourself on the head to say,
“Why didn’t I think of that?” Ashkan’s view that it is far easier to
trade with a trend—because a trend is essentially continuous while
turns are rare and difficult to time—is one such kernel of wisdom
we picked up in our interview with him. Although in principle,
the majority of novice traders agree that trading with the trend
is the way to go, in reality most of traders are inveterate top and
bottom pickers. Too many times we have seen traders get seduced
with the notion that they are smarter than the market as they try
to fade every rally and buy every dip. Few, like Chuck Hays, are
excellent contrarians and can execute this strategy well. Most wind

303


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

up simply getting stopped out or worse—margined out of their
positions. Ashkan’s point, that it is far easier to go in the direction
of price flow rather than against it, is something that most traders
would be well advised to remember.

Two Losses in a Row and You Should Stop

There are only two reasons why trades get stopped out—either the
trader is not in sync with the market or the market environment
has changed so dramatically that the traders’ analysis is simply
wrong. In either case, taking a break from the market at that point
is usually the best course of action. Ashkan’s rule of turning off
the computer after taking two stops in a row on any given day
would probably save countless dollars of lost capital if most traders
followed it. Typically, the greatest point of vulnerability for any
trader is right after a losing trade. The need to “get it back” is one
of the strongest and most destructive impulses of human nature.
Study the history of any blowup from that of the tiniest of retail
speculators to the phenomenal flame outs of massive hedge funds
such as Long Term Capital Management and you will see that the
ruin is always triggered by the desire to recover losses quickly. This
impulse typically devolves into random, seat of the pants decision
making and ultimately utter destruction of capital. A physical pause
in activity is one of the best ways to avoid the very unpleasant
consequences of “revenge” trading.

Take It Seriously

Often success does not belong to those with biggest talent but
rather to those with the greatest persistence. As with all other
endeavors in life, talent can only take you so far. In the end skill
is a function of effort and experience. Ashkan’s suggestion to take
trading seriously speaks directly to that idea. Many novices regard
trading as either an electronic version of a slot machine looking to
hit a quick and easy payout or some form of passive income stream
like a vending route or a McDonald’s franchise. The reality, of
course, couldn’t be more different. Would any rational person

304


SURFING FOR PROFITS

expect to become an expert in surgery, law, or molecular physics
after only six months of training in the subject matter? Hardly.
We accept the fact that those professions require years, sometimes
decades, of intense training, but somehow scoff at the notion that
trading could demand the same amount of dedication. As Ashkan
says, “If you don’t [take it seriously], you'll always see the potential
but you'll never reach it. I think a lot of people see the potential
but they never take it to that next level.”

305




CHAPTER 11

THE ALL-AMERICAN
TRADER

PAUL WILLETTE

le there was ever a trader to epitomize the classic all-American
values of dedication, hard work, and discipline, it would be Paul
Willette. Self-taught, Paul started day trading stocks using a dial-
up connection and a single, old laptop. But despite these humble
beginnings, within two years he was able to parlay his success
into a mid-six-figure account. Next, Paul moved into the tough-
est trading arena of all—the electronic e-mini stock index futures
market—where high leverage and whipsaw volatility destroy even
the most seasoned traders. Again, he succeeded where so many
others have failed by practicing the simplest yet the most elusive
rule of the game: cutting your losses short and letting your profits
run. A very competitive, highly disciplined trader, Paul leaves little
to chance, approaching trading with the intensity and focus of a
world-class athlete. We had the pleasure to interview him from his
Midwest home, which he shares with his wife and three children.

307


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q - How did you come to trading futures?

A : Here’s my story. I graduated from college in 1992 and from
there I became a stockbroker. I actually saw the movie Wall Street
in 1988, which kind of tipped me off that this is what I wanted to
do for the rest of the life.

Q.- who is your hero in Wall Street, Gecko or Bud Fox?
A: Bud Fox.

Q.: You saw yourself as Bud?
A. I saw myself as Bud.

Q_: Unfortunately, many of us saw that movie, and many of us
went to Wall Street for that same reason.

A : Yes [laughter]. So I was a stockbroker until February of 1998.

Q.: Were you working for a regional brokerage house or big wire
house?

A : | was working for a company called R.J. Steichen & Co. here
in Minnesota, and then a company called Josephthal.

Q - How did you build your book as a broker?

A : [ built my book by doing well for clients—doing my own niche,
working on little Minnesota-based companies. They were growing.
They were kind of undiscovered by Wall Street.

308


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

Q. would you do your own research and meet with management?

A: Yes, I did my own. I think personally, just my opinion, for what
it’s worth, analysts don’t know much. I mean a perfect example
was when I worked at R.J. Steichen & Co. and they were telling us
to sell this company called Insignia Systems and we could deal it
out with a dollar in it. I think it was about a $4 stock as I remember.
Then about two weeks later they came out with bad numbers
and I have come to find out in my schooling that it was just the
big guys at our firm. They just needed liquidity in the markets.
They were just selling it to us. So they wouldn’t screw up the
market.

Q.: There was no liquidity, so they're selling it back to you.

A : They were selling to us, so then we’d sell it back to all of our
clients. I said enough of this and went on my own. That way I could
blame no one but myself.

Q.. was that the straw that broke the camel’s back? Was that
when you had enough of being a broker?

A : That was one of them, and I also just thought that I could
trade these stocks in my own account.

: At that point you were already in the business for about six
years, right?

A: Yes.

Q.: You built a book, what kind of tricks of trade did you pick

up in your six years as a broker? What was your methodology like
then?

A : Its more fine-tuned today but it was just technical analysis,
big fat technical analysis. I didn’t care what the company did.

309


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: Earlier you said you were doing a lot of smaller Minnesota
undiscovered companies?

A : Right.

Q.: Which would require a lot of fundamental analysis because
you would talk to management, then find out what they were

doing.

A : Right. Then after being bagged in a couple of deals with
management telling me one thing, the stock acting another way,
I got more involved with the technical side of it, which really
propelled my whole trading and career.

Q.: Was there any particular book that you read at that time that
had a very strong impact on you?

A : No, as a matter of fact I didn’t read many books. I was kind of
self-taught.

Q.: How did you discover the basic concepts of technical analysis?

A : There was a friend of my dad who’s a stockbroker. I interned
with him before I became a broker in 1992. He taught me. He gave
me the backdrop of moving averages and different formations, head
and shoulders, double tops, ete.

Q.: Was this your primary method of analysis when you were

doing stocks, you started to become a pattern reader?

A : Right. Then I got big into candlesticks, too.

310


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

Q.: When did you get into candlesticks? Was that before you
went to trade on your own or while you were still a broker?

A : While I still was a broker.

Q.: were you applying these technical analysis concepts mainly
to smaller, less-liquid stocks, looking for big break outs?

A : Exactly. You know the long base and then the big break out.
The longer the base, I found that the higher it would go.

Q.: You were a classic break-out trader where you wouldn’t buy
until it made a new swing high?

A : Yes. That’s right.

Q.: and that worked well for you?

A: yes.

Q_ . Especially in 1998, if there was ever a time to be a breakout
trader that was then.

A: That was then. Yes. When I went on my own, I mean everyone
was golden back then, it was easy.

Q.:s0 let’s go to that time you went on your own. You've been a
broker for six years. You probably accumulated a little bit of trade
capital at that point?

A: Yes.

311


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: What was going through your head? What made you say, “I’m
going to pull the trigger and go trade stocks on the screen”?

A : [had $85,000. The reason I decided to trade for myself was
because I had all these stupid rules that I couldn’t basically do all
this stuff for my clients and trade the stocks for myself.

Q.: pid you have a 30-day holding rule? Some brokers won’t let
you trade in and out of a position for shorter than 30 days.

A : Yes, it was crazy. I mean I was being audited by the compliance
officer every other day for the stuff I was doing. All of it was legal.
But there were so many rules and so many sheets, that I had to
sign. I said enough of this. I figured I could do it on my own.

Q.: were you married at the time?

A : Nope. I was not married at the time.

Q.:s0 no responsibilities. You had money. You had capital. How
much time did you give yourself to be a success? Six months? Three
months?

A : You know I didn’t really put a time on it. I just kind of went
with it. Just took the risk. I figured I didn’t have any kids. I wasn’t
married. I had a house, but that was about it.

Q.: What was your first experience? Which kind of a shop did
you go with?

A : I called over a phone line using E*TRADE.

312


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

QO: 50 you were trading on a dial-up connection?

A: Yes.

Q.: Using E*TRADE?

A : With one screen—it was a laptop as a matter of fact.

Q.. [Laughter] What was your holding time at that point? How
were you trading then?

A : | was kind of a swing trader, and held things for five or six
days.

Q.: were you trading a thousand shares for three or four or five
points?

A. Exactly. And then Id sell half and then just move my stop up.

Q.: ana then just milk the rest?

A: At that time, I mean those things just went to Pluto. You know
every stock, no matter which one really.

Q. you happen to remember any of the early big winners at that
time?

A: The big hits?

Q.- Yes.

A. Oh, one was Qualcomm.

313


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.:on wow. You must have been in Qualcomm at around 50 or
80 right?

A : Yes, that’s exactly right.

QO - thers the stock that went to the 600?

A : Six-hundred and split, yes. It was crazy.

Q.- you took it for the ride because you basically went to break
even on the stop and just held on and held on?

A : Held on, yes, pretty much. Then I sold a quarter, sold another
quarter, then sold another quarter, you know I just kept riding it

Q.: Most traders have a problem with holding on to their winners
and yet you tend to naturally do that. What do you think makes
you different from everybody else? Why is it easy for you to hold
to winning positions and not want to cash them in?

A : Just learning from my past mistakes.

: So you also have an inclination to ring the cash register, but
you've learned how to control it?

A : Exactly. I mean being around other traders and other stock-
brokers and they would always seem to add to losers. They'd double
down. They'd sell their XYZ stock that went from 5 to 10 because
they doubled their money. But they'd buy the one that went 20 to
5 because it was so-called cheap. As I learned from my mistakes,
that’s not the right way to do it. If anything, you want to add to
your winners and get rid of your losers.

314


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

OQ: 50 that kind of methodology, where you have a single entry,
single stop, no doubling down, no averaging down, stayed with
you? Do you still follow that methodology?

A : Absolutely. I do. To a T.

Q.:80 you're trading E*TRADE. How long did that go on for on
your dial-up connection with a single laptop screen?

A : [Laughter.] I know you laugh about that. I do too. I can’t
believe what I did on that dial-up. I'd get kicked off and have

problems getting through on execution. It’s crazy but I did it until
May 2000.

: So that was about two-years’ worth, and how much did you
run up the account at that point?

A : Let’s see I started at 85 and took it to 490.

Q.:s0 you quintupled you account.

A: Yes.

Q_- Now comes the year 2000. This is pre-Nasdaq crash, right?

A : Yes, pre-Nasdaq crash. I pretty much got stopped out of
everything and was at all cash.

Q.: How were you managing your stops at that point? How were
you trailing them up?

A : Candlesticks. Just a little bit below the last candlestick, like if
it was a green. Obviously there were green candlesticks back then.
I put the stop just below that day’s low.

315


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q : 0 it was just prior day’s low, not even two days’ low, just
prior day’s low?

A: Yes, prior day’s low, and depending upon how strong the stock
was or what kind of move it made I might do it on a weekly basis
or whatever.

Q.tes 2000, still precrash, what happens then?

A : The market dried out and some of these techniques that I was
using started to not work. I didn’t know a lot about shorting a stock
and that’s what the market did.

: How did they not work? You would buy a breakout and then
the next day you would be stopped out because it would reverse
and take out the low of the candle?

A : Right, exactly.

Q.:s0 you started getting stopped out a lot?

A : Started getting stopped out a lot, yes, and so then I had to go
get a real job.

Q.- what was that job?

A : That was selling photocopiers, and I hated it.

Qu can’t imagine a bigger change of work from trading Nasdaq

stocks in the go-go years to selling photocopiers.

A : L absolutely hated it. I mean, my passion was always the stock
market and along the way I still followed the stock market during
those times.

316


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

Q.: would you still trade smaller, swing size there?

A : Very small. Yes, very small. The liquidity and the volume in
the stuff just wasn’t there like it was.

QO): when you started getting stopped out, how much of a draw-
down did you incur? Did you give up a third or half?

A : I gave up about almost $100,000.

Q.:s0 about a little bit less than a third.

Avyes.

Q.: you started selling copiers, and then what happened?

A: I met a girl, we got married. Like I said, I still did my job, but
at least she got her MBA down at Duke.

Q.:s0 you met a smart girl.

A : Yes, I met a very smart girl. Kind of told her that my passion
was the stock market and I wanted to get back to doing something
with the stock market. She said, “Well, I'll tell you what, I'll get a
job and I'll support us and I’m going to trust you on this.”

Q - That's a very unusual story.
A : She paid all the bills for about three-and-half years.

317


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Do you know how lucky you are?

A: Hey, I mean, I married a gem. I had three-and-half years, and
I quit selling copiers about a year and half into it and went back
to doing stocks but this time on broadband using a cable modem.
I got the stuff and got it all hooked up but then I started to learn
that E*TRADE was brutal.

Q : They are intermediaries. They weren't direct access, execu-
tion brokers.

A : No, they were horrible. They were eating up my profits. I
put the order in and it didn’t get filled for a minute, Then you
come back and it’s already gone up a half point. At that time I
was more of a quick in and out guy. So that wasn’t working. Then
in November 2004, I went to my cousin Andrea’s wedding and
I met a guy by the name of Chuck Hays. She married his son
and I was picking up chairs on the beach and Chuck’s wife asked
me what I did. I said I trade stocks. She said, “Well, you should
talk to my husband, Chuck, he trades futures.” All I knew about
futures was that they were very hard to trade and, like in options,
you could lose all your money quickly. That’s basically all I knew
about it. So I went up there, and he said, you know, I have a chat
room, and he told Andrea to give me the password at the end of
weekend. I got in there and asked Chuck more and he told me
you’ve got to open up account and you've got to do this and that.
That’s kind of where it was born. He was hooked up with a guy
who knew all about computers. So I set up five screens in front
me. I'll never forget that first day when I looked at this ER2 thing.
I just couldn’t believe it. I’m like, “How in hell are these guys
trading this thing? It’s impossible. There’s no way.” My analogy
was like being a high school quarterback going to the pros and
just the game being lightning fast. It started to slow down after a
while and I started to do paper trades. Then I went and did the
simulator mold and, in January 2005, I did my first trade and I
made .70.

318


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

Q.- which translates to 70 dollars on one contract.

A : You got it! Minus $5.40 commission [laughter].

Q:s0 you were paper trading and simulator trading for how long
approximately?

A : Three months.

Q.: while you were paper trading, were you keeping a diary and
analyzing your style?

A : Yes. On paper. I really didn’t have a style yet. I was kind of
doing scalps. I was very jittery. As soon as it got up, I’d sell it. I was
overtrading. You know I traded probably 20 times during the day.

Q.- But this was all on simulator, you had a lot of data.

A:yYes.

Q.: Then what happens, how do you get a little more comfortable
with the instrument?

A : Then I added a couple little things to my work and my can-
dlesticks and slowly but surely developed a style. There was a guy
by name of Daniel in our room, a.k.a. “Jazz.” I was very impressed
with how he would get these plus fives and plus fours. I was more
Chuck’s style—the quick scalp. So I really developed a system that
was a little of Chuck’s style and a little of Jazz’s style, which holds
longer for bigger trades. Using moving averages and candlesticks,
I started trading in parts, selling a third of a position at .6, selling
a little more, and then just keep lowering my stop by using the
candlesticks.

319


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

: You mean selling a little bit at the beginning just to bank
some profit?

A : Right. Lowering my stop and letting the profits run a little bit.
The mentality I learned back in my stock days.

Quis your methodology that if the first target is hit, you go to

breakeven on the stop?

A : No, not necessarily. Again I use candlesticks, and I put the
stop right above that. I basically trade off the five minute. I mean
I’ve got 15-minute and 60-minute charts that I blink on and off,
but the five-minute is what I use.

Qe in other words if it takes out the five-minute high or low,
you are out. It’s interesting that you were obviously a pure long
trader in 1998 and forward and now you say you're always thinking
on the short side. Can you explain a little about that? Why do you
primarily trade from short side now?

A : [hear from other traders that they go down a lot faster than
they go up. So I’ve done all my statistical analysis looking back on
my stats. I make way more money at picking tops than bottoms
for some reason, and it’s hard to get that thing out of my head.
But that’s just the way it is. I’m a better short trader than long
trader.

Q.: You say youre better at picking tops yet you are using
moving averages and candlesticks, which are primarily long only
type of tools. What do you do to figure out when momentum is
waning?

A : Luse moving averages, MACD, and candlestick.

320


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

QO: 50 MACD is your momentum indicator, if you start to see
divergence that’s going to be your clue to a turn in the price action?

A : Exactly.

Q : Do you wait for a red candlestick to develop before you

initiate a short?

A : Yes. I not only do that, but I don’t try to pick exact tops and
I don’t try to pick exact bottoms. I don’t really care if the thing is
trading at 770 at the top and I get short only at 765 because I know
it’s going to 762. I've gotten burned way too many times trying to
pick tops and bottoms. I’d rather know where it’s going. All I care
about is where it’s going.
