But even this example failed to reduce their numbers, and the Turks continued to be as
well informed as the Christians themselves of all that was passing in the camp.
The news of the arrival of a reinforcement of soldiers from Europe, with an abundant
stock of provisions, came to cheer them when reduced to the last extremity. The welcome
succour landed at St. Simeon, the port of Antioch, and about six miles from that city.
Thitherwards the famishing crusaders proceeded in tumultuous bands, followed by
Bohemund and the Count of Toulouse, with strong detachments of their retainers and
vassals, to escort the supplies in safety to the camp. The garrison of Antioch, forewarned
of this arrival, was on the alert, and a corps of Turkish archers was despatched to lie in
ambuscade among the mountains and intercept their return. Bohemund, laden with
provisions, was encountered in the rocky passes by the Turkish host. Great numbers of
his followers were slain, and he himself had just time to escape to the camp with the news
of his defeat. Godfrey of Bouillon, the Duke of Normandy, and the other leaders had
heard the rumour of this battle, and were at that instant preparing for the rescue. The
army was immediately in motion, animated both by zeal and by hunger, and marched so
rapidly as to intercept the victorious Turks before they had time to reach Antioch with
their spoil. A fierce battle ensued, which lasted from noon till the going down of the sun.
The Christians gained and maintained the advantage, each man fighting as if upon
himself alone had depended the fortune of the day. Hundreds of Turks perished in the
Orontes, and more than two thousand were left dead upon the field of battle. All the
provision was recaptured and brought in safety to the camp, whither the crusaders
returned singing Allelulia! or shouting Deus adjuva! Deus adjuva!
This relief lasted for some days, and, had it been duly economized, would have lasted
much longer; but the chiefs had no authority, and were unable to exercise any control
over its distribution. Famine again approached with rapid strides, and Stephen Count of
Blois, not liking the prospect, withdrew from the camp, with four thousand of his
retainers, and established himself at Alexandretta. The moral influence of this desertion
was highly prejudicial upon those who remained; and Bohemund, the most impatient and
ambitious of the chiefs, foresaw that, unless speedily checked, it would lead to the utter
failure of the expedition. It was necessary to act decisively; the army murmured at the
length of the siege, and the Sultan was collecting his forces to crush them. Against the
efforts of the crusaders Antioch might have held out for months; but treason within
effected that, which courage without might have striven for in vain.
Baghasihan, the Turkish Prince or Emir of Antioch, had under his command an Armenian
of the name of Phirouz, whom he had intrusted with the defence of a tower on that part of
the city wall which overlooked the passes of the mountains. Bohemund, by means of a
spy who had embraced the Christian religion, and to whom he had given his own name at
baptism, kept up a daily communication with this captain, and made him the most
magnificent promises of reward, if he would deliver up his post to the Christian knights.
Whether the proposal was first made by Bohemund or by the Armenian is uncertain, but
that a good understanding soon existed between them, is undoubted; and a night was
fixed for the execution of the project. Bohemund communicated the scheme to Godfrey
and the Count of Toulouse, with the stipulation that, if the city were won, he, as the soul

of the enterprise, should enjoy the dignity of Prince of Antioch. The other leaders
hesitated: ambition and jealousy prompted them to refuse their aid in furthering the views
of the intriguer. More mature consideration decided them to acquiesce, and seven
hundred of the bravest knights were chosen for the expedition, the real object of which,
for fear of spies, was kept a profound secret from the rest of the army. When all was
ready, a report was promulgated, that the seven hundred were intended to form an
ambuscade for a division of the Sultan's army, which was stated to be approaching.
Every thing favoured the treacherous project of the Armenian captain, who, on his
solitary watchtower, received due intimation of the approach of the crusaders. The night
was dark and stormy; not a star was visible above, and the wind howled so furiously as to
overpower all other sounds: the rain fell in torrents, and the watchers on the towers
adjoining to that of Phirouz could not hear the tramp of the armed knights for the wind,
nor see them for the obscurity of the night and the dismalness of the weather. When
within shot of the walls, Bohemund sent forward an interpreter to confer with the
Armenian. The latter urged them to make haste, and seize the favourable interval, as
armed men, with lighted torches, patrolled the battlements every half hour, and at that
instant they had just passed. The chiefs were instantly at the foot of the wall: Phirouz let
down a rope; Bohemund attached it to the end of a ladder of hides, which was then raised
by the Armenian, and held while the knights mounted. A momentary fear came over the
spirits of the adventurers, and every one hesitated. At last Bohemund, [Vide William of
Tyre.] encouraged by Phirouz from above, ascended a few steps on the ladder, and was
followed by Godfrey, Count Robert of Flanders, and a number of other knights. As they
advanced, others pressed forward, until their weight became too great for the ladder,
which, breaking, precipitated about a dozen of them to the ground, where they fell one
upon the other, making a great clatter with their heavy coats of mail. For a moment they
thought that all was lost; but the wind made so loud a howling as it swept in fierce gusts
through the mountain gorges -- and the Orontes, swollen by the rain, rushed so noisily
along -- that the guards heard nothing. The ladder was easily repaired, and the knights
ascended two at a time, and reached the platform in safety, When sixty of them had thus
ascended, the torch of the coming patrol was seen to gleam at the angle of the wall.
Hiding themselves behind a buttress, they awaited his coming in breathless silence. As
soon as he arrived at arm's length, he was suddenly seized, and, before he could open his
lips to raise an alarm, the silence of death closed them up for ever. They next descended
rapidly the spiral staircase of the tower, and, opening the portal, admitted the whole of
their companions. Raymond of Toulouse, who, cognizant of the whole plan, had been left
behind with the main body of the army, heard at this instant the signal horn, which
announced that an entry had been effected, and, leading on his legions, the town was
attacked from within and without.
Imagination cannot conceive a scene more dreadful than that presented by the devoted
city of Antioch on that night of horror. The crusaders fought with a blind fury, which
fanaticism and suffering alike incited. Men, women, and children were indiscriminately
slaughtered till the streets ran in gore. Darkness increased the destruction, for when
morning dawned the crusaders found themselves with their swords at the breasts of their
fellow-soldiers, whom they had mistaken for foes. The Turkish commander fled, first to

the citadel, and that becoming insecure, to the mountains, whither he was pursued and
slain, his grey head brought back to Antioch as a trophy. At daylight the massacre ceased,
and the crusaders gave themselves up to plunder. They found gold, and jewels, and silks,
and velvets in abundance, but, of provisions, which were of more importance to them,
they found but little of any kind. Corn was excessively scarce, and they discovered to
their sorrow that in this respect the besieged had been but little better off than the
besiegers.
Before they had time to instal themselves in their new position, and take the necessary
measures for procuring a supply, the city was invested by the Turks. The Sultan of Persia
had raised an immense army, which he intrusted to the command of Kerbogha, the Emir
of Mosul, with instructions to sweep the Christian locusts from the face of the land. The
Emir effected junction with Kilij Aslaun, and the two armies surrounded the city.
Discouragement took complete possession of the Christian host, and numbers of them
contrived to elude the vigilance of the besiegers, and escape to Count Stephen of Blots at
Alexandretta, to whom they related the most exaggerated tales of the misery they had
endured, and the utter hopelessness of continuing the war. Stephen forthwith broke up his
camp and retreated towards Constantinople. On his way he was met by the Emperor
Alexius, at the head of a considerable force, hastening to take possession of the conquests
made by the Christians in Asia. As soon as he heard of their woeful plight, he turned
back, and proceeded with the Count of Blots to Constantinople, leaving the remnant of
the crusaders to shift for themselves.
The news of this defection increased the discouragement at Antioch. All the useless
horses of the army had been slain and eaten, and dogs, cats, and rats were sold at
enormous prices. Even vermin were becoming scarce. With increasing famine came a
pestilence, so that in a short time but sixty thousand remained of the three hundred
thousand that had originally invested Antioch. But this bitter extremity, while it
annihilated the energy of the host, only served to knit the leaders more firmly together;
and Bohemund, Godfrey, and Tancred swore never to desert the cause as long as life
lasted. The former strove in vain to reanimate the courage of his followers. They were
weary and sick at heart, and his menaces and promises were alike thrown away. Some of
them had shut themselves up in the houses, and refused to come forth. Bohemund, to
drive them to their duty, set fire to the whole quarter, and many of them perished in the
flames, while the rest of the army looked on with the utmost indifference. Bohemund,
animated himself by a worldly spirit, did not know the true character of the crusaders, nor
understand the religious madness which had brought them in such shoals from Europe. A
priest, more clear-sighted, devised a scheme which restored all their confidence, and
inspired them with a courage so wonderful as to make the poor sixty thousand emaciated,
sick, and starving zealots, put to flight the well-fed and six times as numerous legions of
the Sultan of Persia.
This priest, a native of Provence, was named Peter Barthelemy, and whether he were a
knave or an enthusiast, or both; a principal, or a tool in the hands of others, will ever
remain a matter of doubt. Certain it is, however, that he was the means of raising the
siege of Antioch, and causing the eventual triumph of the armies of the Cross. When the

strength of the crusaders was completely broken by their sufferings, and hope had fled
from every bosom, Peter came to Count Raymond of Toulouse, and demanded an
interview on matters of serious moment. He was immediately admitted. He said that,
some weeks previously, at the time the Christians were besieging Antioch, he was
reposing alone in his tent, when he was startled by the shock of the earthquake, which
had so alarmed the whole host. Through violent terror of the shock he could only
ejaculate, God help me! when turning round he saw two men standing before him, whom
he at once recognized by the halo of glory around them as beings of another world. One
of them appeared to be an aged man, with reddish hair sprinkled with grey, black eyes,
and a long flowing grey beard. The other was younger, larger, and handsomer, and had
something more divine in his aspect. The elderly man alone spoke, and informed him that
he was the Holy Apostle St. Andrew, and desired him to seek out the Count Raymond,
the Bishop of Puy, and Raymond of Altopulto, and ask them why the Bishop did not
exhort the people, and sign them with the cross which he bore. The Apostle then took
him, naked in his shirt as he was, and transported him through the air into the heart of the
city of Antioch, where he led him into the church of St. Peter, at that time a Saracen
mosque. The Apostle made him stop by the pillar close to the steps by which they ascend
on the south side to the altar, where hung two lamps, which gave out a light brighter than
that of the noonday sun; the younger man, whom he did not at that time know, standing
afar off, near the steps of the altar. The Apostle then descended into the ground and
brought up a lance, which he gave into his hand, telling him that it was the very lance that
had opened the side whence had flowed the salvation of the world. With tears of joy he
held the holy lance, and implored the Apostle to allow him to take it away and deliver it
into the hands of Count Raymond. The Apostle refused, and buried the lance again in the
ground, commanding him, when the city was won from the infidels, to go with twelve
chosen men, and dig it up again in the same place. The Apostle then transported him back
to his tent, and the two vanished from his sight. He had neglected, he said, to deliver this
message, afraid that his wonderful tale would not obtain credence from men of such high
rank. After some days he again saw the holy vision, as he was gone out of the camp to
look for food. This time the divine eyes of the younger looked reproachfully upon him.
He implored the Apostle to choose some one else more fitted for the mission, but the
Apostle refused, and smote him with a disorder of the eyes, as a punishment for his
disobedience. With an obstinacy unaccountable even to himself, he had still delayed. A
third time the Apostle and his companion had appeared to him, as he was in a tent with
his master William at St. Simeon. On that occasion St. Andrew told him to bear his
command to the Count of Toulouse not to bathe in the waters of the Jordan when he came
to it, but to cross over in a boat, clad in a shirt and breeches of linen, which he should
sprinkle with the sacred waters of the river. These clothes he was afterwards to preserve
along with the holy lance. His master William, although he could not see the saint,
distinctly heard the voice giving orders to that effect. Again he neglected to execute the
commission, and again the saints appeared to him, when he was at the port of Mamistra,
about to sail for Cyprus, and St. Andrew threatened him with eternal perdition if he
refused longer. Upon this he made up his mind to divulge all that had been revealed to
him.

The Count of Toulouse, who, in all probability, concocted this precious tale with the
priest, appeared struck with the recital, and sent immediately for the Bishop of Puy and
Raymond of Altapulto. The Bishop at once expressed his disbelief of the whole story, and
refused to have anything to do in the matter. The Count of Toulouse, on the contrary, saw
abundant motives, if not for believing, for pretending to believe; and, in the end, he so
impressed upon the mind of the Bishop the advantage that might be derived from it, in
working up the popular mind to its former excitement, that the latter reluctantly agreed to
make search in due form for the holy weapon. The day after the morrow was fixed upon
for the ceremony, and, in the mean time, Peter was consigned to the care of Raymond, the
Count's chaplain, in order that no profane curiosity might have an opportunity of crossexamining him, and putting him to a nonplus.
Twelve devout men were forthwith chosen for the undertaking, among whom were the
Count of Toulouse and his chaplain. They began digging at sunrise, and continued
unwearied till near sunset, without finding the lance; -- they might have dug till this day
with no better success, had not Peter himself sprung into the pit, praying to God to bring
the lance to light, for the strengthening and victory of his people. Those who hide know
where to find; and so it was with Peter, for both he and the lance found their way into the
hole at the same time. On a sudden, he and Raymond, the chaplain, beheld its point in the
earth, and Raymond, drawing it forth, kissed it with tears of joy, in sight of the multitude
which had assembled in the church. It was immediately enveloped in a rich purple cloth,
already prepared to receive it, and exhibited in this state to the faithful, who made the
building resound with their shouts of gladness.
Peter had another vision the same night, and became from that day forth "dreamer of
dreams," in general, to the army. He stated on the following day, that the Apostle Andrew
and "the youth with the divine aspect" appeared to him again, and directed that the Count
of Toulouse, as a reward for his persevering piety, should carry the Holy Lance at the
head of the army, and that the day on which it was found should be observed as a solemn
festival throughout Christendom. St. Andrew showed him, at the same time, the holes in
the feet and hands of his benign companion; and he became convinced that he stood in
the awful presence of THE REDEEMER.
Peter gained so much credit by his visions that dreaming became contagious. Other
monks beside himself were visited by the saints, who promised victory to the host if it
would valiantly hold out to the last, and crowns of eternal glory to those who fell in the
fight. Two deserters, wearied of the fatigues and privations of the war, who had stealthily
left the camp, suddenly returned, and seeking Bohemund, told him that they had been met
by two apparitions, who, with great anger, had commanded them to return. The one of
them said, that he recognized his brother, who had been killed in battle some months
before, and that he had a halo of glory around his head. The other, still more hardy,
asserted that the apparition which had spoken to him was the Saviour himself, who had
promised eternal happiness as his reward if he returned to his duty, but the pains of
eternal fire if he rejected the cross. No one thought of disbelieving these men. The
courage of the army immediately revived; despondency gave way to hope; every arm
grew strong again, and the pangs of hunger were for a time disregarded. The enthusiasm

which had led them from Europe burned forth once more as brightly as ever, and they
demanded, with loud cries, to be led against the enemy. The leaders were not unwilling.
In a battle lay their only chance of salvation; and although Godfrey, Bohemund, and
Tancred received the story of the lance with much suspicion, they were too wise to throw
discredit upon an imposture which bade fair to open the gates of victory.
Peter the Hermit was previously sent to the camp of Kerbogha to propose that the quarrel
between the two religions should be decided by a chosen number of the bravest soldiers
of each army. Kerbogha turned from him with a look of contempt, and said he could
agree to no proposals from a set of such miserable beggars and robbers. With this
uncourteous answer Peter returned to Antioch. Preparations were immediately
commenced for an attack upon the enemy: the latter continued to be perfectly well
informed of all the proceedings of the Christian camp. The citadel of Antioch, which
remained in their possession, overlooked the town, and the commander of the fortress
could distinctly see all that was passing within. On the morning of the 28th of June 1098
a black flag, hoisted from its highest tower, announced to the besieging army that the
Christians were about to sally forth.
The Moslem leaders knew the sad inroads that famine and disease had made upon the
numbers of the foe: they knew that not above two hundred of the knights had horses to
ride upon, and that the foot soldiers were sick and emaciated; but they did not know the
almost incredible valour which superstition had infused into their hearts. The story of the
lance they treated with the most supreme contempt, and, secure of an easy victory, they
gave themselves no trouble in preparing for the onslaught. It is related that Kerbogha was
playing a game at chess, when the black flag on the citadel gave warning of the enemy's
approach, and that, with true oriental coolness, he insisted upon finishing the game ere he
bestowed any of his attention upon a foe so unworthy. The defeat of his advanced post of
two thousand men aroused him from his apathy.
The crusaders, after this first victory, advanced joyfully towards the mountains, hoping to
draw the Turks to a place where their cavalry would be unable to manoeuvre. Their
spirits were light and their courage high, as led on by the Duke of Normandy, Count
Robert of Flanders, and Hugh of Vermandois, they came within sight of the splendid
camp of the enemy. Godfrey of Bouillon and Adhemar, Bishop of Puy, followed
immediately after these leaders, the latter clad in complete armour, and bearing the Holy
Lance within sight of the whole army: Bohemund and Tancred brought up the rear.
Kerbogha, aware at last that his enemy was not so despicable, took vigorous measures to
remedy his mistake, and, preparing himself to meet the Christians in front, he despatched
the Sultan Soliman, of Roum, to attack them in the rear. To conceal this movement, he set
fire to the dried weeds and grass with which the ground was covered, and Soliman, taking
a wide circuit with his cavalry, succeeded, under cover of the smoke, in making good his
position in the rear. The battle raged furiously in front; the arrows of the Turks fell thick
as hail, and their well-trained squadrons trod the crusaders under their hoofs like stubble.
Still the affray was doubtful; for the Christians had the advantage of the ground, and were
rapidly gaining upon the enemy, when the overwhelming forces of Soliman arrived in the

rear. Godfrey and Tancred flew to the rescue of Bohemund, spreading dismay in the
Turkish ranks by their fierce impetuosity. The Bishop of Puy was left almost alone with
the Provencals to oppose the legions commanded by Kerbogha in person; but the
presence of the Holy Lance made a hero of the meanest soldier in his train. Still,
however, the numbers of the enemy seemed interminable. The Christians, attacked on
every side, began at last to give way, and the Turks made sure of victory.
At this moment a cry was raised in the Christian host that the saints were fighting on their
side. The battle-field was clear of the smoke from the burning weeds, which had curled
away, and hung in white clouds of fantastic shape on the brow of the distant mountains.
Some imaginative zealot, seeing this dimly through the dust of the battle, called out to his
fellows, to look at the army of saints, clothed in white, and riding upon white horses, that
were pouring over the hills to the rescue. All eyes were immediately turned to the distant
smoke; faith was in every heart; and the old battle-cry, God wills it! God wills it!
resounded through the field, as every soldier, believing that God was visibly sending His
armies to his aid, fought with an energy unfelt before. A panic seized the Persian and
Turkish hosts, and they gave way in all directions. In vain Kerbogha tried to rally them.
Fear is more contagious than enthusiasm, and they fled over the mountains like deer
pursued by the hounds. The two leaders, seeing the uselessness of further efforts, fled
with the rest; and that immense army was scattered over Palestine, leaving nearly seventy
thousand of its dead upon the field of battle.
Their magnificent camp fell into the hands of the enemy, with its rich stores of corn, and
its droves of sheep and oxen. Jewels, gold, and rich velvets in abundance were distributed
among the army. Tancred followed the fugitives over the hills, and reaped as much
plunder as those who had remained in the camp. The way, as they fled, was covered with
valuables, and horses of the finest breed of Arabia became so plentiful, that every knight
of the Christians was provided with a steed. The crusaders, in this battle, acknowledge to
have lost nearly ten thousand men.
Their return to Antioch was one of joy indeed: the citadel was surrendered at once, and
many of the Turkish garrison embraced the Christian faith, and the rest were suffered to
depart. A solemn thanksgiving was offered up by the Bishop of Puy, in which the whole
army joined, and the Holy Lance was visited by every soldier.
The enthusiasm lasted for some days, and the army loudly demanded to be led forward to
Jerusalem, the grand goal of all their wishes: but none of their leaders was anxious to
move; -- the more prudent among them, such as Godfrey and Tancred, for reasons of
expediency; and the more ambitious, such as the Count of Toulouse and Bohemund, for
reasons of self-interest. Violent dissensions sprang up again between all the chiefs.
Raymond of Toulouse, who was left at Antioch to guard the town, had summoned the
citadel to surrender, as soon as he saw that there was no fear of any attack upon the part
of the Persians; and the other chiefs found, upon their return, his banner waving on its
walls. This had given great offence to Bohemund, who had stipulated the principality of
Antioch as his reward for winning the town in the first instance. Godfrey and Tancred
supported his claim, and, after a great deal of bickering, the flag of Raymond was
