
Chapter Twelve

Greetings from Nigeria, Please Help!
Detecting and Avoiding Forex Scams
About once a week I receive an e-mail that begins like this:

Dear Sir,
I have been requested by the Nigerian National Petroleum Company to contact you for assistance in resolving a matter. The Nigerian
National Petroleum Company has recently concluded a large number of contracts for oil exploration in the sub-Sahara region. The contracts
have immediately produced moneys equaling US$40,000,000.
Your assistance is requested as a non-Nigerian citizen to assist the Nigerian National Petroleum Company, and also the Central Bank of
Nigeria, in moving these funds out of Nigeria. If the funds can be transferred to your name, in your United States account, then you can forward
the funds as directed by the Nigerian National Petroleum Company. In exchange for your accommodating services, the Nigerian National
Petroleum Company would agree to allow you to retain 10%, or US$4 million of this amount.
However, to be a legitimate transferee of these moneys according to Nigerian law, you must presently be a depositor of at least US$50,000 in
a Nigerian bank which is regulated by the Central Bank of Nigeria.
Sound familiar? Many people have heard of this infamous Nigerian e-mail scam and if you are like me, by the time I read the words “requested
by the Nigerian . . .,” I have already hit the delete button. Depositing $50,000 for an immediate access to $40 million with a promise to return $36
million is too good to be true. Yet believe or not, thousands of Americans fall victim to this scam. A quick search on the Internet will reveal hundreds
of stories of real Americans who for one reason or another have taken the bait. The reason most of us don’t give these e-mails even a passing
thought is because we know that when something sounds too good to be true, it probably is.
Scammers exist everywhere, including the financial market. Investing and trading is not easy because it takes hard work, discipline, and
commitment. Some people are able to succeed relatively quickly but most struggle at first, which is why shortcuts are attractive. Traders are
presented with a great many get-rich-quick offers, such as software that generates guaranteed profits for only $20 a month. These opportunities are
enticing but never live up to their promises. The scams are always the same, only packaged in different ways. If anyone promises guaranteed
profits, there is a 99.9 percent chance that it is a scam. There is no such thing as a money-making system that will generate guaranteed profits, and
if it does exist, the person will be much more interested in managing millions and billions of dollars on the system than selling it to you for $20 a
month. This type of scam exists in the equity and futures market so it should not be a surprise that it exists in forex as well. The key to avoiding a
scam is to be smart and use common sense.
Avoiding popular forex mistakes is useful but avoiding scammers is even more important because you are giving up full control with very little
transparency—someone can cheat you out of your money and you may not even know why. Scammers in the financial market typically reach their
potential audience by e-mail, online advertisements, magazines, newspapers, or radio promotions. New scams pop up all the time, but they are
rarely original and they usually fall into one of several categories. Some scammers offer to provide trading signals, a new system, or fund
management and brokerage services. Whatever the scam, the message always boils down to one single idea, which is an offer to make a quick
and easy buck.

The Signal Provider Scam
Signal providers are basically “experts” who sell trading recommendations with specific entry and exit levels. The types of people who subscribe to
signals are usually people who are looking for someone to hold their hand while they learn how to trade or are looking for more trade ideas. Signal
providers will send their trading recommendations to their subscribers via e-mail or text message and tell them exactly which currency to trade,
when to buy or sell, how to exit, and where to place their stop. Essentially they spoon-feed the information to their clients, who will then either follow it
wholeheartedly or compare it to their own analysis. As in any business, there are both honest and dishonest providers. Some signal providers are
legitimate and actually care about sending quality trades to their subscribers, but others may not have such high scruples.
It is not always easy to tell if the signal provider is honest, but there are warning signs to watch for, including promises of 100 percent guaranteed
forex winning signals or offers to make $1,000 per week (both of which are promotions that can be found by doing a quick online search for “forex
signals”). Also beware of any offshore signal providers because, most likely, they have incorporated offshore to avoid taxes, lawsuits, or regulations
that are required by countries that may have stricter rules to protect their consumers. If the results are audited and tracked on a live account, then
there is a better chance that the signal provider is honest.

The Trading System Scam
Forex signal providers have been around for a very long time but in recent years the number of forex trading systems has exploded. They may also

be called robots, expert advisers, or algos, but the concept is the same—they are computer programs that automatically execute trades based
upon set parameters. The benefit of automated systems is that it removes fear and greed, which are the common human emotions that hold traders
back. These systems are enticing because you don’t need to watch for trades 24 hours a day, as the computer will do it for you. However, the
biggest problem with using a trading system is the lack of transparency. When you are the developer of the system, you understand exactly how it
works inside and out. When it is someone else’s system that you have bought, most of the time you have no clue how it works. Trading systems are
mostly trend following or range trading but rarely both. Finding a trading system that works well in both environments is like finding the holy grail of
trading, and as a smart person once told me, if you have found the Holy Grail, why on earth would you share it?
For example, a forex trading system that only bought carry trades would have worked extremely well between 2001 and 2007. If the forex trading
system provider only showed results from those years, the returns would have been extremely attractive. However, carry trades came crashing
down in 2008, leading to significant losses. Forex robots tend to show results of idealized scenarios that are rarely sustainable over time. If the
system creator is truly dishonest, they may have even over-optimized their results, showing only the perfect scenarios.
Promises of automated trading systems (also known as trading robots and expert advisors) that make claims of no losses 100 percent of the
time is an obvious red flag, but the price of the automated system, robot, or expert advisors can also give you a hint of whether it is legitimate. If the
trading system is really as great as they tout, then any smart developer would not be willing to offer it for free or even for a small one-time fee of
$100. Beware of robots or expert advisers with results that are based only on demo accounts and not live accounts, trading systems with results for
less than a year, and providers with no contact information. The robots are oftentimes repackaged and sold over and over again and under different
names. Another scam is to sell indicators that repaint the past. Most technical indicators are fixed once a candle or bar has closed, but repainting
indicators redraws the past data as new data comes in, which basically distorts the results and makes them far more attractive than what could be
achieved in real time.

Managed Accounts or Managed Funds Scams
Managed accounts or managed funds are popular among investors who are interested in getting some exposure to currencies but do not have the
time or knowledge to actually trade or invest their own money actively. Therefore, they seek the assistance of an expert who will manage their
money for them. Investment funds that tout returns of 300 percent a month are clearly red flags. If you are evaluating a managed account, it is
important to look for ones where the returns are realistic because it usually means they are maintaining some degree of discipline and risk control.
Make sure that they do not use too much leverage and their drawdowns are tolerable. Managed funds that are run by professional money managers
who are registered Commodity Trading Advisors or Commodity Pool Operators (or the equivalent in other countries) also tend to be more
legitimate. Usually regulators who keep an eye on these registered parties will regularly review their marketing practices as well as their results to
make sure they are factually accurate.
Like forex signal providers and trading systems, you should avoid the managers who are incorporated in suspicious countries and the ones who
promise outrageous returns. It is also generally safer when your funds are held with a regulated broker rather than directly with the money manager.

More Scammers . . . Bucket Shop Brokers or Referring Parties
Believe it or not, forex brokers can also be scam artists. The National Futures Association regulates the retail foreign exchange industry in the
United States and they have cited a number of brokers, large and small, for infractions. These include things such as misleading documentation or
dealing practices. When picking a broker, make sure it is regulated in a country with strict guidelines such as the United States, United Kingdom,
Japan, or Australia. The more countries that they are regulated in, the better. If your broker is domiciled in the Caribbean or anywhere else, that can
be suspicious; it may be better to choose another broker because you may have less legal recourse when sending your money to an offshore
broker than an onshore one.
If the broker is regulated in the United States, check the National Futures Association’s web site (www.nfa.futures.org) to see if they have any
infractions; then check the Commodity Futures Trading Commission’s (CFTC) web site (www.cftc.gov) to see how well they are capitalized. In
order to operate in the United States, retail foreign exchange brokers must have minimum net capital of $20 million with an additional volumebased minimum capital threshold that they must maintain. The U.S. regulator implemented this rule in 2009 (it was first introduced in 2007) to weed
out the weakly capitalized brokers. The more capital that your broker has, the better because you never want to be in a situation where your
accounts are frozen because your broker suddenly fell into bankruptcy after faulty position taking. We can never avoid this risk completely, but we
can minimize it by trading with a well-capitalized broker. As of May 2010, the four largest retail forex brokers in the United States have adjusted net
capital in excess of $75 million. Take a look and see how your broker compares.
It is also important to check the public forums and review sites to see if other customers have complained about the brokers that you are
considering. All foreign exchange brokers will have problems with execution, slippage, requotes, or the stability of their platform at some point or
another, but the ones who have these problems consistently should be avoided. There are thousands of forex brokers around the world and only a
handful of regulated firms—those are the ones that you want to trade with.

10 Tips for Avoiding a Forex Scam
1. Stay away from opportunities that sound too good to be true.
2. Avoid any company that predicts or guarantees large profits.
3. Stay away from companies that promise little or no financial risk.
4. Don’t trade on margin unless you understand what it means.
5. Question firms that claim to trade in the “Interbank Market.”
6. Be wary of sending or transferring cash on the Internet, by mail, or otherwise.
7. Currency scams often target members of ethnic minorities via ethnic newspapers and television infomercials.
8. Be sure you get the company’s performance track record.
9. Don’t deal with anyone who won’t give you their background.

10. Be alert to the warning signs of commodity “come-ons.”
Source: CFTC, www.cftc.gov/ConsumerProtection/ FraudAwarenessPrevention/CFTCFraudAdvisories/ fraudadv_forex.html.

Trust No One but Yourself
The best way to avoid scammers is to trust no one but yourself. If you are serious about being successful at currency trading, there is no need to
rush because the market will still be waiting for you three months from now. Take your time to learn how the market works, learn the basics of how to
read charts and use technical indicators, understand the fundamental drivers of currencies and how to manage your trades. Then do some due
diligence on regulated retail foreign exchange brokers, open up demo accounts with a few of them, download their software, pick up the phone and
have their staff walk you through their trading stations. Practice makes perfect so the next step is to practice trading on a demo account. Once you
feel comfortable and have made money on the demo, deposit a small amount of money into a mini or micro account, practice some more and only
after turning a consistent profit on a small amount of money should you start trading for real. Shortcuts may be enticing but nothing can replace a
true understanding of how the market works. Don’t waste money on the scammers, invest in educating yourself instead.
Whether it’s a forex scam or a legitimate offer, use common sense and remember that there is no free lunch and fortunes aren’t made overnight.
If it sounds too good to be true, then it probably is.

Get It? Got It? Good!
Avoid any company that predicts or guarantees large profits with little or no financial risk.
Be wary of high-pressure tactics to convince you to send or transfer cash immediately to the firm, via overnight delivery companies, the internet, by mail, or otherwise.
Be skeptical about unsolicited phone calls about investments from offshore salespersons or companies.
If you have any questions, contact the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).

Chapter Thirteen

Getting Down to Business
The Importance of a Good Trading Plan
Now that you are armed with trading strategies, tips on avoiding the biggest mistakes made by forex traders, and the know-how to spot the scams,
it is time to start trading—but before pressing the buy or sell buttons, you’re going to need a plan.
In the 1980s, there was a very popular game show in the United States called Press Your Luck. The rules of the game were simple: Answer trivia
questions to earn spins and then use the spins to win either cash or prizes on the 18-space game board. However, within the game board were a
number of Whammies that, if landed on, would trigger a cute but deadly animation of a Tasmanian Devil–like character that would run across the
screen and steal all of the contestant’s money. As you can imagine, no contestants wanted their spin to land on a Whammy and so they chanted
“No Whammy, No Whammy” as the board spun around. Yet as luck would have it, most people either had their money stolen by the Whammy or
cashed out with less than $20,000. However, in 1984, a man named Michael Larson surprised everyone, including CBS, the network that carried
the show, by winning $110,237 in cash and prizes, making him the biggest game show winner of his time.
Larson did not win because he rubbed a rabbit’s foot for good luck. Prior to appearing on the game show, he had a clearly thought out and wellpracticed plan of action. He spent six months studying the movement of the light used for the Big Board and learned how to consistently hit the
squares containing bonuses and to never let the spinner stop on a Whammy. He recorded every episode of the game and spent hours each night
watching the videos, freezing it frame by frame to look for patterns. Although some people may consider this cheating, Larson did not break any
rules and the producers of the game show could not do anything but let him walk away with the winnings.
What separated Larson from other contestants was that he went on the game show armed with a plan that he spent months fine-tuning and
practiced over and over again. Having this type of preparation and discipline would benefit all traders. Larson knew that he had only one opportunity
to appear on the game show and therefore he needed to be as prepared as possible. However, unlike a game show contestant, you have the
opportunity to trade every day.

Trading Is Not Your Hobby
In life, what separates professionals from novices is that professionals are always prepared. They do more homework than necessary just in case
the unexpected occurs. A trading plan is the equivalent of any other professional’s business plan. Smart traders know that they are more rational
when evaluating a trade setup and less rational once the trade is unfolding. Acting on emotions once a trade is live can kill profits.
With a trading plan, it is much easier to stick to your original idea and not let a 10-pip move against the trade sway your conviction. In any
business, there will undoubtedly be setbacks, but as long as we trust our business model and, in this case, our trading strategy, you won’t be
discouraged when the trade moves slightly in the wrong direction. For anyone serious about making money trading forex, it is important to
approach it like a business and not a recreational hobby.

Start the Day Fresh
Starting the day by catching up on the news and checking your charts is a solid start to establishing a trading plan and one I recommend to any
trader or investor.
The first thing to do every morning is to catch up on news flow. If you are obsessed with efficiency like I am, turn on CNBC or Bloomberg while
getting ready in the morning to hear the top stories in the financial markets to make sure nothing crazy happened overnight. If you commute to work,
pick up either the Wall Street Journal or the Financial Times on the way for a broader and deeper coverage on the themes in the market. When I
get to the office, the first thing that I do after I turn on my computer is look at the economic data released overnight and scan the headlines for
stories relating to currencies. Then I look at how Asian and European equities performed, as well as how U.S. equity futures are trading. All of this
happens before I look at the charts because I want to get a clear picture of the data and the stories in the financial markets without having my
judgment distorted by price action.
After catching up on news flow, it is time to check the quotes. I set up my quote screen in such a way that I can see exactly how the market is
behaving at a glance. At the very top of my quote screen are the three U.S. equity indices followed by real-time quotes for the 21 most actively
traded currency pairs. I organize my quote screen by the majors, then EUR/GBP, EUR/CHF, and the Japanese yen crosses (crosses are currency
pairs that do not include the U.S. dollar). The more obscurely traded crosses, which are the currency pairs that do not include the dollar, are listed
last. The reason I choose to organize it this way is that, at a quick glance, I can tell if all of the yen crosses are up or down for the day and whether
the dollar has risen or fallen against all other major currencies. In addition to the latest quotes, I have columns for the high, low, the pip, and
percentage change for the day. The percentage change also helps me quickly tell which currency is the best and worst performing.
Each of the quotes is linked to a real-time chart; after checking the quotes, I will scan through the charts to see if the overnight moves have
caused the currency pairs to break any significant levels. Throughout the day I will be watching my quote screen to see how stocks and currencies

are moving while periodically flipping through my charts.

Ready, Set, Plan!
After all of this pre-trade work, then it is time to plan my trades! Every trader should have a trading plan for short-term trades and another for longterm trades. Since I trade event risk, my short-term trade plan will be a bit different from my longer term position trade plan, which may key off
indicators such as the Double Bollinger Bands.
For my short-term intraday trades, I like to ride the momentum off news releases as we discussed in Chapter 9. In order to maintain the utmost
efficiency, I spend time in the evenings listing the events that I plan to trade the next day. Since I trade during the New York session, I usually trade
U.S. and Canadian economic reports that are released at 8:30 a.m. Eastern Time or 10:00 a.m. data. Occasionally I have the opportunity to trade
7:00 a.m. Canadian employment data or the Australian and New Zealand economic reports that are released toward the end of my day.
Regardless of whether I take these trades, I create my trading plan the previous day, listing the currency that I plan to trade. Sometimes I also have
an opinion on how the data could surprise and open a small position 20 minutes before the number is released and add to it once the data is out.
Here’s a sample of my initial Daily Trading Plan (read on and you will see how it changes):

Economic Data to Trade
U.S. Trade Balance @ 8:30 a.m.
Confidence: HIGH
Bearish USD (because of decline in ISM)
CAD Trade Balance @ 8:30 a.m.
Confidence: MEDIUM
Bearish CAD (because of decline in IVEY)
Australian Employment @ 9:30 p.m.
Confidence: HIGH
Bullish AUD (employment component of PMIs increased)
I also trade a few other short-term strategies that are a bit more complex and explained in further detail in my book for intermediate traders titled
Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market. One of my favorites is called the Momo, which is another momentum-based strategy. So the
next thing that I do is list the currency pairs that could be setting up for the Momo and the levels to watch.

Momo Setup in the Works
EUR/USD: on break above 1.3245
GBP/USD: on break above 1.5825
USD/JPY: on break below 88.20
I am up early so all of this preparatory work is done before 8 a.m. Eastern Time!
On this particular day, I am looking to short USD/JPY at 8:10 a.m. Eastern Time if the currency pair is trading below the 50-period SMA on the 5minute chart at that time and only add to the position if the U.S. trade balance is weak. If it is strong, I would close out my USD/JPY short trade
immediately and move into a new long USD/JPY trade five minutes after the release if the move takes the currency pair above the 50-period SMA
as explained in Chapter 9. At the same time, I would be looking to buy or sell USD/CAD in the direction of the data and I will not forget to place a
stop on the entire position and a first target (T1) on half of the position. Then I will leave the news trades alone and check back only if they are
stopped out or the first target is reached.
Meanwhile, I have one eye on the EUR/USD and GBP/USD quotes to look for a Momo trade. If I have a USD/JPY news trade on, I will most likely
not trade USD/JPY using a different strategy because it just creates confusion. Usually my news trades are closed out within the first few hours of
trading. Since the Momo strategy is based on technical indicators, I will check the charts throughout the day to see if the levels that I listed above
need to be changed or if other currency pairs and levels should be added to the list. By 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern Time, most of my shorter term
trading is done.
At 4:30 p.m. Eastern Time, I will be looking for opportunities to join an existing trend or a new trend using the Double Bollinger Bands discussed
in Chapter 8. First I will list the three types of setups and the possible opportunities that I am looking for in the following format:
