
Averaging into a position
Medium- and longer-term trade strategies typically benefit from averaging into a position.
Averaging into a position refers to the practice of buying/selling at successively lower/higher
prices to improve the average rate of the desired long/short position. The idea here is to allow
larger market swings to unfold and use them to establish a larger position at better prices than
current levels in anticipation that the market will eventually reverse course in line with your
strategy.

Take a look at a detailed example of averaging into a position to see how it works. Imagine
that the USD/JPY is moving lower from 82.20 on a weak U.S. economic release, but you
think USD/JPY is unlikely to decline below 81.00, where the 200-day moving average is
located.
One possible strategy would be to buy USD/JPY on the current weakness, spacing your buys so
that you can buy as low as possible, but above 81.00 where you don’t expect it to trade. (The stoploss exit in this example would be somewhere below 81.00.) Imagine that you buy one lot of
USD/JPY at the market, now at 82.00, just so you have some piece of the position in case the
market rebounds abruptly. You decide that 81.20 is another good level to buy at because it’s a
margin of error above the key 81.00 level. If your order to buy at 81.20 is filled, you’ll be long
two lots at an average price of 81.60 ([82.00 + 81.20] ÷ 2 = 81.60).
Take a look at what just happened there. To begin with, you were long one lot from 82.00. To add
to the position at 81.20 means the market was trading lower, which also means you were looking
at an unrealized loss of –80 pips on your initial position from 82.00. After you buy the second lot,
your unrealized loss has not changed substantially (assuming that the market is still at 81.20 and
excluding the spread, you’re still out –80 pips, now –40 pips on 2 lots), but your position size has
just doubled, which means your risk has also just doubled.
If the market rebounds from 81.20, your unrealized loss will be reduced. But if the market
continues to decline, your losses are going to be twice what they were had you not added on to
your position. If your strategy plays out and the market reverses higher, you now have a larger
position from a better entry price than if you had entered the two lot position earlier at higher
levels.
I’ve seen the practice referred to as pyramiding in other trading books, and the advice is usually
to avoid doing it (as in “Don’t pyramid into a losing position”). Sometimes “adding on” to
winning positions is acceptable, such as after a technical level breaks in the direction of your
trade. The result of adding on to winning positions, however, is a worse average rate for the
overall position — a higher average long price or a lower average short price. If the market
reverses after you add on, any gains in the overall trade can be quickly erased.
So what’s the deal? Should you average into positions or not? As with most questions on trading
tactics, the answer is a straightforward “It depends.” Before deciding whether to average into
positions, consider the following:
Time frame of the trade: Short-term trades seek to exploit the immediate direction of the
market. If you’re wrong on the direction in the first place, adding to the position at better
rates will likely only compound your losses. For medium- and longer-term trades,
averaging into a position can make sense if the trade setup anticipates a market reversal. (I
talk about this a bit more in the “When averaging into a position makes sense” section,
later in this chapter.)

Account size: Depending on your account size, you may not have the ability to add to
positions. You also need to keep in mind that adding to a position will further reduce your
available margin, which reduces your cushion against adverse price movements, bringing
you closer to liquidation due to insufficient margin. If that means trading smaller position
sizes, such as 10,000 mini-lots, go with that.
Volatility: If the overall market or the currency pair you’re trading is experiencing
heightened volatility, averaging into trades is probably not a good idea. Increased
volatility is usually symptomatic of uncertainty or fresh news hitting the market, both of
which are prone to see more extreme directional price moves, in which case averaging is
a losing proposition. In contrast, lower volatility conditions tend to favor range-trading
environments, where averaging can be successful.

Signs that averaging into a trade is not a good idea
Many trading books recommend avoiding averaging into, or adding on to, a losing position
— and with good reason. The tactic can lead to dramatically higher losses on smaller
incremental price movements. Also, if you’re adding on to a losing position, you’re missing
out on the current directional move. In other words, not only are you losing money, but you’re
also not making money, which is the opportunity cost of averaging.
But that still doesn’t stop people from averaging into losing trades, even professional traders.
Here are some indications that averaging is probably not a good idea:
The market just blew through your stop-loss level. But you didn’t have a stop-loss
order in place, so you’re still holding onto the losing position. First tactical error: Trading
without an active stop-loss order. Second tactical error: Instead of exiting the position in
line with your trade plan, you’re reluctant to take the larger loss than you initially
reckoned with, so you decide to hold on to the position, hoping it will recover. This is
usually the first wipeout on the slippery slope of relinquishing trading discipline. Save
yourself some money and don’t commit a third tactical error by averaging into an even
larger position (which you had already planned to be out of by that point anyway).
The range just broke. You may have had great success in recent trades playing a rangebound market, and you’re in a position again based on that range. But ranges do break, and
prices do move to new levels. Remember the basis for your trade — the range is going to
hold — and don’t hang on, much less add on, to positions beyond your predetermined
stop-loss exit level based on the range.
News is out, but the currency pair is not responding the way it should. The news or
data may be USD-positive, for example, but the dollar is coming under selling pressure
anyway. Keep in mind that multiple cross-currents are at work at any given moment in the
forex market. Sometimes they’re position related (a large hedge fund may be turning

around a multibillion-dollar position); other times they’re based on news or information
that is not widely known in the market, like a mergers-and-acquisitions (M&A) deal or a
rumor. Remember: The market reaction to a news/data report is more important than the
report itself. If you’ve taken a position based on the news, don’t second-guess the market
reaction by adding on to the position if the market doesn’t respond the way you think the
data indicates. Instead, accept that something else is going on and that the news you based
your trade on is not it.

When averaging into a position makes sense
Depending on the trade setup, you may be entirely justified in averaging into a position. In fact,
with some trade opportunities, you’ll be hoping to have the chance to average into the position at
better rates, because if the trade setup is correct, you’ll want to have on as large a position as
possible.

Even though I’m suggesting that certain trade opportunities warrant averaging into a
position, I want to stress that you still need to identify the ultimate stop-loss exit point in
every trade setup. In other words, you can average into a position as much as you want up to
a certain point, but after that the trade setup is invalidated, and you need to exit the position.

The trade setups I’m referring to are those where a reversal is anticipated. Prices
frequently move into a counter-trend consolidation ranges, where prices move in the
opposite direction of the primary trend for a time before the trend resumes. You may see
signs of an impending reversal from daily candlestick patterns, such as a shooting
star/hammer or a tweezers top/bottom. You may begin to suspect a reversal after a significant
intraday spike reversal/rejection from key technical levels. The market may also be nearing
important long-term trend-line support or resistance that suggests a medium-term bottom or
top is close by.
What all these setups have in common is a price difference between current market levels and the
ideal entry point based on the setup. For example, major daily trend-line resistance dating back six
months may lie above in EUR/USD at 1.2960/70. Current market levels are well below at 1.2890,
and there has been a spike rejection from an intraday test to 1.2930/35. Adding up these
observations, we may justifiably conclude that the current market price is just below an area of
major resistance, suggesting a short position as the overall way to proceed.
But we have no accurate way of predicting how much higher the market might trade, or even if it
will, before the anticipated reversal lower takes place. The market could start moving directly
lower from current levels. It could retest the spike highs seen earlier in the day, or it could make it
all the way to test the key trend-line resistance before stalling. So where might we look to get
short?

The answer is in that zone of resistance we just identified between current market levels and the
daily trend-line resistance. This is where it makes sense to average into a trade to exploit the trade
setup.
As an example of my own approach, I may not know how much higher the market will go, so I may
be prepared to short a portion of the overall position at current market levels, in case the top has
already been seen and prices move directly lower. I may also be prepared to sell remaining
portion(s) of the position at successively higher levels, if the market allows it. I’ll save my last
portion of the position for the trend-line resistance level in case it’s reached.
When considering where to leave your limit-entry orders to average into a trade, be aware of what
your final average rate will be if all your orders are filled. The difference between that average
rate and your stop-loss level multiplied by the total position size will give you the total amount
you’re risking on the trade. (In Chapter 16, I look at the profit/loss implications of closing out a
multiple lot position that was averaged into.)

Although there are no 100 percent accurate gauges to tell us how much higher the market is
likely to trade, we can use short-term momentum studies — such as stochastic models, the
Relative Strength Index (RSI), or Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD) — to
make an educated guess as to how much more upside potential there may be.
If hourly momentum studies have already topped out and crossed over to the downside, for
example, the upside potential is likely more limited. This may argue for being more aggressive in
establishing a short position, such as making the initial sale at current market levels and placing
any additional limit orders to sell above at closer levels. But if hourly momentum studies are still
moving higher, we can reasonably wait and look to sell at relatively higher levels using limit sell
orders.

Averaging into a reversal setup requires that you’re able to buy/sell multiple lots over
relatively large price zones, sometimes as much as 100 pips or more. Make sure that you
have sufficient margin resources available before you start averaging into your overall
position. Depending on the size of the buy/sell zone and your available margin balance, you
may have to space your limit-entry orders farther apart or trade fewer lots overall.

It’s always a trade-off between being in the right position to catch the move and getting in at
the best price possible. It’s quite frustrating to identify a potentially significant market
reversal, leave a single limit-entry order, but then see the reversal take place without your
order being filled. Averaging into the position starting at current prices is one way to make
sure you’re on board for at least some of the move.

If the setup works out, you’ll have taken advantage of any favorable price moves the market has
made, resulting in a better average rate on your position. If the setup fails, averaging into the
position at successively better rates will cost less in the end than entering the whole position at the
current market level.

Trading breakouts
A breakout or break refers to a price movement that moves beyond, or breaks out of, recent
established trading ranges or price patterns captured with trend lines. Breakouts can occur in all
time frames, from weeks and days on down to hours and minutes. The longer the time frame, the
more significant the breakout in terms of the overall expected price movement that follows.
In the very short term, prices on a 15-minute chart may establish a trading range of 20 to 30 pips
over several hours, for example. A breakout on such a short time scale might result in a 30- to 50pip movement in a matter of minutes/hours. Daily trading ranges of 300 to 400 pips may see a
breakout result in an initial 50- to 150-pip movement in subsequent hours, with more to come in
following sessions.
There’s no real fixed ratio or scale for range breakouts; I’ve just given those examples above to
give you an idea of the relative scales involved. To be sure, a breakout of a 15-minute range can
lead to the break of an hourly range, which can lead to a breakout of a daily range.

Breakouts are important because they represent a shift in market thinking. Most trading
theories start with the premise that the current price reflects all the known information on that
market at the moment. But rather than settling on one price and stopping, markets tend to
consolidate into a zone of prices, or a range, where relatively minor price fluctuations are
simply noise in terms of the grand theories of market price behavior.
For a range to break, then, by definition something must have changed in the market’s thinking. And
there’s only one thing that will change the market’s thinking: new information. New information
can be anything from news and data to rumors or comments, down to the prices themselves. Many
traders rely on price information as their primary source of decision-making information. If prices
in USD/CHF have been capped by 1.0500 for the past four weeks, a price move above that level
is new information and requires adjustments in the market.
The beauty of breakouts from an individual trader’s perspective is that you don’t necessarily need
to know the reason for the breakout — just that prices have broken out. Of course, being aware of
what’s going on and what news is driving the market always helps give you a leg up in anticipating
and preparing for potential breakouts.
In terms of entering a position, breakouts frequently represent important signals to get in or out of
positions. In that sense, they take a lot of the guesswork out of deciding where to enter or exit a

position.

Identifying potential breakout levels
The first step in trading on a breakout is to identify where breakouts are likely to occur.
Pinpointing likely breakout levels is most easily done by drawing trend lines that capture recent
high/low price ranges. In many cases, these ranges will form a sideways or horizontal range of
prices, where sellers have repeatedly emerged at the same level on the upside and buyers have
regularly stepped in at the lower level. Horizontal ranges are mostly neutral in predicting which
direction the break will occur.
Other ranges are going to form price patterns with sloping trend lines on the top and bottom, such
as flags, pennants, wedges, and triangles. These patterns have more predictive capacity for the
direction of the eventual breakout and even the distance of the breakout. (I review the most
common patterns and what they imply in greater detail in Chapter 11.)

The time frame that you’re looking at will determine the overall significance of the breakout
and go a long way toward determining whether you should make a trade based on it. Very
short time frames (less than an hour) are going to have much less significance than a break of
a four-hour range or a daily price pattern. The length of time that a price range or pattern has
endured also gives you an idea of its significance. A break of a range that has formed over the
past 48 hours is going to have less significance for price movements than the break of a range
that has persisted for the past three weeks.

Trading breaks with stop-loss entry orders
After you’ve identified a likely breakout point, you can use a resting stop-loss entry order placed
just beyond the breakout level to get into a position if a break occurs. To get long for a break to the
upside, you would leave a stop-loss entry order to buy at a price just above the upper level of the
range or pattern. To get short for a break lower, you would leave a stop-loss entry order to sell at
a price just below the lower level of the range or pattern. Figure 14-1 is a chart showing
EUR/USD and where stop-loss entry orders could be placed to trade breakouts.
The appeal of using stop-loss entry orders is that you’re able to trade the breakout without any
further action on your part. Breakouts can occur in the blink of an eye. Just when you thought the
upper range level was going to hold and prices started to drift off, for example, they’ll come
roaring back and blow right through the breakout level.

Figure 14-1:
Placing stoploss orders to
trade a

breakout
identified with
trend lines.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Price moves like that can leave the most experienced traders caught like deer in the headlights. By
the time they react, the break has already seen prices jump well beyond their desired entry level.
Worse, by trying to trade at the market in a fast-moving breakout, you may miss your price and
have to reenter the trade, by which time prices may have moved even farther in the direction of the
break.

When placing a stop-loss entry order to trade a breakout level, be aware of any major data
or news events that are coming up. If your stop-loss entry order is triggered as a result of a
news event, the execution rate on the order could be subject to slippage, which may reduce
much of the gains from getting in on the breakout. (We discuss slippage in Chapter 13.)

Trading the retest of a breakout level
The other way to trade a breakout is after the break has occurred. You may not have noticed the
significance of a particular technical level, or you may not have left orders in overnight to exploit
a break. You turn on your computer the next morning to discover that prices have jumped higher
overnight and feel like you’ve missed the boat. But you may still get a chance to trade the breakout
if prices return to re-test the breakout level.
A retest refers to prices reversing direction after a break and returning to the breakout level to see
if it will hold. In the case of a break to the upside, for example, after the initial wave of buying has

run its course, prices may stall and trigger very short-term profit-taking selling. The tendency is
for prices to return to the breakout level, which should now act as support and attract buying
interest.

You can use these retests to establish a position in the direction of the breakout, in this case
getting long on the pullback. Figure 14-1 shows where you could have bought on the retest of
the break higher in AUD/USD. Note that prices did not make it exactly back to the breakout
level. When trying to get in on a retest, you may consider allowing for a margin of error in
case the exact level is not retested. You could also consider using a strategy of averaging into
a position, discussed earlier in this chapter, to establish a position on any pullbacks
following a breakout. Here the averaging range would be between current prices and the
break level.

Earlier I wrote that you may get the chance to buy/sell a retest of a breakout level. The
reason is that not every breakout sees prices return to retest the break level. Some retests may
retrace only a portion of the breakout move, stopping short of retesting the exact break level,
which is typically a good sign that the break is for real and will continue. Other breakouts
never look back and just keep going.
But to the extent that it’s a common-enough phenomenon, you still need to be aware of and
anticipate that prices may return to the breakout level. From a technical perspective, if prices do
retest the breakout level, and the level holds, it’s a strong sign that the breakout is valid, because
market interest is entering there in the direction of the break.

