
Fig 10.14 GLD - ETF 15 Min Chart

This next example is another extremely popular commodity for traders, gold, and the ETF is the GLD fund. Once
again I've taken a faster time frame here to use as an example, and in this case my commentary is on a candle
by candle basis with no annotation. The reason is that the chart would simply be too cluttered!
Before starting, let me put the gold market into context for you. At the time of this chart, gold had been weak for
some time, and in a low inflation environment with higher returns in risk markets, money flow in general at this
point was away from safe havens. The longer term trend for gold was therefore bearish. This is the context
against which to view this intra day price action.
The market opens gapped down on extremely high volume, a clear signal of weakness. We are starting with
weakness which has been validated by volume. The next candle forms, a small hammer, again with ultra high
volume. Is this stopping volume – perhaps, and we wait for the next candle to form, a small candle with an
upper wick, suggestive of further weakness, and coupled with high volume.
Clearly not a positive response to the 'stopping' volume. The next two down candles suggest a modicum of
buying on each, with the lower wicks showing some support, but the market continues lower on rising volume
with the penultimate candle suggesting stopping volume once again. Finally the last down candle in this price
waterfall closes on average volume, followed by the first up candle of the session. A weak response if ever
there was one, with a deep upper wick and narrow spread with above average volume. This is hardly a market
that is preparing to reverse at this point. The next candle is perfectly valid, a narrow spread up candle with
average volume – this looks fine.
Then we see a repeat of the first candle in this sequence of up candles, but this time, look at the volume – it is
extremely high. This is sending a LOUD signal that the market is VERY WEAK. If this were buying volume then
the market would be rising fast – it isn't, so it must be selling volume. Everyone is selling and trying to get out of
the market before it collapses, with every attempt to rise knocked back by the pressure of selling. The next
candle is even worse, sending an even stronger signal, if any were needed, that everyone is selling and the
market is now incredibly weak.
Here we have ultra high volume and a market that is going nowhere. The price spread is narrow, and if the
volume were buying, then the market would have risen. The insiders are propping the market up, selling stock
accumulated in the price waterfall, before taking it lower.
The next two candles give no clues, narrow spreads with low volume, then the market sells off sharply, as
expected, and validated with ultra high volume, as it lurches lower once again. The next candle hints at
stopping volume once again with a narrow spread and deep wick on very high volume. The buyers are moving
in at this level, and this is repeated on the next candle with high volume again on a narrow spread. Now we
should see the market recover, but look at the next candle. The market attempts to rise, but falls back to close
near the open on above average volume. Not a strong signal. A small hammer follows, on ultra high volume so
perhaps there are more buyers in the market, and based on the volume of the last few bars, perhaps a reversal
is now in prospect?
Three bullish candles then follow, each with a narrow spread, but the volume is flat, so we have a market rising
on flat volume, and therefore unlikely to go very far. The market reverses from this level, and as it falls volumes
are increasing signalling selling pressure once again. The final candle in this sequence is a very narrow spread
doji candle, with high volume, and again we can assume that this is stopping volume with buyers coming in
once more.
This is confirmed with the next candle which is a wide spread up candle with above average volume, but as the
market rises on the next two candles, volume is falling away. The insiders are not taking this market far. The
market then drifts sideways for an extended period in the session with several attempts to rally all failing, and
with volumes generally falling to low levels throughout this phase the market duly closes, looking very weak.
What then happened in the following day’s trading session is that the bearish tone of the previous day was
taken up in dramatic fashion, as the GLD opened gapped down once again on three times the volume of the
previous day’s open.

Fig 10.15 GLD - ETF 15 Min Chart - Next Day!
Whilst the open was bad news for those traders bullish on gold, even worse was to follow, and candles five, six
and seven were accompanied with volume which can only be described as extreme. Trading volumes on each
candle were in excess of 6 million, with average volumes around 500,000. In other words, panic selling.
Even the hammer candle and the associated volume was not sufficient to slow the market momentum and the
solitary wide spread up candle on high volume, failed to follow through, with the market moving into a
congestion phase before rising volumes on the four down candles at the end of the sequence signalled yet
more bearish pressure and heavy selling.
The above market analysis, which I have written here for you in long hand, is really a transcript of the
conversation that I would have in my head as this price action appeared on the screen and could be for any
chart, any instrument and in any time frame. All I need is volume to give me a view of what is going on inside
the market. With this insight I can draw my conclusions from the price behaviour. The above is on gold, but it
could be any ETF or other instrument. It makes no difference.
I now want to move to the spot forex market and here the charts are from the MT4 platform. With MT4 we have
time charts and tick volume. However, the same principles apply.
The first example is from an actual trade I took on the Aussie Dollar on the 15 minute chart.
The currency pair had been rising nicely for a little while, volumes were average (as marked with the dotted
white line) with no anomalies or signs of weakness at this stage. Then suddenly we see the blue candle form,
with a wide body but also with an equally deep wick above.

Fig 10.16 AUD/USD - 15 Min Spot Forex Chart
We are now paying attention as with this volume bar, the pair should have risen strongly, and clearly in the
volume bar there is a large amount of selling, confirmed by the deep wick to the top of the candle.
The pair manage to move higher for a couple of bars, but the warning has been flagged and sure enough five
bars later we see a shooting star candle with high volume. The next candle is also weak, a narrow spread doji
candle with high volume. A potential reversal awaits! The next candle confirms the weakness, another shooting
star candle this time with higher volume still. And what is also important here, a lower high than the previous
candle. This is the time and place to take a short position with a stop loss above the level of the wick of the first
candle.
The pair sell off and duly start to move lower, and one aspect that I want to highlight here is how volume helps
you to stay in a strong position and hold it in order to maximise your profits from the trend.
As we all know, markets never move in a straight line, they move lower, then pull back a little, before then
moving lower again. Here we can see this in action perfectly illustrated, and the point I want to make is this.
Four bars after the second shooting star, we have a wide spread down candle, and we are delighted. Our
analysis has been proved correct, and we are now in a strong position. Then the market begins to reverse
against us. Is this a trend reversal, or merely a pause in the move lower?
Well, the first candle appears. The spread is relatively narrow and the volume is above average, so this is an
encouraging sign. In addition, we have not seen any evidence of stopping volume with narrowing spreads and
rising volume, so this looks like a pause point. The next candle confirms this as does the third, and on the
completion of this last candle we can see that we have a market attempting to rise on falling volume, and we
know what that means!
The next candle is weak, and whilst the volume is below average it is another small shooting star.
The market moves lower in steps and each attempt to rally is seen in the context of falling volume, confirming
the weakness further which is my point.
Once you have a position in the market, you must keep revisiting your VPA techniques as they will give you the
confidence to hold and stay in the trend. If you are short the market and it pulls back against you, but the volume
on the upwards moves is falling, then you KNOW that this is simply a temporary pullback and not a change in

trend. Equally, if any pullback has not been pre-ceded with signs of stopping volume, then the buyers are not in
the market at that level and any reversal will not last long, so you can continue too hold.
Equally, if you are long the market the same applies. In an up trend the market will pull back against you. If the
volume is falling on these pull backs then you KNOW this is simply a minor reversal lower and not a change in
trend, particularly if you have seen no topping out volume.
Finally as we can see on the right hand side of the chart, stopping volume finally appeared, with the market
moving into a congestion phase with the selling pressure dropping away to below average. The pair completed
this phase of its journey and we exit.
Our entry, our management, and exit of this position have all been executed using one simple tool. VPA.
Nothing else. Why more traders, speculators and investors don't pay attention to volume is beyond me, but
there we are.
Here are some further examples from the world of spot forex.

Fig 10.17 AUD/USD – Weekly Spot Forex Chart : Selling Climax
The reason I’ve chosen the weekly chart for the AUD/USD is that not only is it a good example of a selling
climax, it also gives us a perspective on how long this may last. As I have said several times in this book, we
have to be patient. Major changes in trend take time to come into effect, and this is an example. It also shows
that VPA works in all time frames.
Remember, here we are looking at a period of around 18 months, so long term trends with big profits to be
made if you are patient, and believe in the power of VPA of course!
As we can see from the chart the AUD/USD pair has been bullish, before moving into a congestion phase on
average volume. Then we see our first anomaly. A narrow spread up candle with very high volume. The pair are
struggling at this price point and the market is not responding. The next weekly candle arrives with ultra high
volume, and if this pair were going to sell off sharply, then we would expect this to be a wide spread down
candle – it isn't. It's a narrow spread. The buyers must be supporting the market at this level. The next candle
arrives, a hammer with a deep wick, and this confirms the previous candle. This is buying, and now we wait for
any further signals, which arrive on the next candle, a low volume test on a smaller hammer candle. The high
volume selling that we were seeing in the previous candle, which was absorbed by the buyers, has now
dissipated and the forex market makers are ready to take this pair higher. And off it goes at a nice steady pace,

marching higher on nice steady volume.
The move higher extends over several months, but the point to note here, is the slow steady fall in volume over
this period. It's not dramatic, just a steady fall, and then as we enter the yellow box on the chart – what do we
see? Two wide bars, one after the other, but look at the volume. It has fallen away to almost nothing. This is a
HUGE warning signal that this pair is becoming exhausted, and either running out of steam, or there is some
alternative explanation. What is clear, is that the market makers are moving prices higher with NO volume, and
have withdrawn from the market.
Traders who have missed this long trend higher, are now jumping in on fear and greed. They fear missing out
on a golden opportunity. After all, they have watched this market go up and up, and have finally caved in and
bought, just when the market makers are leaving by the side door.
Then the selling climax begins. The market makers are selling in huge volumes at this level, before finally after
several weeks the pair break lower, and attempts to rally giving us signs of further weakness, before breaking
lower again.
Note the attempt to rally at the right hand edge of the chart. Here we see narrow spread up candles on very high
volume, and falling, another very strong signal of further weakness to come, which duly arrives.
One point I do want to cover here in a little more detail is the whole issue of rising and falling volumes when
associated with trends, because we do have to apply some flexibility to any analysis and interpretation here.
After all, if the market moved higher for ten consecutive bars, and you wanted to apply the volume principle to
the letter of the law, then you would have to see 10 volume bars each higher than the last. Clearly this would
place a limit on how far any trend could go, since it is unreasonable to expect volumes to go up and up and up
for ever!
The above example is a case in point. The first few candles on the up move are supported by good volume,
which is up and down, but above, or just around, average. This is fine. After all, there are always going to be
variations particularly when you begin to look at the longer term timescales. There may be seasonal effects,
days when the markets are thinly traded during holidays, and of course days when the markets actually close.
This rarely happens in forex, but it does happen in other markets and affects the forex markets accordingly.
Please be a little flexible in your approach when judging volume in trends, and allow a little bit of latitude in your
analysis. Here we were waiting for an anomaly, and until the two low volume candles arrived, there was nothing
to signal that any change in trend was imminent.
I now want to consider the opposite, namely a buying climax and once again we have a nice example on the
AUD/USD weekly chart in Fig 10.18 below.
On this chart, we are looking at an eighteen month period approximately, and we can see that the pair has
topped out and rolled over into a nice price waterfall, all confirmed with nicely rising selling volumes, validating
the move lower.
Then a hammer candle arrives and we need to assess whether there is sufficient stopping volume? The next
candle gives us the answer with a small shooting star on high volume.

Fig 10.18 AUD/USD - Weekly Spot Forex Chart : Buying Climax
Clearly the market is NOT ready to rise just yet and the selling pressure continues as we finally enter the buying
climax phase. However, as the pair attempt to rally the first candle we see is a narrow spread up candle with a
deep upper wick, hardly a sign of strength, on high volume. The pair are not ready to rise just yet, and the
following two candles confirm this, with very low volume. The second of these is particularly significant with a
wide spread and ultra low volume.
The AUD/USD pair then roll over again and back down into the congestion area, which I have marked on the
chart with the two yellow lines, and this is the ceiling of resistance that we would now be monitoring, along with
the floor of support below.
Any break above through this resistance area would now need to be supported with good rising volume. It
doesn't have to be 'explosive' volume, and in many ways it is better that it isn't – just steady and rising. If this
were a gap up breakout, as we saw in earlier examples, then we do expect to see volumes well above average,
and even ultra high if the move is dramatic. But for normal breakouts through an area of resistance, then above
average is fine.
The pair then develop a nice even trend higher, with some pauses along the way. This trend lasted for over
nine months before finally running out of steam with a selling climax developing.
I now want to move into the world of futures and back to my NinjaTrader platform. The first chart is the 5 minute
on the YM E-mini futures contract, an extremely popular index futures contract for scalping, and derived from the
Dow Jones Industrial Average in the cash market.
There are two versions of the index, the 'small' Dow and the 'big' Dow. This is the small Dow with each index
point worth $5, whilst the big Dow is $25. I ALWAYS recommend new traders to any market to start with the
smallest instrument, so if you are new to index trading or indeed the futures market in general, start with the mini
Dow.
The reason I wanted to show this example is really to focus on the open of the market. As I explained earlier,
these contracts now trade virtually 24 hours a day, and therefore the open of the physical market is not the
surprise that it once was, as this will generally follow the trend of the electronic contract, which will have been
trading overnight following the close of the exchange.

Fig 10.19 YM E-mini 5 Min Chart
What do we see here? First, we have a gapped up open, so the electronic contract must have ticked up from the
physical close of the day before, which you can see here. Volume is high and a nice wide spread up candle
closes the first five minutes of trading. The big operators are joining the move. The next two candles are down,
but the volume is falling, so we do not expect the market to move far, and indeed the lower wick on the second
of these candles, is a clue that this is simply some early profit taking on the gap up open, and that the buyers
are in control.
From there, the market moves steadily higher. There are no signals of a reversal, just a steady rise, with minor
pull backs, but each time we see a little wave lower, then this is balanced by a wave higher in the volume trend,
which is what I was trying to describe earlier. You do have to be a little flexible in how you view volume in a
rising (or falling) trend. What is interesting here is if we compare the first 'wave' with the second 'wave' in terms
of the buying volumes. Volumes on the second wave in the up move, are slightly lower than volumes in the first
wave, so we may begin to think that perhaps this move was running out of steam, and possibly time to exit the
trend. However, there is nothing particularly frightening in any of the subsequent price action, and indeed as we
can see on the right of the chart, the down candles have very low volumes. But interest appears to be waning
and we need to be vigilant.
One further point on this chart, before we move on to look at another.
The move higher after the first few candles of the open would also have given us confidence as the index broke
above the initial resistance area created at the open. This is only a secondary resistance level, but nevertheless
another 'confidence builder' for us in taking a position in this market. The same applies at the right hand side of
the chart as the market moves into a congestion phase, and coupled with the general decline in volumes, this
may prompt us to exit at this stage.

Fig 10.20 ES E-mini 10 Min Chart
Fig 10.20 is another very popular futures index for scalping traders, the ES E-mini which is a derivative of the
S&P 500. However, it is extremely volatile and of all the indices, is the most manipulated by the big operators,
which is what I wanted to show here. In this example we are looking at a 10 minute chart, and here we have a
complete daily session, sandwiched between a day either side.
Working from left to right, as the trading session comes to an end we can see the extremely high volume bar in
red, standing like a telegraph pole above all the others. The big operators are clearing out of the market
preparing for the following day. This ultra high volume is associated with a shooting star candle, a sure sign of
selling, followed by an up candle with very high volume, which goes nowhere. The big operators are selling into
the market and struggling to hold it at this level. Finally, the session ends with a small doji on average volume.
The following day, the market opens at much the same level as the close of the night before, with a classic trap
up move by the big operators, a wide spread up candle on low to average volume. Compare this volume with
that of the up candle of the night before following the shooting star candle. The price spread is much the same,
but the volume is substantially lower.
This is a TRAP up move, and one that was prepared the night before. It is a classic move that happens all the
time, particularly at the open of a session, and you will see this time and time again in the futures markets and
the cash markets. The insiders, whether they are the operators or the market makers, love to trap traders into
weak positions, and this is the easiest time to do it, when traders are waiting for the market to open, eager with
anticipation, and jump in making emotional trading decisions, frightened to miss out on a nice move higher or
lower. Then the selling starts, and down it goes! Easy really, and given the chance we would do the same! It
goes without saying that volume is the ONLY way to see these tricks in action – watch out for them and you will
see them ALL the time, in every market, and in every time frame.
Finally, and just to prove the point, on the third day on our chart the market opens gapped up, but look at the
volume – it's high, and well above the volume of the previous day, so this is a genuine move, and the big
operators are buying into the bullish trend higher.
Moving to yet another platform, a different market and a different type of chart. So far, all the charts we have

considered in our volume analysis have been based on time, but many traders, myself included like to trade tick
charts for some markets. If you have never used such charts to trade, then I would urge you to consider these as
part of your trading education, for one simple reason.
When we trade on a time based chart, for example a 15 minute chart, every bar or candle on the chart is created
in 15 minutes. By contrast when we trade on an 80 tick chart, each candle will be created according to the time
it takes to complete. In other words, the time taken to build each candle will depend on the energy and activity in
the market. It is, yet another way to consider volume or market activity. A tick on a futures chart essentially
records an order, but that order could be for one contract or a hundred contracts. However, the point with a tick
chart is this. If the market is very active and there is a great deal of buying and selling, let's say after a news
announcement, then each 80 tick candle will form very quickly, perhaps in just a few seconds, as there are
hundreds of orders flowing through the market in a very short space of time, each of which is recorded as a tick.
Therefore if we were watching a tick chart following the release of the NFP data, then the candles would form
as though being fired from a machine gun – they would literally print on the chart at high speed, but each tick
candle would take a different length of time to form. So in seeing the speed of creation of the tick candles, we
are also, in a sense, seeing inside the market and the 'volume' or activity that is associated with this buying and
selling frenzy.
This is something you will NEVER see on a time based chart, since each candle is defined by the time frame of
the chart. On a tick chart it is not, and this is a key difference and why many full time traders and professional
traders only use tick charts.
To put this into context for you, imagine a tick chart in the following scenarios.
First in the example above, the open of the New York trading session and an NFP data release. Each 80 tick
candle would form in seconds and perhaps in milliseconds. Now imagine the same chart overnight in Asia,
where perhaps we are overlapping the close of one market and the opening of another. Then the time taken for
each candle on the chart might be 30 seconds, perhaps even a few minutes.
And the point is this. With a tick chart, you see the activity visually with the speed the candles are created. With
a time chart, you never see the activity, just a price moving higher or lower as the candle forms. This is the
difference between tick and time based charts and is why many traders prefer to trade on tick charts. With a tick
chart, we are seeing 'inside the market' and it is reinforcing our volume analysis. After all, volume is really
nothing more than 'activity' which is what we see visually with a tick chart.
One important point about tick charts is if the volume is also represented as ticks, all we would see would be a
series of 'soldiers' of equal height, with each one representing 80 ticks or 80 transactions. In order to overcome
this problem, most platforms will provide the option of selecting either tick volume or trade volume when setting
up a chart, and this is certainly the case with another of my trading accounts. Here we simply select trade
volume when setting up the chart, rather than tick volume, and we then have volume reported in trade size,
which gives us our variable volume bars.
