
the individual stocks enables you to get a better idea of the relative strength or weakness of SMH, especially when the price of one of the stocks in SMH is being heavily
affected by company news.
It is a good idea to thoroughly study the components within SMH. Once you
begin to memorize the individual components and weightings of each stock, your
proﬁtability will improve signiﬁcantly because you will instantly know if a company
announcement is likely to lead to changes in stock value. If a company whose stock
has a low percentage weighting in the portfolio announces major news, it will have less
of an effect than signiﬁcant news from a company with a more heavily weighted stock.
Keeping track of the individual components gives you an additional edge.
With the plethora of ETF families that have come to market in recent years, it is
important to understand that the composition of the various families can vary greatly.
Some ETFs are designed to precisely mirror an actual index, others are weighted
heavily in only the leaders of each sector, while still others use computerized algorithms managed in an attempt to outperform the corresponding indexes. Within the
industry sector ETFs, the biotech ETF is one group in which the percentage weightings of stocks within an ETF family will vary greatly.
On April 12, 2007, the Biotech Index ($BTK) surged 2.5 percent and broke out
to a six-year high. At the time, it looked like the chart in Figure 5.2.
Although the Biotech Index ($BTK) broke out to a multiyear high, most of the
ETFs that track the Biotech Index did not do so. Remember that after identifying
the sector index with the most relative strength or best chart pattern, the next step is
to compare the individual charts of the various ETF families that correspond to the
underlying index. In this case, the ﬁve ETFs are as follows: Biotech HOLDR (BBH),
FIGURE 5.2 Biotech Index ($BTK), April 12, 2007
$BTK.X – Daily
800.76
800.00
790.00

789.29

780.00
770.00
767.64
760.00
752.09
750.00
740.00
The Biotech Index ($BTK) broke out to a fresh
six-year high on April 12, 2007.

730.00
720.00
710.00

2007

Source: TradeStation

Feb

Mar

Apr

60

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 5.3 First Trust Amex Biotech Index (FBT), April 12, 2007
FBT – Daily
25.00
24.95
24.66
24.50
24.00
23.94
23.50
23.45
Similar to the $BTK index,
First Trust Amex Biotech (FBT) broke out
to a new high on April 12.

2007

Feb

23.00
22.50

Mar

Apr

Source: TradeStation

iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology Index Fund (IBB), PowerShares Dynamic Biotech
(PBE), SPDR S&P Biotech (XBI), and First Trust Amex Biotechnology Index Fund
(FBT). Of the ﬁve, only FBT broke out to a high along with the $BTK. While many
ETF families of other sectors consist of the same leading stocks, the biotech ETFs are
vastly different in the composition of their underlying stocks. The variance in their
composition causes signiﬁcantly different chart patterns to form within the group.
FBT broke out to a multiyear high because it is designed to precisely mirror the
stocks and percentage weightings of the $BTK itself. Twenty stocks make up both
the $BTK and FBT, and each stock has no greater weighting than 6 percent. The top
10 stocks in the index have a weighting variance of approximately 1 percent or less.
By comparison, BBH, perhaps the most well-known biotech ETF, presently consists
of only 16 stocks and is much more heavily weighted in only a few large-cap biotech stocks. Together, Amgen (AMGN) and Genentech (DNA) currently make up
a whopping 60 percent of the portfolio. When these two stocks underperform the
$BTK, as they have done for quite some time, it’s no wonder that the chart of BBH is
rather bearish. As you can see in Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4, the daily charts of FBT and
BBH bear no resemblance toeach other, even though they both track the same sector.
Buy the Leaders, Not the Laggards

When I ﬁrst began sector trading in 1999, I frequently made the expensive mistake of
buying the stocks and ETFs that were lagging behind others within the strong sector.
My (faulty) rationale was that the leaders had already rallied “too much” and were

61

Selecting the Best ETFs
FIGURE 5.4 Biotech HOLDR (BBH) Lagging Behind
BBH – Daily
Unlike FBT, the Biotech HOLDR (BBH)
had a bearish chart pattern when the
$BTK index broke out to a new
multiyear high. This was primarily due
to the low diversification of stocks
that comprise the ETF.

188.00
186.00
184.00
182.00
180.00
178.00
176.00
174.00
172.96
172.00
170.93
170.00
169.40
168.00
166.00

2007

Feb

Mar

Apr

Source: TradeStation

not likely to go much higher. I therefore assumed that better value could be found
with the laggards, which were bound to “catch up” to the leaders. On the surface, this
might have seemed logical, but I learned the hard way that it rarely works that way.
I remember one particular instance when I spotted incredible strength in the
Pharmaceutical Index ($DRG) shortly after the market opened. One of the big drug
companies had received positive news from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) regarding one of its key products, which sparked a rally in the sector. Thirty minutes after the open, I decided to get a piece of that strong institutional money ﬂow into
the pharma sector, so I took a look at the stocks that composed the index. ETF choices
were quite limited at that time, so I opted for the individual stocks within the sector.
The leaders in the sector included companies like Merck, Johnson & Johnson,
Pﬁzer, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Upon checking their stock prices, I noted that every
one of them was already showing a gain of around 3 percent or more within the ﬁrst
30 minutes of trading. Incorrectly assuming that they were “already up too much,”
I then looked to second-tier stocks within the sector. I liked the chart pattern in
Schering-Plough, and it was trading only 0.4 percent higher on the day. Thinking it
would catch up to the leaders, I bought Schering-Plough and then waited for my big
gains to ﬂow in.
By day’s end, the sector leaders that “couldn’t go any higher” were showing average gains of 5 percent to 6 percent, approximately double the advance of when I ﬁrst
looked at them. My position in Schering-Plough not only failed to move higher, but
it actually moved lower to ﬁnish with a measly gain of just 0.2 percent. Such began my
lessons learned about buying the leaders instead of the laggards.

62

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

Although the previous scenario pertained to individual stocks, it could be applied
to ETFs. When you buy the laggard ETF within a sector, it will usually stay that way.
Conversely, the leaders will continue powering higher. Think of it this way: Cheap
stocks are cheap for a reason. Similarly, ETFs showing relative weakness do so for a good
reason: Traders and investors have no interest in the underlying shares. The reason the
ETFs are weak is irrelevant. All that matters is the price action (and volume, of course).
Leading ETFs within a sector are not only the ﬁrst ones to shoot to new highs
when the corresponding index bounces just a little, but they are also the last ones to
fall if the broad market suddenly reverses to the downside. Buying only the ETFs with
strength relative to the sector index, which is showing strength relative to the overall
market, is also a good way to minimize your losses when markets correct from strong
uptrends. Buy the leaders, not the laggards!
After you become experienced at detecting relative strength, it won’t be important whether the overall market is going up, down, or sideways because you will know
that opportunities abound no matter what. Whether the Dow is at a high for one day
or many years, there will continue to be sector and specialty ETFs with strength or
weakness relative to the broad market. Using percentage-change overlay charts is an
efﬁcient way to spot the institutional money ﬂow early in the trends.
Analyzing Volume

Besides price, volume is the most reliable technical indicator at your disposal for determining the true relative strength or weakness of an ETF. While price shows where an
ETF is moving, volume always shows the amount of power behind the price movement. Because more than half of the market’s average daily volume is the result of
trading by mutual funds, hedge funds, and other institutional players, their activity
determines the overall direction of the market. Studying the volume patterns that
coincide with the market’s price movements is a way to understand with accuracy
what is really happening beneath the surface. Institutions can attempt to hide their
buying and selling activity in many ways, but their actions are always reﬂected by
surges in volume within the broad market and individual stocks. Think of volume as
the footprint of institutional activity, which should be followed on a daily basis.
Analysis of volume patterns in the broad market, individual stocks, and ETFs is
also the most reliable, yet underappreciated, technical analysis tool. Ironically, volume
is the one indicator that both novice and experienced traders sometimes forget when
they become too wrapped up in analyzing trendlines, support/resistance levels, and
moving averages (MAs). No technical indicator other than price will predict the likelihood of future price movements as much as volume. Some professional traders base their
entire analysis solely on price and volume, never even glancing at a single chart pattern.
The general concept underlying price-volume analysis is that rising price patterns
should be accompanied by increasing volume. This indicates that institutions, not just
mom-and-pop retail traders, are supporting the price movement. While such retail
traders play a key psychological role in the markets, they don’t collectively generate

Selecting the Best ETFs

63

enough buying power to counteract institutional activity in the opposite direction.
Therefore, if a market is rising on declining volume, driven primarily by just retail
buying, it requires only a small amount of institutional selling activity to counteract
the low volume rally. It’s not uncommon for a market to surrender several weeks’
worth of gains in just a couple of down days if the preceding gains occurred on lighter
than average volume levels. One day of institutional selling will typically wipe out
numerous days of retail-driven buying.
Conversely, falling prices accompanied by high volume indicates institutions are
rushing to the exit doors. When that happens, either stand clear of the buy side or join
it by selling short. Markets can fall sharply without an accompanying surge in volume,
but rarely will sustainable rallies occur on lower than average volume.
Detecting changes in the patterns of institutional buying or selling works incredibly
well for predicting changes in price. This is because volume is the one technical indicator that never lies. Moving averages, trendlines, and support/resistance levels all work a
majority of the time, but there are occasional times when markets ignore these patterns.
Analysis of volume patterns works with accuracy all the time because it is a true
picture of stock market activity. Think of a car that looks fast and sleek on the outside.
No matter how cool the car appears externally, it’s not until you actually look under the
hood that you will really know whether or not the car is fast. The same is true of the stock
market. Noting the level of volume that accompanies a price movement in an ETF or the
overall market is akin to looking “under the hood” at the health of the market.
Finally, understand that volume is a leading indicator, not a lagging indicator.
Technical indicators such as MAs are known as lagging indicators because they simply
plot what has already happened. Because volume leads price, however, changes in the
market’s price are usually reﬂected several days after changes in volume. It’s the volume
of trading that causes the change in the market’s direction; it’s not just an indicator that
merely shows what has already happened.

Analyzing the Volume of Individual ETFs
The average daily volume of an ETF is somewhat irrelevant because the bid and ask
prices automatically move in sync with the prices of the underlying stocks, regardless of
supply or demand. But even though ETFs are synthetic and not directly inﬂuenced by
changes in their underlying volume, taking account of volume spikes on days of strong
gains is a good way of conﬁrming the institutional accumulation within the sector. This
helps you to determine whether or not institutions are accumulating shares under the
radar. You can take this a step further by looking at the leading stocks that constitute
the ETF. You don’t use volume to select an ETF as much as to conﬁrm changes in price.
Rarely will an ETF have a sustained price breakout without a correspondingly
sharp increase in volume. Have you ever bought a breakout in an ETF or a stock that
you thought was a no-brainer because all the technicals looked good, but the breakout
failed anyway? Chances are that volume did not conﬁrm the price breakout by correspondingly spiking higher. This occurs because it only takes a small number of buyers
or sellers jumping into the market to move prices in the opposite direction of the trend.

64

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

Once those buyers or sellers are done, however, prices will often revert back to where
they previously were, thereby causing a lack of follow-through and choppy conditions.
Any trends that form on light overall market volume must be taken with a grain of
salt and an extra ounce of caution. The same thing often happens on the downside.
Sell-offs and breaks of support often do not follow through if the volume does not
simultaneously increase.
When analyzing the volume of an ETF, you should be more interested in how
much volume it is trading relative to itself, not just how much volume it trades in absolute terms. For example, it doesn’t matter whether one of the iShares family of ETFs
normally trades 100,000 shares per day or 3 million shares per day. What is important
to look at is how the session’s volume compares with the average daily volume. If the
ETF has an average daily volume of 500,000 shares, but has already traded 400,000
shares within the ﬁrst hour of trading, it indicates very high volume relative to itself,
and the ETF will probably end up trading two to three times its average daily volume.
As a rule of thumb, you want to see ETFs breaking out of bases of consolidation on at least
200 percent to 300 percent of their average daily volume levels.

Analyzing the Volume of the Broad Market
I monitor the total volume in both the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the
Nasdaq stock exchange every day and look to see if bullish or bearish prices are conﬁrmed. If on a given day the S&P 500 or Nasdaq Composite registers gains on higher
volume, it is known as an accumulation day, which indicates institutional buying. When
the S&P 500 or the Nasdaq Composite sells off at higher volume, it is known as a
distribution day, which indicates institutional selling. Healthy markets can normally
absorb a couple of distribution days within a one-month period, but the presence of
ﬁve or more such distribution days can put even the strongest of uptrends in danger
of breaking down. Conversely, downtrends often end when the markets suddenly start
posting accumulation days after a series of higher-volume losing sessions.
In monitoring the volume of the overall market, you are not only looking to conﬁrm bullish or bearish price action; you also want to know whether volume levels are
high enough for trends to be sustainable. Because volume leads price, thin market
volume tends to create choppy markets and to cause trends to reverse easily.
Average or heavy volume causes sustainable trends to form and enables the market
to follow through. Even if a small group of sellers jumps into the market during a high
volume uptrending day, the uptrend will usually continue because there are enough buyers to absorb the selling volume. If you have ever watched an ETF trend up the entire
day without even a minor pullback, even when the overall market was weak, chances
are that the underlying components of the ETF were probably trading on very high
volume that day. This enabled the ETF to maintain its relative strength even when sellers stepped in. This is what I mean by volume conﬁrming relative strength or weakness.
The same thing is true of downtrending indexes in that the downtrend is more likely to
continue if the sell-off is on heavy, or at least average, volume. This indicates there are
enough sellers to continue the downward momentum even if some buyers step in.

65

Selecting the Best ETFs

To determine whether total market volume is heavier or lighter than average, you
plot both a 5-day MA and a 50-day MA to look for changes in volume. The 5-day MA
shows you the average daily volume for the past ﬁve trading days, which is a good time
horizon for indicating short-term changes in volume. In general, you want to trade
more aggressively when the total market volume is above the 5-day MA because this
indicates a short-term increase in volume, which typically leads to continued followthrough in pricing. However, when total volume is below the 5-day MA, the result is
usually a lack of direction and less desirable trading conditions. The 50-day MA gives a
longer-term view of volume, which is useful in conﬁrming multimonth trends (or lack
thereof ). You can also use the crossover of the two MAs as an indicator of a change in
sentiment. When the 5-day MA is above the 50-day MA, it typically indicates a more
sustained increase in volume. But, if the 5-day MA is below the 50-day MA, it points
to a sustained period of decreased volume (and hence a lack of interest). Figure 5.5 is
a daily chart of the Nasdaq total market volume, along with the MAs just discussed.
Notice how the 5-day MA is slowly drifting further away from the 50-day MA.
This indicates a steadily increasing lack of interest in the markets, which will continue
to make trading difﬁcult until that trend changes. Also notice how only one out of
the last eight trading days has been above the 5-day MA. Generally, it is not wise to be
aggressive in the markets when volume is below the 5-day MA.
Figure 5.6 is a clear example of why markets are difﬁcult to trade during lightvolume periods. It is a 15-minute chart of trading volume for the S&P 500 futures
in mid-February 2003, as the broad market was trying to form a long-term bottom.
FIGURE 5.5 Nasdaq Total Market Volume and Moving Averages
$TVOLQ – Daily
Volume has been steadily declining below
the 5-day MA (line 1). Notice how that moving
average is also moving further below the
50-day MA (line 2).
2,000,000
2
1

1,602,974
1,500,000
1,353,786
1,000,000

500,000

May

Source: TradeStation

Jun

Jul

Aug

66

ETF Selection through Technical Analysis

FIGURE 5.6

S&P 500 E-Mini Futures, February 2003

ESH03.D – 15 min E-mini S&P 500 Mar 2003
842.00
840.00
838.00
836.00
834.00
832.00
830.00
828.00
826.00
824.00
822.00
820.00
818.00
817.00

When a break of support fails to
follow through lower, be sure to
cover quickly. I did so upon the
subsequent break of the
downtrend line (circled below).

822.25
Break of horizontal price support at 822 level
should have led to a sharp sell-off, but the
futures held and reversed above the downtrend line.

40,000.00
22,795.00
2/10

12:00

14:00

2/11

12:00

14:00

2/12

12:00

14:00

2/13

Source: TradeStation

Looking at the above chart, notice how at around 1:15 p.m. EST on February
12 the 822 support level (as indicated by the dashed horizontal line) was tested three
times and broke to a new low. This should have caused the S&P 500 futures (and
SPY) to sharply and quickly collapse to a new low. Instead, the futures deliberated
and actually rallied back above the downtrend line from the two days before. Then,
after everyone was forced to close their short positions, the market eventually sold
off and set new lows, though the futures only dropped four points below the support level. This was all the result of light market volume. Looking at the entire day, it
looks like the 20-period MA on the 15-minute chart formed resistance for a smooth
and steady downtrend. But a closer look on a shorter time frame indicates why it was
tricky to stay short in the afternoon.

Analyzing Intraday Volume
Although daily charts are great for studying volume over a period of several days to
one week, they do not work very well for assessing intraday volume. To analyze volume
change from one day to another, switch to an intraday chart, which is usually based
on a 15-minute period, and simply compare volume based on the time of day. You do
this by measuring the volume after a speciﬁed number of bars, each of which represents
15 minutes. For example, if it is 10:30 a.m. EST, you would simply look at the total
volume after the ﬁrst four 15-minute bars and compare it with the volume represented
by the ﬁrst four 15-minute bars of the previous day. Figure 5.7 illustrates this.
Intraday volume comparisons, as illustrated in Figure 5.7, give an early indication of whether volume is on track to exceed the previous day’s volume. If volume is
already well above the previous day’s level by a speciﬁed intraday period, it tells you
that trading is likely to exceed the previous day’s level by the end of the day. If that

67

Selecting the Best ETFs
FIGURE 5.7 Intraday Volume Comparison of Total NYSE Volume
$TVOL – 15 min
Notice how the volume on 8/23 was greater
after the first four 15-minute periods than it
was at the same time on the previous day.

1,400,000
1,253,660
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000

12:00

15:00 8/19 12:00

15:00 8/22 12:00

15:00 8/23 12:00

15:00 8/24

Source: TradeStation

rise in turnover corresponds to higher prices, you’re looking at the conﬁrmation of an
uptrending day.
Selecting the right sector index with the most strength relative to the broad market is a major key to positioning yourself in the best ETFs. However, the numerous
choices among ETF families within each sector index now mandates that you ensure
that you are also positioned in the speciﬁc ETF with the most strength relative to the
index. In the top-down system of relative strength trading, remember that you are ﬁrst
looking for the sector indexes with the most relative strength compared to the market
and then looking for the speciﬁc ETFs with the most relative strength compared to the
sector index. Then, you look for the conﬁrmation of the volume.
