
Exposing Yourself to Loss

185

underlying 100 shares are valued at $5,000 then a trader is required to put
up $1,000 in margins to obtain one single stock future contract.
A consistent margin rate may actually be the only advantage that single
stock futures have over their CFD counterparts. On the other hand, CFDs
can have margins that range from as little as 10 percent to as much as
50 percent of a stock's face value. This wide range in margin requirement
is solely dependent on the underlying liquidity of the stocks that the CFD
is based on. Therefore, a trader would have to put up a margin that could
vary anywhere in price from $500 to $1,750.
Stock option premiums tend to come out the clear winners whether
they're the fixed margin rates of single stock futures or the variable margins of CFDs. Stock option premiums are quoted in 100 share increments.
Depending on the strike price of a stock option the premium could be just a
few hundred dollars or less. This can playa significant role when deciding
if stock options should be used to create a synthetic futures contract or not.
While the focus has been on the stock market, the same scenario can
also play out on expensive futures contracts such as natural gas, the full
size S&P 500 contract, or the big contract silver. Each of these markets
have margins that are so expensive that it simply makes sense to find the
right combination of options to convert into a synthetic futures position.
What would cost possibly thousands of dollars can be reduced to a few
thousand dollars at most. This is a significant modification, particularly
when the margin for natural gas, as of this writing, is almost $10,000, a
full size S&P 500 contract has a margin requirement at over $22,000, and
the 5000 oz silver margin is $10,000.
When compared side by side with each other a synthetic futures contract will be less expensive, on the face of it. Depending on how your brokerage or your FCM handles the matter there may be additional margin
requirements. This will come down to your relationship with them. In the
examples below we dissect what a long and a short synthetic futures contract actually looks like and compare it to futures counterpart.

Synthetic Futures Long Position
The components required to establish a long synthetic futures contract are
the purchase of a call option and the sale of a put option of the exact same
price. That call gives you access to unlimited profit potential, but the sold
put opens you up to unlimited loss on the downside. This strategy works
best when you buy and sell both options at-the-money; you can collect the
maximum amount of premium. Let's look at the S&P 500 as an example.
A full-sized S&P 500 futures contract has a margin requirement of
$22,500. Earlier we discussed straddles. At that time, we looked at the

186

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

SP..067: S&PtiOOlnd&x(Pft)cadjUq (DaIlybara)

Synthetic Long Futures Position
Buy a Call Option

I

i 1,'··II"'.I+.I,'tl, 1,1"'I!I••,.···t,
I •• t

,·,t

i...

t

"...

Ill+lt"I,' 'II I

::

~Ijl~.
I:::

Sell a Put Option

!I

~iiil:;o-=~,........,=~~,......."""",-~..,..""..,;;;.........~.......".,=~_~;;;;;;-~~~~iif;;_
,,,-~~-Ji lmJJ
FIGURE 12.1

Synthetic Long Futures

Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

straddle option prices as a financial commitment to profiting from the market's moving in one direction or another. What if we had decided to create
a synthetic futures contract instead (see Figure 12.1 and Table 12.1)?
These two scenarios are a huge difference in price. The first margin
requirement of $22,500 doesn't compare to the net margin requirement of
$725. This is like night and day. This is a huge difference in price, $21,775 to
be exact. But the trade can't be left naked. It has to treated and protected
just like a naked position. Either you can use an option as a hard stop or
you can create a collar on the position.
Based on this example for $3,000 to $4,000, a slightly out-of-the-money
protective put can be purchased at 1345. This would make the maximum
loss of the sold put limited to 5 points. This protective measure also has
the potential to encourage your FCM or brokerage to minimize their restrictions on your selling options.

TABLE 12.1

Buy call
Sell put

Synthetic Long Futures Position
Strike Price

Premium

1350
1350

-16.70 (-$4, 175)
+ 13.80 (+ $3,450)
- 2.90 (-$ 725)

Exposing Yourself to Loss

187

So for a total of $4,725 you are trading the value of a full-sized S&P 50n
contract, with risk management protection-the same margin price that an
Emini S&P contract would cost without any risk management in place.
This contract is still a futures contract, though, so you do end up picking a side, long or short. If the market doesn't move in that direction, you
will lose value in your premium. Therefore you must watch the values of
the various premiums, and if the market is moving against your position.
simply exit the position entirely.

Synthetic Futures Short Position
A short synthetic futures position is simply a mirror of a long synthetic
futures position. An at-the-money put is purchased and an at-the-money
call is sold. This opens the door for unlimited profits if the market drops in
value, but it also allows for unlimited loss if the market moves towards the
upside. The actions to protect the synthetic short position are the same as
a normal short position. Purchase a call to protect you from upside risk or
use a collar. Any other form of risk management can be used, but may also
be too complicated to keep track of.
The Brent light sweet crude oil contract is another great commodity
to use a synthetic position with. The Brent light sweet crude oil futures
contract margin is $12,488 (see Figure 12.2 and Table 12.2).

CL-0fi7, C.... 011 NY (PIt) Codj Uq (DoIIy_)

Synthetic Short Futures Position
Sell a Call Option

Buy a Put Option

~m-~-~--~~---~~~~'---~==----~~­
svmllecie~FIA:IIr"pOfiflon

FIGURE 12.2 Synthetic Short Futu res

Source: TradeNavigator.co m © 2007 . A ll rights reserved.

188

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

l'ABLE 12.2 Synthetic Short Futures Position

Buy put
Sell call

Strike Price

Premium

138.00
138.50

-2.43 (-$2,430)
+1.50 (+ $1,500)
- .93 (-$930)

There is no comparison in value for your investment. The actual contract is valued at $12,488 and the synthetic is only $930. Another $2,000
(estimate based on the example prices) spent on a protective option position would still only set a speculator back by $2,930. The mini crude oil
contract has a margin of $6,244. The amount of capital committed is half of
the mini contract and you are still gaining value in your position at the full
contract rate.

PRIMARY DRAWBACKS
The key problem with the synthetic futures position is its potential for unlimited loss whenever you sell an option. Another drawback is how your
brokerage firm will treat you when you decide to execute an order of this
type, whether they are flexible and allow the SPAN risk management software to handle the risk analysis or if they fly by the seat of their pants in
determining the actual risk associated with this strategy. Finally, you have
a limited array of risk management tools at your disposal. The goal is to
not only make sure that you are protected from unlimited risk, but to also
decrease your overall risk profile. This can only be done with some sort of
protective option position. A stop loss or a stop limit will not cut it, and
most likely will backfire by forcing you to maintain futures margin rates.

INTERCOMMODITY SPREAD
From the outset of this book I have been working on you to think like a
professional as well as a hedger. With that in mind there is no way I could
leave out one of the essential concepts of commodities trading, intercommodity spread trading. This is a big word for the simple concept that there
is more than one use for a single commodity, such as com. When you sit
down at the dinner table you may be eating a piece of com on the cob,
while drinking a soda (which has com syrup), eating a nice piece of chicken
fried steak (which was probably fried with com oil), all while watching an

Exposing Yourself to Loss

189

exclusive special on TV on ethanol (mainly corn) as the next big alternative
fuel source.
Many commodities have multiple uses and purposes in our everyday
lives. Corporations are constantly attempting to figure out more ways to
slice, dice, and shred their way through a commodity to make sure every
last piece is economically viable. They then go to the commodities market
to minimize their risk by splitting up the various risk associated with each
of their commercial products.
Nowhere is this seen more readily than in the commodity markets of
soybean and oil. Each commodity has its own contract and so do their
more popular derivative markets. In soybeans this is known as the crush
spread and in the oil market this is known as the crack spread, named after
the sound oil makes when it's being refined.
Crush Spread: Soybean, Soybean Meal,
Soybean Oil
When soybeans are processed, two by-products are produced, soybean
meal and soybean oil. A soybean grower is always attempting to determine
the value of the two products in relationship to its raw commodity, and
protect himself from any changes in either. The by-product purchasers are
in the same boat. Therefore, when soybean prices are high a buyer will buy
soybean to protect himself while simultaneously shorting soybean meal
and soybean oil just in case prices drop. The sellers/growers, on the other
hand, want to protect themselves from any sudden drops in price so they
will short the soybean market and will go long the soybean meal and soybean oil markets to make sure they don't miss out on any jumps in price.
The difference between the spread becomes their net profit, known as the
gross processing margin.
The NovemberlDecember crush spread is the most common to trade.
It was developed to protect the new crop. Growers attempting to protect
themselves from the traditional cheap prices at harvest tend to exploit
this spread to their best advantage. Regardless of what factors affect soybeans every day, traders can participate in the crush spread just as easily as
the pros.
The spread trades themselves can give you access to very cheap margins, known as spread margins, which can be 10 times cheaper than standard margins. In order to trade a standard soybean contract you would
have to put up over $5,000 in margin; the listed spread margin is just $500.
This is a big difference. The reason spread margins can be so low is because of the perceived risk management, of being both long and short in
the same commodity complex. By now you are probably beginning to see
a pattern.

190

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

To trade the crush spread is quite simple. The Chicago Board of Trade
(CBOT) has determined that 60 pounds of soybean is the equivalent of
11 pounds of soybean oil and 48 pounds of soybean meal. There are two
choices: either you can use a trading ratio of 1 soybean contract to 1
soybean meal and 1 soybean oil contract or, if you are going for absolute accuracy you can trade 10 soybean contracts to 11 soybean meal
contracts and 9 soybean oil contracts. The latter ratio will approximate
50,000 bushels for each contract. The CBOT calls this the package trade
(see Figure 12.3).
In fact, the CBOT established a crush options contract in 2006. Due to
high demand and popularity of the intercommodity soybean crush trade,
they wanted to allow the corporations (that is, the pros) to protect their
crush position conveniently. In doing so, they have allowed everyday buyers and sellers to have one tool, without having to muck about with ratios
and conversions, to track the crush spread and to treat it like any other
option trade.
In keeping with the focus of the option being primarily for the professionals, buying a call means you are long the by-products and short the
soybeans and buying a put means you are short the by-products but long
the soybeans.
The primary drawback of any spread, as we discussed earlier, is that
you can be wishboned in your trade. Therefore stops and stop limits are
necessary to protect yourself from your position going south on you.

~S.061: Soybe... CBT (P11) Cadi Uq (Dally bani)

Soybean Crush Spread Overlay

FIGUREJ 2.3 Soybean Crush Spread Overlay
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved .

Exposing Yourself to Loss

191

Crack Spread: Crude Oil, Heating Oil, Gasoline
Another popular intercommodity spread is the crack spread (see Figure 12.4). This spread shows the interrelationship between heating oil.
gasoline, and crude oil. In identical fashion to the soybean crush spread.
oil refiners attempt to hedge their risk from crude oil prices and its refined
products. The most popular ratio is the 3:2: 1 ratio: three crude oil futures
contracts to two unleaded gasoline futures contracts to one heating oil futures contract.
The oil is bought in the front month and its by-products are sold in the
following month or vice versa. In 1994 the New York Mercantile Exchange
(NYMEX) made the crack spread convenient for all traders by considering
this spread as one purchase, similar to the CBOT option. With oil shortages
being predicted for decades to come this is a simple and inexpensive way
for speculators to trade oil futures with a margin value that doesn't exceed
$10,000.

Gold-Silver Ratio Spread
Finally, there is the gold-silver ratio spread. This spread has long been used
to determine how expensive or inexpensive gold is at any given time. The
theory follows that if it takes more ounces of silver to purchase gold than
it did previously, then gold is considered expensive. If it takes less silver
to purchase gold, again regardless of the price, then gold is inexpensive.

Crude Oil Crack Spread Overlay
" ..co

FIGURE J2.4 Crude Oil Crack Spread Overlay
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

192

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

By playing around with this relationship, a trader can buy or sell gold and
silver in the hope that they can profit from sudden increases or drops in
value of both these precious metals.
Silver bugs believe that the prices of silver and gold should naturally
revert to their historic interrelated monetary ratio of 16:1. As the prices
wrestle for position there is a belief either that now is a good time to short
gold and buy silver or that silver can increase in value to bring the ratio
back in alignment. Whatever the case there is a constant hope that the
prices will revert back to the mean to recreate this historic relationship.
With this hope in place, whenever gold is stronger than silver there is a
short gold, buy silver bias.
Whether you believe in trading the gold/silver ratio spread or not, others do. As a result, it is important to understand the psychology of those
around you so you can better recognize opportunities in the precious metal
sector for yourself.
In Figure 12.5 we see gold on the top and silver on the bottom; this
chart follows these two commodities from January 2008 until July 2008.
As you can see, the two precious metals move in tandem pretty closely.
Nevertheless, it looks like the swings in the silver market are a little more
aggressive. On July 9,2008, silver was at $18.175 and gold was at $929.60.
According to those numbers the ratio of silver to gold was 51: 1. In order for
the traditional ratio of 16:1 to come into effect, silver would have to triple

FIGURE 12.5 Gold Silver Ratio
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

Exposing Yourself to Loss

in price to $54 an ounce or gold would have to drop to $290 an ounce. You
would have to be the judge of what most likely would happen.

PRIl\IARY DRAWBACKS
Spread trading can be tricky. While you are given cheaper margins because
the trades, on the surface, appear lower risk, don't let down your guard.
These trades are meant to be treated with the same respect as any naked
position out there. Using options as a stop loss or putting stops in place
to protect yourself is required. There are no shortcuts when using spread
trading.

THE BULL CALL SPREAD AND
BEAR PUT SPREAD
The third advanced technique that can be employed is the bull call spread
and bear put spread. These are mirror images of each other. They are a
sophisticated way of combining an at-the-money option and an out-of-themoney option. This type of strategy is a way to get the market to pay for
part of your trading. By collecting a premium you are able to reduce the
overall expense of an at-the-money option while giving yourself the opportunity to profit from the market's move.

Bull Call Spread
A bull call spread is the simultaneous purchase of an at-the-money option
and the sale of an out-of-the-money option. The difference in value between
the two different strike prices is what creates the profit opportunity for the
trader. What makes this strategy attractive is the fact that you are able to
purchase an at-the-money option at a discount. For expensive or highly
volatile markets such as the S&P 500, euro, or crude oil, this is the easiest
way to get into their options. If you have an account of $15,000 or less you
can find that when you purchase an at-the-money option, one-third to twothirds of your capital can be tied up for an extended period of time. The
bull call spread gives your capital much needed relief.
In return for this reprieve you have to give up the main trading advantage that options have-unlimited profit potential. Your trading activity is
locked between the difference in the two strike prices. This cap in your
profits, while unpleasant, if done right, can add enough to the bottom line
so that this technique will no longer be necessary.

194

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

Call premium paid
Call premium collected
Difference

$1.2500 (- $2,975)
$1.2700 (+ $900)
$1 .2700 (-$2,075)

In the bull call spread example there is an overall bullish bias for the
euro market, so a bull call spread is used. By selling a $1.27 call, $900 in premiums are collected. An at-the-money call option is purchased for $2,975.
This leaves a net cost of $2,075.
One of three scenarios can play out.
First, the trade is successful and the difference between $1.25 and $1.27
is collected as a profit. That would make a total profit of approximately
$2,500. If the market stays at the $1.27 level and doesn't break through you
will be able to keep your profits, plus the premium you collected, for a
grand total of $3,400.
The second scenario would force the price past the $1.27 strike price.
Any money above and beyond $1.27 will be forfeited along with the $900
in collected premium. That would leave you with $2,500 in profits, but you
would have to hold on to the position until expiration.
The third possible scenario is that the market tanks below the $1.25
level. You have one of two choices: You can hold on until all of your premium is eroded, which would give you an official loss, or you can exit once
the accumulated losses are equal to the amount of the premium that you
have collected. This would let you exit your trade at almost breakeven.
If you fiddle around with closer strike prices you will be able to collect
more premium on the sold option, but at the expense of your profit potential between the two strike prices. This requires a balancing act between
profit goals and risk management that needs to be calculated before the
trade is ever executed (see Figure 12.6).
Bull Call Spread At-the-Money

Bear Put Spread
A bear put spread is the mirror opposite of the bull call spread. In the
bear put spread a put option is purchased at-the-money and an out-of-themoney put option is sold. The premium collected offsets the costs of
the bought put, and the difference between the two strike prices is your
profit.
This strategy is designed to catch any move in the market's value to the
downside. All the same potential scenarios exist for the bear put spread:
The market price can drop, but not break past the sold option's strike price;

195

Exposing Yourself to Loss

~

EU-067: Euro F5«PIII Ceclj Uq (DIlly baIW)

:Bull Call Spread

$1.25 Call Option Bought
I

__

~·~-~--~~----~~~<M~~~~~~~------~~w~----~--~

FIGURE 12.6 Euro Bull Call Spread
Source: TradeNavigator.co m © 2007. All rights reserved .

the market price can drop and break through the sold call's strike price; or
the market can move up and break through the bought option's strike price.
Each example is a different opportunity to interact with the market,
but in a limited fashion. The bear put spread limits you from having unlimited profit opportunities, but it can strengthen your understanding of the
market's rhythms. In Figure 12.7 we look at the corn market and see how a
bear put spread would have looked like had we executed this kind of trade.

PRII\IARY DRAWBACKS
When investing in real estate, location is everything. When trading the bull
call spread and the bear put spread, premium is everything. If the collected
premium is too little to justify the cap in profits, don't do it. If the collected
premium is a lot, maybe your two strike prices are too close in value and
you are capping your profits too tightly.
It also must be kept in mind that these trades can lose money. There
is no risk management associated with these trades. In a volatile market
that is moving against you, you can end up losing your entire premium if
you are not prepared for any sudden drop in value. This adds another level

196

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

Bear Put Spread

..........

B"Ya790P"tO~jl
I,i ' il!11
.U

Sell a 735 Put Option

FIGURE J 2.7 Corn Bear Put Spread
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

of vigilance to your trading or more complexity if you use any of the risk
management tools mentioned earlier.

CONCLUSION
This group of advanced strategies can be exciting to use as long as you understand the exposure to loss. The synthetic futures expose you to unlimited loss, the intercommodity spreads expose you to being wishboned and
losing on two sides of a trade simultaneously, and the bull call spread and
the bear put spread expose you to losing most if not all of your option's
premium. What makes any of these strategies worthwhile is that they reduce your costs and give you the ability to trade in markets that otherwise
may be out of your accounts trading range.
Trade these strategies with the intent of including other risk management tools to fully optimize them. This will have the immediate effect of
power-boosting your account and helping you find trading opportunities
that you may otherwise overlook or ignore.
