
The Market Is Not a Coin Flip
If the Cootner theory is correct and market activity is random, then a test of day-to-day price change
should be easy to establish. We can start with a very simple question: "If market activity is random, should
not the daily trading range, each day's high minus the close, be just about the same regardless of which day
of the week it is? "
Also one should ask, "If all price action is random, would you not expect the daily change, regardless
of being up or down, just the absolute value of daily changes to be about the same for each day of the week"
And finally, "If price is random, is it not true that no one day of the week could or would show a strong
bias up or down'-" If the market has no memory, it surely should not matter which day you flip the coin or
take your trades. The truth is it does matter, a great deal.
Instead of listening to the theorists, I went to the market to see what it had to say. I asked the preceding
questions and many others to see whether there is dependency from one day to the next or one pattern or past
certain price action that consistently influences tomorrow's price past the critical random walk point. The
answer was clear; the market does not reflect Cootner's claim. Tables 6.1 and 6.2 prove my point.

83

I have sampled two of the biggest, and thus you would think the most efficient markets, the S&P 500, a
measure of 500 stocks, and the United States Treasury Bonds.
My first question was, Is there a difference in the size of the range for different days of the week? Next,
Does the distance change from the open to the close, depend on the day of the week? And finally, I looked at
the net price change each day. In Cootner's world, all these questions should produce a homogeneous
response; there should be no or little variance.
For the S&P 500 Tuesdays and Fridays consistently had daily ranges larger than any other time period.
For the Bond market, Thursdays and Fridays had the largest daily ranges. Could it be that not all days are
created equally?
You bet, or had better bet, because the second column for each market shows the absolute value of the
price swing from the open to the close also varies widely. In the S&P 500 the largest open to close change
takes place on Mondays at an average of .631 while the smallest takes place on Thursdays with -.044.
In the Bond market the difference is even larger Tuesdays saw the largest open to close change, .645
and the smallest on Mondays with -.001!.
Finally, check out the last column to see that in both set s of data for the S&P 500 Fridays have a
negative value and in Bonds, Monday and Thursday show negative changes for these days. Cootner should
say this is impossible, in an efficient market one day should not be pre-disposed to rally or decline more
than any other. The market tells us otherwise, some days of the week are in fact better for buying or selling
than others'
I want to drive this point home: Cootner and his crowd apparently did not test for day of the week
dependency. I conducted a study where we asked the computer to buy on the opening each day and exit on
the close. I ran this test on all the grain markets (not shown). While not a trading system on its own, the data
opens a door and gives us an advantage those who put this book back on the shelves don't have. The data
makes clear:
All the grain markets have a pronounced pattern of rallying more on Wednesdays than any other day
of the week.

84

Go ahead, check it out, what happened to that random walk? Sure looks like it gets stuck on
Wednesdays in the grains. What is evident here is an advantage to the game. Granted, it is small, but casinos
work of an advantage of usually 1.5 percent to 4 percent in most of their games of random chances. It is that
tiny percentage, played often enough, that builds all those hotels and subsidizes the buffet lines.
Although the grains, especially Soybeans, offer some short-term trading opportunities, this is being
written at the turn of the twenty-first century, and there are more explosive short-term markets to focus on:
the S&P, T-Bonds, the British Pound, and Gold. The first two are the best for us short-termers and
short-timers.
Table 6.3 shows the impact the day of the week has on price changes in these markets. Again,
traditionalists would argue there should be little if any differences assuming price change is random. What
we find is that the trading day of the week does indeed produce a bias of future price activity, a bias we can
turn into profitable trading.
One of my favorite short-term trading advantages is Trading Day of the Week (TDW). My focus here
is the price change from the opening of the day to the close as opposed to just close to close. The reason
should be clear to you, the day for a short-term trader begins on the open and, at least for a day trader, ends
on the close.
Table 6.4 shows the results of such a study where the Bonds or S&P 500 were purchased on the open
and exited on the close each TDW.
Table 6.4
Open-to-Close Change in Price by Day

85
Random walk theorists should be gasping for their last breath about now. Here's a thumbnail sketch, the
British Pound rallies off the open 55 percent of the time on Wednesdays and "makes" $18 per trade.
"Makes" is in quotation marks because after commissions and slippage are taken into consideration not
much is left, but the pattern sheds light on a market bias we can develop into tradable material.
Gold has rallied 52 percent of the time off of Tuesday's opening making -$3, while things are not
much better with Tuesday buys on the Bond market; 47 percent winners and an average of -$3 5 per trade.
The biggest display of this bias comes from the S&P 500 (Figure 6.1). This is where I first discovered the
bias and have traded it since 1984. On Mondays, this kingpin of volatility has closed above the opening 57
percent of the time with an average profit of $109! Bond traders should note the open to close change on
Mondays has been positive 55 percent of the time with an average gain of $53.
In case you are wondering about the close-to-close relationship, it is shown in and again the bias or
advantage to the game becomes apparent. Study them for yourself.
Table 6.5 shows the results of buying on the opening and exiting 3 days later. Any remaining random
walk enthusiasts will tell you we should not be able to find any differences between days of the week over
a 3-day period. An efficient market should wipe that out. Yet when we look at just the best performing day
of each week, based on the open-to-close change, we see a large bias and taste the sweetness of knowing
markets are not totally random. The only random market was Gold; the rest of the markets I studied beat
the random walk. Bonds and the S&P 500 led the way showing some decent profits.

86
Table 6.5
Best Trading Day of Week with a Three-Day Hold

TDW does make a difference and can give us a workable bias to trade with. There are numerous ways
to begin milking this cow, and you probably have already thought of some on your own. Certainly, it is a
bias you want to understand, and consider, for any market you are going to trade on a shortterm basis.
Earlier, I said the open is critical; if we start to expand or move away from the opening, price will
probably continue in that direction. Now I will demonstrate one such approach. We will combine our
day-of-the-week bias with one simple rule; buy on the opening of the bias day + X percent of the previous
day's range. We target our bias day, and buy that day at an expansion off the opening price. Our exit is
simple; we hold the trade to the close and take our profits/losses at that time. (There are better exit
techniques, which I will get to later.)
The S&P 500 results of buying the opening Monday +.05 percent of Friday's range are pretty
spectacular for trading just one day a week (see Figure 6.2)! This approach shows a net profit of
$95,150 with 435

Figure 6.2 Buying on the opening Monday.

87
winning trades out of a total 758. Thus the average profit per trade is $125 with 57 percent accuracy. Bonds
make money buying on Tuesday opening plus 70 percent of Monday's range with $28,812 profits and 53
percent accuracy netting $86 a trade which is a little small, but a better exit technique will radically change
this number (see Figure 6.3). The long and short of all this data is that a simple filter, TDW, enables us to
do what the professors say is impossible ... beat the market.
To recap, stocks have a proven proclivity to rally on Mondays, Bonds on Tuesdays and virtually all
the grains on Wednesday. To arrive at this opinion, we examined grain prices as far back as 1968 (30 years
of data), Bonds to 1977 (21 years of data), and the S&P since they began trading in 1982 (17 years). In
short, we rolled the dice enough to draw some reliable conclusions and observed enough data to determine
there are biases; price is not solely motivated by a drunken sailor's random walk through the pages of the
Wall Street Journal.
From this research, we have a leg up on other traders, an advantage in the game, and a window of
opportunity to focus on when trading. It is not how often you trade that makes you a winner, after all any
fool can trade every day of the week. Old punters like myself know it is how often you don't trade, how
selective you are, that will lead to a successful career.
Astute traders are probably already asking the next question I will now answer, "If there is a bias to
the TDW could there be a bias to the Trading Day of the Month?"
The answer is yes, and here comes the proof. The following results were arrived at by buying/selling
on the opening of the trading day of the month

Figure 6.3 Using a better exit technique.

88
shown and exited with either a $2,500 stop in the S&P 500 or $1,500 in the Bonds or on the close the third
day after entry.
The entry day was not the calendar date but the trading day of the month (TDM). A month can have 22
trading days, but because of holidays, weekends, and the like, we don't always get 22 days. Our entry rule is
to buy or sell on the open of the TDM shown. This means you will have to count how many trading days
have taken place so far this month to set up the trade.
This concept, TDM, is akin to seasonal influences. Most other authors and students of market activity
have focused on calendar days but that approach has inherent problems; if the computer spits out that the
15th calendar day is the best for a buy, yet this year the 15th is a Saturday and the day before is a holiday,
just when do we take action? On Wednesday, Thursday, or the following Monday? TDM eliminates this
question, giving us focus on a specific tradable day.
I do not trade these days as exclusively, or should I say, inclusively, as TDWs. I use TDMs as setups,
leading indicators of when to take what type of action. I may or may not take a TDM trade, I reserve
judgment for that specific trade when that time rolls around. I will want to see what else is going on because
this is a thinking person's game that deals in reality, not a robotic virtual reality experience. My research
shows that all markets have TDM setup periods where the odds of a rally or decline are definitely tipped in
our favor. If you trade markets other than the ones discussed in this book, you should get a computer, or
programmer, to provide you with this information on your trading vehicles.
Indeed, there is a time to sow and a time to reap each week and each month of the year. Some times are
better than others, but only a very inexperienced trader would blindly take such trades. My strategy is to find
a bias such as TDW and TDM and then couple it with another bias to load or stack the deck in my favor.
Should you and I play cards, for money, trust me to come with a marked and stacked deck, which is exactly
how I want to trade; with as many odds in my favor as possible. If the scales are not heavily unbalanced in
my favor, why trade? There are plenty of trades every year that are stacked deck trades, I will wait for them
to materialize.
Enough said. Tables 6.6 and 6.7 show the best TDMs for Bonds and the S&P 500, respectively.
These results are actually staggering. By following some very simple rules, $211,910 of profits could
be had from trading Bonds just 6 days a month, and $387,320 from trading the S&P a mere 7 days per
month. The S&P results reflect no stop on entry day, but a $2,000 stop after entry day, whereas the Bonds
used a $1,500 stop starting on entry day.
Although you may not want to blindly follow these trade dates, we certainly want to be awake and
aware around these pivotal trading periods because we have a definite advantage in the game-we know when
strong rallies are most likely to take place.

89
Table 6.6
Best TDMs for S&P 500 1982-1998

Table 6.7
Best TDM's for T-Bonds 1977-1998

Monthly Road Maps
To give you a better feel of how prices usually move during each month of the year, Figure 6.4 shows a
daily chart that reflects how price changes on each TDM. Again, these are general outlines of what price has
done in the past. Like road maps, price may, or may not follow the same pattern this Year and this month.
Usually though, these price formats will be followed. Figure 6.4 charts T-Bonds for 1998; underneath the
price activity is a line that reflects the daily movement during each month. No one should expect price to
follow this index exactly, but, it generally follows the ups and downs. This index shown was created on data
from the past and extended out into 1998. As you can see, the January peak came on schedule as did the May
lows, June rally, and late July pullback.
Is this a fluke? Could be, so let's look at another TDM road map, this time for the S&P 500, again
created on data ending in 1996, and then look at how prices moved in 1998 (see Figure 6.5). Although not a
perfect representation, the similarity is remarkable and some excellent "stacked deck" trading time periods
did appear in the future as the past suggested they might.

90
The best example is the major stock market slide that started in July 1998, right on schedule, congruent
with the TDM road map. This index is one of the tools I used to get all my stock subscribers out of the
market in

Figure 6.4 Day T-Bonds (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 6.5 S&P 500 Index (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

91
June 1998.
I do not believe the past precisely predicts the future. My view is that the past is an indication of what
is likely to happen in the future, thus it is a general guideline, an outline or bias we can and should take
into consideration. It is time to think about what we should be doing on this day, this month, this year.
I am closing this chapter with an actual example from my own trading in 1998. Based on a system I
use for trading Bonds, I was short a little over 300 contracts of Bonds where the arrows are marked on
Figure 6.6. This was not a very good place to be short; price moved against my position to the tune of
almost $250,000. I was emotionally fraught as my automatic dollar stop was close at hand calling for me to
exit and take my licking at 122 22/32nds.
Had I not known of this map or pattern I would have been stopped out. But, knowing of the pattern of
weakness usually starting on the 12th TDM, I chose to not only raise my stop to the 122 21/3 2nd area but
also went short on the 2/19 in hopes the TDM influence would come to play as it usually does. Fortunately,
the market "knew what to do" and declined from that point until February 24 when my system called for
going long. I still took a loss on

Figure 6.6 Day T-Bonds (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

92
the initial trade, but far less than the one I would have taken had I not known of this market bias.
Admittedly, the market could have moved higher; the possibility of being wrong never takes a vacation,
which is why I still used a stop. I just slightly altered it based on the information at hand. This is a thinking
business. Always has been, always will be, which is why I am interested in teaching the elements that can
lead to successful trading. One of the vital elements I have used with a good degree of success is the
TDM/TDW concept. I am not really certain who first came up with this idea-Sheldon Knight, one of the
nicest guys and best researchers in the commodities business, or myself. But I think I have relied the most on
the technique.
Several of my trading friends reject the TDW concept and insist there is no difference from one day of
the week to the other. I violently disagree; it is my first building block in determining what I will do
tomorrow. The data in this chapter indicate the existence of bias on certain days of the week. It is my job as
a trader to maximize this opportunity.

Chapter 7

Patterns to Profit

My evidence that there is method to the madness of market

Chartists have believed that certain patterns or formations on their charts can predict market behavior.
For the most part, this crowd has looked at long-term patterns of market activity. Serious students of such
phenomena should start with the Edwards and Magee classic, Technical Trends.
In the 1930s, Richard Wyckoff, Owen Taylor Gartley-. and George Seaman (my favorite), spent a
great deal of time on these long-term patterns in an attempt to build a systematic approach to trading. In the
1950s Richard Dunnigan took a big step forward by focusing on price patterns of 10 to 15 days while the
older crowd was still looking at 30- to 60-day price patterns.
As mentioned, these same price patterns con be found in any activity. Flip a coin, chart it, and you will
see the same formation, found on a Pork Belly or Corn chart' This has turned some analysts price structure
analysis and for good reason; enerally speaking, these do not forecast or tell us much about the future. This
may be because there is no predictable ability in chart formations, or the time period studied is not

93

94
correct. W. L. Linden, writing in Forbes magazine, found that economic forecasts made by leading
economists have consistently been incorrect at virtually every major turning point since the 1970s. A
chilling thought here is that the study included forecasts done by Townsend-Greenspan-the latter name is
that of the man who became head of the Federal Reserve System (the world's most powerful private
corporation), Alan Greenspan.
The only ray of hope to be found in the article is the statement that these forecasts were correct in only
a short time frame. This makes sense; it is far easier to forecast the next 5 minutes of your life than the next
5 years. AS time progresses, more variables, more change, comes into play. Hence forecasts stumble in the
unknown dark, black holes of the future altering what was once known or thought to be the path of
righteousness.
I guess this may explain why I have actually made money (for many years I might add), trading off of
patterns. The patterns I have used are for calling very short-term market fluctuations of from 1 to 5 days.
There may be some grand scheme of things, some master pattern of all major market highs and lows. If so, it
has never been revealed to me, but certainly there are many short-term market patterns that give you a big-in some cases, I would go so far as saying huge-advantage in the game.

The Common Element
First, I need to prove that patterns can and do work or at least bring an advantage to the table, a cow
for us to milk. Then I can tell you why I think these patterns do work, what the method to the madness is,
what my working premise to these patterns to profits is all about.
Let's start with a basic pattern using the S&P 500, a broadly traded market. What we know is that 50
percent of the time this market should close up for the day, 50 percent of the time down for the day. What
will happen tomorrow on any given day is supposed to be a coin flip, if we don't consider TDW.
Patterns can change all that rather dramatically.
We begin by establishing a basic parameter. What happens if we buy the S&P 500 every day and exit
on the next close with a $3,2 50 stop? From July 1982 through February 1998, there were 2,064 trades with
52 percent accuracy and an average profit per trade of $134.
Now we add our first pattern, what if we only buy tomorrow if today closed down? In this case, there
were 1,334 trades with the same 52 percent accuracy, but the average profit per trade escalated to $212.
Finally, if our pattern consists of three consecutive down closes, the accuracy jumps to 58 percent to 248
trades and the average profit per trade skyrockets to $353 Could it be there is something to this pattern stuff?

95
Let's mock up a simple pattern to see what happens tomorrow if the following conditions exist: First,
we want today's price to be greater than the close 30 days ago so we are in some sort of up trend. Next, we
would like to have seen a slight pullback against the uptrend so we will want today's close lower than the
close 9 days ago. If that condition exists, we will buy on the open tomorrow and exit on the next day's
close. If the market is really random, 52 percent of such trades should make money (not 50% because
during the time period of the study there had been an overall trend bias to rally best evidenced by the fact
that the initial study showed higher closes 52% of the time).
The facts of the matter are far different. This meek little pattern produced 354 trades with 57 percent
accuracy and an average profit of $421 a trade. Accuracy jumps from 52 percent to 57 percent and the
average profit per trade increases almost fourfold! Hold on to your hat, it gets better.
If we combine a pattern with our trade-day-of-the-week concept and take these pattern trades on just
Monday, the accuracy goes to 59 percent and average profit to $672. I rest my case; patterns and days of
the week can be a helpful trading tool or advantage for the short-term trader.
The best patterns I have found have a common element tying them together patterns that represent
extreme market emotions reliably set up trades for price swings in the opposite direction.
In other words, what the public "sees" on their charts as being negative is most often apt to be positive
for short-term market moves and vice versa. A case in point is an outside day with a down close. The day's
high is greater than the previous day's high and the low is lower than the previous day's low and the close is
below the previous day's low. This looks bad, like the sky is indeed falling in. In fact, the books I have read
say this is an excellent sell s ignal, that such a wild swing is a sign of a market reversal in favor of the
direction of the close, in this case down.
Whoever writes these books does not spend much time looking at price charts! As Figure 7.1 of the
Dollar Index shows, this can be a very bullish pattern or market configuration.
Reality is far different than conjecture as a quick computer test shows and reveals the power of one of
my favorite short-term patterns. It does not take much to prove the validity of patterns or to check to see
what is really going on. Given this outside day pattern I have noticed, there is a final filter, or event that can
happen to further influence the pattern tomorrow. This event is the direction of tomorrow's opening, as
shown in Figure 7.2. If, in the S&P 500 index, tomorrow opens lower than the outside day's down close and
we buy on the next day's opening, we find 109 occurrences with 85 percent accuracy making $52,062 and
$477 a trade.
