
“I would get these papers from 1929. I couldn’t get enough of it. I read everything—not just the business
and stock-market stories. History is interesting, and there is something about history in a newspaper, just
seeing a place, the stories, even the ads, everything. It takes you into a different world, told by somebody
who was an eyewitness, and you are really living in that time.”
Warren collected information, weeding out biases imposed by other people’s way of thinking. He spent hours
reading the Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s manuals, looking for stocks. But it was the weekly Graham
seminar that he looked forward to more than anything else he did. He even convinced his disciple Fred
Stanback to come in and audit a class or two.
While the chemistry between Warren and his teacher was obvious to everyone else in the class, one student
in particular had taken note of him. Bill Ruane, a stockbroker at Kidder, Peabody, had found his way to
Graham through his alma mater, Harvard Business School, after reading two important and memorable
books—Where Are the Customers’ Yachts? and Security Analysis. Ruane loved telling tales about his
stockbroking job, though he swore that his first choice of career was working as an elevator boy at the Plaza
Hotel, a future derailed by a lengthy wait for a uniform.19 He and Warren had connected immediately. But
neither Ruane, nor any other of Graham’s students, nor Warren himself, ever had the temerity to try to see
Graham outside the seminar room. Warren did manage to find reasons, however, to drop in on his new
acquaintance, Walter Schloss, down at the Graham-Newman Corporation.20 He got to know Schloss better
and learned he was caring for a wife who had been suffering from depression throughout most of their
marriage.21 Schloss, like David Dodd, appeared to be remarkably loyal and steadfast, qualities that Buffett
sought out in people. He also envied Schloss his job; he would have cleaned the washrooms for free in
exchange for one of those gray laboratory-style jackets, made of thin cotton, that everyone at GrahamNewman wore to keep from dirtying their shirtsleeves while they filled out the forms that Graham used to test
stocks against his investing criteria.22 Above all, Warren wanted to work for Graham.
As the semester neared an end, the rest of the class was busy finding their futures. Bob Dunn would be
heading off to U.S. Steel, possibly the most prestigious corporate job in the United States. Almost every
young businessman saw the route to success as working his way up the ladder in a great industrial
corporation. In Eisenhower’s postwar, post-Depression America, job security was all-important, and
Americans believed that institutions—from the government to large corporations—were essentially
benevolent. Finding one’s cell inside the institutional beehive and learning how to fit in was the normal and
expected thing to do.
“I don’t think there was one guy in the class that thought about whether U.S. Steel was a good business. I
mean, it was a big business, but they weren’t thinking about what kind of train they were getting on.”
Warren had one goal in mind. He knew he would excel if Graham would hire him. While lacking
self-confidence in many things, he had always felt sure-footed in the specialized area of stocks. He proposed
himself to Graham for a job at Graham-Newman Corporation. It took audacity to even dream of working for
the great man himself, but Warren was audacious. He was, after all, Ben Graham’s star student, the only one
to earn an A+ in his class. If Walter Schloss could work there, why couldn’t he? To clinch the deal, he
offered to work for free. He went in and asked for the job with far more confidence than he had felt riding up
to Chicago for his interview with the Harvard Business School.
Graham turned him down.
“He was terrific. He just said, ‘Lookit, Warren. In Wall Street still, the “white-shoe” firms, the big
investment banks, they don’t hire Jews. We only have the ability to hire a very few people here. And,
therefore, we only hire Jews.’ That was true of the two gals in the office and everybody. It was sort of like
his version of affirmative action. And the truth is, there was a lot of prejudice against Jews in the fifties. I
understood.”
Buffett found it impossible to say anything that could be interpreted as critical of Graham, even decades

later. Of course, it must have been incredibly disappointing. Couldn’t Graham have made an exception for his
star student? Someone it wouldn’t cost him anything to employ?
Warren, who idolized his teacher, had to accept that Graham viewed him impersonally, so much so that he
would not overrule a principle even for the best student who had ever taken his class. There was no
appeal—at least for now. Chagrined, he stayed through graduation, then once again he pulled himself
together and stepped aboard a train.
He had two consolations. He would be back in Omaha, where he felt he belonged. And it would be much
easier to pursue his love life there, for he had met an Omaha girl and was now smitten. As usual, the girl he
wanted was not smitten with him. But this time, he was determined to change her mind.

18
Miss Nebraska
New York City and Omaha • 1950–1952

Warren had always been a washout with girls. He longed to have a girlfriend, but the very things that made
him different hindered his quest. “Nobody was more shy than I was with girls,” he says. “But my reaction to
that was probably to turn into a talking machine.” When he ran out of words about stocks or politics, he
resorted to grunts. He was afraid to ask girls out. He summoned the nerve when a girl occasionally did
something that made him think he wouldn’t get turned down, but in general his attitude was, “Why would
they want to go out with me?” Thus he didn’t go on many dates during high school or college. And when he
did, something always seemed to go wrong.
On a date to a baseball game with a girl named Jackie Gillian, the high point was hitting a cow with his car on
the way home. He took another girl to hit golf balls at a driving range.1 That didn’t fly. Driving a hearse to
pick up Barbara Weigand, he says, was “sort of desperate,” not a stunt. It may have worked as an icebreaker,
but after that, what was there to say? On a date with a shy girl like Ann Beck, he was struck mute; he was so
insecure that he had no idea what to do. Girls didn’t want to hear about Ben Graham and the margin of
safety. If he couldn’t get to first base with Bobbie Worley, who had dated him all one summer, what hope did
he have? Very little, he thought, and maybe the girls could sense it.
Finally, the summer of 1950 before he went to Columbia, his sister Bertie set him up on a date with her
roommate from Northwestern. A round-cheeked kewpie of a brunette named Susan Thompson,2 she had
quickly impressed Bertie, who was a year and a half younger, as a special girl with a knack for understanding
people.3 As soon as Warren met Susie, he was fascinated, but suspected she was too good to be true: “I bet
she was a fake at first. I was intrigued by her and I was pursuing her, but I was determined to find the hole
in the dike. I just couldn’t believe anybody was really like her.” Susie, however, was not interested in him.
She was in love with somebody else.
After Warren went off to Columbia, he read in Earl Wilson’s gossip column4 in the New York Post that Miss
Nebraska 1949, Vanita Mae Brown, was living at the Webster women’s residence5 and performing with the
singer and teen idol Eddie Fisher on a television show.
Vanita had attended the University of Nebraska at the same time as Warren, although she had escaped his
notice and aspirations until now. Something about the situation overcame his shyness. Since the glamorous
Miss Nebraska was living in New York, he telephoned her at the Webster.

Vanita took the bait. Before long, she and Mr. Omaha had a date. He learned that her upbringing had been
nothing like his. She grew up in South Omaha near the stockyards, cleaning chickens at Omaha Cold Storage
after school. Her pinup body and girl-next-door face had been her ticket out. She got a job in Omaha as an
usherette at the Paramount Theater, then parlayed her love of putting herself on display into victory in a local
beauty pageant. “I think her talent was bedazzling the judges,” Buffett says. After winning the Miss
Nebraska title, she represented the state as Princess Nebraska in the Washington, D.C., Cherry Blossom
Festival. From there she moved to New York City, where she was now desperately trying to make it in show
business.
Although Warren was not the kind of guy to take a girl to dinner at the Stork Club or a show at the
Copacabana, she must have welcomed a hometown face. Soon the two of them were exploring the streets of
New York together. Looking to upgrade themselves, they went to Marble Collegiate Church to hear Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale, a famous self-improvement writer and speaker. Warren serenaded her with “Sweet
Georgia Brown” by ukulele on the bank of the Hudson, toting along cheese sandwiches as riverside picnic
fare.
Even though Vanita hated cheese sandwiches,6 she seemed willing to keep seeing him. He found her so
entertaining and quick-witted that talking to her was like playing verbal Ping-Pong.7 The aura of Technicolor
that surrounded her made her magnetizing. Vanita’s interest did not delude him, however, about his woefully
lacking social skills. With each passing year, he had become more desperate to improve them. He’d seen an
ad for a public-speaking course in the Dale Carnegie method. Warren trusted Dale Carnegie, who had already
helped him to get along better with people. He went to a Carnegie course in New York with a $100 check in
his pocket.
“I went to Dale Carnegie because I was painfully aware of being socially maladjusted. And I went and gave
them a check, but then I stopped payment on it because I lost my nerve.”
Nor did Warren’s social deficiencies augur well for his prospects with Susan Thompson, to whom he had
been writing all fall. She was not encouraging, but neither did she tell him outright to stop bothering her.
Warren quickly hit on the strategy of befriending Susie’s parents as a gateway to their daughter. Over
Thanksgiving, he went to Evanston with them for a Northwestern football game. Afterward, the three of them
had dinner with Susie, but she ditched them early to go out on a date.8
Warren returned to New York after the holiday, discouraged but no less intrigued. He continued to see
Vanita. “She had one of the most imaginative minds I’ve ever run into,” he says.
In fact, dating her began to take on an edge of unpredictability and risk. At various times she threatened to go
down to Washington when Howard was speaking on the floor of Congress and throw herself at his feet,
shrieking, “Your son is the father of my unborn child!” Warren thought she might actually do it. Another
time, she created such a scene as they left a movie theater that, unable to listen to it any longer, he hoisted
her up and stuffed her, jackknifed, into a wire-mesh trash basket on the street corner. She hung there,
suspended and screaming, as he stalked away.9
Vanita was beautiful, she was smart, and she was entertaining. She was also dangerous, and Warren knew it
was risky to get more involved with her. But there must have been some sort of thrill to it. Dating Vanita was
like walking a leopard on a leash to see if it would make a good pet. Yet, “Vanita could handle herself fine.
She had no problem carrying it off. The only question was whether she was going to want to carry it off.
You didn’t have to worry about her embarrassing you unless she wanted to.”
Once Warren invited her to a dinner at the New York Athletic Club for Frank Matthews, a distinguished
lawyer and Secretary of the Navy. Having the beautiful Miss Nebraska on his arm would be a plus. Matthews
was Nebraskan, the crowd was full of people worth knowing, and Warren wanted to be known. During the
cocktail hour, Vanita made sure he would indeed be talked about. After he introduced her as his date, she
corrected him and insisted she was his wife. “I don’t know why he does this,” she said. “Is he ashamed of
me? Would you be ashamed of me? Every time we go out, he pretends that I’m just his date, and we’ve been

married.”
Finally, Warren realized that even though Vanita could handle herself just fine when she wanted to, “the
truth was that she would always want to embarrass me. She preferred acting that way with me,” he says,
and she did so regularly. Vanita had a fascination about her, however, and had he not had an alternative,
there is no telling what would have happened next.10
Every time Warren went home to Nebraska, he saw Susan Thompson as much as she allowed, even though it
wasn’t much. To him she seemed immensely sophisticated, even authoritative, and generous with her
emotions. “Susie was way, way, way more mature than I was,” he says. He started falling hard for her and
disentangling himself from Vanita, even though “it was obvious I wasn’t Number One”11 with Susie. “My
intentions were clear,” he says; “they just weren’t having any effect on her.”
Susan Thompson’s family was well known to the Buffetts—in fact it was her father, “Doc Thompson,” who
had managed Howard’s only failed reelection campaign—but in most respects they were as different as could
be from Warren’s. Susie’s mother, Dorothy Thompson, a sweet, tiny woman, warm, genuine, and wise to the
world, was known in the family as the “wife who went along.” She made sure dinner was on the table at six
p.m. sharp and supported the many lives her husband, Dr. William Thompson, led. A smallish, silver-haired
peacock of a man who wore bow ties and dressed in three-piece wool suits in lavender or cotton-candy pink
or chartreuse, he cut a striking figure and carried himself with the posture of someone who was confident that
he was being admired. He came, he said, “from a long line of teachers and preachers,” and seemed to want to
replicate all their labors at once.12
As dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of Omaha, he ran the college while at the same
time teaching psychology. As assistant athletic director, he controlled the university athletic programs and
directed them with all the gusto of a former football player and sports fanatic. This role made him so
prominent that “every cop in town knew him,” says Buffett, “which was a good thing, because of the way he
drove.” He also designed IQ tests and psychology tests, and supervised the testing of all the city’s
schoolchildren.13 Not content to enjoy a day of rest from bossing people around and testing their children, on
Sundays he donned the vestments of an ordained minister and preached v-e-r-y s-l-o-w-l-y in a deep,
booming voice at the tiny Irvington Christian Church, where his daughters made up the two-person choir.14
The rest of the time, he broadcast his political beliefs, which were similar to Howard Buffett’s, to anyone
who came within the sound of his voice.
Doc Thompson expressed his wishes with a jovial smile while insisting that they be obeyed at once. He talked
of the importance of women while expecting them to wait on him. His work revolved around the inner self,
but he was noticeably vain. He clung to those he loved, growing nervous when they were out of his sight. A
chronically anxious hypochondriac, he often predicted that some sort of disaster would befall anyone he
cared about. He lavished affection on those who satisfied his demanding ways.
The Thompsons’ older daughter, Dorothy, known as Dottie, was not one of those. According to family lore,
during the first few years of Dottie’s life, when her father was especially displeased with her, he locked her in
a closet.15 A charitable interpretation would be that the pressure of trying to finish his PhD with a toddler
underfoot unhinged him.
Seven years after Dottie’s arrival, their second daughter, Susie, was born. Dorothy Thompson, seeing how
badly Dottie was responding to her husband’s harsh child-rearing methods, supposedly asserted herself to tell
him “that one was yours, I’m raising the next.”
Susie was sickly from birth. She had allergies and chronic ear infections and endured a dozen ear lancings
during her first eighteen months. She suffered through long bouts of rheumatic fever, and her illnesses
confined her to the house for four to five months at a time from kindergarten through second grade. She later
recalled watching her friends playing outside her window during these periods, while she longed to join
them.16

Through her many illnesses, the Thompsons constantly comforted, cuddled, and rocked their daughter. Her
father doted on her. “There was nothing in his life remotely approaching her,” says Warren. “Susie could
do no wrong, but everything that Dottie did was wrong. They were always critical of her.”
A family home movie shows Susie, about age four, shouting, “No!” and ordering around Dottie, age eleven,
as they played with a tea set.17
When at last Susie was well and no longer a prisoner of her bedroom, she never chose to play sports or games
outdoors but was always eager to make friends.18 It was people she had missed during those long days of
illness.
“When you’ve had pain,” Susie later recalled, “the release from it can be totally freeing. It’s marvelous. To
be free of pain is a great state of being. I learned that at a very young age. Knowing that, you can be very
simpleminded about life. And then you get with people and think, boy, people are really fascinating.”19
As Susie grew older, she retained her girlish round cheeks and a breathy, deceptively childlike voice. During
her teens she went to Omaha’s Central High, an integrated school with a student body of different faiths and
colors, unusual in the 1940s. Even though she was part of a crowd that some considered snobbish, her
classmates recall her as having friends among all these groups.20 Her exuberant warmth and her ethereal way
of speaking could come across as “a little phony,” even “a little loopy,”21 but her friends said there wasn’t
anything phony about her. Her interests ran to speech and performing arts rather than academics. She argued
with passion and persuasiveness on the Central High debate team, where people noticed that her politics had
strayed far from her father’s. She acted charmingly in school plays and sang in a smooth contralto in school
operettas and as a mainstay of the choir. Her performance as the sweetly harebrained lead in Our Hearts
Were Young and Gay so sparkled that her teachers recalled it for years afterward.22 Indeed, her charm and
strength of personality made her “Most Popular,” a “lady in waiting” to the school sweetheart, Miss Central,
and led her classmates to elect her senior class president.
Susie’s first boyfriend was John Gillmore, a quiet, bland boy whom she openly adored. By the time he
became her steady at Central High, Gillmore towered over her by almost a foot, but despite her “kittenish”
demeanor, she dominated him.23
During those years, she also began dating a friendly, intelligent boy she had met at a freshman debate
competition. A student at Thomas Jefferson High School in Council Bluffs, Iowa, across the Missouri River
from Omaha, Milton Brown was a tall, dark-haired young man with a warm, wide smile. They saw each other
several times a week throughout high school.24 While her close friends were aware of Milt, it was Gillmore
who continued to be her steady date for parties and school events.
Susie’s father did not approve of Brown, who was the son of an unschooled Russian-Jewish immigrant
worker on the Union Pacific Railroad. The three or four times that she dared to bring him to the house, he
was made to feel unwelcome by Doc Thompson, who lectured him about FDR and Truman. Susie’s father
made no secret of his determination to pry his daughter loose from dating a Jew.25 Like the Buffetts, Doc
Thompson had all the prejudices typical of Omaha, where different ethnic and religious groups kept to
themselves, and life for a couple of mixed religion would be taxing at best. Yet Susie dared to cross these
social lines—while at the same time managing to maintain another life as a conventional, popular high school
girl.
Susie navigated these choppy waters until she went to college, when she and Milt headed off to freedom
—together—at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois. There she roomed with Bertie Buffett, and
both pledged sororities. Bertie coasted through her classes, and was immediately crowned as the Phi Delt
“Pajama Queen.”26 Susie, a journalism major, had arranged her schedule so that she could see Milt nearly
every day.

The two joined the Wildcat Council together and met at the library after he got off one of the several jobs he
held after school to pay his tuition.27 Susie’s unconventional choice to openly date a Jewish boy clashed with
her life as a typical coed, and members of her sorority forbade her to bring Brown to a dance because he had
pledged a Jewish fraternity. Susie, although hurt, did not depledge.28 But she and Milt began to study Zen
Buddhism, looking for a faith that could reflect their common spiritual beliefs.29
Knowing nothing of this, Warren made his futile Thanksgiving trip to Evanston, then visited Susie in Omaha
over the winter holidays. By then he had made up his mind to pursue her seriously. She had the qualities he’d
always looked for in a woman. She described herself as “one of those few fortunate people who grew up with
the feeling that I was unconditionally loved. That’s the most wonderful gift you can give anyone.”30 But the
person she wanted to give her unconditional love to was Milt Brown.
That spring of 1951, Milt was elected sophomore class president and Bertie its vice president. Susie cried
every time she opened a letter from home demanding that she break off her relationship with Brown. Bertie
could see what was going on, but Susie never confided in her, even though they had grown to be friends.31
She seemed to have a way of never letting anyone get inside her head. Then, one day as the semester neared
an end, the two were sitting in their dorm room when the phone rang. It was Doc Thompson. “Come home
now,” he commanded. He wanted her away from Milt and he let her know she would not be going back to
Northwestern in the fall. Susie collapsed, sobbing, but there was never any appeal of her father’s decisions.
After graduating from Columbia that spring, Warren, too, returned to Omaha. He would be living in his
parents’ home since they were away in Washington, but he would have to spend part of that first summer
after his return fulfilling his obligation to the National Guard. Though he wasn’t particularly well suited to the
Guard, it was better than the alternative—going off to fight in Korea. The Guard required him to attend
training camp in La Crosse, Wisconsin, for several weeks every year, however. Training camp did nothing to
help him mature.
“In the National Guard, at first, the guys were very suspicious of me because my dad was in Congress. They
thought I was going to be some kind of prima donna or something. But that didn’t last long.
“It’s a very democratic organization. I mean, what you do outside doesn’t mean much. To fit in, all you had
to do was be willing to read comic books. About an hour after I got there, I was reading comic books.
Everybody else was reading comic books, why shouldn’t I? My vocabulary shrank to about four words, and
you can guess what they were.
“I learned that it pays to hang around with people better than you are, because you will float upward a
little bit. And if you hang around with people that behave worse than you, pretty soon you’ll start sliding
down the pole. It just works that way.”
The experience gave Warren incentive to make good on another vow just as soon as he got back from
National Guard camp. “I was terrified of public speaking. You can’t believe what I was like if I had to give
a talk. I was so terrified that I just couldn’t do it. I would throw up. In fact, I arranged my life so that I
never had to get up in front of anybody. When I came out here to Omaha after graduating, I saw another
ad. And I knew I was going to have to speak in public sometimes. The agony was such that just to get rid of
the pain I signed up for the course again.” That was not his only mission: To win the heart of Susan
Thompson, he knew he would have to be able to converse with her as well. The odds against succeeding with
Susie were long, but he would do anything to improve them, and this summer might be his last chance.
The Dale Carnegie class met down at the Rome Hotel, a favorite of the cattlemen. “I took a hundred bucks
in cash and gave it to Wally Keenan, the instructor, and said, ‘Take it before I change my mind.’
“There were about twenty-five or thirty of us in there. We were all just terrified. We couldn’t say our own
names. We all stood there and wouldn’t talk to each other. Meanwhile, one thing that impressed me was
that, after meeting all those people once, Wally could rattle off all our names from memory. He was a good
teacher, and he tried to teach us the memory association trick, but I never learned that part.
