
93

94

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Day traders, who buy and sell so quickly, can be susceptible to hot tips. They
may be participating in message boards or chat services where hot rumors
can get the blood flowing on a dull day. If these hot tips are actually inside
information, though, the trader can become liable. If you get great information from someone who is in a position to know — an officer, a director, a
lawyer, an investment banker — and you act on this information in your
trades or share it with someone who then acts on it, you may be looking at
stiff penalties. Civil penalties are usually three times your profits, but the
government may decide that your trading was part of a criminal enterprise,
making the potential penalties much greater.
Insider trading is difficult to prove, so federal regulators use other tools to
punish those it suspects of making improper profits. Martha Stewart wasn’t
sent to prison on insider trading charges; she was charged with obstructing
justice by lying to investigators about what happened.
Whenever a big announcement is made, such as a merger, the exchanges go
back and review trading for the past several days to see whether any unusual
activities occurred in relevant securities and derivatives. Then they start
tracing that activity back to the traders involved through the brokerage firms
to see whether the activity was coincidence or part of a pattern.
By the way, most tips turn out to be groundless, or at least not as interesting
to the market as it seems like they will be. Real insider information is hard to
get, but starting a rumor is easy-peasy.
The bottom line is this: You may never come across inside information. But if a
tip seems too good to be true, it probably is, so be careful.

Preparing for Rule Changes
in Crisis Conditions
Many regulators sit on the sidelines, watching the markets with little interaction until a big crisis hits. When that happens, they rush in to calm the markets,
often by setting up new and temporary rules until everyone is calm and normal
market activities can resume.
Three main types of rules apply only in a crisis. They’re circuit breakers,
short-selling restrictions, and broken trades.
Circuit breakers are temporary halts on trading that apply when the market
has excessive volatility, at least in the eye of the New York Stock Exchange.
(Traders love volatility, but the NYSE isn’t so keen.) Here’s how circuit
breakers work:

Chapter 5: Regulation and the Modern Trader
✓ If the Dow Jones Industrial Average falls by 10 percent before 2 p.m.
New York time, trading stops for one hour. If it falls that much between
2 p.m. and 2:30 p.m., trading stops for a half hour. If it falls that much
after 2:30 p.m., trading continues until the bell rings at 4 p.m. or until it
hits the 20 percent mark, at which point it’s done for the day.
✓ If the Dow Jones Industrial Average falls by 20 percent before 1 p.m.
New York time, trading stops for two hours. If it falls that much between
1 p.m. and 2 p.m., trading stops for one hour. If it falls that much after
2 p.m., trading closes for the day.
✓ If the Dow Jones Industrial Average falls by 30 percent, trading ends
for the day, although it most likely would have been shut down already
due to the 20 percent rule.
The other exchanges don’t have to follow the New York Stock Exchange rules,
but they often do. In addition, the NYSE has the right to halt trading in any
one security if it falls by more than 10 percent in a five-minute period.
Short-selling restrictions can be put into place if the regulatory authorities
believe that action in one industry is dragging down the entire market. In the
fall of 2008, short-selling was temporarily banned on financial services stocks.
Finally, if the market really goes haywire, the exchanges have the right to
break trades, cancelling the buy and sell orders that looked too good to be
true. When the Flash Crash of 2010 hit, many traders were thrilled to find that
they could buy shares in illustrious and profitable corporations for a fraction of their usual share price. They weren’t so thrilled when the exchanges
­cancelled those trades.
The Securities and Exchange Commission allows stock exchanges to break
trades whenever prices in the system are “clearly erroneous,” especially if a
computer malfunction is involved. Some traders allege that trades are broken
even if the prices are not clearly erroneous, denying them a sure-thing profit.
The guidelines allow exchanges to consider breaking a trade whenever prices
vary by 10 percent for stocks priced under $25, 5 percent for stocks priced
between $25 and $50, and 3 percent of stocks priced over $50. Also, the review
process should begin within 30 minutes of the trade.
If you see a fabulous bargain, go ahead and make the trade, but know that it
may be cancelled if that great price was due to an error.

Taking on Partners
After your day trading proves to be wildly successful, you may want to take
on partners to give you more trading capital and a slightly more regular
income from the management fees. You can take on partners, but it’s a lot of
work, and once again, you must follow certain rules and procedures.

95

96

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
If you’re trading options and futures and are operating a commodity pool
or working as a commodity trading advisor, you need to register with the
National Futures Association. If you’re trading stocks and bonds, you have to
register with the Securities and Exchange Commission unless you meet the
exemption tests that let you operate as a hedge fund instead.
Registration is not a do-it-yourself project. For that matter, neither is ensuring
that you are exempt from registration even though you have partners. An
error or omission may have tremendous repercussions down the line, including fines or jail time. If you want to take on partners for your trading business,
spend the money for qualified legal advice. Doing so protects you and shows
prospective customers that you’re serious about your business.
To qualify as a hedge fund, which is a private investment partnership that
does not qualify for registration under the Investment Company Act of 1940,
you have to deal only with accredited investors (those with at least $1 million
in net worth or an annual income of $200,000) or qualified purchasers (those
with $5 million in investable assets). The idea is that these people understand
the risks they’re taking and have enough money to lose. Hedge funds do not
have to register with the SEC, but they may have to register with the NFA.
Whether or not you need to register, prospective investors will want to see
proof that you know what you’re doing and know how to handle their money.
That step is beyond the scope of this book, but it’s something for a
successful day trader to consider.

Part II

Exploring Popular
Day-Trading Strategies
Pitchfork pattern

Point 2

Point 3
Point 1

Head and shoulders pattern
Head
Left
Shoulder

Cup and handle pattern
Right
Shoulder

Handle

Cup

Find out about what day traders do all day with a free article at www.dummies.com/
extras/daytrading.

In this part…
✓ Find out how the best traders use research and tested strategies to help them determine when to buy and when to sell.
✓ Dig into money management, which is the key to successful
trading. It helps you keep some powder dry for the next
opportunity — and there will be a next opportunity, if you stay
in the game.
✓ Get familiar with common strategies, including basic technical
patterns, arbitrage, short selling, and leverage.
✓ Look here for an overview of the online brokers that specialize
in traders.

Chapter 6

Managing Your Money
and Positions
In This Chapter
▶ Calculating expected return
▶ Knowing your probability of ruin
▶ Mulling over the many methods of money management
▶ Figuring out what money management has to do with returns
▶ Deciding what to do with your profits

Y

ou can’t trade if you don’t have money. Sure, your brokerage firm will
loan you some funds, but only if you have some of your own funds to
stake as margin. You have to keep some powder dry.
So how much of your money should you put on the line each time you trade?
Risk too much, and you can be put out of business when you lose your capital. Risk too little, and you can be put out of business because you can’t make
enough money to cover your costs and time.
Over time, many academic theorists and experienced traders have developed
different systems of money management designed to help traders, investors,
and even gamblers manage their money in such a way as to maximize return
while protecting capital. In this chapter, I explain how some of the betterknown systems work so that you can figure out how to best apply them to
your own trading. Doing so can help you protect your trading funds and figure
out what size trades to enter so that you can stay trading as long as you like.
Note: Some of the material in this chapter is related to leverage, which is
borrowing money to trade. Because leverage can dramatically increase the
money that you have available to trade, as well as the risk and return profile
of the trades that you make, it affects how you manage your money. Flip to
Chapter 9 for more information on leverage and why you may want to use it.

100 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Setting Your Earnings Expectations
Return is a function of risk. If you want a guaranteed return, go down to
your bank and open a federally insured deposit account. The returns will be
almost comically low, but you’ll have no risk. If you want anything higher
than what your bank is quoting, well, you have to take on at least a little bit
of risk. When you take on risk, you increase both your likelihood of return
and your likelihood of loss.
Successful day traders lose money all the time, but they’re able to keep trading. If you’re looking at a trade with even a 0.5 percent chance of 100 percent
loss, the odds indicate that you would lose everything over the course of
200 trades — but only if you put all your money into each trade. If you put
only some of your money in that trade, then you’ll never lose everything in it.
Sure, you won’t get all of the upside potential, but you’ll be able to hit
the potential high return more often because you can make that trade
more often.
The key term in investing is diversification: If your money is spread out among
different assets, your long-return return will be higher for less total risk than if
you commit to only one asset.
Trading isn’t investing, but the power of diversification holds. If you divide
your money among a few different trades or always keep some cash on
hand in your account for the next trade, you’ll almost definitely make more
money in the long run than if you put all your money on one idea. Sure, risking everything on one idea may work a few times, but are you that lucky? If
you’re smart about your money management, you don’t need luck.

Finding your expected return
Before you can figure out how to manage your money, you need to figure
out how much money you can expect to make. This amount is your expected
return, although some traders prefer the word expectancy. You start by laying
out your trading system and testing it (described in Chapter 16). You’re
looking for four numbers:
✓ How many of your trades are losers?
✓ What’s the typical percentage loss on a losing trade?
✓ How many of your trades are winners?
✓ What’s the typical percentage gain on a winning trade?

Chapter 6: Managing Your Money and Positions
Say that you determine that a certain trade loses 40 percent of the time,
and it loses 1 percent. Sixty percent of the time, the trade wins, and winning
trades are up 1.5 percent. With these numbers, you can calculate your
per-trade expected return, like this:
% of losing trades × loss on losing trades + % of winning trades × gain on
winning trades = expected return
Which in this example works out to be
0.40 × –0.01 + 0.60 × 0.015 = –0.004 + 0.009 = 0.005, which is the same as 0.5%.
On average, then, you would expect to earn 0.5 percent on every trade you
make. Make enough trades with enough money, and it adds up.
You are more likely to make more money if you have a high expectation of
winning trades and if those winners are expected to perform well. As long as
probability of loss exists, you stand to lose money.

Determining your probability of ruin
Expected return is the happy number. It’s how much money you can expect
to make if you stay in the trading game. But it has a counterpart that, while
not so happy, is at least as important: the probability of ruin.
Yes, ruin.
As long as some probability of loss exists, no matter how small, there is some
probability that you can lose everything when you’re trading. How much
you can lose depends on how large each trade is relative to your account,
the likelihood of each trade having a loss, and the size of the losses as they
occur. (Don’t think it can happen? That’s what the top executives at AIG, Bear
Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and Washington Mutual said.)
Many traders who have winning trading strategies find themselves shut down
because a few bad trades ruined them. Every trader has some losses, but these
losses don’t have to end your trading career if you know the probability of ruin
and how to use it. The equation you use to calculate the probability of ruin (R) is

[

1−A
R=
1+A

]C

In this equation, A is the advantage on each trade. That’s the difference
between the percentage of winning trades and the percentage of losing trades.

101

102 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
In the expected return example discussed earlier, trades win 60 percent of
the time and lose everything 40 percent of the time. In that case, the trader’s
advantage would be
60% – 40% = 20%
And c is the number of trades in an account. Assume that you’re dividing the
account into ten equal parts, with the plan of making ten trades today. The
probability of ruin today is 1.7 percent, as shown in this equation:

1.7% =

[

1 − 0.20
1 + 0.20

]10

Now 1.7 percent isn’t a high likelihood of ruin, but it’s not zero, either. It can
happen. If your advantage is smaller, if the expected loss is larger, or if the
number of trades is fewer, then the likelihood becomes even higher.
Figure 6-1 shows you the relationship between the trader’s advantage,
number of trades, and the corresponding probability of ruin, rounded to
the nearest percentage.
Probability of Ruin
Trader's Advantage

Figure 6-1:
Adding
trader’s
advantage
to the mix.

2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%

Number of Trades
1
96%
92%
89%
85%
82%
79%
75%
72%
69%
67%

2
92%
85%
79%
73%
67%
62%
57%
52%
48%
44%

3
89%
79%
70%
62%
55%
49%
43%
38%
34%
30%

4
85%
73%
62%
53%
45%
38%
32%
27%
23%
20%

5
82%
67%
55%
45%
37%
30%
24%
20%
16%
13%

6
79%
62%
49%
38%
30%
24%
18%
14%
1%
1
9%

7
76%
57%
43%
33%
25%
18%
14%
10%
8%
6%

8
73%
53%
38%
28%
20%
15%
10%
8%
5%
4%

9
70%
49%
34%
24%
16%
1%
1
8%
5%
4%
3%

10
67%
45%
30%
20%
13%
9%
6%
4%
3%
2%

The bigger the edge and the more trades you can make, the lower your
probability of ruin. Now, this model is a simplification in that it assumes
that a losing trade goes to zero, and that’s not always the case. In fact, if
you use stops (automatic buy and sell orders, described in Chapter 2), you
should never have a 100 percent loss. But you can see steady erosion in your
account that will make it harder for you to make money. Hence, probability
of ruin is a useful calculation that shows whether you’ll lose money in the
long run.
The more trades you can make with your account, the lower your probability
of ruin. That’s why money management is a key part of risk management.

Chapter 6: Managing Your Money and Positions

Gaining Advantage with a
Money-Management Plan
As long as there’s some chance of losing all your money, you want to avoid
betting it all on any one trade. But as long as there’s a chance of making
money, you want to have enough exposure to a winning trade so that you can
post good profits. How do you figure out how much money to risk?
Later in this chapter, I describe some of the different money-management
systems that traders use to figure out how much money to risk per trade. But
first, I want to explain the logic behind a money-management system so that
you understand why you need one. That way, you can better manage your
funds and improve the dollar returns to your trading.

Minimizing damage while
increasing opportunity
Expected return gives you an idea of how much you can get from a trade on
average, but it doesn’t tell you how much that return may vary from trade to
trade. The average of 9, 10, and 11 is 10; the average of –90, 10, and 110 is also
10. The first number series is a lot narrower than the second. The wider the
range of returns that a strategy has, the more volatile it is.

Measuring volatility
You can measure volatility in several ways. One
common measurement is standard deviation,
which tells you how much your actual return is
likely to differ from what you expect to get. The
higher the standard deviation, the more volatile,
and riskier, the strategy.
In the derivatives markets, volatility is measured by a group of numbers known as the
Greeks: delta, gamma, vega, and theta. These
numbers are based on calculus, but don’t worry
if you forgot it or never took it!
✓ Delta is a ratio that tells you how much
the option or future changes in price when

the underlying security or market index
changes in price. Delta changes over time.
✓ Gamma is the rate of change on delta. A
derivative’s delta will be higher when it is
close to the expiration date, for example, than
when the expiration date is further away.
✓ Vega is the amount that the derivative would
change in price if the implied volatility of the
underlying security shifted by 1 percent.
✓ Theta is the amount that a derivative’s
price declines as it gets closer to the day
of ­expiration.

103

104 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Day traders seek more volatile securities because they offer more opportunities
to make money during any given day. For this reason, they need to have ways
to minimize the damage that may occur while being able to capitalize on the
upward swings. Money management can help with that.

Staying in the market longer
You have only a limited amount of money to trade. Whether it’s $1,000 or
$1,000,000, once the money’s gone, you’re out. The problem is that you can
have a long string of losing trades before the markets go in a direction that
favors you and your system.
Say you trade 100 percent of your account. If you have one trade that goes
down 100 percent, then you have nothing. If you divide your account into
ten parts, then you can have ten total losers before you’re out. If you start
with ten equal parts and double each time you lose, you can be out after four
losing trades.
On the other hand, if you divide your account into 100 portions, then you can
endure 100 losing trades. If you trade fractions of your account, then you can
keep going indefinitely, or at least until you get down to a level that’s too low
to place a minimum order. (That’s the philosophy behind the Kelly Criterion,
described later in this chapter.) Money management can keep you in the
game longer, and that gives you more opportunities to place winning trades.
The riskier your trading strategy, the more thought you need to put into money
management. Otherwise, you can find yourself out of the market in no time.

Getting out before you lose everything
A money-management system works best if the trader using it knows when to
close out a position. You have to have a trading plan and know when you’re
willing to get out: at the recent high? A few ticks below the most recent high?
A few ticks up from where you entered? A few ticks below where you entered,
to limit your losses?
Sometimes the market will go nuts, and you won’t be able to get out as
quickly as you’d like. In these situations, those tiny chances of losing everything kick in, and good money management offers the most protection.
On more ordinary trading days, be sure to supplement your position size and
capital protection efforts with ordinary trading tools: trade planning and use
of stop and limit orders. You can review these in Chapter 2.

Chapter 6: Managing Your Money and Positions

Accounting for opportunity costs
Opportunity cost is the value you give up because you choose to do something else. In trading, each dollar you commit to one trade is a dollar that
you cannot commit to another trade. Thus, each dollar you trade carries some opportunity cost, and good traders seek to minimize this cost.
During the course of the trading day, you may see several great trades,
and some opportunities will show up before you are ready to close out a
different trade.
Because a money-management system holds back some of your capital, you
are more likely to have funds to take advantage of these opportunities than
if you allocate your cash willy-nilly. Your plan may cause you to miss some
trades, and that’s okay. If you believe that you are missing too many, though,
you may want to experiment with another system to see whether it gives you
better results. Whatever you do, don’t ignore money management.
If you have committed all your capital to one trade, you miss out on the
second. That alone is a good reason to keep some money on the table each
time you trade.

Examining Styles of Money
Management
Over the years, traders have developed many different ways to manage their
money. Some money-management strategies are rooted in superstition, but
most are based on different statistical probability theories. The underlying idea is that you should never place all of your money in a single trade.
Instead, you should put in an amount appropriate given the level of volatility.
Otherwise, you risk losing everything too soon.
Calculating position size under many of these formulas is tricky stuff.
That’s why brokerage firms and trading software packages often include
money-management calculators. Check Chapter 11 for more information on the
brokers and Chapter 12 for more on different software and research services.
In the following sections, I offer a sampling of the many different moneymanagement methods available. Other methods are out there, and none is
suitable to all markets all the time. If you trade both options and stocks, you
may want to use one system for option trades and another for stock trades.
And if that’s your situation, you have one big money-management decision
to make before you begin: how much money to allocate to each market!
