
- 185 -

John Grisham

The Broker

eration is to see who kills him," Teddy said as his white wrinkled hands
slowly lifted a paper cup of green tea to his mouth. He slurped it loudly,
crudely.
Maybe it was time for the old man to fade away in a retirement home.
"I'm reasonably confident," Lucat said. Hoby wrote that down.
"If we leak it now, how long before he's dead?" Teddy asked.
Lucat shrugged and looked away as he pondered the question. Julia was
chewing another nail. "It depends," she said cautiously. "If the Israelis move,
it could happen in a week. The Chinese are usually slower. The Saudis will
probably hire a freelance agent; it could take a month to get one on the
ground."
"The Russians could do it in a week," Lucat added.
"I won't be here when it happens," Teddy said sadly. "And no one on this
side of the Atlantic will ever know. Promise me you'll give me a call."
"This is the green light?" Lucat asked.
"Yes. Careful how you leak it, though. All hunters must be given an equal
chance at the prey."
They gave Teddy their final farewells and left his office. At nine- thirty,
Hoby pushed him into the hall and to the elevator. They rode down eight
levels to the basement where the bulletproof white vans were waiting for his
last trip to the White House.
The meeting was brief. Dan Sandberg was sitting at his desk at the Post
when it began in the Oval Office a few minutes after ten. And he hadn't
moved twenty minutes later when the call came from Rusty Lowell. "It's
over," he said.
"What happened?" Sandberg asked, already pecking at his keyboard.
"As scripted. The President wanted to know about Backman. Teddy
wouldn't budge. The President said he was entitled to know everything.
Teddy agreed but said the information was going to be abused for political
purposes and it would compromise a sensitive operation. They argued
briefly. Teddy got himself fired. Just like I told you."
"Wow."

- 186 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"The White House is making an announcement in five minutes. You might
want to watch."
As always, the spin began immediately. The somber-faced press secretary
announced that the President had decided to "pursue a fresher course with
our intelligence operations." He praised Director Maynard for his legendary
leadership and seemed downright saddened by the prospect of having to find
his successor. The first question, shot from the front row, was whether
Maynard resigned or had been fired.
"The President and Director Maynard reached a mutual understanding."
"What does that mean?"
"Just what I said."
And so it went for thirty minutes.
Sandberg's front-page story the following morning dropped two bombs. It
began with the definite confirmation that Maynard had been fired after he
refused to divulge sensitive information for what he deemed to be raw
political purposes. There was no resignation, no "reaching of a mutual
understanding." It was an old-fashioned sacking. The second blast
announced to the world that the President's insistence on obtaining
intelligence data was directly tied to a new FBI investigation into the selling
of pardons. The cash-for-pardon scandal had been a distant rumbling until
Sandberg opened the door. His scoop practically stopped traffic on the
Arlington Memorial Bridge.
While Sandberg was hanging around the press room, reveling in his coup,
his cell phone rang. It was Rusty Lowell, who abruptly said, "Call me on a
land line, and do it quickly." Sandberg went to a small office for privacy and
dialed Lowell's number at Langley.
"Lucat just got fired," Lowell said. "At eight o'clock this morning he met
with the President in the Oval Office. He was asked to step in as the interim
director. He said yes. They met for an hour. The President pushed on
Backman. Lucat wouldn't budge. Got himself fired, just like Teddy."
"Damn, he's been there a hundred years."
"Thirty-eight to be exact. One of the best men here. A great administrator."
"Who's next?"
"That's a very good question. We're all afraid of the knock on the door."

- 187 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Somebody's got to run the agency."
"Ever meet Susan Penn?"
"No. I know who she is, but I never met her."
"Deputy director for science and technology. Very loyal to Teddy, hell we
all are, but she's also a survivor. She's in the Oval Office right now. If she's
offered the interim, she'll take it. And she'll give up Back- man to get it."
"He is the President, Rusty. He's entitled to know everything."
"Of course. And it's a matter of principle. Can't really blame the guy. He's
new on the job, wants to flex his muscle. Looks like he'll fire us all until he
gets what he wants. I told Susan Penn to take the job to stop the bleeding."
"So the FBI should know about Backman real soon?"
"Today, I would guess. Not sure what they'll do when they find out where he
is. They're weeks away from an indictment. They'll probably just screw up
our operation."
"Where is he?"
"Don't know."
"Come on, Rusty, things are different now."
"The answer is no. End of story. I'll keep you posted on the bloodletting."
An hour later, the White House press secretary met with the press and
announced the appointment of Susan Penn as interim director of the CIA. He
made much of the fact that she was the first female to hold the position, thus
proving once again how determined this President was to labor diligently for
the cause of equal rights.
Luigi was sitting on the edge of his bed, fully dressed and all alone, waiting
for the signal from next door. It came at fourteen minutes after 6:00 a.m.Marco was becoming such a creature of habit. Luigi walked to his control
room and pushed a button to silence the buzzer that indicated that his friend
had exited through the front door. A computer recorded the exact time and
within seconds someone at Langley would know that Marco Lazzeri had just
left their safe house on Via Fondazza at precisely 6:14.
He hadn't trailed him in a few days. Simona had been sleeping over. He
waited a few seconds, slipped out his rear door, cut through a

- 188 -

John Grisham

The Broker

narrow alley, then peeked through the shadows of the arcades along Via
Fondazza. Marco was to his left, headed south and walking at his usual brisk
pace, which was getting faster the longer he stayed in Bologna. He was at
least twenty years older than Luigi, but with his penchant for walking miles
every day he was in better shape. Plus he didn t smoke, didn't drink much,
didn't seem to be interested in ladies and the nightlife, and he'd spent the last
six years in a cage. Little wonder he could roam the streets for hours, doing
nothing.
He wore the new hiking boots every day. Luigi had not been able to get his
hands on them. They remained bug-free, leaving no signal behind. Whitaker
worried about this in Milan, but then he worried about everything. Luigi was
convinced that Marco might walk for a hundred miles within the city, but he
wasnt leaving town. He'd disappear for a while, go exploring or sightseeing,
but he could always be found.
He turned onto Via Santo Stefano, a main avenue that ran from the southeast
corner of old Bologna into the thick of things around Piazza Maggiore. Luigi
crossed over and followed from the other side. As he practically jogged
along, he quickly radioed Zellman, a new guy in town, sent by Whitaker to
tighten the web. Zellman was waiting on Strada Maggiore, another busy
avenue between the safe house and the university.
Zellman's arrival was an indication of the plan moving forward. Luigi knew
most of the details now, and was somewhat saddened by the fact that
Marco's days were numbered. He wasn't sure who would take him out, and
he got the impression that Whitaker didn't know either.
Luigi was praying that he would not be called upon to do the deed. He'd
killed two other men, and preferred to avoid such messes. Plus, he liked
Marco.
Before Zellman picked up the trail, Marco vanished. Luigi stopped and
listened. He ducked into the darkness of a doorway, just in case Marco had
stopped too.
He heard him back there, walking a little too heavily, breathing a little too
hard. A quick left on a narrow street, Via Castellata, a sprint for fifty yards,
then another left onto Via de' Chiari, and a complete

- 189 -

John Grisham

The Broker

change of direction, from due north to due west, a hard pace for a long time
until he came to an opening, a small square called Piazza Cavour. He knew
the old city so well now, the avenues, alleys, dead ends, intersections, the
endless maze of crooked little streets, the names of ever)' square and many
of the shops and stores. He knew which tobacco stores opened at six and
which waited until seven. He could find five coffee shops that were filled by
sunrise, though most waited until daylight. He knew where to sit in the front
window, behind a newspaper, with a view of the sidewalk and wait for Luigi
to stroll by.
He could lose Luigi anytime he wanted, though most days he played along
and kept his trails wide and easy to follow. But it was the fact that he was
being watched so closely that spoke volumes.
They don't want me to disappear, he kept saying to himself. And why?
Because I'm here for a reason.
He swung wide to the west of the city, far away from where he might be
expected to be. After almost an hour of zigzagging through and looping
around dozens of short streets and alleys, he stepped onto Via Irnerio and
watched the foot traffic. Bar Fontana was directly across the street. There
was no one watching it.
Rudolph was tucked away in the rear, head buried low in the morning paper,
pipe smoke rising in a lazy blue spiral. They hadn't seen each other in ten
days, and after the usual warm greetings his first question was "Did you
make it to Venice?"
Yes, a delightful visit. Marco dropped the names of all the places he'd
memorized from the guidebook. He raved about the beauty of the canals, the
amazing variety of bridges, the smothering hordes of tourists. A fabulous
place. Couldn't wait to go back. Rudolph added some of his own memories.
Marco described the church of San Marco as if he'd spent a week there.
Where to next? Rudolph inquired. Probably south, toward warmer weather.
Maybe Sicily, the Amalfi coast. Rudolph, of course, adored Sicily and
described his visits there. After half an hour of travel talk, Marco finally got
around to business. "I'm traveling so much, I really have no address. A
friend from the States is sending me a package. I gave him your address at
the law school. Hope you don't mind."
Rudolph was relighting his pipe. "It's already here. Came yesterday," he
said, with heavy smoke pouring out with the words.
Marco's heart skipped a beat. "Was there a return address?"

- 190 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Some place in Virginia."
"Good." His mouth was instantly dry. He took a sip of water and tried to
conceal his excitement. "Hope it wasn't a problem."
"Not at all."
"I'll swing by later and pick it up."
"I'm in the office from eleven to twelve-thirty."
"Good, thanks." Another sip. "Just curious, how big is the package?
Rudolph chewed on the stem of his pipe and said, "A small cigar box
maybe."
A cold rain started at mid-morning. Marco and Ermanno were walking
through the university area and found shelter in a quiet little bar. They
finished the lesson early, primarily because the student pushed so hard.
Ermanno was always ready to quit early.
Since Luigi had not booked lunch, Marco was free to roam, presumably
without being followed. But he was careful just the same. He did his loops
and backtracking maneuvers, and felt silly as always. Silly or not, they were
now standard procedure. Back on Via Zamboni he drifted behind a group of
students strolling aimlessly along. At the door to the law school he ducked
inside, bounded up the stairs, and within seconds was knocking on Rudolphs
half-opened door.
Rudolph was at his ancient typewriter, hammering away at what appeared to
be a personal letter. "Over there," he said, pointing to a pile of rubble
covering a table that hadn't been cleared in decades. "That brown thing on
top."
Marco picked up the package with as little interest as possible. "Thanks
again, Rudolph," he said, but Rudolph was typing again and in no mood for
a visit. He'd clearly been interrupted.
"Don't mention it," he said over his shoulder, releasing another cloud of pipe
smoke.
"Is there a restroom nearby?" Marco asked.
"Down the hall, on your left."
"Thanks. See you around."
There was a prehistoric urinal and three wooden stalls. Marco went into the
far one, locked the door, lowered the lid, and took a seat. He carefully
opened his package and unfolded the sheets of paper. The

- 191 -

John Grisham

The Broker

first one was plain, white, no letterhead of any kind. When he saw the words
"Dear Marco," he felt like crying.
Dear Marco:
Needless to say, I was thrilled to hear from you. I thanked God when you
were released and I pray for your safety now. As you know, I will do
anything to help.
Here is a stnartphone, state of the art and all that. The Europeans are ahead
of us with cell phone and wireless Internet technology, so this should work
fine over there. I've written some instructions on another sheet of paper. I
know this will sound like Greek, but it's really not that complicated.
Don't try and call-it's too easy to track. Plus, you would have to use a name
and set up an account. E-mail is the way. By using KwyteMail with
encryption, it's impossible to track our messages. I suggest that you e-mail
only me. I can then handle the relays.
On this end I have a new laptop that I keep near me at all times.
This will work, Marco. Trust me. As soon as you're online, email and we can
chat.
Good Luck, Grinch(March 5)
Grinch? A code or something. He had not used their real names.
Marco studied the sleek device, thoroughly bewildered by it but also
determined to get the damn thing going. He probed its small case, found the
cash, and counted it slowly as if it were gold. The door opened and closed;
someone was using the urinal. Marco could hardly breathe. Relax, he kept
telling himself.
The restroom door opened and closed again, and he was alone. The page of
instructions was handwritten, obviously when Neal didn't have a lot of time.
It read:
Ankyo 850 PC Pocket Smartphone--fully charged battery-6 hours talk time
before recharging, recharger included. Step 1) Find Internet cafe with
wireless access-list enclosed Step 2) Either enter cafe or get within 200 feet
of it Step 3) Turn on, switch is in upper right-hand corner Step 4) Watch
screen for 'Access Area" then the question "Access Now?" Press "Yes"
under screen; wait.

- 192 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Step 5) Then push keypad switch, bottom right, and unfold keypad
Step 6) Press Wi-Fi access on screen
Step 7) Press "Start"for Internet browser
Step 8) At cursor, type "www.kwytefnail.com"
Step 9) Type user name "Grinch456"
Step 10) Type pass phrase "post hoc ergo propter hoc"
Step 11) Press "Compose" to bring up New Message Form
Step 12) Select my e-mail address: 123Grinch@kwytemail.com
Step 13) Type your message to me
Step 14) Click on "Encrypt Message"
Step IS) Click "Send"
Step 16) Bingo-I'll have the message
More notes followed on the other side, but Marco needed to pause. The
smartphone was growing heavier by the minute as it inspired more questions
than answers. For a man who'd never been in an Internet cafe, he could not
begin to understand how one could be used from across the street. Or within
two hundred feet.
Secretaries had always handled the e-mail flood. He'd been much too busy to
sit in front of a monitor.
There was an instruction booklet that he opened at random. He read a few
lines and didn't understand a single phrase. Trust Neal, he told himself.
You have no choice here, Marco. You have to master this damn thing.
From a Web site called www.AxEss.com Neal had printed a list of free
wireless Internet places in Bologna-three cafes, two hotels, one library, and
one bookstore.
Marco folded his cash, stuck it in his pocket, then slowly put his package
back together. He stood, flushed the toilet for some reason, and left the
restroom. The phone, the papers, the case, and the small recharger were
easily buried in the deep pockets of his parka.
The rain had turned to snow when he left the law school, but the covered
sidewalks protected him and the crowd of students hurrying to lunch. As he
drifted away from the university area, he pondered ways to hide the
wonderful little assets Neal had sent him. The phone would never leave his
person. Nor would the cash. But the paperwork-the letter, the instructions,
the manual-where could he stash

- 193 -

John Grisham

The Broker

them? Nothing was protected in his apartment. He saw in a store window an
attractive shoulder bag of some sort. He went and inquired. It was a Silvio
brand laptop case, navy blue, waterproof, made of a synthetic fabric that the
saleslady could not translate. It cost sixty euros, and Marco reluctantly
placed them on the counter. As she finished the sale, he carefully placed the
smartphone and its related items into the bag. Outside, he flung it over his
shoulder and tucked it snugly under his right arm.
The bag meant freedom for Marco Lazzeri. He would guard it with his life.
He found the bookstore on Via Ugo Bassi. The magazines were on the
second level. He stood by the rack for five minutes, holding a soccer weekly
while watching the front door for anyone suspicious. Silly. But it was a habit
now. The Internet hookups were on the third floor, in a small coffee shop.
He bought a pastry and a Coke and found a narrow booth where he could sit
and watch everyone going and coming.
No one could find him there.
He pulled out his Ankyo 850 with as much confidence as he could muster
and glanced through its manual. He reread Neal's instructions. He followed
them nervously, typing on the tiny keypad with both thumbs, the way it was
illustrated in the owner's manual. After each step he looked up to check the
movements around the cafe.
The steps worked perfectly. He was online in short order, much to his
amazement, and when the codes worked he was looking at a screen that was
giving him the okay to write a message. Slowy, he moved his thumbs around
and typed his first wireless Internet email:
Grinch: Got the package. You'll never know how much it means to me.
Thank you for your help. Are you sure our messages are completely secure?
If so, I will tell you more about my situation. I fear I am not safe. It's about
8:30 a.m. your time. Til send this message now, and check back in a few
hours. Love, Marco
He sent the message, turned the machine off, then stayed for an hour poring
over the manual. Before he left to meet Francesca, he turned it on again and
followed the route to get online. On the screen

- 194 -

John Grisham

The Broker

he tapped "Google Search," then typed in "Washington Post." Sand- berg's
story caught his attention, and he scrolled through it.
He'd never met Teddy Maynard, but they had spoken several times by
phone. Very tense conversations. The man had been practically dead ten
years ago. In his other life Joel had butted heads a few times with the CIA,
usually over shenanigans his defense-contractor clients were trying to pull.
Outside the bookstore, Marco sized up the street, saw nothing of interest,
and began another long walk.
Cash for pardons? What a sensational story, but it was asking too much to
believe that an outgoing president would take bribes like that. During his
spectacular fall from power, Joel had read many things about himself, about
half of them true. He'd learned the hard way to believe little of what got
printed.

- 195 -

John Grisham

The Broker

At an unnamed, unnumbered, nondescript building on Pinsker
Street in downtown Tel Aviv, an agent named Efraim entered from the
sidewalk and walked past the elevator to a dead-end corridor with one
locked door. There was no knob, no handle. He pulled a device that
resembled a small television remote from his pocket and aimed it at the
door. Thick tumblers fell somewhere inside, a sharp click, and the door
opened into one of the many safe houses maintained by the Mossad, the
Israeli secret police. It had four rooms-two with bunk beds where Efraim and
his three colleagues slept, a small kitchen where they cooked their simple
meals, and a large cluttered workroom where they spent hours every day
planning an operation that had been practically dormant for six years but
was suddenly one of the Mossad's highest priorities.
The four were members of kidon, a small, tight unit of highly skilled field
agents whose primary function was assassination. Quick, efficient, silent
killing. Their targets were enemies of Israel who could not be brought to
trial because its courts could not get jurisdiction. Most targets were in Arab
and Islamic countries, but kidon were often used in the former Soviet bloc,
Europe, Asia, even North Korea and the United States. They had no
boundaries, no restraints, nothing to

- 196 -

John Grisham

The Broker

stop them from taking out those who wanted to destroy Israel. The men and
women of kidon were fully licensed to kill for their country. Once a target
was approved, in writing, by the current prime minister, an operation plan
was put into place, a unit was organized, and the enemy of Israel was as
good as dead. Obtaining such approval at the top had rarely been difficult.
Efraim tossed a bag of pastries onto one of the folding tables where Ran and
Shaul were plowing through research. Amos was in a corner at the
computer, studying maps of Bologna, Italy.
Most of their research was stale; it included pages of mainly useless
background on Joel Backman, information that had been collected years ago.
They knew everything about his chaotic personal life-the three ex-wives, the
three children, the former partners, the girlfriends, the clients, the old lost
friends from the power circles in D.C. When his killing had been approved
six years earlier, another kidon had worked urgently putting together the
background on Backman. A preliminary plan to kill him in a car accident in
D.C. had been jettisoned when he suddenly pled guilty and fled to prison.
Not even a kidon could reach him in protective custody at Rudley.
The background was important now only because of his son. Since his
surprise pardon and disappearance seven weeks earlier, the Mossad had kept
two agents close to Neal Backman. They rotated every three or four days so
no one in Culpeper, Virginia, would get suspicious; small towns with their
nosy neighbors and bored cops presented enormous challenges. One agent, a
pretty lady with a German accent, had actually chatted with Neal on Main
Street. She claimed to be a tourist and needed directions to Montpelier, the
nearby home of President James Madison. She flirted, or tried her best to,
and was perfectly willing go further. He didn't take the bait. They'd bugged
his home and office, and they listened to cell phone conversations. From a
lab in Tel Aviv, they read every one of his office e-mails and those from
home as well. They monitored his bank account and his credit card
spending. They knew he'd made a quick trip to Alexandria six days earlier,
but they did not know why.
They were watching Backman's mother too, in Oakland, but the poor lady
was fading fast. For years they had debated the idea of slipping her one of
the poison pills from their amazing arsenal. They would then ambush her
son at her funeral. However, the kidon manual
