
- 84 -

John Grisham

The Broker

the kitchen. No one gawked at him, no one seemed to notice. Was he
actually passing himself off as an Italian, a real local? Or was it so obvious
that he was an alien that the locals didn't bother to look? He had quickly
developed the habit of evaluating how other men were dressed, and he
judged himself to be in the game. As Luigi had told him, the men of northern
Italy were much more concerned with style and appearance than Americans.
There were more jackets and tailored slacks, more sweaters and ties. Much
less denim, and virtually no sweatshirts or other signs of indifference to
appearance.
Luigi, or whoever had put together his wardrobe, one no doubt paid for by
the American taxpayers, had done a fine job. For a man who'd worn the
same prison garb for six years, Marco was quickly adjusting to things
Italian.
He watched the plates of food as they popped up along the counter near the
grill. After about ten minutes, a thick sandwich appeared. A server grabbed
it, snatched off a ticket, and yelled, "Numero sessantasette." Marco stepped
forward without a word and produced his ticket. The soft drink came next.
He found a seat at a small corner table and thoroughly enjoyed the solitude
of his dinner. The deli was loud and crowded, a neighborhood place where
many of the customers knew each other. Their greetings involved hugs and
kisses and long hellos, even longer goodbyes. Waiting in line to order
caused no problems, though the Italians seemed to struggle with the basic
concept of one standing behind the other. Back home there would've been
sharp words from the customers and perhaps swearing from the cashier.
In a country where a three-hundred-year-old house is considered new, time
has a different meaning. Food is to be enjoyed, even in a small deli with few
tables. Those seated close to Joel seemed poised to take hours to digest their
pizza and sandwiches. There was simply too much talking to do!
The brain-dead pace of prison life had flattened all his edges. He'd kept his
sanity by reading eight books a week, but even that exercise had been for
escape and not necessarily for learning. Two days of intensive memorizing,
conjugating, pronouncing, and listening like he'd never listened before left
him mentally exhausted.
So he absorbed the roar of Italian without trying to understand any of it. He
enjoyed its rhythm and cadence and laughter. He caught a word every now
and then, especially in the greetings and farewells,

- 85 -

John Grisham

The Broker

and considered this to be progress of some sort. Watching the families and
friends made him lonely, though he refused to dwell on it. Loneliness was
twenty-three hours a day in a small cell with little mail and nothing but a
cheap paperback to keep him company. He'd seen loneliness; this was a day
at the beach.
He tried hard to linger over his ham and cheese, but he could only stretch it
so far. He reminded himself to order fries the next time because fries can be
toyed with until long after they're cold, thus extending the meal far beyond
what would be considered normal back home. Reluctantly, he surrendered
his table. Almost an hour after he entered the cafe, he left the warmth of it
and walked to the fountain where the water had been turned off so it
wouldn't freeze. Luigi strolled up a few minutes later, as if he'd been
loitering in the shadows, waiting. He had the nerve to suggest a gelato, an
ice cream, but Marco was already shivering. They walked to the hotel and
said good night.
Luigi his field supervisor had diplomatic cover at the US. consulate in
Milan. His name was Whitaker, and Backman was the least of his priorities.
Backman was not involved in intelligence, or counterintelligence, and
Whitaker had a full load in those arenas without having to worry about an
ex-Washington power broker who'd been stashed away in Italy. But he
dutifully prepared his daily summaries and sent them to Langley. There they
were received and reviewed by Julia Javier, the veteran with access to Mr.
Maynard himself. It was because of Ms. Javier's watchful eye that Whitaker
was so diligent in Milan. Otherwise, the daily summaries may not have been
so prompt.
Teddy wanted a briefing.
Ms. Javier was summoned to his office on the seventh floor, to the "Teddy
Wing," as it was known throughout Langley. She entered his "station," as he
preferred it to be called, and once again found him parked at the end of a
long wide conference table, sitting high in his jacked-up wheelchair, bundled
in blankets from the chest down, wearing his standard black suit, peering
over stacks of summaries, with Hoby hovering nearby ready to fetch another
cup of the wretched green tea that Teddy was convinced was keeping him
alive.
He was barely alive, but then Julia Javier had been thinking that for years
now.

- 86 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Since she didn't drink coffee and wouldn't touch the tea, nothing was
offered. She took her customary seat to his right, sort of the witness chair
that all visitors were expected to take-his right ear caught much more than
his left-and he managed a very tired "Hello, Julia.'
Hoby, as always, sat across from her and prepared to take notes. Every
sound in the "station" was being captured by some of the most sophisticated
recording devices modern technology had created, but Hoby nonetheless
went through the charade of writing it all down.
"Brief me on Backman," Teddy said. A verbal report such as this was
expected to be concise, to the point, with not a single unnecessary word
thrown in.
Julia looked at her notes, cleared her throat, and began speaking for the
hidden recorders. "He's in place in Treviso, a nice little town in northern
Italy. Been there for three full days, seems to be making the adjustment quite
well. Our agent is in complete contact, and the language tutor is a local
who's doing a nice job. Backman has no money and no passport, and so far
has been quite willing to stick close to the agent. He has not used the phone
in his hotel room, nor has he tried to use his cell phone for anything other
than to call our agent. He has shown no desire to explore or to wander about.
Evidently, the habits learned in prison are hard to break. Pie's staying close
to his hotel. When he's not being tutored or eating, he stays in his room and
studies Italian."
"How is his language?"
"Not bad. He's fifty-two years old, so it wont be quick."
"I learned Arabic when I was sixty," Teddy said proudly, as if sixty was a
century ago.
"Yes, I know," she said. Everyone at Langley knew it. "He is studying
extremely hard and making progress, but it's only been three days. The tutor
is impressed."
"What does he talk about?"
"Not the past, not old friends and old enemies. Nothing that would interest
us. He's closed that off, for now anyway. Idle conversation tends to be about
his new home, the culture and language."
"His mood?"
"He just walked out of prison fourteen years early and he's having long
meals and good wine. He's quite happy. Doesn't appear to be

- 87 -

John Grisham

The Broker

homesick, but of course he doesn't really have a home. Never talks about his
family."
"His health?"
"Seems fine. The cough is gone. Appears to be sleeping. No complaints."
"How much does he drink?"
"He's careful. Enjoys wine at lunch and dinner and a beer in a nearby bar,
but nothing excessive.''
"Lets try and crank up the boo2e, okay? See if hell talk more."
"That's our plan."
"How secure is he?"
"Everything's bugged-phones, room, language lessons, lunches, dinners.
Even his shoes have mikes. Both pairs. His overcoat has a Peak 30 sewn into
the lining. We can track him virtually anywhere."
"So you can't lose him?"
"He's a lawyer, not a spy. As of now, he seems very content to enjoy his
freedom and do what he's told."
"He's not stupid, though. Remember that, Julia. Backman knows there are
some very nasty people who would love to find him."
"True, but right now he's like a toddler clinging to his mother."
"So he feels safe?"
"Under the circumstances, yes."
"Then let's give him a scare."
"Now?"
"Yes." Teddy rubbed his eyes and took a sip of tea. "What about his son?"
"Level-three surveillance, not much happening in Culpeper, Virginia. If
Backman tries to contact anyone, it will be Neal Backman. But we'll know it
in Italy before we know it in Culpeper."
"His son is the only person he trusts," Teddy said, stating what Julia had said
many times.
"Very true."
After a long pause he said, "Anything else, Julia?"
"He's writing a letter to his mother in Oakland."
Teddy gave a quick smile. "How nice. Do we have it?"
"Yes, our agent took a picture of it yesterday, we just got it. Backman hides
it in between the pages of a local tourism magazine in his hotel room."

- 88 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"How long is it?"
"Two good paragraphs. Evidently a work in progress."
"Read it to me," Teddy said as he leaned his head back against his
wheelchair and closed his eyes.
Julia shuffled papers and pushed up her reading glasses. "No date,
handwritten, which is a chore because Backman's penmanship is lousy. 'Dear
Mother: I'm not sure when or if you will ever receive this letter. I'm not sure
if I will ever mail it, which could affect whether or not you get it. At any
rate, I'm out of prison and doing better. In my last letter I said things were
going well in the flat country of Oklahoma. I had no idea at that time that I
would be pardoned by the President. It happened so quickly that I still find it
hard to believe.' Second paragraph. Tm living on the other side of the world,
I can't say where because this would upset some people. I would prefer to be
in the United States, but that is not possible. I had no say in the matter. It's
not a great life but it's certainly better than the one I had a week ago. I was
dying in prison, in spite of what I said in my letters. Didn't want to worry
you. Here, I'm free, and that's the most important thing in the world. I can
walk down the street, eat in a cafe, come and go as I please, do pretty much
whatever I want. Freedom, Mother, something I dreamed of for years and
thought was impossible.' "
She laid it down and said, "That's as far as he's gotten."
Teddy opened his eyes and said, "You think he's stupid enough to mail a
letter to his mother?"
"No. But he's been writing her once a week for a long time. It's a habit, and
it's probably therapeutic. He has to talk to somebody."
"Are we still watching her mail?"
"Yes, what little she receives."
"Very well. Scare the hell out of him, then report back."
"Yes sir." Julia gathered her papers and left the office. Teddy picked up a
summary and adjusted his reading glasses. Hoby went to a small kitchen
nearby.
Backmans mother's phone had been tapped in the nursing home in Oakland,
and so far it had revealed nothing. The day the pardon was announced two
very old friends had called with lots of questions and some subdued
congratulations, but Mrs. Backman had been so bewildered she was
eventually sedated and napped for hours. None of her

- 89 -

John Grisham

The Broker

grandchildren-the three produced by Joel and his various wives-had called
her in the past six months.
Lydia Backman had survived two strokes and was confined to a wheelchair.
When her son was at his pinnacle she lived in relative luxury in a spacious
condo with a full-time nurse. His conviction had forced her to give up the
good life and live in a nursing home with a hundred others.
Surely Backman would not try to contact her.

- 90 -

John Grisham

The Broker

After a few days of dreaming about the money, Critz began
spending it, at least mentally. With all that cash, he wouldn't be forced to
work for the sleazy defense contractor, nor would he be forced to hustle
audiences on the lecture circuit. (He wasn't convinced the audiences were
out there to begin with, in spite of what his lecture agent had promised him.)
Critz was thinking about retirement! Somewhere far away from Washington
and all the enemies he'd made there, somewhere on a beach with a sailboat
nearby. Or maybe he'd move to Switzerland and stay close to his new
fortune buried in his new bank, all wonderfully tax free and growing by the
day.
He made a phone call and got the flat in London for a few more days. He
encouraged Mrs. Critz to shop more aggressively. She, too, was tired of
Washington and deserved an easier life.
Partly because of his greedy enthusiasm, and partly because of his natural
ineptitude, and also because of his lack of sophistication in intelligence
matters, Critz blundered badly from the start. For such an old hand at the
Washington game, his mistakes were inexcusable.
First, he used the phone in his borrowed flat, thus making it easy for
someone to nail down his exact location. He called Jeb Priddy, the

- 91 -

John Grisham

The Broker

CIA liaison who had been stationed in the White House during the last four
years. Priddy was still at his post but expected to be called back to Langley
soon. The new President was settling in, things were chaotic, and so on,
according to Priddy, who seemed slightly irritated by the call. He and Critz
had never been close, and Priddy knew immediately that the guy was
fishing. Critz eventually said he was trying to find an old pal, a senior CIA
analyst he'd once played a lot of golf with. Name was Daly, Addison Daly,
and he'd left Washington for a stint in Asia. Did Priddy perhaps know where
he was now?
Addison Daly was tucked away at Langley and Priddy knew him well. "I
know the name," Priddy said. "Maybe I can find him. Where can I reach
you?"
Critz gave him the number at the flat. Priddy called Addison Daly and
passed along his suspicions. Daly turned on his recorder and called London
on a secure line. Critz answered the phone and went overboard with his
delight at hearing from an old friend. He rambled on about how wonderful
life was after the White House, after all those years playing the political
game, how nice it was being a private citizen. He was anxious to renew old
friendships and get serious about his golf game.
Daly played along well. He offered that he, too, was contemplating
retirement-almost thirty years in the service-and that he caught himself
looking forward to an easier life.
Hows Teddy these days? Critz wanted to know. And how's the new
president? What's the mood in Washington with the new administration?
Nothing changes much, Daly mused, just another bunch of fools. By the
way, how's former president Morgan?
Critz didn't know, hadn't talked to him, in fact might not talk to him for
many weeks. As the conversation was winding down, Critz said with a
clumsy laugh, "Don't guess anybody's seen Joel Backman?"
Daly managed to laugh too-it was all a big joke. "No," he said, "I think the
boy's well hidden."
"He should be."
Critz promised to call as soon as he returned to D.C. They'd play eighteen
holes at one of the good clubs, then have a drink, just like in the old days!
What old days? Daly asked himself after he hung up.

- 92 -

John Grisham

The Broker

An hour later, the phone conversation was played for Teddy Maynard.
Since the first two calls had been somewhat encouraging, Critz pressed on.
He'd always been one to work the phones like a maniac. He subscribed to
the shotgun theory-fill the air with calls and something will happen. A rough
plan was coming together. Another old pal had once been a senior staffer to
the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, and though he was now
a well-connected lobbyist, he had, allegedly, maintained close ties to the
CIA.
They talked politics and golf and eventually, much to Critzs delight, the pal
asked what, exactly, was President Morgan thinking when he pardoned
Duke Mongo, the biggest tax evader in the history of America? Critz
claimed to have been opposed to the pardon but managed to steer the
conversation along to the other controversial reprieve. "What's the gossip on
Backman?" he asked.
"You were there," answered his pal.
"Yes, but where did Maynard stash him? That's the big question."
"So it was a CIA job?" his friend asked.
"Of course," Critz said with the voice of authority. Who else could sneak
him out of the country in the middle of the night?
"That's interesting," said his pal, who then became very quiet. Critz insisted
on a lunch the following week, and that's where they left the conversation.
As Critz feverishly worked the phone, he marveled once again at his endless
list of contacts. Power did have its rewards.
Joel, or Marco, said goodbye to Ermanno at five-thirty in the afternoon,
completing a three-hour session that had gone virtually nonstop. Both were
exhausted.
The chilly air helped clear his head as he walked the narrow streets of
Treviso. For the second day, he dropped by a small corner bar and ordered a
beer. He sat in the window and watched the locals hurry about, some rushing
home from work, others shopping quickly for dinner. The bar was warm and
smoky, and Marco once again drifted back to prison. He couldn't help
himself-the change had been too drastic, the freedom too sudden. There was
still the lingering fear that

- 93 -

John Grisham

The Broker

he would wake up and find himself locked in the cell with some unseen
prankster laughing hysterically in the distance.
After the beer he had an espresso, and after that he stepped into the darkness
and shoved both hands deep into his pockets. When he turned the corner and
saw his hotel, he also saw Luigi pacing nervously along the sidewalk,
smoking a cigarette. As Marco crossed the street, Luigi came after him. "We
are leaving, immediately," he said.
"Why?" Marco asked, glancing around, looking for bad guys.
"I'll explain later. There's a travel bag on your bed. Pack your things as
quickly as possible. I'll wait here."
"What if I don't want to leave?" Marco asked.
Luigi clutched his left wrist, thought for a quick second, then gave a very
tight smile. "Then you might not last twenty-four hours," he said as
ominously as possible. "Please trust me."
Marco raced up the stairs and down the hall, and was almost to his room
before he realized that the sharp pain in his stomach was not from heavy
breathing but from fear.
What had happened? What had Luigi seen or heard, or been told? Who,
exactly, was Luigi in the first place and who was he taking orders from? As
Marco yanked his clothes out of the tiny closet and flung them toward the
bed he asked all these questions, and many more. When everything was
packed, he sat for a moment and tried to collect his thoughts. He took deep
breaths, exhaled slowly, told himself that whatever was happening was just
part of the game.
Would he be running forever? Always packing in a hurry, fleeing one room
in search of another? It still beat the hell out of prison, but it would take its
toll.
And how could anyone possibly have found him this soon? He'd been in
Treviso only four days.
When his composure was somewhat restored, he walked slowly down the
hall, down the stairs, through the lobby where he nodded at the gawking
clerk but said nothing, and out the front door. Luigi snatched his bag and
tossed it into the trunk of a compact Fiat. They were on the outskirts of
Treviso before a word was spoken.
"Okay, Luigi, what's up?" Marco asked.
"A change of scenery."
"Got that. Why?"
"Some very good reasons."

- 94 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Oh, well, that explains everything."
Luigi drove with his left hand, shifted gears frantically with his right, and
kept the accelerator as close to the floor as possible while ignoring the
brakes. Marco was already perplexed as to how a race of people could spend
two and a half leisurely hours over lunch, then hop in a car for a ten-minute
drive across town at breakneck speed.
They drove an hour, generally in a southward direction, avoiding the
highways by clinging to the back roads. "Is someone behind us?" Marco
asked more than once as they sped around tight curves on two wheels.
Luigi just shook his head. His eyes were narrow, his eyebrows pinched
together, his jaw clenched tightly when the cigarette wasn't near. He
somehow managed to drive like a maniac while smoking calmly and never
glancing behind them. He was determined not to speak, and that reinforced
Marco's determination to have a conversation.
"You're just trying to scare me, aren't you, Luigi? We re playing the spy
game-you're the master, I'm the poor schmuck with the secrets. Scare the
hell out of me and keep me dependent and loyal. I know what you're doing."
"Who killed Jacy Hubbard?" Luigi asked, barely moving his lips.
Backman suddenly wanted to go quiet. The mere mention of Hubbard made
him freeze for a second. The name always brought the same flashback: a
police photo of Jacy slumped against his brother's grave, the left side of his
head blown away, blood everywhere-on the tombstone, on his white shirt.
Everywhere.
"You have the file," Backman said. "It was a suicide."
"Oh yes. And if you believed that, then why did you decide to plead guilty
and beg for protective custody in prison?"
"I was scared. Suicides can be contagious."
"Very true."
"So you're saying that the boys who did the Hubbard suicide are after me?"
Luigi confirmed it with a shrug.
"And somehow they found out I was hiding in Treviso?"
"It's best not to take chances."
He would not get the details, if, in fact, there were any. He tried not to, but
he instinctively glanced over his shoulder and saw the dark

- 95 -

John Grisham

The Broker

road behind them. Luigi looked into his rearview mirror, and managed a
satisfactory smile, as if to say: They're back there, somewhere.
Joel sank a few inches in his seat and closed his eyes. Two of his clients had
died first. Safi Mirza had been knifed outside a Georgetown nightclub three
months after he hired Backman and handed over the only copy of JAM. The
knife wounds were severe enough, but a poison had been injected, probably
with the thrust of the blade. No witnesses. No clues. A very unsolved
murder, but one of many in D.C. A month later Fazal Sharif had disappeared
in Karachi, and was presumed dead.
JAM was indeed worth a billion dollars, but no one would ever enjoy the
money.
In 1998, Backman, Pratt & Boiling had hired Jacy Hubbard for $1 million a
year. The marketing of JAM was his first big challenge. To prove his worth,
Hubbard bullied and bribed his way into the Pentagon in a clumsy and illfated effort to confirm the existence of the Neptune satellite system. Some
documents-doctored but still classified-were smuggled out by a Hubbard
mole who was reporting everything to his superiors. The highly sensitive
papers purported to show the existence of Gamma Net, a fictitious Star
Wars-like surveillance system with unheard-of capabilities. Once Hubbard
"confirmed" that the three young Pakistanis were indeed correct-their
Neptune was a US. project-he proudly reported his findings to Joel Backman
and they were in business.
Since Gamma Net was supposedly the creation of the US. military, JAM
was worth even more. The truth was that neither the Pentagon nor the CIA
knew about Neptune.
The Pentagon then leaked its own fiction-a fabricated breach of security by a
mole working for ex-senator Jacy Hubbard and his powerful new boss, the
broker himself. The scandal erupted. The FBI raided the offices of Backman,
Pratt & Boiling in the middle of the night, found the Pentagon documents
that everyone presumed to be authentic, and within forty-eight hours a
highly motivated team of federal prosecutors had issued indictments against
every partner in the firm.
The killings soon followed, with no clues as to who was behind
