
2. There must always be a conscious and continuous
effort, based on fact, not propaganda, to have employees
at every level, from the most newly hired blue-collar or
white-collar worker to the highest levels of management,

feel that their company is a good place to work.

This is a world that requires most of us to put in a substantial number
of hours each week doing what is asked of us by others in order to


The Second Dimension 193

receive a paycheck even though we might prefer to spend those hours
on our own amusement or recreation. Most people recognize the neces-
sity for this. When a management can instill a belief, not just among a
few top people but generally among the employees, that it is doing
everything reasonably to be expected to create a good working envi-
ronment and take care of its employees’ interests, the rewards the com-
pany reccives in greater productivity and lower costs can vastly out-
weigh the costs of such a policy.

The first step in this policy is seeing (not just talking about it but
actually assuring) that every employee is treated with reasonable digni-
ty and consideration. A year or so ago I read in the press that a union
official claimed that one of the nation’s largest companies was com-
pelling its production-line employees to eat lunch with grease-stained
hands because there was not sufficient time, with the number of wash-
room facilities available, for most of them to be able to wash before
lunch. The stock of this company was of no investment interest to me
for quite different reasons. Therefore, I have no knowledge of whether
the charge was based on fact or was made in the heat of an emotional
battle over wage negotiations. However, if true, this condition alone
would, in my opinion, make the shares of this company unsuitable for
holding by careful investors.

Besides treating employees with dignity and decency, the routes to
obtaining genuine employee loyalty are many and varied. Pension and
profit-sharing plans can play a significant part. So can good communi-
cation to and from all levels of employees. Concerning matters of gen-
eral interest, letting everyone know not only exactly what is being done
but. why frequently eliminates friction that might otherwise occur.
Actually knowing what people in various levels of the company are
thinking, particularly when that view is adverse, can be even more
important. A feeling throughout the company that people can express
their grievances to superiors without fear of reprisal can be beneficial,
although this open-door policy is not always simple to maintain because
of the time wasted by cranks and nuts. When grievances occur, decisions
on what to do about them should be made quickly. It is the long-smol-
dering grievance that usually proves the most costly.

A striking example of the benefits that may be attained through cre-
ating a unity of purpose with employees is the “people-effectiveness”
program of Texas Instruments. The history of this program is an excel-
lent example of how brilliant management perseveres with and perfects


194 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

policies of this sort even when new outside influences force some redi-
rection of these policies. From the early days of this company, top man-
agement held a deep conviction that everyone would gain if a system
could be set up whereby all employees participated in managerial-type
decisions to improve performance but that, to sustain interest on the
part of employees, all participants must genuinely benefit from the
results of their contributions. In the 1950s semiconductor production
was largely a matter of hand assembly, offering many opportunities for
employees to make brilliant individual suggestions for improving per-
formance. Meetings, even formal classes, were held in which production
workers were shown how they could as individuals or groups show the
way to improving operations. At the same time, through both profit-
sharing plans and awards and honors, those participating benefited both
financially and by feeling they were part of the picture. Then mecha-
nization of these former manual operations started to appear. As this
trend grew, there was somewhat less opportunity for certain types of
individual contributions, as in certain ways the machines controlled
what would be done. A few foremen within the organization began
feeling that there was no longer a place for lower-level contributions to
management type participation. Top management took quite the oppo-
site viewpoint: People-participation would play a greater role than ever
before. Now, however, it would be a group or team effort with the
workers as a group estimating what could be done and setting their own
goals for performance.

Because workers started feeling that they (1) were genuinely partic-
ipating in decisions, not just being told what to do, and (2) were being
rewarded both financially and in honors and recognition, the results
have been spectacular. In instance after instance, teams of workers have
set for themselves goals quite considerably higher than anything man-
agement would have considered suggesting. At times when it appeared
that targeted goals might not be met or when inter-team competition
was producing rivalry, the workers proposed and voluntarily voted such
unheard-of things (for this day and agc) as cutting down on coffec
breaks or shortening lunch periods to get the work out. The pressure of
peer groups on the tardy or lazy worker who threatens the goals the
group has set for itself dwarfs any amount of discipline that might be
exerted from above through conventional management methods. Nor
are these results confined to U.S. workers with their lifelong back-
ground in political democracy. They appear to be equally effective and


The Second Dimension 195

mutually beneficial to people, regardless of the color of their skin and
their origins from countrics of quite different economic backgrounds.
Though the performance-goal plan was first initiated in the United
States, equally striking results have appeared not just in Texas Instru-
ments plants in the so-called developed industrial nations such as France
and Japan but also in Singapore, with its native Asian employees, and in
Curacao, where those on the payroll are overwhelmingly black. In all
countries the morale effects appear striking when worker teams not
only report directly to top management levels but also know their
reports will be heeded and their accomplishments recognized and
acknowledged.

What all this has meant to investors was spelled out when compa-
ny president Mark Shepherd, Jr., addressed stockholders at the 1974
annual meeting. He stated that a people-effectiveness index had been
established consisting of the net sales billed divided by the total payroll.
Since semiconductors, the company’s largest product line, are one of the
very few products in today’s inflationary world that consistently decline
in unit price and since wages have been rising at the company’s plants
at rates from 7 percent a year in the United States to 20 percent in Italy
and Japan, it would be logical to expect, in spite of improvements in
people-effectiveness, this index to decline. Instead it rose from about
2.25 percent in 1969 to 2.5 percent by the end of 1973. Furthermore,
with definite plans for additional improvement and with further
increases in profit-sharing funds tied into such improvement, it was
announced that it was the company’s goal to bring the index up to
3.1 percent by 1980-—a goal that, if attained, would make the company
a dramatically profitable place to work. Over the years Texas Instruments
has frequently publicized some rather ambitious long-range goals and to
date has rather consistently accomplished them.

From the investment standpoint, there are some extremely impor-
tant similarities in the three examples of people-oriented programs that
were chosen to illustrate aspects of the second dimension of a conser-
vative investment. It is a relatively simple matter to mention and give a
general description of Motorola’s institute for selecting and training
unusual talent to handle the growing needs of the company. It is an
equally simple affair to mention that Dow found a means to stimulate
people to work together to master environmental problems and to make
them profitable for the company, or to state a few facts about the remark-
able people-effectiveness program at Texas Instruments. However, if


196 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

another company decided to start programs like these from scratch, the
problems that could arise might be infinitely more complicated than
merely persuading @ board of directors to approve the necessary appro-
priation. Programs of this kind are easy to formulate, but their imple-
mentation is a quite different rhatter. Mistakes can be very costly. It is
not hard to imagine what might happen if a training school such as
Motorola’s selected the wrong people for promotion, with the result
that the best junior talent quit the company in disgust. Similarly, suppose
a company tried to follow, in general, a people-effectiveness plan but
either failed to create an atmosphere where workers genuinely felt
themselves involved of failed to compensate their employees adequate~
ly, with the result that they became disillusioned. The misapplication of
such a program could literally wreck a company. Meanwhile, companies
that do perfect advantageous people-oriented policies and techniques
usually find mote and more ways to benefit from them. For these com-
panies, such policies and techniques—these special ways of approaching
problems and of solving them—are in a sense proprietary. For this reason

they are of great importance to long-range investors.

3. Management must be willing to submit itself to the
disciplines required for sound growth.

It has already been pointed out that in this rapidly changing world com-
panies cannot stand still, They must either get better or worse, improve
or go downhill. The true investment objective of growth is not just to
make gains but to avoid loss. There are very few companies whose man-
make claims to being growth companies. However, a
management that talks about being growth-oriented is not necessarily
actually so oriented. Many companies seem to have an irresistible urge to
show the greatest possible profits at the end of each accounting period—
to bring every possible cent down to the bottom line. This a true
growth-oriented company can never do. Its focus must be on earning
sufficient current profits to finance the costs of expanding the business.
When adjustment for earning the required additional financial strength
has been made, the company worthy of farsighted investment will give
priority to curtailing maximum immediate profits when there are gen-
wine worthwhile opportunities for developing new products or process-
es or for starting new product lines or for any one of the hundred and

one more mundane actions whereby a dollar spent today may mean

agements will not


The Second Dimension 197

many dollars earned in the future. Such actions can vary all the way
from hiring and training new personnel that will be needed as the busi-
ness grows to forgoing the greatest possible profit on a customer’s order
to build up his permanent loyalty by rushing something to him when
he needs it badly. For the conservative investor, the test of all such
actions is whether management is truly building up the long-range
profits of the business rather than just seeming to. No matter how well
known, the company with a policy that only gives lip service to these
disciplines is not likely to prove a happy vehicle for investment funds.
Neither is one that tries to follow these disciplines but falls down in
executing them, as, for example, a company that makes large research
expenditures but so mishandles its efforts as to gain little from them.


3

The Third Dimension

Investment Characteristics
of Some Businesses

he first dimension of a conservative stock investment is the degree

of excellence in the company’s activities that are most important to

present and future profitability. The second dimension is the quali-
ty of the people controlling these activities and the policies they create.
The third dimension deals with something quite different: the degree to
which there does or does not exist within the nature of the business itself
certain inherent characteristics that make possible an above-average
profitability for as long as can be foreseen into the future.

Before examining these characteristics it may be well to point out
why above-average profitability is so important to the investor, not only
as a source of further gain but as a protection for what he already has.
The vital role of growth in this connection has already been discussed.
Growth costs money in many ways. Part of what otherwise would be
the profit stream has to be diverted to experimenting, inventing, test-
marketing, new-product marketing, and all the other operating costs of
expansion, including the complete loss of the inevitable percentage of
such expansion attempts that are bound to fail. Even more costly may
be the additions to factories or stores or equipment that must be made.
Meanwhile, as the business grows, more inventory will inevitably be


The Third Dimension 199

needed to fill the pipelines. Finally, except for the very few businesses
that sell only for cash, there will be a corresponding drain on corporate
resources to take care of the growing volume of receivables. To accom-
plish all these things, profitability is vital.

In inflationary periods the matter of profitability becomes even
more important. Usually when prices and, therefore, costs are rising on
a broad front, a business can, in time, pass these costs along through
higher prices of its own. However, this often cannot be done immedi-
ately. During the interim, obviously a much smaller bite is taken out of
the profits of the broad-profit-margin company than occurs for its high-
€t-cost competition, since the higher-cost company is probably facing
comparably increased costs of doing business.

Profitability can be expressed in two ways. The fundamental way,
which is the yardstick used by most managements, is the return on
invested assets. This is the factor that will cause a company to decide
whether to go ahead with a new product or process. What percent
return can the company expect on the part of its capital invested in this
particular way in comparison to what the return might be if the same
amount of its assets was employed in some other way? It is considerably
more difficult for the investor to use this yardstick than it is for the cor-
porate executive. What the investor usually sees is not the return on a
specific amount of present-day dollars utilized in a specific subdivision
of the business but the total earnings of the business as a percentage of
its total assets. When the cost of capital equipment has risen as much as
it has in the last forty years, comparisons of the return on total invested
capital between one company and another may be so distorted by vari-
ations in the price levels at which different companies made major
expenditures that the figures are highly misleading. For this reason,
comparing the profit margins per dollar of sales may be more helpful as
long as one other point is kept in mind. This is that a company that has
a high rate of sales in relation to assets may be a more profitable com-
pany than one with a higher profit margin to sales but a slower rate of
sales turnover. For example, a company that has annual sales three times
its assets can have a lower profit margin but make a lot more money
than one that needs to employ a dollar of assets in order to obtain each
dollar of annual sales. However, while from the standpoint of profitability
return on investment must be considered as well as profit margin on
sales, from the standpoint of safety of investment all the emphasis is on
profit margin on sales. Thus if two companies were each to experience


200 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

a 2 percent increase in operating costs and were unable to raise prices,
the one with a 1 percent margin of profit would be running at a loss
and might be wiped out, while, if the other had a 10 percent margin,
the increased costs would wipe out only one-fifth of its profits.

There is one final matter to be kept in mind in order to place this
dimension of conservative investing in proper perspective: In today’s
highly fluid and competitive business world, obtaining well-above-aver-
age profit margins or a high return on assets is so desirable that, when-
ever a company accomplishes this goal for any significant period of time,
it is bound to be faced with a host of potential competitors. If the poten-
tial competitors actually enter the field, they will cut into markets the
established company now has. Normally, when potential competition
becomes actual competition the ensuing struggle for sales results in any-
thing from a minor to a major reduction in the high profit margin that
had theretofore existed. High profit margins may be compared to an
open jar of honey owned by the prospering company. The honey will
inevitably attract a swarm of hungry insects bent on devouring it. In the
business world there are but two ways a company can protect the con-
tents of its honey jar from being consumed by the insects of competi-
tion, One is by monopoly, which is usually illegal, although, if the
monopoly is due to patent protection, it may not be. In any event,
monopolies are likely to end quite suddenly and do not commend them-
selves as vehicles for the safest type of investing. The other way for the
honey-jar company to keep the insects out is to operate so much more
efficiently than others that there is no incentive for present or potential
competition to take action that will upset the existing situation.

Now let us turn from this background discussion of relative prof-
itability to the heart of the third dimension of conservative invesung—
namely, the specific characteristics that enable certain well-managed
companies to maintain above-average profit margins more or less indef-
initely. Possibly the most common characteristic is what businessmen call
the “economies of scale’ A simple example of economy of scale: A well-
run company making one million units a month will often have a lower
production cost for each unit than a company producing only 100,000
units in the same period. The difference between the cost per unit of
these two companies, one ten times larger than the other, can vary con-
siderably from one line of business to another. In some there may be
almost no difference at all. Furthermore, it should never be forgotten that
in any industry the larger company will have a maximum advantage only


126 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

thing from what it used to be. For the reasons already explained,
today’s corporation is designed to be far more suitable as. an invest-
ment medium for those desiring long-range growth than as a vehicle
for in-and-out trading.

All this has profoundly changed the market place. It undoubtedly
represents tremendous improvement—improvement, however, at the
expense of marketability. The liquidity of the average stock has
decreased rather than increased. In spite of breathtaking economic
growth and a seemingly endless procession of stock splits, the volume of
trading on the New York Stock Exchange has declined. For the smaller
exchanges it has almost vanished. The gambler, the in-and-out buyer,
and even the “sucker” trying to outguess the pool manipulator were not
conducive to a healthy economy. They did, however, help provide a
ready market.

I do not want to get involved in semantics. Nevertheless, it must be
realized that this has resulted in the gradual decline of the “stock
broker” and the rise of what might be called the “stock salesman.” So far
as stocks are concerned, the broker works in an auction market, He takes
an order from someone who has already decided on his investment
course. He matches this order with an order he or some other broker
has received to sell. This process is not overly time-consuming. If the
orders received are for a large rather than small number of shares, the
broker can operate on a very small commission for each share handled
and still end the year with a handsome profit.

Contrast him with the salesman, who must. go through the far more
time-consuming routine of persuading the customer on the course of
action to be taken. There are only a given number of hours in the day.
Therefore, to make a profit commensurate with that of a broker, he
must charge a higher commission for his services. This is particularly
true if the salesman is serving a large number of small customers rather
than a few big ones. Under todays economic conditions, small customers
are the ones most salesmen must serve.

The stock exchanges are still primarily operating as a vehicle for
stock brokers rather than stock salesmen. Their commission rates have
gone up. They have only gone up, however, about in proportion to that
of most other types of services. In contrast, the over-the-counter mar-
kets work on a quite different principle. Each day, designated members
of the National Association of Securities Dealers furnish the newspapers
of that region with quotations on a long list of the more active unlisted


Five Don’ts for Investors 125

the other. Everyone should recognize the importance of marketability.
Normally, most if not all buying should be confined to stocks which can
be sold should a reason—either financial or personal—arise for such
selling. However, some confusion seems to exist in the minds of
investors as to what gives adequate protection in this regard and what
does not. This in turn gives rise to even more confusion concerning the
desirability of those stocks not listed on any exchange. Such stocks are
commonly called “over-the-counter” stocks.

The reason for this confusion lies in basic changes that have come
over common stock buying in the last quarter century—changes that
make the markets of the 1950's very different even from those as recent
as the never-to-be-forgotten 1920’s. During most of the 1920's and in
all of the period before that, the stock broker had as customers a rela-
tively small number of rather rich men. Most buying was done in large
blocks, frequently in multiples of thousands of shares. The motive was
usually to sell out to someone else at a higher price. Gambling rather
than investment was the order of the day. Buying on margin—that is,
with borrowed funds—was then the accepted method of operation.
Today a very large percentage of all buying is on a cash basis.
