
Reflexivity in the Stock Market

55

not be apparent in the early stages but it is likely to manifest itself
later on. When it does, it sets the stage for a reversal in the prevailing bias. If the change in bias reverses the underlying trend a
self-reinforcing process is set in motion in the opposite direction.
What the flaw is and how and when it is likely to manifest itself
are the keys to understanding boomhust sequences.
The model I presented above is built on these two generalizations. It hardly needs emphasizing how crude the mode1 is.
Nevertheless, it is valuable in identifying the crucial features of a
typical boombust sequence. These are the unrecognized trend;
the beginning of a self-reinforcingprocess; the successful test; the
growing conviction, resulting in a widening divergence between
reality and expectations; the flaw in perceptions; the climax; a
self-reinforcing process in the opposite direction. Just by identifying these features we can gain some insight into the behavior of
stock prices. We cannot expect much more from our rudimentary
model.
In any case, a reflexive model cannot take the place of fundamental analysis: all it can do is to provide an ingredient that is
missing from it. In principle, the two approaches could be reconciled. Fundamental analysis seeks to establish how underlying
values are reflected in stock prices, whereas the theory of reflexivity shows how stock prices can influence underlying
values. One provides a static picture, the other a dynamic
one.
A theory that offers a partial explanation of st@% price movements can be very useful to the investor especially if it illuminates a relationship that other investors fail to grasp. Investors
operate with limited funds and limited intelligence: they do not
need to know everything. As long as they understand something
better than others, they have an edge. The trouble with any kind
of specialized knowledge is that one's area of expertise may not
be especially interesting, but the theory of reflexivity serves to
identify historically significant price movements, so it goes right
to the heart of the matter.
The rudimentary model I have outlined above has proved
extremely rewarding in my career as an investor. That may
seem surprising because the model is so simple and it fits a welltrodden stock market pattern so well that one would expect every
investor to be familiar with it. Yet, that is not the case. Why? Part
of the answer must be that market participants have been mis-

56

4

I

Theory

guided by a different theoretical construction, one derived from
classical economics and, even more important, from the natural
sciences. The ingrained attitude is that stock prices are the passive reflection of some underlying reality and not an active ingredient in the historical process. This view is simply false. It is
remarkable that the error has still not been fully recognized.
Nevertheless, investors do recognize the sequence I have described and do respond to it, only they respond later than someone who is working with the appropriate model and is on the
lookout for the crucial features that define the shape of the price
curve. That is what has given me my edge.
The first time I used the model systematically was in the cmglomerate boom oi the late 1960s. It enabled me to make money
both on the way up and on the way down.
The key to the conglomerate boom was a pre~ailingmisconception among investors. Investors had come to value growth in
per-share earnings and failed to discriminate about the way the
earnings growth was accomplished. A few companies learned to
produce earnings growth through acquisitions. Once the market
started to reward them for their performance, their task became
easier because they could offer their own highly priced stock in
acquiring other companies.
In theory, the process works as follows. Let us assume that all
of the companies involved have the same intrinsic growth in earnings but the stock of the acquiring company sells at twice the
earnings multiple of the acquired ones; if the acquiring company
manages to double its size, its earnings per share jump by 50%,
and its growth rate increases accordingly.
In practice, the early conglnmerates started out with high intrinsic growth rates that were rewarded by high multiples. Several
of the pathbreakers were high-technology companies with a
strong defense component whose managements recognized that
their historic growth rate could not be sustained indefinitely: Textron, Teledyne, Ling-Temco-Vought(later LTV), to mention a few.
They started to acquire more mundane companies, but, as their
per-share earnings growth accelerated, the multiples expanded
instead of contracting. Their success attracted imitators and later
on even the most humdrum companies could attain a high multiple by going on an acquisition spree. For instance, the bulk of
Ogden's earnings was derived from trading scrap metal; nevertheless, the stock sold at more than twenty times earnings at its peak.

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

57

Eventually, a company could achieve a high multiple just by
promising to put it to good use by making acquisitions.
Managements developed special accounting techniques that enhanced the impact of acquisitions. They also introduced changes
in the acquired compahies, streamlining operations, disposing of
assets, and generally; focusing on the bottom line, but these
changes were less sigriificant than the impact on per-share earnings of the acquisitions themselves.
Investors responded like Indians to firewater. At first, the record of each company was judged on its own merit, but gradually
conglomerates became recognized as a group. A new breed of
investors emerged, thp so-called go-go fund managers, or gunslingers, who developed a special affinity with the managements
of conglomerates. Direct lines of communication were opened
between them and conglomerates would place so-called "letter
stock" directly with investors. Eventually, conglomerates learned
to manage their stock prices as well as their earnings.
Events followed th4 sequence described in my model. Multiples expanded and eventually reality could not sustain expectations. More and more people realized the misconception on
which the boom rested even as they continued to play the game.
Acquisitions had to get larger and larger in order to maintain the
momentum, and in the end they ran into the limits of size. The
climactic event was the attempt by Saul Steinberg to acquire
Chemical Bank: it was fought and defeated by the establishment.
When stock prices started to fall, the decline fedon itself. The
favorable impact of acquisitions on per-share earnings diminished and eventually it became impractical to make new acquisitions. The internal problems that had been swept under the carpet
during the period of rapid external growth began to surface. Earnings reports revealed unpleasant surprises. Investors became disillusioned and managements went through their own crises: after
the heady days of success, few were willing to buckle down to
the burdens of day-to-day management. The situation was aggravated by recession, and many of the high-flying conglomerates
literally disintegrated. Investors were prepared to believe the
worst and in some cases the worst actually occurred. In others,
reality turned out to be better than expectations and eventually
the situation stabilized with the surviving companies, often under
new management, slowly working themselves out from under the
debris.

Theory

4

The conglomerate boom is particularly well suited to serve as
an illustration of my rudimentary model because the "fundamentals" are readily quantified. Investors based their valuations on
reported per-share earnings. However meaningless the figures,
they provide charts that closely conform to my theoretical prototype. Here they are:

Courtesy of Securities Research Company, a Division of Babson-United Investment Advisors, Inc.,
St.,Boston, MA 02116.

208 Newbury

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

59

Courtesy of Securities Research Company, a Division of Babson-United InvsrLLhent Advisors. Inc..
208 Newbury St., Boston, MA 02116.

Theory

Courtesy of Securities Research Company, a Division of Babson-United Investment Advisors. Inc.,
208 Newbury St., Boston, MA 02116.

My best documented encounter with a boom/bust sequence is
that of Real Estate Investment Trusts. REITs, as they are called,
are a special corporate form brought into existence by legislation.
Their key feature is that they can distribute their income free of
corporate taxation, provided they distribute all the income they
receive. The opportunity created by this legislation remained
largely unexploited until 1969 when a large number of REITs
were founded. I was present at the creation and, fresh from my
experience with conglomerates, recognized their boom/bust potential. I published a research report whose key part reads as
follows:

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

61

THE C A S FOR
~ MORTGAGE TRUSTS
(February 1970)

THE CONCEPT
Superficially, mortgage trusts seem to resemble mutual funds
designed to provide h i ~ hcurrent yields. But the analogy is misleading. The true attraction of mortgage trusts lies in their ability
to generate capital gains for their shareholdersby selling additional
shares at a premium over book value. If a trust with a book value
of $10 and a 12% return on equity doubles its equity by selling
additional shares at $20, the book value jumps to $13.33 and pershare earnings go from $1.20 to $1.60.
Investors are willing to pay a premium because of the high yield
and the expectation of per-share earnings growth. The higher the
premium, the easier it is for the trust to fulfill this expectation. The
process is a self-reinforcing one. Once it gets under way, the trust
can show a steady growth in per-share earnings despite the fact
that it distributes practjcally all its earnings as dividends. Investors
who participate in the process early enough can enjoy the compound benefits of a high return on equity, a rising book value, and
a rising premium over book value.
ANALYTICAL APPROACH
The conventional method of security analysis is to try and predict the future course of earnings and then to estimate the price
that investors may be willing to pay for those earnings. This
method is inappropriate to the analysis of mortgage trusts because
the price that investors are willing to pay for the shares is an importmt factor in determining the future course of earnings.
Instead of predicting future earnings and valuations separately,
we shall try to predict the future course of the entire selfreinforcing process. We shall identify three major factors which
reinforce each other and we shall sketch out a scenario of the
probable course of development. The three factors are:
1. The effective rate of return on the mortgage trust's capital
2. The rate of growth of the mortgage trust's size
3. Investor recognition, i.e., the multiple investors are willing

to pay for a given rate of growth in per-share earnings

Theory

62

THE SCENARIO
Act One: At present, the effectiveyield on construction loans is at
an optimum. Not only are interest rates high but losses are at a
relatively low level. There is a pent-up demand for housing and
new houses readily find buyers. There is a shortage of funds so that
the projects which do get off the ground are economically well
justified. Builders who are still in business are more substantial
and more reliable than at the tail end of a boom. Moreover, they do
their utmost to complete the construction phase as fast as possible
because money is so expensive. Shortages of labor and material do
cause defaults and delays but rising costs permit mortgage trusts to
liquidate their commitments without loss.
Money is tight and alternative sources of interim financing are
in short supply. Investor recognition of the mortgage trust concept
has progressed far enough to permit the formation of new trusts
and the rapid expansion of existing ones. The self-reinforcing process gets under way.
Act Two: If and when inflation abates, the effective yield on construction loans will decline. On the other hand, there will be a
housing boom and bank credit will be available at advantageous
rates. With higher leverage, the rate of return on equity can be
maintained despite a lower effectiveyield. With a growing market
and growing investor recognition, the premium over book value
may continue to increase. Mortgage trusts are likely to take full
advantage of the premium and show a rapid rise in both size and
per-share earnings. Since entry into the field is unrestricted, the
number of mortgage trusts will also increase.
Act Three: The self-reinforcing process will continue until mort-

gage trusts have captured a significant part of %he construction loan
market. Increasing competition will then force them to take greater
risks. Construction activity itself will have become more speculative and bad loans will increase. Eventually, the housing boom will
slacken off and housing surpluses will appear in various parts of
the country, accompanied by a slack real estate market and temporary declines in real estate prices. At this point, some of the
mortgage trusts will be bound to have a large number of delinquent
loans in their portfolios and the banks will panic and demand that
their lines of credit be paid off.
Act Four: Investor disappointment will affect the valuation of the
group, and a lower premium coupled with slower growth will in

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

63

turn reduce the per-share earnings progression. The multiple will
decline and the group will go through a shakeout period. After the
shakeout, the industry will have attained maturity: there will be
few new entries, regulations may be introduced, and existing trusts
will settle down to a more moderate growth.
,
EVALUATION
I

I

The shakeout is a ldng time away. Before it occurs, mortgage
trusts will have grown manifold in size and mortgage trust shares
will have shown tremendous gains. It is not a danger that should
deter investors at the p~esentime.
The only real danger at present is that the self-reinforcing process may not get under way at all. In a really serious stock mamet
decline investors may be unwilling to pay any premium even for a
12% return on equity. We doubt that such conditions would arise;
we are more inclined to expect an environment in which a 12%
return is more exceptional than it has been recently and in which
the self-reinforcing processes of the last few years, notably conglomerates and computer leasing companies, are going through
their shakeout period. In such an environment there should be
enough money available for a self-reinforcing process which is just
starting, especially if it is the only game in town.
'"If the process fails to get under way, investors would find downside protection in the book value. The new trusts are coming to the
market at book value plus underwriting commission (usually 10%).
Most recently formed trusts are selling at a premium which is still
modest. It will be recalled that when their assets 3 f e fully employed in interim loans, mortgage trusts can earn 11% on their
book without leverage and 12% with a 1:l leverage. A modest
premium over book value would seem justified even in the absence
of growth.
If the self-reinforcing process does get under way, shareholders
in well-managed mortgage trusts should enjoy the compound benefits of a high return on equity, a rising book value, and a rising
premium over book value for the next few years. The capital gains
potential is of the same order of magnitude as at the beginning of
other self-reinforcing processes in recent stock market history.

My report had an interesting history. It came at a time when gogo fund managers had suffered severe losses in the collapse of the
conglomerates. Since they were entitled to share in the profits but
did not have to share in the losses of the funds they managed,

64

I

4

Theory

they were inclined to grasp at anything that held out the prospect of a quick profit. They instinctively understood how a selfreinforcing process works since they had just participated in one
and they were anxious to play. The report found a tremendous
response whose extent I realized only when I received a telephone
call from a bank in Cleveland asking for a new copy because theirs
had gone through so many Xerox incarnations that it was no
longer legible. There were only a few mortgage trusts in existence
at the time but the shares were so eagerly sought after that they
nearly doubled in price in the space of a month or so. Demand
generated supply and there was a flood of new issues coming to
market. When it became clear that the stream of new mortgage
trusts was inexhaustible, prices fell almost as rapidly as they had
gone up. Obviously the readers of the report failed to take into
account the ease of entry and their mistake was corrected in short
order. Nevertheless their enthusiastic reception helped to get the
self-reinforcing process described in the report under way. Subsequent events took the course outlined in the report. Mortgage
trust shares enjoyed a boom that was not as violent as the one that
followed the publication of the report but turned out to be more
enduring.
I had invested heavily in mortgage trusts and took some profits
when the reception of my study exceeded my expectations. But I
was sufficiently carried away by my own success to be caught in
the downdraft with a significant inventory. I hung on and even
increased my positions. I followed the industry closely for a year
or so and sold my holdings with good profits. Then I lost touch
with the group until a few years later when problems began to
surface. I was tempted to establish a short pcsitioo but was handicapped in that I was no longer famiiiar with the terrain. Nevertheless, when I reread the report I had written several years
earlier, I was persuaded by my own prediction. I decided to sell
the group short more or less indiscriminately. Moreover, as the
shares fell I maintained the same level of exposure by selling
additional shares short. My original prediction was fulfilled and
most REITs went broke. The result was that 1 reaped more than
100% profit on my short positions-a seeming impossibility since
the maximum profit on a short position is 100%. (The explanation
is that I kept on selling additional shares.)
Self-reinforcinghelf-defeating cycles like the conglomerate
boom and the REITs do not occur every day. There are long fallow

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

65

periods when the specialist in such cycles remains unemployed.
He need not starve, however. The divergence between underlying
trends and investor recognition persists at all times and the astute
investor can take advantage of it. New industries arise, or old ones
come back into favor. 'Typically, they are inadequately followed
at first. For instance, when defense spending started to rise in the
early 1970s after a long decline, there were only two or three
analysts left who follbwed the industry, although it still represented a substantial portion of the economy. Those who were left
were too demoralized to recognize the beginning of a major new
trend. That was a wqnderful time to invest in defense stocks.
There were high-tech fiefense stocks that had never been visited
by an analyst, like E-Systems, Inc., and well-established companies that had fallen on evil days trying to diversify out of defense,
like Sanders Associates, or getting caught up in scandals trying to
sell airplanes through bribery, like Northrop and Lockheed.
In the case of defense stocks, there was no self-reinforcing process involved but investor recognition certainly helped the price
of the stocks. Actually, it is a rare case where the investors' bias
leaves the fundamentals totally unaffected. Even with defense
stocks the prevailing bias played a role, but it was a negative one.
Lockheed had to be bailed out by the government and companies
like Sanders Associates had to restructure.their debt by offering
conver$ble bonds at prices that turned out to be very low in
retrospect. Only when the negative bias was corrsted was there
very little further feedback: companies had little need for additional capital, and managements, having been burned once before,
were leery of diversifying out of defense. There were exceptions,
like United Aircraft, but investnrs' bias never turned positive
enough to allow a self-reinforcing process to get under way: many
of United Aircraft's acquisitions were for cash and those that involved stock did not enhance earnings significantly. The result
was a larger, diversified company, but no boom and bust in the
stock.
Perhaps the most interesting case of negative bias occurred in
technology stocks. After the stock market debacle of 1974, investors were leery of any company that needed to raise equity capital
from outside sources. Distributed data processing was in the early
stages of its development. New companies like Datapoint and
Four-Phase were in the vanguard with IBM lagging badly. The
market was practically exploding but these little companies were

66

,

4

Theory

hamstrung by their inability to raise capital. The stocks were selling at very low multiples of anticipated earnings and the main
argument against them was that they would not be able to grow
fast enough to meet the demand and eventually IBM would move
into the market. The argument turned out to be valid, but not
before these companies became large and prosperous and investors became eager to throw money at them at high multiples.
Those who had been willing to fight the negative bias were amply
rewarded.
As the various niches occupied by these small companies converged to form a large market, most of them were absorbed by
larger companies and thase that stayed independent fel1 on evil
days. Datapoint is currently looking for a home at a much reduced
multiple. Four-Phase was recently acquired by Motorola, which
proceeded to lose its shirt on it. If the initial market reaction to
distributed data-processing companies had been more positive, it
is possible that some of the early starters might have grown fast
enough to survive, just as the earlier wave of microcomputer manufacturers did spawn a few enduring companies like Digital
Equipment and Data General.
The negative bias of the 1975-1976 period gave way to the
opposite extreme. It found expression in a venture capital boom
that culminated in the second quarter of 1983. The sequence of
events is not as clear cut as in the case of REITs, but that is only
because high technology is not as homogeneous an industry. The
same reflexive interaction between stock prices, prevailing bias,
and fundamentals can be observed but much more specific
knowledge is required to trace the course of events.
The availability of venture capital on altiticti.~eterms led to a
proliferation of new ventures. Every new company needed equipment, as well as inventory, so that electronic equipment manufacturers enjoyed a boom, and so did the manufacturers of products
and components. The electronics industry is a large customer of
its own products so that the boom was self-reinforcing. But the
proliferation of companies intensified competition. Industry leaders lost their market position as a new generation of products was
introduced because the individuals who were responsible for developing them left their companies and set up new ones. Instead
of companies growing in step with their industry, the industry
grew by the multiplication of companies. Investors failed to recognize this trend; as a result, technology stocks in general and
new issues in particular became substantially overvalued.
