
 “Do you regard Jim Clark as a truthful man?” the lawyer had asked. 

 “I regard him as a salesman,” replied Barksdale. 

 “I’m not going to touch that, Mr. Barksdale,” said the Microsoft lawyer, and moved on to less interesting matters.

The New New Thing 

 15 

 At Sea in the Home of the Future 

 T o spend any time at all with Clark you had to foreswear the usual conveniences that come with planning ahead: advance-purchase airline tickets, hotel reservations, clean underwear. Clark’s friends learned to take it in stride when the call came from Jim—always from a cell phone, usually a thousand miles or so from where they expected him to be at that moment—that began, “Hey, um, I just wanted to let you know that, um, there’s been a change of plans. I won’t be meeting you in Nairobi this afternoon.” Clark’s wife Nancy Rutter had long ago figured out that any plans he made were not plans at all. A plan was merely a theory of how he might spend his day; at all times it clashed in his mind with half a dozen other theories. 

 It came as no surprise to anyone who knew Clark—and it certainly did not surprise his new crew—that before he crossed the Atlantic Ocean on his new computerized yacht he first had to change his mind seven or eight times about whether to do it. First he said that he would not miss the crossing for the world. Then he said that he might have to miss it to give a speech to some students at Stanford University. Then he saw that he could cancel the speech to make the crossing, and became more excited than ever about sailing across the ocean. Once he set the date of departure, he said the boat could not leave, because on that day the curtains in the boat’s living room were not exactly the way he wanted them to be. On and on he went. He was a man with a daisy, playing “She loves me, she loves me not,” except that he was doing it with his entire life. 

 Finally, at four o’ clock one morning in January 1999, or three months after Healtheon canceled its IPO, we boarded Clark’s plane in Palm Beach, Florida, and flew to the Canary Islands: I, Clark, and Hyperion ’s chef, Tina Braddock, whom Clark had decided to take with him wherever he went. The rest of its crew and the software engineer Steve Hague were already on board. (Lance and Tim had been sent back to the room on top of the Jenny Craig weight loss center in Menlo Park, California.) Hyperion had just passed Spain on its way to a dock in Grand Canary, where it planned to collect us the next day. Clark’s jet was fired up and ready to go. His luggage compartment was crammed with food and wine for the crossing. After seven years of writing software that could sail a boat, Clark, at last, had the chance to watch his program guide his boat across an ocean. Even so, no one on his jet could predict what would happen next. When Clark went off to fiddle with something in the back of his plane, Tina leaned across the aisle and said, nervously, “I wonder if we’re really going to go.” 

 She knew! Somewhere was a reason for not sailing across the Atlantic Ocean on Hyperion ’s maiden voyage. She also knew that she would have to wait to find out what that might be. 

 By the time we arrived on Grand Canary, the crowd of islanders had already gathered. It was an ugly dock, in an industrial area, half a mile from any place to which a sane human being would voluntarily venture. Yet all that night the people came and gawked. At midnight islanders streamed down the dock on foot, or puttered out in shambolic old cars, stopped, and peered into the boat. By midnight there was not much to see: a few people milling around; Steve and Jim down below plinking commands into their computers; and Allan Prior perched in his captain’s chair, wearing the same outfit he’d worn the past three days, staring, for reasons that would soon become clear, into the computer screen. 

 A few hours after we arrived, Allan took his position at the helm, behind the row of computer screens, punched a few buttons, and sailed Hyperion into the Atlantic Ocean. 

 As we pushed away from the Canary Island dock and headed out to sea, the crew and the passengers gathered around the captain and took one long, last look. From the guest cabins came Steve and Clark and Louie Psihoyos, the photographer Clark had hired to document the crossing. From the kitchen came Tina and her steward, Peter, and his assistant, Kristi; from the deck came the first mate, Jaime, and the two deckhands, Simon Hutchins and the curiously named Celcelia. The sun beamed and the sea stretched out calmly as if the Atlantic were inviting us to cross. Just when it seemed that everyone was present and basking in the pride of departure, the kitchen floor opened up and a man climbed out of a hole. He looked as if he had not seen sunlight for a century. He was the engineer, Robert. 

 That is how eleven of the twelve people on board began crossing the Atlantic Ocean—with a sense of adventure. For most people who do it there is some romance in sailing across the Atlantic Ocean. Columbus, no less, had left from the Canary Islands and sailed for three months to the Caribbean. We would follow Columbus’s route, though we’d need only ten days to make the same trip. Imagine! The rest of us did; only Clark didn’t, or wouldn’t, or couldn’t imagine. He was not one of those people who can be sustained for long by other people’s fictions. He required his own. He saw the romance in the journey, or at any rate he saw that there should be romance in it. Certainly, the idea of it appealed to him. If it hadn’t, he wouldn’t have hired a photographer to come along to document it. But it soon became clear why he’d been so reluctant to come. The reality of the thing would nearly kill him. 

 The reality of crossing the Atlantic on a sailboat is that it is tedious. Very, very tedious. At least when it goes well it is tedious. When it goes badly it is treacherous. Not long after we departed, Robert, the engineer, gave me and Louie, who, it was clear to all, had to be watched like a couple of morons, a tour of the stuff that was used only when things went wrong: the life rafts, the fancy life jackets with special whistles and flares, the man-overboard system, the fire alarms. Robert tapped the side of the canister of gas hanging from a wall and used, apparently, to put out fires. (“The chances that you’ll be firing the gases are very remote,” he said. “But if everyone else on board is dead, you know, have a go.”) So far as I could tell there were several ways to die while crossing an ocean on a sailboat; if there weren’t, it wouldn’t be an adventure. One was to be run over by a tanker so large that it didn’t even realize it had hit you. The second was to be swept up in a storm that caused the mast to snap or the boat to capsize. A third was to fall overboard. The fourth, and most likely, was to die of boredom. 

 Clark was concerned only with the fourth. For him the crossing was a study in absences: no change, no diversion, no stimulation, no new place to go. He seemed to know at the outset that there are only so many times you can find Orion’s belt, or scan the horizon for whales and porpoises that fail to materialize, or remind yourself that an ocean crossing is meant to be the thrill of a lifetime before you begin to doubt the whole enterprise. The average man would require perhaps three days to discover his inner mutineer. It took Clark a bit under three hours. Exactly two hours and forty minutes into the ten-day trip, he turned to me and said, “I don’t know why the fuck I came on this. It’s going to be boring as hell.” He then walked over to Allan, who struck the pose of the captain at the helm, and gave an order to relay to the computers, which amounted to: “Get across this ocean in a straight line, as fast as you possibly can.” 

 Then he went down below into the living room and moped. On a boat the living room is for some reason called the “salon.” Clark sank into one of the deep upholstered chairs in his salon and surveyed his creation. A Monet landscape hung on the wall over his head, and a Picasso portrait from his Blue Period hung on the wall eight feet across from him—when he set out to make enough money to build his boat, he’d overshot a bit. Here was the moment in the Hollywood movie where the script would direct him to wave his hand over his brand-new, $37 million boat decorated with another $30 million in paintings and say what an amazing thing it was that a poor boy from Plainview, Texas, could sail off into the sunset in such a machine, bought and paid for with money he’d made inside of eighteen months. Instead, his mouth squinched up into its terrifying pucker of irritation. You could see that his mind had got hold of some object it disapproved of and was working itself into a tizzy. Finally, he said, “They should have extended the woodwork around the portholes.” 

 The crew looked up to see what was wrong with the portholes. They were rimmed by white painted aluminum rather than the dark teak and mahogany of the rest of the interior. They seemed fine to me, more than fine, and obviously they had seemed fine to the fifty or so Dutch master woodworkers who had created the interior. But here we were, at sea at last, and all Clark could think about was how they might have been better. The man chose his own path to madness, and it was the path not of the pessimist but of the utopian. He was on an endless search for some unattainable solution. The perfect world. The moment he suspected that he had created that perfect world, however, he found something in it that needed to be changed. 

 For the other eleven people on board the trip began calmly enough. Those who had business went about it. Celcelia and Jaime and Simon swabbed the decks and tested the sails. Steve hunched over his computer for hours on end until his posture called to mind Ichabod Crane with a backache. Clark, once he became tired of finding things that were wrong with his new boat, vanished into his cabin to find things that were wrong with his computer code. For the first few days he appeared only to eat, to drink, or to consult with Steve about some intractable bug. The seas were neither calm nor rough. There were no tankers or, for that matter, ships of any sort on the horizon. The only voice on the radio was static, punctuated by the occasional squawking from Filipino deckhands on the supertankers we could not see. “Filipino monkey! Filipino monkey!” they’d holler hysterically at each other for some reason no one could explain. Then they burst into mad howls. They sounded like people who rammed sailboats for kicks. 

 For the first few days we lived in a changeless world. Our biggest challenge, at least at the outset, was to avoid getting on each other’s nerves. The challenge was heightened by a strangely powerful form of sleep deprivation, known as the “watch.” Other than Clark everyone on board was required to sit two four-hour watches to ensure that we were not plowed under by the Filipino monkeys. Allan Prior posted the watch schedule just before we left. It looked like this: 

 12:00–4:00: Jaime, Celcelia, Peter 

 4:00–8:00: Robert, Simon, Louie, Michael 

 8:00–12:00: Allan, Kristi, Steve 

 The person listed first on each shift was officially designated “captain of the watch.” Our watch had four people on it because it included the two people—me and Louie, the photographer—who had no business on the boat. The captain had assumed that two idiots added up to one useful person. Actually, they didn’t even add up to that, as we discovered one evening when Robert was below inspecting the engine room. Struck by an intensely painful bowel movement, Simon hopped around the deck on one foot for twenty minutes straight rather than entrust Louie and me with the job of spotting supertankers before they crushed us. 

 The watch schedule repeated itself each twelve hours. In the grand scheme of human suffering a four-hour watch does not sound like much. Until you have gazed into perfect, unchanging blankness for four hours straight, you might even think it soothing. Coupled with the churning of the sea and the creaking of the boat, it was deadly. The sea transformed the boat’s beds into souped-up, turbo-charged versions of the coin-operated vibrating beds in a 1970 Holiday Inn. The new Dutch woodwork crackled like strings of miniature firecrackers. All in all, bedtime on Hyperion was more an idea than a fact. This was true not merely for the landlubbers but for everyone on board. Before long, eyes were rheumy, nerves frayed, and the feelings that are normally well sealed inside people’s hearts began to leak—then gush—out. 

 F or the first few days Captain Allan Prior either sat at the wheel or hovered covetously over the computer with an intensity that surprised me, given how often he disavowed any interest in the thing. Once every half hour or so something minor went wrong, or the computer believed it went wrong, and an alarm sounded. “Beep-beep-beep,” it went, as Clark had not yet had time to write the code that enabled the computer to shout at the crew. Whenever the alarm made its irritating noise, another crew member shouted out “Robert! Alarm!” and Robert, the stout young engineer, would pop out through some hatch in the floor, wander over, punch a button or two on the computer, and the annoying beep-beep-beep ceased. On the surface, at least, all seemed well. 

 All was not well—though, apart from Clark’s obvious discontent, the signs of this were subtle. On the first night Louie’s cabin overheated, all by itself. Louie emerged for our 4:00 A.M. watch with trickles of sweat running down the sides of his face. He asked, quite reasonably, “Why’s it so fucking hot in my cabin?” It turned out that it was hot because the computer decided it should be hot. It took about two hours of punching buttons on the computers to persuade it to lower the temperature, only to have the computer decide, seemingly by edict, to raise it again. On the second night, as Steve slept in the cabin he and I shared, someone mistakenly activated the flat-panel display screen tucked inside the ceiling. Our cabin, for some reason I never understood, had one computer screen in a drawer by the bed and another hidden up in the ceiling. At two in the morning the ceiling over Steve’s head opened with an eerie hum, and a green glowing screen dropped down from a new hole, like a UFO. It had scared the hell out of him, as it would have out of anyone. 

 Obviously, these were mere ripples in the pond. Changes in technology are not simple matters. Often they change the way people interact with their surroundings, and with each other. Invent the automobile, and people will travel more often; invent air-conditioning, and they’ll travel south. Hyperion offered a neat little illustration of the early stages of technically inspired social chaos. There is, or was, until Jim Clark got ahold of it, probably no space in the Western world outside of a church more highly ritualized than a sailboat. It has its own peculiar vocabulary designed to mystify outsiders. Lee, jib, splice tang, furl, gimbal—not one in ten intelligent landlubbers could define half of them. There are customs and traditions on a sailboat. There is a carefully observed pecking order. The captain lords it over the first mate, the first mate lords it over the deckhands, the deckhands lord it over the stewards. Into this neat little feudal environment Clark had thrust his anarchic temperament and his twenty-five Silicon Graphics computers—more computing power than you’d find in a big, fully automated factory. The crew members who did not understand computers suddenly discovered they were at the mercy of those who did. This posed some obvious threats to the peace. 

 As I say, the early signs that the technologist’s utopia was anything but a utopia were subtle. On our watch, for instance, Simon and Robert preferred not to sit together. When Robert entered a conversation, Simon left it. Either I sat with Simon on the deck and Louie sat with Robert on the bridge, or, more often, I sat with Robert on the bridge and Louie sat with Simon on the deck. The two crew members were clearly avoiding each other, without making that big a deal of it. On the third evening Robert and I sat together in the tall swivel chairs on the bridge, facing the bank of five glowing flat-panel display screens. Outside, the sea washed gently against the hull and the stars twinkled. Robert began to talk about what it meant to be an engineer. When he used the word “engineer,” he clearly meant “old-fashioned engineer” and not “computer geek.” He held the view that there were two kinds of people in the world, those who did the work and those who got the credit. Real engineers belonged in the former category. Among other things, he felt that engineers had been generally neglected by history. 

 “Who invented the gas turbine engine?” he asked, a bit sharply. 

 I had no idea. 

 “Frank Whittle,” he said. “Who was the chief engineer on the Apollo project?” 

 I said I didn’t know the answer to that one either. 

 “Exactly,” said Robert, and rested his case. In the darkness I could hear him smiling. “But if you want to get your picture in the paper now,” he said, “All you have to do is sit in front of a computer screen.” He whistled a bit to himself, then said, “When something goes wrong with this boat, everyone assumes the engineer broke it. When the computer program goes wrong, everyone assumes the geeks fix it. Why do you think that is?” 

 The room was dark except for the glowing orange screens. The waves rocked the boat back and forth. Robert was no more than a thick shadow. “The problem here,” that voice now said, “is that Jim has built the most technologically sophisticated boat ever built and staffed it with nontechnical people.” 

 This statement made no immediate sense whatsoever to me. After all, Simon had been hired by Clark to present the computers to the crew with a human face. Simon could not program a computer, but he had learned, from a three-week stint at Silicon Graphics, how to perform some rudimentary technical tasks. If your laptop crashed, Simon was distinctly more likely than you were to solve the problem. He belonged to the growing tribe of semitechnical people whose main function is to respond to mankind’s complaints about its computers. Undoubtedly, he was the first deckhand in history who, to become a deckhand, needed to know some computer science. I said as much to Robert. 

 “If something goes really wrong, Simon can’t fix it,” said Robert. “That’s one of the reasons there’s friction between me and Simon. I told Allan that I thought the person on board who was to be the computer interface should have fifteen years training in the area. Allan doesn’t have any idea how it all works. And neither does Simon. Simon cannot program the computer . These aren’t technical people. And you want things to work when you press the button on the computer.” 

 Apparently, Robert had already become slightly fed up by things not working when he pressed a button on the computer. He was, after all, a technical man. There were times, he said, when he couldn’t figure out how to turn out the lights. And it bothered him. 

 L ate on the fourth day at sea we turned south and switched on the engine. South was the wrong direction for anyone making a beeline for the New World. Just a few hours earlier Clark had said he was in a hurry to get back home, as he really needed to give this speech to two thousand doctors who might become customers of Healtheon. But now he’d changed his mind about the urgency of arriving on time; he said he wanted to get out of the cold. 

 As a weak wind blew from the wrong direction, the computer reeled the mainsail back into the boom and revved the engine to a brisk twelve knots. For the moment we would forget the joy of sailing and rely on the engine to get us across. Clark retired to his cabin at ten o’ clock, and I went to the guest cabin soon afterward. At midnight Steve’s watch ended, and he came into the cabin and fell into the other bed. He reflected briefly on his curious role: the man who wrote the code that controlled the sailboat. The boat was not meant to be carrying a programmer, but now a programmer was indispensable. “Back at the boatyard we really didn’t have a chance to test the system, because we never had the full system up and running,” he said. “I needed to be around just to understand the computers because no one else does—except Jim, and Jim doesn’t want to fuck with explaining it all to Simon. I still wonder how this boat will function without either me or Lance or Tim or Jim on board. If there’s a serious failure, I guess they’ll just reboot the computers and hope for the best.” 

 I asked the obvious question how Hyperion had come to pass. “I’m not sure how much Jim knew about sailing, to be honest,” he said. “He just had this idea he wanted to sail a boat by remote control.” 

 “He sailed a lot before he left Silicon Graphics,” I said, because he had. 

 “Maybe,” said Steve. “But this thing kind of started as a lab experiment.” Then he said again what he had said once before, so disconcertingly. “I don’t think Jim understood that people’s lives depended on this stuff working properly.” 

 Then he fell into a deep sleep. The boat whirred and clicked and rose and fell. The new wood creaking into place sounded like a tall tree just before it snaps. Other than that, I realized, every noise on board was the result of the computer doing something. I stared at the ceiling and envied Steve his snore. 
