
Chapter 7: Listening to Analyst Calls
these calls and access to archived calls. Thousands of companies list their
conferences and analyst calls on this site, and you can set up an e-mail alert
for any company you want to follow. Best Call charges membership fees to
access the entire site and fees for transcripts of older calls. You may be able
to find a link for free from the investor relations section of a company’s Web
site.

Identifying Trends in the Stock
Analyst Community
The new regulatory climate in Washington now drives changes in the stock
analyst community following disclosures of the abuses exposed after the
stock bubble that ended in 2000. The Financial Disclosure Regulation of 2001
(Regulation FD) controls the flow of information between companies and
analysts and ultimately what information makes its way to you as an outside
investor or trader.
Some traders believe that the new restrictions that ban selective disclosure
to friendly analysts or key investors actually hurt the flow of information to
the general public. Regulation FD requires that any information disclosed
to analysts or key investors that can affect the value of the company must
be disclosed to the general public within 24 hours, even if the information
wasn’t part of a planned report.
The preference is for making announcements about material information at
the same time for everyone, but sometimes during meetings with an analyst
or institutional investor information is shared inadvertently. For example, if
analysts find out information during a company tour, the company then is
required to put out a press release disclosing the same information to the
general public. Some analysts believe this is making the preparation of their
reports much more difficult than it needs to be.
Regulation FD, however, halted some commonplace industry practices,
including closed meetings with analysts and institutional investors. Lawyers
for many companies warn senior managers to be careful about responding to
calls from individual analysts. Some companies require that any contact with
analysts first be evaluated and approved through their legal advisors.
Regulations also impact roadshows, which are marketing tours that introduce
a company’s new securities offerings. The SEC permits these events but
gives clear guidance that they now need to be more like oral offers that are
designed to avoid the prohibition against written or broadcast offers made
outside the official prospectus of the offering. The SEC believes these road-

115

116 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
shows are best conducted in the open to all investors and has voiced
objections to having two separate roadshows, one for institutional investors
and another, more sanitized version, for retail investors. Some legal experts
also advise companies to be careful about whether they include outside
analysts, those not employed by the underwriter of the offering, as part of
the roadshow. Including outside analysts, some believe, can be viewed as
selective disclosure, which violates Regulation FD.
The biggest regulatory changes you’ll see as an individual investor or trader
relate to disclosures that must be made in research reports, including a
requirement that securities firms must disclose any compensation they
receive for investment banking services they provide during the three months
following the public offering for a covered company. In addition, firms that are
members of the New York Stock Exchange or the National Association of
Securities Dealers must disclose when they stop coverage of a public company.
Many times this type of news generates unfavorable publicity for the company
and can result in a drop in stock prices. In addition to these big disclosures,
analysts’ research reports now must include information about the relationships
between the analysts, underwriters, and stock issuer.
Operating in this type of fish bowl may make companies and analysts
nervous, but it nevertheless should level the playing field for individual
investors. Look carefully for these disclosures as you read analysts’ reports
and take advantage of your newfound access to information by attending
analysts’ earnings conferences and being part of the insider pool rather than
a passive outsider waiting to be fed information by the financial media or
professional analysts.

Part III

Reading the Charts:
Technical Analysis

Y

In this part . . .

ou discover how to read and interpret stock price
charts as we describe their virtues and usefulness
together with the weaknesses of chart analysis. We cover
the basics of constructing a stock price chart, and then
delve into identifying distinct patterns that lead to profitable
trades. In addition, we talk about trends, how to spot
them, and why they’re so important, and we explore how
computer-generated indicators and oscillators can
enhance your analytical skills.

Chapter 8

Reading the Tea Leaves: Does
Technical Analysis Work?
In This Chapter
▶ Revealing truth beyond the mythology
▶ Understanding technical analysis procedures
▶ Deciding whether it works
▶ Determining whether technical analysis is for telling fortunes or trading

E

veryone knows that foretelling the future is a tough thing to do, especially
when money is involved. Whether your prognosticating tool of choice
is a Ouija board or a Magic 8 Ball, knowing exactly what the future holds is
difficult.
Investors and traders are always looking for an edge in forecasting stock
prices to improve their trading results. The method of choice for many
investors is fundamental analysis, which we describe in Chapters 5, 6, and 7.
For traders, on the other hand, technical analysis, as described here and in
Chapters 9–11, is the way to go.
Although some overlap exists between fundamental and technical analyses,
you find dyed-in-the-wool, true believers in both camps, and they argue
that their way is best, even going so far as to say the opposite way is worse
than useless. For our money, the truth lies somewhere in between these two
extremes.

Understanding the Mythology
A technician — that’s someone who reads charts — believes that you can
use price charts and market statistics to develop a profitable trading plan.
Some technicians even say that price charts foretell where a stock’s price
is heading simply by showing where it has been. Detractors argue that

120 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
technical analysis is merely another name for fortune telling, a charlatan’s
moniker that avoids entanglements with local authorities and the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC).
Had Miss Cleo, that deposed temptress of tarot cards, made her living
foretelling stock prices, she might still be in business. Likewise, had she
lived in earlier times, she might have been revered by the masses and the
high priests for her fortune-telling skills instead of being scorned as a fraud.
In ancient Rome, tracking the stars, the planets, and the behavior of birds
was popular, and so was inspecting the entrails of sacrificial animals.
Although a bit gruesome, the haruspex — that’s the expert gut checker —
was highly regarded. As an augur, an official diviner in ancient Rome, Miss
Cleo would have been consulted to foretell events and reveal the gods’
reactions to any future courses of action. She would have been in the limelight
and riding as high as she was right before the FTC brought her into check.
Although it may have been bogus, Miss Cleo couldn’t have hoped for more.
In spite of Miss Cleo’s fate, fortune-tellers still ply their trade. Are the most
successful the ones who divine future price movements by reading the
entrails of stock price charts? That’s what a cadre of academic financial
experts thinks. To the uninitiated, price charts are merely squiggles and lines
on a page. The academics apparently believe, just like augurs of old, that
technicians track those squiggles and lines as a means of predicting price
behavior and attempting to divine a particular stock’s future course of action.
Thankfully, the market entrails viewed by technicians aren’t as gruesome as
the ones analyzed by the haruspex. Nevertheless, academics and fundamental
analysts often regard technicians in the same light as haruspices — little more
than an expert gut checker — but the analogy isn’t really valid. Technical
analysis is not a forecasting tool. It is a trading tool and nothing more.

Understanding the Methodology
Although technicians try to anticipate the future and make trading plans
based on price-chart squiggles, technical analysis is a far cry from reading tea
leaves or tarot cards. Instead of predicting the future, technical analysis is
used to identify events that are likely to occur, and to make trading plans in
case they do, and alternative plans in case they do not. Technicians use a
logical framework to identify price trends, turning points, trading ranges, and
breakouts. These important trading concepts are covered in Chapters 9
through 11.

Chapter 8: Reading the Tea Leaves: Does Technical Analysis Work?
To understand the technical analyst’s methods, you need to be familiar with
these technical analysis concepts:
✓ Everything is in the price.
✓ Price movements are not (always) random.
✓ Price changes are caused by an imbalance between supply and demand.

Finding everything in the price
The stock market is so efficient that everything that’s currently known about
a company is priced into its stock. In other words, the current price reflects
the combined wisdom of everyone in the market, including corporate insiders,
pension funds, mutual funds, individual investors, stock analysts, fundamental
analysts, technicians, and you.
Technical analysis provides a synopsis of all the fundamental and psychological
factors that affect the price of a stock. Although we personally think putting
all your eggs in the price basket is taking the point to an extreme, that’s why
some technicians don’t even try to evaluate the fundamentals. Why bother
trying to outsmart the smartest when everything’s in the price?
The technician’s understanding of why a stock’s price moves is not important.
Technicians don’t care whether the price movement was caused by the most
recent analyst’s report or by the flapping of a butterfly’s wings in China. They
are concerned only with
✓ What the price is now
✓ What the price history is
Technical analysts examine current prices relative to the histories of price
movements to understand and plan for what may happen next. Fundamental
analysts ask why, trying to understand what piece of news causes a particular
rise in price or what bit of insider knowledge causes a sell off. Technicians
try to see everything the price represents and base their trades only on what
they see.
You can’t know what causes every ripple in the price continuum. So why try?

121

122 Part III: Reading the Charts: Technical Analysis
Price movements are not always random
Sometimes prices move higher. Sometimes they move lower. And sometimes
prices move back and forth within a tight trading range. When prices move
higher or lower, we say prices are trending. The trading-range periods
between trending periods often appear to be random price movements, and
at times, they may actually be random. But when you zoom in to view the
price movements within those seemingly random trading-range periods, you
will find the trading range is made up of many mini trends. The closer you
look, the less random these price movements appear, and that is the crux of
technical analysis. These are important concepts for trading and are covered
more fully in Chapter 10.
At its simplest, technical analysis identifies the periods of time during which
trends occur. In general, technicians want to base their trades on trending
markets. The idea is determining when trends are beginning and when they’re
ending. But which trend? Are you the type of trader who is interested in the
little mini trends that make up a trading range? Or are you most interested in
trading longer-lasting trends?
The trick to technical trading, therefore, is identifying a stock’s price trend
within the time frame during which you want to buy or sell it. Depending on
the length of time you plan to hold the stock, you want to base your trades on
analyses done in the corresponding time frame. We are primarily concerned
with long-lasting trends that span many weeks or months. In that case, you’ll
want to analyze charts showing daily and weekly prices. If, instead, you
plan to hold your stock for no more than a few hours or a few days, you’ll
want to analyze charts showing intraday prices. When looking at intraday
price charts, you will see many examples of mini trends and trading ranges.
However, if you’re buying a stock and holding your position for weeks or
months, those mini intraday trends and trading ranges are meaningless. We
discuss these concepts more fully in Chapter 9.

Balancing supply and demand
If you’ve ever watched the nightly business news, you’ve probably heard
reporters claim that stocks rose because more buyers were looking for
stocks than sellers were willing to part with them. At some level, that’s
hogwash. Even novice investors realize that every trade must have a buyer
and a seller.
What the reporter really means is that the supply and demand were out
of balance and that price is a function of supply and demand. In macroeconomics, this concept is illustrated using a freely traded commodity like
wheat. When farmers grow more wheat than bakers need, the price of wheat
falls. When bakers need more wheat than farmers grew, bakers bid higher
prices to get the wheat they need.

Chapter 8: Reading the Tea Leaves: Does Technical Analysis Work?
In many ways, the price of a stock works just like the price of wheat. When
buyers want to buy more shares of a stock than sellers are willing or able to
sell, buyers bid the stock price higher until they find sellers willing to part
with their shares. Conversely, when sellers can’t find enough buyers, they
offer their shares at lower and lower prices until enough buyers can be found.
Changes in a company’s business plan, a new competitor, anything really,
can throw the balance between supply and demand out of whack. Realizing
that imbalances cause prices to move — and not the news itself — is the
point where technical analysis is concerned.

Understanding where you’ve been
Technicians examine price history, trading volume, and additional market
statistics to evaluate the balance between supply and demand. The conceptual
framework is easy to understand. As long as prices are rising, demand
exceeds supply, and buyers are more interested in buying than sellers are in
selling. The reverse is equally true. When prices are falling, supply exceeds
demand, and sellers are more interested in selling than buyers are in buying.
When a stock trades within a tight range of prices, a balance between supply
and demand has been achieved. This situation is evident on the price chart
when a stock trades within a trading range. Examples are shown in Chapter 9.
Technical analysis helps identify these kinds of scenarios. Technicians
examine charts in search of the price levels where buying pressure stops a
stock’s price from falling further or where selling pressure squashes a rally.
Here’s a hypothetical scenario to illustrate that point. A high-profile investment
advisor issues a recommendation to buy shares of XYZ, which closed at
$18.50 the day before and has traded in a tight price range of $17 to $18.75
during the past four months. The recommendation to buy is in effect only if
the stock trades for less than $19 a share. The idea is not necessarily to buy
the instant that a recommendation is made, but rather to buy at a good price.
Taking the hypothetical example a step further, say that the investment
advisor has a wide following. Invariably, the recommendation is quickly
followed by a surge in the volume of buyers purchasing shares of XYZ that
ultimately pushes the price of the stock to $21.
Buying surges based on these kinds of recommendations have a tendency to
stall out and return to the buy-under price (in this case $19) after all the early
buyers make their trades. Patient subscribers of this advisor have seen this
movie many times before, so they wait for a pullback, and place a limit order
near the $19 price. (Limit orders are discussed in Chapter 2.) Enough patient
subscribers usually are in the market for the stock to keep its price from
falling further.

123

