staggering sum of capital merely to satisfy their penchant for "financial flip-flopping". In addition, investment management fees of
over $2 billion annually-sums paid for chair-changing advice-require the forfeiture by investors of all earnings of the five largest
banking organizations (Citicorp, Bank America, Chase Manhattan,
Manufacturers Hanover and J.P. Morgan). These expensive activities may decide who eats the pie, but they don't enlarge it.
(We are aware of the pie-expanding argument that says that
such activities improve the rationality of the capital allocation process. We think that this argument is specious and that, on balance,
hyperactive equity markets subvert rational capital allocation and
act as pie shrinkers. Adam Smith felt that all noncollusive acts in a
free market were guided by an invisible hand that led an economy
to maximum progress; our view is that casino-type markets and
hair-trigger investment management act as an invisible foot that
trips up and slows down a forward-moving economy.)
Contrast the hyperactive stock with Berkshire. The bid-andask spread in our stock currently is about 30 points, or a little over
2%. Depending on the size of the transaction, the difference between proceeds received by the seller of Berkshire and cost to the
buyer may range downward from 4% (trading involving only a few
shares) to perhaps 1½% (in large trades where negotiation can reduce both the market-maker's spread and the broker's commission). Because most Berkshire shares are traded in fairly large
transactions, the spread on all trading probably does not average
more than 2%.
Meanwhile, true turnover in Berkshire stock (excluding interdealer transactions, gifts and bequests) probably runs 3% per year.
Thus our owners, in aggregate, are paying perhaps 6/100 of 1 % of
Berkshire's market value annually for transfer privileges. By this
very rough estimate, that's $900,000-not a small cost, but far less
than average. Splitting the stock would increase that cost, downgrade the quality of our shareholder population, and encourage a
market price less consistently related to intrinsic business value.
We see no offsetting advantages.
E.

Shareholder Strategies 34

Late last year Berkshire's stock price crossed $10,000. Several
shareholders have mentioned to me that the high price causes them
problems: They like to give shares away each year and find them34

[1992.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

131

selves impeded by the tax rule that draws a distinction between
annual gifts of $10,000 or under to a single individual and those
above $10,000. That is, those gifts no greater than $10,000 are completely tax-free; those above $10,000 require the donor to use up a
portion of his or her lifetime exemption from gift and estate taxes,
or, if that exemption has been exhausted, to pay gift taxes.
I can suggest three ways to address this problem. The first
would be useful to a married shareholder, who can give up to
$20,000 annually to a single recipient, as long as the donor files a
gift tax return containing his or her spouse's written consent to gifts
made during the year.
Secondly, a shareholder, married or not, can make a bargain
sale. Imagine, for example, that Berkshire is selling for $12,000
and that one wishes to make only a $10,000 gift. In that case, sell
the stock to the giftee for $2,000. (Caution: You will be taxed on
the amount, if any, by which the sales price to your giftee exceeds
your tax basis.)
Finally, you can establish a partnership with people to whom
you are making gifts, fund it with Berkshire shares, and simply give
percentage interests in the partnership away each year. These interests can be for any value that you select. If the value is $10,000
or less, the gift will be tax-free.
We issue the customary warning: Consult with your own tax
advisor before taking action on any of the more esoteric methods
of gift-making.
We hold to the view about stock splits that we set forth in the
1983 Annual Report. 35 Overall, we believe our owner-related policies-including the no-split policy-have helped us assemble a
body of shareholders that is the best associated with any widelyheld American corporation. Our shareholders think and behave
like rational long-term owners and view the business much as
Charlie and I do. Consequently, our stock consistently trades in a
price range that is sensibly related to intrinsic value.
Additionally, we believe that our shares turn over far less actively than do the shares of any other widely-held company. The
frictional costs of trading-which act as a major "tax" on the owners of many companies-are virtually non-existent at Berkshire.
(The market-making skills of Jim Maguire, our New York Stock
Exchange specialist, definitely help to keep these costs low.) Obviously a split would not change this situation dramatically. None35

[See the essay Stock Splits and Trading Activity in Part iII.D.]

132

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

theless, there is no way that our shareholder group would be
upgraded by the new shareholders enticed by a split. Instead we
believe that modest degradation would occur.
F.

Berkshire's Recapitalization 36

At the Annual Meeting you will be asked to approve a recapitalization of Berkshire, creating two classes of stock. If the plan is
adopted, our existing common stock will be designated as Class A
Common Stock and a new Class B Common Stock will be
authorized.
Each share of the "B" will have the rights of 1I30th of an "A"
share with these exceptions: First, a B share will have 1I200th of the
vote of an A share (rather than 1I30th of the vote). Second, the B
will not be eligible to participate in Berkshire's shareholder-designated charitable contributions program.
When the recapitalization is complete, each share of A will
become convertible, at the holder's option and at any time, into 30
shares of B. This conversion privilege will not extend in the opposite direction. That is, holders of B shares will not be able to convert them into A shares.
We expect to list the B shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where they will trade alongside the A stock. To create the
shareholder base necessary for a listing-and to ensure a liquid
market in the B stock-Berkshire expects to make a public offering for cash of at least $100 million of new B shares. The offering
will be made only by means of a prospectus.
The market will ultimately determine the price of the B shares.
Their price, though, should be in the neighborhood of 1I30th of the
price of the A shares.
Class A shareholders who wish to give gifts may find it convenient to convert a share or two of their stock into Class B shares.
Additionally, arbitrage-related conversions will occur if demand
for the B is strong enough to push its price to slightly above 1I30th
of the price of A.
However, because the Class A stock will entitle its holders to
full voting rights and access to Berkshire's contributions program,
these shares will be superior to the Class B shares and we would
expect most shareholders to remain holders of the Class A-which
is precisely what the Buffett and Munger families plan to do, except in those instances when we ourselves might convert a few
36

[Divided by hash lines: 1995; 1996.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

133

shares to facilitate gifts. The prospect that most shareholders will
stick to the A stock suggests that it will enjoy a somewhat more
liquid market than the B.
There are tradeoffs for Berkshire in this recapitalization. But
they do not arise from the proceeds of the offering-we will find
constructive uses for the money-nor in any degree from the price
at which we will sell the B shares. As I write this-with Berkshire
stock at $36,000-Charlie and I do not believe it undervalued.
Therefore, the offering we propose will not diminish the per-share
intrinsic value of our existing stock. Let me also put our thoughts
about valuation more baldly: Berkshire is selling at a price at which
Charlie and I would not consider buying it.
What Berkshire will incur by way of the B stock are certain
added costs, including those involving the mechanics of handling a
larger number of shareholders. On the other hand, the stock
should be a convenience for people wishing to make gifts. And
those of you who have hoped for a split have gained a do-it-yourself method of bringing one about.
We are making this move, though, for other reasons-having
to do with the appearance of expense-laden unit trusts purporting
to be low-priced "clones" of Berkshire and sure to be aggressively
marketed. The idea behind these vehicles is not new: In recent
years, a number of people have told me about their wish to create
an "all-Berkshire" investment fund to be sold at a low dollar price.
But until recently, the promoters of these investments heard out
my objections and backed off.
I did not discourage these people because I prefer large investors over small. Were it possible, Charlie and I would love to turn
$1,000 into $3,000 for multitudes of people who would find that
gain an important answer to their immediate problems.
In order to quickly triple small stakes, however, we would
have to just as quickly turn our present market capitalization of $43
billion into $129 billion (roughly the market cap of General Electric, America's most highly valued company). We can't come close
to doing that. The very best we hope for is-on average-to
double Berkshire's per-share intrinsic value every five years, and
we may well fall far short of that goal.
In the end, Charlie and I do not care whether our shareholders
own Berkshire in large or small amounts. What we wish for are
shareholders of any size who are knowledgeable about our operations, share our objectives and long-term perspective, and are

134

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

aware of our limitations, most particularly those imposed by our
large capital base.
The unit trusts that have recently surfaced fiy in the face of
these goals. They would be sold by brokers working for big commissions, would impose other burdensome costs on their shareholders, and would be marketed en masse to unsophisticated
buyers, apt to be seduced by our past record and beguiled by the
publicity Berkshire and I have received in recent years. The sure
outcome: a multitude of investors destined to be disappointed.
Through our creation of the B stock-a low-denomination
product far superior to Berkshire-only trusts-we hope to make
the clones unmerchandisable.
But both present and prospective Berkshire shareholders
should pay special attention to one point: Though the per-share
intrinsic value of our stock has grown at an excellent rate during
the past five years, its market price has grown still faster. The
stock, in other words, has outperformed the business.
That kind of market overperformance cannot persist indefinitely, neither for Berkshire nor any other stock. Inevitably, there
will be periods of underperformance as well. The price volatility
that results, though endemic to public markets, is not to our liking.
What we would prefer instead is to have the market price of Berkshire precisely track its intrinsic value. Were the stock to do that,
every shareholder would benefit during his period of ownership in
exact proportion to the progress Berkshire itself made in the
period.
Obviously, the market behavior of Berkshire's stock will never
conform to this ideal. But we will come closer to this goal than we
would otherwise if our present and prospective shareholders are
informed, business-oriented and not exposed to high-commission
salesmanship when making their investment decisions. To that
end, we are better off if we can blunt the merchandising efforts of
the unit trust-and that is the reason we are creating the B stock.
[W]e made two good-sized offerings through Salomon [during
1996], both with interesting aspects. The first was our sale in May
of 517,500 shares of Class B Common, which generated net proceeds of $565 million. As I have told you before, we made this sale
in response to the threatened creation of unit trusts that would
have marketed themselves as Berkshire look-alikes. In the process, they would have used our past, and definitely nonrepeatable,

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

135

record to entice naive small investors and would have charged
these innocents high fees and commissions.
I think it would have been quite easy for such trusts to have
sold many billions of dollars worth of units, and I also believe that
early marketing successes by these trusts would have led to the formation of others. (In the securities business, whatever can be sold
will be sold.) The trusts would have meanwhile indiscriminately
poured the proceeds of their offerings into a supply of Berkshire
shares that is fixed and limited. The likely result: a speculative
bubble in our stock. For at least a time, the price jump would have
been self-validating, in that it would have pulled new waves of naive and impressionable investors into the trusts and set off still
more buying of Berkshire shares.
Some Berkshire shareholders choosing to exit might have
found that outcome ideal, since they could have profited at the expense of the buyers entering with false hopes. Continuing shareholders, however, would have suffered once reality set in, for at
that point Berkshire would have been burdened with both hundreds of thousands of unhappy, indirect owners (trustholders, that
is) and a stained reputation.
Our issuance of the B shares not only arrested the sale of the
trusts, but provided a low-cost way for people to invest in Berkshire if they still wished to after hearing the warnings we issued. To
blunt the enthusiasm that brokers normally have for pushing new
issues-because that's where the money is-we arranged for our
offering to carry a commission of only 11h%, the lowest payoff that
we have ever seen in common stock underwriting. Additionally,
we made the amount of the offering open-ended, thereby repelling
the typical IPO buyer who looks for a short-term price spurt arising
from a combination of hype and scarcity.
Overall, we tried to make sure that the B stock would be
purchased only by investors with a long-term perspective. Those
efforts were generally successful: Trading volume in the B shares
immediately following the offering-a rough index of "flipping"was far below the norm for a new issue. In the end we added about
40,000 shareholders, most of whom we believe both understand
what they own and share our time horizons.
Salomon could not have performed better in the handling of
this unusual transaction. Its investment bankers understood perfectly what we were trying to achieve and tailored every aspect of
the offering to meet these objectives. The firm would have made
far more money-perhaps ten times as much-if our offering had

136

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

been standard in its make-up. But the investment bankers involved made no attempt to tweak the specifics in that direction.
Instead they came up with ideas that were counter to Salomon's
financial interest but that made it much more certain Berkshire's
goals would be reached. Terry Fitzgerald captained this effort, and
we thank him for the job that he did.
Given that background, it won't surprise you to learn that we
again went to Terry when we decided late in the year to sell an
issue of Berkshire notes that can be exchanged for a portion of the
Salomon shares that we hold. In this instance, once again, Salomon did an absolutely first-class job, selling $500 million principal
amount of five-year notes for $447.1 million. Each $1,000 note is
exchangeable into 17.65 shares and is callable in three years at accreted value. Counting the original issue discount and a 1 % coupon, the securities will provide a yield of 3 % to maturity for
holders who do not exchange them for Salomon stock. But it
seems quite likely that the notes will be exchanged before their
maturity. If that happens, our interest cost will be about 1.1 % for
the period prior to exchange.
In recent years, it has been written that Charlie and I are unhappy about all investment-banking fees. That's dead wrong. We
have paid a great many fees over the last 30 years-beginning with
the check we wrote to Charlie Heider upon our purchase of National Indemnity in 1967-and we are delighted to make payments
that are commensurate with performance. In the case of the 1996
transactions at Salomon Brothers we more than got our money's
worth.

IV.

MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

Of all our activities at Berkshire, the most exhilarating for
Charlie and me is the acquisition of a business with excellent economic characteristics and a management that we like, trust and admire. Such acquisitions are not easy to make but we look for them
constantly. In the search, we adopt the same attitude one might
find appropriate in looking for a spouse: It pays to be active, interested, and open-minded, but it does not pay to be in a hurry.
In the past, I've observed that many acquisition-hungry managers were apparently mesmerized by their childhood reading of
the story about the frog-kissing princess. Remembering her success, they pay dearly for the right to kiss corporate toads, expecting
wondrous transfigurations. Initially, disappointing results only
deepen their desire to round up new toads. ("Fanaticism," said
[Santayana], "consists of redoubling your effort when you've forgotten your aim.") Ultimately, even the most optimistic manager
must face reality. Standing knee-deep in unresponsive toads, he
then announces an enormous "restructuring" charge. In this corporate equivalent of a Head Start program, the CEO receives the
education but the stockholders pay the tuition.
In my early days as a manager I, too, dated a few toads. They
were cheap dates-I've never been much of a sport-but my results matched those of acquirers who courted higher-priced toads.
I kissed and they croaked.
After several failures of this type, I finally remembered some
useful advice I once got from a golf pro (who, like all pros who
have had anything to do with my game, wishes to remain anonymous). Said the pro: "Practice doesn't make perfect; practice
makes permanent." And thereafter I revised my strategy and tried
to buy good businesses at fair prices rather than fair businesses at
good prices. 37
A.

Bad Motives and High Prices38

As our history indicates, we are comfortable both with total
ownership of businesses and with marketable securities representing small portions of businesses. We continually look for ways to
employ large sums in each area. (But we try to avoid small commitments-"If something's not worth doing at all, it's not worth
doing well".) Indeed, the liquidity requirements of our insurance
37 [Introductory essay, 1992.]
38

[Divided by hash lines: 1981; 1982; 1994.]

137

138

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[VoL 19:1

and trading stamp businesses mandate major investments in marketable securities.
Our acquisition decisions will be aimed at maximizing real
economic benefits, not at maximizing either managerial domain or
reported numbers for accounting purposes. (In the long run, managements stressing accounting appearance over economic substance usually achieve little of either.)
Regardless of the impact upon immediately reportable earnings, we would rather buy 10% of Wonderful Business T at X per
share than 100% of Tat 2X per share. Most corporate managers
prefer just the reverse, and have no shortage of stated rationales
for their behavior.
However, we suspect three motivations-usually unspokento be, singly or in combination, the important ones in most highpremium takeovers:
(1) Leaders, business or otherwise, seldom are deficient in
animal spirits and often relish increased activity and challenge. At Berkshire, the corporate pulse never beats
faster than when an acquisition is in prospect.
(2) Most organizations, business or otherwise, measure themselves, are measured by others, and compensate their
managers far more by the yardstick of size than by any
other yardstick. (Ask a Fortune 500 manager where his
corporation stands on that famous list and, invariably, the
number responded will be from the list ranked by size of
sales; he may well not even know where his corporation
places on the list Fortune just as faithfully compiles ranking the same 500 corporations by profitability.)
(3) Many managements apparently were overexposed in impressionable childhood years to the story in which the imprisoned handsome prince is released from a toad's body
by a kiss from a beautiful princess. Consequently, they are
certain their managerial kiss will do wonders for the profitability of Company T(arget).
Such optimism is essentiaL Absent that rosy view, why else
should the shareholders of Company A(cquisitor) want to own an
interest in T at the 2X takeover cost rather than at the X market
price they would pay if they made direct purchases on their own?
In other words, investors can always buy toads at the going
price for toads. If investors instead bankroll princesses who wish
to pay double for the right to kiss the toad, those kisses had better
pack some real dynamite. We've observed many kisses but very

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

139

few miracles. Nevertheless, many managerial princesses remain serenely confident about the future potency of their kisses-even after their corporate backyards are knee-deep in unresponsive toads.
In fairness, we should acknowledge that some acquisition records
have been dazzling. Two major categories stand out.
The first involves companies that, through design or accident,
have purchased only businesses that are particularly well adapted
to an inflationary environment. Such favored business must have
two characteristics: (1) an ability to increase prices rather easily
(even when product demand is flat and capacity is not fully utilized) without fear of significant loss of either market share or unit
volume, and (2) an ability to accommodate large dollar volume increases in business (often produced more by inflation than by real
growth) with only minor additional investment of capital. Managers of ordinary ability, focusing solely on acquisition possibilities
meeting these tests, have achieved excellent results in recent decades. However, very few enterprises possess both characteristics,
and competition to buy those that do has now become fierce to the
point of being self-defeating.
The second category involves the managerial superstars-men
who can recognize that rare prince who is disguised as a toad, and
who have managerial abilities that enable them to peel away the
disguise. We salute such managers as Ben Heineman at Northwest
Industries, Henry Singleton at Teledyne, Erwin Zaban at National
Service Industries, and especially Tom Murphy at Capital Cities
Communications (a real managerial "twofer", whose acquisition
efforts have been properly focused in Category 1 and whose operating talents also make him a leader of Category 2). From both
direct and vicarious experience, we recognize the difficulty and rarity of these executives' achievements. (So do they; these champs
have made very few deals in recent years, and often have found
repurchase of their own shares to be the most sensible employment
of corporate capital.)
Your Chairman, unfortunately, does not qualify for Category
2. And, despite a reasonably good understanding of the economic
