
Using the Stochastic Indicator
and Bearish Candlestick
Patterns for Shorting
If you’re interested in another reliable technical indicator that you can combine with bearish candlestick patterns to help you in your short trades, look
no farther than the stochastic indicator. The stochastic indicator can be a very
useful trading tool when you’re trying to determine when a security is overbought or oversold. You can read all about the stochastic indicator in
Chapter 11, but for this discussion just keep in mind the following points:
 The stochastic indicator includes two components: the fast and slow
stochastic.
 The fast and slow stochastics oscillate between 0 and 100.
 When the fast stochastic is under the slow stochastic, there’s a
downtrend in place.
 When the fast stochastic is above the slow stochastic, there’s an
uptrend in place.
 The stochastic indicator can be based on a variety of look back periods.
In this chapter my examples have a 14-period look back, which you’ll
find is a standard level in charting packages.
 Overbought and oversold levels on the stochastic indicator can vary,
but in this chapter I use the standard levels of 20 for oversold and 80 for
overbought. Keep in mind that this is slightly different than the standard
oversold and overbought levels used for the RSI.
This section focuses on how to use the stochastic indicator alongside your
candlesticks in shorting situations. Keep in mind, though, that you can use
the same information to help you figure out when to get out of a long position. The rule is fairly simple. If you have a long position and the trend looks
like it’s going to head downward, exit and book your profit!

285

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 286

286 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Picking short entry points
Picking the best entry point for a short can be a difficult undertaking, but
using the stochastic indicator as a supplement to your candlestick patterns
can make the task much easier. For a prime example of how the stochastic
indicator can be used with a bearish candlestick pattern to pick a short
entry, take a look at Figure 13-5.
In the figure, you see a chart of Convergys Corporation (CVG), a provider of
specialized software solutions for business customers. Its headquarters is in
Cincinnati, Ohio, and Cincinnati’s airport code is CVG. Coincidence? Nah,
probably not. As you can see, the stock’s price action is pretty bullish for a
few days, and the result is a stochastic indicator reading over 80. The three
inside down candlestick pattern forms shortly after the indicators reach this
overbought level. Feel free to flip back to Chapter 10 for more information on
the three inside down candlestick pattern.
The situation is ripe for a short entry, and the short entry situation gets even
better when the fast stochastic crosses under the slow stochastic while both
are still in overbought territory. If you see that combination of factors come
together, you should be quick to enter a short position, because all signs
point to a forthcoming downtrend.
For a second example, see the chart of Xerox (XRX) stock in Figure 13-6.
Xerox has become synonymous with document solutions for all businesses
great and small.

Figure 13-5:
A bearish
candlestick
pattern
and the
stochastic
indicator
reveal a
short entry
on a chart
of CVG.

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 287

Chapter 13: Sell Indicators and Bearish Reversal Candlestick Patterns

Figure 13-6:
Short entry
points are
signaled by
bearish
candlestick
patterns
and the
stochastic
indicator on
a chart
of XRX.

In the middle of the chart in Figure 13-6, I highlight three points where the
stochastic reading is overbought. Two of those points are accompanied by
bearish candlestick patterns, and one isn’t. Guess which ones provide the
best entry point signals? I explain each scenario:
 The first of the three points at which the stochastic indicates that the
stock is overbought occurs as the stochastic indicator comes to the end
of an uptrend that was in place for a few weeks. The overbought level is
reached just when a hanging man (a bearish reversal signal covered in
Chapter 6) appears on the chart. On the very next day, the fast stochastic crosses under the slow stochastic, which signals a short entry point
and a confirmation of the hammer pattern as a reversal signal.
Initiating a trade on this day, can prove profitable. Bearish activity prevails for a few days after the signal, but it’s not the significant downtrend
a short seller would hope for. Still, though, it can result in a profitable
trade.
 The second of the three points comes when the stochastic indicator
rebounds into overbought territory. The indicator almost provides some
signals, but nothing really comes of it for a few days. Finally, the indicator appears to signal a short entry opportunity, but as you can see, there
isn’t a corresponding bearish candlestick pattern.
If you rely solely on the stochastic indicator in this situation and initiate
a short position, you’ll be sorry. The downtrend promised by the stochastic indicator doesn’t appear, and the stock continues to trade
higher. Ouch!

287

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 288

288 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
 The last and best of the three signals occurs after the trend has continued upward and the stochastic readings have reached an overbought
level yet again. This time, though, the three outside down pattern (see
Chapter 10 for more details) emerges, and during the pattern’s formation
the fast stochastic crosses under the slow one. A downtrend is probably
on the way, and entering into a short position is smart at this time. Then
you’d be rewarded handsomely, because the stock trades off heavily for
quite some time and the potential profit is quite attractive.

Deciding when to get in and out of shorts
Knowing when to exit a trade can be as important as knowing when to make
an entry, and luckily the stochastic indicator — when used in combination
with bearish candlestick patterns — can provide you with guidance for covering a short. Truth be told, the stochastic indicator actually does an okay
job on its own, but when you use this indicator correctly with candlesticks,
the odds of success are in your favor. To close out this chapter, I present a
couple of examples of how you can use the stochastic indicator with bearish
candlestick patterns to determine when to get in and out of a short.
The first example comes in the form of Figure 13-7 and a chart of First
Horizon National (FHN), which is the parent company of First Tennessee
Bank and some other financial subsidiaries. Also, for the sake of full disclosure, I used to work for this company, and their stock is the first I ever
owned. But I’m talking about Wall Street, here, not Memory Lane, so let me
get on with it.

Figure 13-7:
The
stochastic
indicator
and bearish
candlestick
patterns
signal entry
and exit
points on a
chart of
FHN.

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 289

Chapter 13: Sell Indicators and Bearish Reversal Candlestick Patterns
The stochastic readings in Figure 13-7 are in overbought territory when the
first day of a three inside down candlestick pattern emerges. Coincidentally,
the fast stochastic crosses under the slow stochastic as the pattern comes
together, and the result is a full-blown short-sell signal.
The resulting downtrend stays in place for a couple of weeks, and the
stochastic levels finally reach an oversold level after a long black candle
pushes prices down. The following day sees a small rebound, and more
importantly, a cross of the fast stochastic over the slow one. That’s your
exit signal.
Keep in mind that generally speaking, you can forego a revealing candlestick
pattern and rely on another technical indicator when picking a spot to exit a
trade. Exits are usually a little less precise, and often one technical indicator
is enough to go on. It’s better to have a candlestick pattern for confirmation,
but it isn’t absolutely necessary.
You’d need to get out of the short in Figure 13-7 quickly, because the next
day gaps higher and the gap isn’t filled. Prices just keep moving up, which
is pretty scary for a short in this position. Not exiting quickly when a stop
loss signal is hit can result in worse losses. Figure 13-7 is a prime example.
Figure 13-8 is a real beaut. This chart is of Vornado Realty Trust (VNO), a
real estate investment trust that owns office buildings in the New York
City area.

Figure 13-8:
Bearish
candlestick
patterns
and the
stochastic
indicator
provide
entry and
exit signals
on a chart of
VNO.

289

20_178089 ch13.qxp

2/27/08

9:37 PM

Page 290

290 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
This chart is another good example because there are three potential actionable signals in a row, each with its own unique characteristics. Working from
left to right:
 The first highlighted candlestick reversal pattern is a doji that occurs
after several very strong days in a row that have pushed the fast and
slow stochastic readings into the overbought range. The fast stochastic
crosses under the slow stochastic on the day after the doji, and that
cross confirms the doji and offers a short entry point. The resulting
bearish price action is pure happiness for shorts: ten bearish days in a
row after the confirmation day. It culminates with both stochastic readings reaching the oversold level.
Then, on the tenth down day, another reversal signal appears! It’s a
hammer pattern, and given the market environment, it’s pretty clear that
this hammer indicates that the trend will be heading upward soon. It’s
time for the shorts to cover and walk away with an appealing profit.
Before I move on to the second sell signal on this chart (the next bullet
point), note that the hammer pattern isn’t just an exit signal. It can also be
used as a buy signal for a long trade! There’s nothing wrong with making
money on the same stock being both long and short. From personal experience I can tell you it’s actually a lot of fun, and can be quite profitable!
 The second sell signal on the chart in Figure 13-8 is a gravestone doji, and
it appears because the stochastic levels are both in overbought territory
(details of the gravestone doji in Chapter 5). Much like the first signal, it’s
followed by a down day that results in a crossing of the fast stochastic
under the slow one. That’s confirmation that the gravestone doji indeed
signaled a trend reversal, and it presents a short entry opportunity.
The second trade doesn’t work out quite as well as the first, but if you
trade nimbly you may break even at the very worst, and you more than
likely will book a small profit if you follow the rules. The entry day is followed by a little bearishness, but the bulls come in and cause the stochastic indicator to show a change in trend to the upside. A quick exit of
the short would be in order.
 The third sell signal has a pattern that’s a little more elaborate and is a
three inside down reversal pattern (covered in Chapter 10). Like the
previous two reversal signals (previous two bullets), it occurs with the
stochastic indicator in the overbought range, and during the pattern
formation the stochastic indicator signals a change in trend to the
downside. You guessed it: That serves as a short entry signal.
The exit on this last trade is pretty quick and not terribly profitable.
Once again the stochastic indicator changes trend just a few days after
the short entry point. Luckily, if followed correctly, a small profit
would’ve been booked.

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 291

Chapter 14

Using Technical Indicators
Alongside Bullish-Trending
Candlestick Patterns
In This Chapter
 Combining trendlines with bullish-trending candlestick patterns
 Making profitable trades with moving averages and bullish-trending candlestick

patterns

Y

ou can combine candlestick patterns effectively with a variety of technical indicators to produce information that helps you decide when to
put on and get out of trades. Like candlestick patterns, many technical indicators tell you when a trend is about to reverse, but several others can let you
know that a prevailing trend continues. These indicators are powerful
weapons that can add to the versatility of your trading arsenal.
If you understand how to use technical indicators in tandem with bullishtrending candlestick patterns, it’s easier for you to spot situations where
buying to enter a long position is a wise move. And you can also use technical indicators to confirm market or individual security predictions that
you’ve made based on candlestick patterns.
I cover all that and more in this chapter, and I focus my discussion on two of
the most common technical indicators: trendlines and moving averages. If
you need a refresher on those two indicators, flip back to Chapter 11. If you
have a basic understanding of how they’re created and how they work, read
on and get trading!

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 292

292 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Using Trendlines and Bullish-Trending
Candlestick Patterns for Buying and
Confirmation
The trendline is one of the oldest and easiest to understand of all the technical indicators. You’d be hard pressed to find any current charting software
that won’t draw a trendline automatically for you, but you can also hark back
to the good ol’ days and draw a trendline yourself with nothing more than a
chart, a ruler, and a pencil. If you need to get familiar with trendlines or brush
up on what you already know, flip back to Chapter 11.
Trendlines have a positive slope during an uptrend or a negative slope during
a downtrend, and those simple signals can be very useful when you’re trying
to confirm your opinion of the market trend.
In this section, I show you how to use the trend confirmation that trendlines
provide in combination with bullish-trending candlestick patterns, which
signal that a trend in place will continue. You can use the combinations to
decide when it’s time to buy to enter a long position or when you should
stick with a trade to realize additional profits.

Using trendlines and bullish-trending
candlestick patterns to pick long entry
points and confirm trends
Because trendlines are so useful for trend confirmation, you can trade with
confidence when you combine bullish trendlines with bullish candlestick
patterns. That tandem can help you decide when to stick with a position or
initiate a new one.
It’s pretty obvious where a trendline should be drawn on a chart, but sometimes you may question its placement. Don’t stress about it too much,
because as a trend goes along and changes, you can always alter the trendline accordingly. I present a couple of examples of how you can combine a
positive trendline and bullish-trending candlestick patterns in this section.

The trendline and bullish pattern on a chart
Figure 14-1 is a chart of Apple Inc. (AAPL), the computer company turned
consumer electronics company that’s scored big with iPods and iPhones.

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 293

Chapter 14: Using Technical Indicators

Figure 14-1:
A chart
of AAPL
with
a couple
of bullishtrending
candlestick
patterns and
a positive
trendline.

Both of the patterns on this chart are bullish neck line patterns, where a bullish day is followed by a gap opening. (You can read all about the bullish neck
line pattern in Chapter 7.) That attracts some bears, and they push the closing price down near the point where the bulls raised the price the previous
day. If you spot these patterns while reviewing charts, you can feel quite confident that an uptrend is indeed in place, and you’d be wise to anticipate
higher prices and a buying opportunity.
The first of the two bullish neck line patterns occurs after the uptrend has
been in place for only a few days. After recognizing that pattern, you should
draw a trendline to better define the uptrend and buy to enter a long position. The trendline makes it easier to see the strength of the uptrend, and it
provides a support level for several days to come.
In the midst of the established uptrend, another bullish neck line pattern
appears. It’s a bit above the trendline, and it shows up after the trend has
been in place for quite awhile, so buying to get into a long position may not
be the best move. It’s like a stale green traffic light: You know it’s going to
turn soon. On the other hand, it’s still a bullish-trending candlestick pattern,
so if you saw it and were already in a long position, you can be confident that
the uptrend carries on at least a little farther.

Another example of a trendline working with a bullish pattern
My second example of bullish candlestick patterns and trendlines working
together is present in Figure 14-2. In that figure, you see the exchange-traded
fund (ETF) based on the 100 biggest stocks trading on the NASDAQ exchange.
The symbol for this ETF is QQQQ. Hopefully, I can provide some A’s for all
those Q’s.

293

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:49 PM

Page 294

294 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators

Figure 14-2:
A chart of
QQQQ with
a bullish
trendline
and a bullish
thrusting
line pattern.

On the chart in Figure 14-2 a bullish thrusting line pattern emerges as QQQQ
is just a few days into an uptrend. This pattern is one of my favorites because
the close is an attractive entry point due to a bit of retracing of the price into
the range of the pattern’s first day. Buying low while in an uptrend is the best
of both worlds!
This bullish thrusting line pattern shows up several days into a bullish trend.
If you see it on a chart, you may want to draw a trendline to further define
the uptrend and give yourself a support level. If that level is violated, you
know it’s time to sell and exit the trade.

Picking long exits and determining
stop levels with trendlines and bullishtrending candlestick patterns
In addition to confirming trends and letting you know when to get in on a
long trade, trendlines can also help with your decisions on when to exit a
trade. Put simply, a bullish trendline may serve as an exit point when it
occurs in a bullish trend. It’s not always easy, because trendlines are constantly changing, but that can also be a plus because the trendline is moving
in the same direction of your position (higher). Sound confusing? Let me
clear things up with a couple of examples in the next sections.

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 295

Chapter 14: Using Technical Indicators
Trendline and patterns for entries and exits
Figure 14-3 is the same chart I use in Figure 14-2, but the trendline has been
expanded a bit to include a level where you exit a long trade if you use the
trendline to define the prevailing uptrend.

Figure 14-3:
A chart of
QQQQ
where a
bullishtrending
candlestick
pattern and
a bullish
trendline
indicate an
entry and
exit point.

Once again, the pattern is a bullish thrusting line pattern that pops up in an
uptrend, and the trendline, which offers a support level for the uptrend, is
established. In a nutshell, if the stock continues to trade above this line, it’s
still in an uptrend. And as long as it’s in an uptrend, you want to be on board
with a long position!
You can clearly see the exit level in Figure 14-3. The stock has a day where it
drops below the trendline, and that’s where you want to get out. In fact, placing a stop order on the level of that trendline would be a good idea, so that
any dip below it would result in an exit. You may be a bit dismayed shortly
after because the stock quickly recovers and the trend resumes for a few
more days. There was still a little more money to be made, but you can take
comfort in the fact that you followed the rules and exited the trade when it
was prudent. Hindsight is 20/20, of course, and in the long run you come out
ahead if you stick with your rules.

Another entry and exit with a trendline and bullish pattern
I provide one more example of how you can use a trendline alongside a bullish candlestick pattern to pick an exit level in Figure 14-4. The chart in this
figure is for the stock of General Electric (GE). At this point it’s pretty difficult
to get away from GE if you’re living in the developed part of the world.

295

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 296

296 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Exiting with a trendline
You may be wondering how it’s possible to use
a trendline as an exit stop level because it
moves every day. That’s a valid concern! Unlike
the set points associated with candlestick patterns, a trendline’s level on a chart changes
daily. You can deal with that challenge in one of
two ways:
 The first is to determine the level of the
support trendline each and every day, and
place an appropriate stop order that’s good
only for that day. That strategy works well
because the line moves with the trend and
your exit point moves accordingly daily. On
the downside, you do have to commit to
making the change every single day, which
can be tough for some busy amateur
traders.

 Second, you can choose to exit the trade
only if the closing price is lower than the
trendline. Going with that strategy keeps
you from having to place trades everyday,
but it does require you to check your chart
toward the close of each day. It’s attractive
because it can keep you from getting
stopped out of a potentially valid trade if the
price happens to take a slight dive. On the
flip side, though, the price can fall dramatically under the trendline during the day and
close at a low level as well, meaning that
your exit would be far lower than if you
went with the first stop level strategy.

Figure 14-4:
A bullish
candlestick
pattern and
a trendline
point to an
exit on a
chart of GE.

The chart in Figure 14-4 is interesting because the bullish neck lines pattern
appears and there’s an uptrend in place, but what to do in terms of trading
action is a little blurry. The prevailing trend is a long one, and the pattern
occurs with quite a lot of price difference between its close and the trendline
that would be drawn at that time. (The trendline on the chart would be old
news by then.)

21_178089 ch14.qxp

2/27/08

9:50 PM

Page 297

Chapter 14: Using Technical Indicators
Even though the trend is your friend, sometimes stocks get so far ahead of
the trend that holding out for a better entry price — on both the long and
short side — or possibly just skipping the trade altogether is wise. The example chart in Figure 14-4 proves prudent to pass on the trade, because if a long
position is initiated, then its exit level comes up rather quickly and the trade
appears to be a small loser.
