
Charts 12-7 and 12-8 feature a short-term KST suitable for use with daily
data. First, the KST for the Bombay SE Index experienced nice fluctuations
between 2000 and the first quarter of 2001. The arrows on the chart indi-
cate the approximate periods when the KST reverses and crosses above or
below its 10-day MA. These MA crossovers are a classic way in which the KST
is used. Unfortunately, not all situations are as usable as this.

Chart 12-8, for instance, shows the KST with the Amex Brokers Index. After
two false KST MA crossovers, the index finally succumbed to a trend break
and a negative KST divergence in the spring of 1999. Occasionally, the KST
Will move in a very quiet and subdued manner, as indicated by the two con-
verging trendlines in the fall of 1999. Once the indicator breaks out and this
1s confirmed by the price, a strong and reliable signal is usually given.



244 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 12-7 Bombay SE Index and a short-term KST. (From www.pring.com.)

Individual Momentum Indicators II 245

Chart 12-9 Apple Computer and two intraday KSTs. (From www.pring.com.)

id ,

ale ee ee ee PY

on es -

Slee Tar” Wor ay [iin ” Dat" hag "Sop Jock Nov" Boe "001 "Feb ora

Chart 12-8 Amex Brokers Index, 1998-2000, and a short-term KST. (From
www.pring.com.)

600 +
600 Amex

‘Short-term kST ~~

Rov Bee [1066 Waar Ther May lun Dur” [aug [Sop [6a Nov oe Baar Dol

Chart 12-9 shows a 15-minute bar of Apple Computer with a short and
intermediate KST suitable for intraday trading. Several oversold crossover
signals are featured. Generally speaking, the monthly KST is far more reli-
able than its daily and weekly counterparts. The degree of success for any

18] Whe

‘Short-term KST (15 ell

omputer,
£

770x448

Long-te T (15 bar)

incites ” As ~ SAM eli” lll

of these time frames will depend on the character of the market being mon-
itored and the nature of the trend. By its very construction, the formula
assumes that markets are influenced by the usual 4-year business cycle.
Whenever that time frame is unduly shortened or lengthened, the monthly
KST suffers in its performance.

Using the KST with the Market Cycle Model

Three Main Trends Chapter | explained that there are several trends
operating in the market at any particular time. They range from intraday,
hourly trends right through to very long term or secular trends that evolve
over a 20- or 30-year period. For investment purposes, the most widely
Tecognized trends are short term, intermediate term, and long term. Short-
term trends are usually monitored with daily prices, intermediate-term
trends with weekly prices, and long-term trends with monthly prices. A
hypothetical bell-shaped curve incorporating all three trends is shown in
Fig. 1-1 in Chapter 1.

_ From an investment point of view, it is important to understand the direc-
Uon of the main, or primary, trend. This makes it possible to gain some per-
Spective on the current position of the overall cycle. The construction of a

Ong-term KST is a useful starting point from which to identify major mar-

et cycle junctures. The introduction of short and intermediate series as well

Now enables us to replicate the Market Cycle Model.



246 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

The best investments are made when the primary trend is in a rising mode
and the intermediate- and short-term market movements are bottoming out.
During a primary bear market, the best selling opportunities occur when
intermediate- and short-term trends are peaking.

In a sense, any investments made during the early and middle stages of
a bull market are bailed out by the fact that the primary trend is rising,
whereas investors have to be much more agile during a bear market in order
to capitalize on the rising intermediate-term swings.

Combining the Three Trends Ideally, it would be very helpful to track
the KST for monthly, weekly, and daily data on the same chart, but plotting
constraints do not easily permit this. It is possible, however, to simulate these
three trends by using different time spans based on weekly data, shown for
the Chicago lumber price in Chart 12-10. This arrangement facilitates iden-
tification of both the direction and the maturity of the primary trend
(shown at the bottom) as well as the interrelationship between the short and
the intermediate trends. The lines above the price reflect primary bullish
and bearish environments as reflected in the long-term KST crossing above
and below its 26-week EMA. Note how the short-term KST rarely moves to

the oversold zone during the bullish environments and rarely to overbought
when the main trend is down.

Chart 12-10 Lumber, 1994-2001, and three KSTs. (From www.pring.com.)

} Lumber

“Tiss6"""""Tisa7”"Fisse”""Tises "ooo wed)

figaa

Individual Momentum Indicators II 247

The best buying opportunities seem to occur either when the long-term
index is in the terminal phase of a decline or when it is in an uptrend, but
has not yet reached an overextended position. These indicators differ from
the previous charts in that they are smoothed by EMAs rather than by sim-
ple MAs. Trial and error suggests this substitution as more suitable for this
type of arrangement. The long-term indicator is constructed from the same
time spans as the monthly series; thus, 12 months becomes 52 weeks, and
so on.

Only an actual EMA crossover should be interpreted as a buy or sell alert
for a momentum series based on exponential smoothing, not on a reversal
in direction. Quite often, the long-term series stabilizes but does not reverse
direction, thereby leaving the observer in doubt as to its true intention. Vital
clues can often be gleaned from the action of the short-term and interme-
diate series in conjunction with the price action itself.

For example, in early 1997 the long-term KST stabilized, but preceding
this event the intermediate series had crossed below its EMA and violated
a trendline. The short-term series also completed a top and crossed below
zero, while the price itself violated a nice up trendline. All these signals sug-
gested that the price was at best likely to move sideways. Even under that
scenario, the long-term KST could be projected to decline since there would
be a tremendous dissipation of upside momentum resulting from these
signals.

The KST can also be adapted to relative strength lines. This is especially
useful for the long term when applied to industry groups or individual
stocks. This is because the group rotation around the business cycle means
that linear up- and downtrends are far less likely to develop than with
absolute price data. For a fuller discussion on these matters, readers are
teferred to Chapter 16, on relative strength, Chapter 19, on group rotation,
and Chapter 31, on individual stock selection. For those who do not have
access to a charting package capable of plotting the KST, a useful substitute
is the MACD, suitably smoothed with longer-term MAs.

The Directional
Movement System

The objective of the Directional Movement System designed by Welles
Wilder is to determine whether a market is likely to experience a trending
or trading range environment. The distinction is important because a
‘tending market will be better signaled by the adoption of trend-following
'dicators such as moving averages (MAs), whereas a trading range envi-
Tonment is more suitable for oscillators. In practice, lam not impressed with
the Capability of the Directional Movement System to accomplish this objec-



248 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

tive, other than to identify a change in trend. On the other hand, there are
several other ways in which this indicator can be usefully applied.

The Concept

The calculation of the Directional Movement System is quite involved and
time does not permit a full discussion here. For that, readers are referred
to Wilder's New Concepts in Technical Trading.

To simplify matters, the directional movement indicator is plotted by cal-
culating the maximum range that the price has moved, either during the
period under consideration (a day, week, 10-minute bar, and so on) or from
the previous period's close to the extreme point reached during the period.
In effect, the system tries to measure directional movement. Since there are
two directions in which prices can move, there are two directional move-
ment indicators, called +D]I and —DI. Since the raw data derived from the
calculation are unduly volatile, they are each calculated as an average over
a specific time period and the result is plotted on a chart. Normally, the DIs
are overlaid in the same chart panel. The standard, or default, time span is
14 periods. Chart 12-11 shows the two DIs using a 14-day span. Crossovers
of the DIs are then used as buy and sell signals.

There is one other important indicator incorporated in this system and
that is the Average Directional Index (ADX). The ADX is simply an aver-
age of the +DIs and —DIs over a specific period. In effect, it subtracts the

Chart 12-11 IBM, 2000-2001, and two Dis. (From www.pring.com.)

Individual Momentum Indicators I 249

days of negative directional movement from the positive ones. However,
when the —DI is greater than the +DI, the negative sign is ignored. This
means that the ADX only tells us whether the security in question is expe-
riencing directional movement or not. Again, the normal default time span
is 14 days.

The ADX is calculated in such a way that the plot is always contained
within the scale of 0 to 100. High readings indicate that the security is in a
trending mode (it has a lot of directional movement), and low readings indi-
cate a lack of directional movement and are more indicative of trading range
markets. Unlike other oscillators, the ADX tells us nothing about the direc-
tion in which a price is moving, only its trending or nontrending charac-
teristics. Use other oscillators for this task.

The Two Dis

Chart 12-11 features the price of IBM together with + DIs using a 14-day time
span. Buy alerts are signaled when the +DI crosses above the —DI and vice
versa. In this example, there are several occasions when it is possible to con-
firm such crossovers with a trendline violation in the price. MA crossovers
or price patterns could just as easily be substituted. In this example, the
crossovers are pretty good and not subject to any whipsaws. Unfortunately,
things do not always work out as well as this. That’s one reason why it is
important to make sure that such crossovers are confirmed by the price.

Chart 12-12 Alcoa, 1999-2000, two smoothed Dis, and an ADX. (From www.pring.com.)

| 14-day ADX bate

+14-day DI (10 MA)

Per aeed

Sul Aug ‘Sep “oct "Nov" Wisc Eas \Feb™ ‘Mar i lApr |May ‘Wun Qui” JAug



peas

250 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Another way around this is to smooth the two Dis, as I have done in Chart
12-12. This certainly reduces the whipsaws, but there is a trade-off in that
the signals are occasionally delayed because this approach is less sensitive.

The ADX

A high ADX reading does not tell us that the market is overbought and
about todo down. Please note that a change in trend is different from a rever-
salin mw since a change in trend can be from up to down, up to side-
ways, or down to up. Similarly, a downtrend could ch: i
or to an uptrend. ™ se
In Chart 12-13, a 14-day ADX has been plotted against Alcoa. I have also
placed an oversold (little directional movement) at 15 and an overbought
(lots of directional movement) at 50. Since the volatility of each security is
different, such lines should be drawn on a trial-and-error basis using the
price history (as much as possible) as a guide. There are three periods when

14-day ADX

(\ [|

SND 8, AME DAB OND pom AME DAB Np poms

Individual Momentum Indicators Il 251

the ADX, having indicated a strong directional movement, then falls back
below its 40 level. The reversal warns us that the trend or strong directional
movement has now reversed, and we should be on the lookout for a change
of trend. In the first instance, it was from up to sideways, in the second from
up to down, and on the far right of the chart from down to up.

There is rarely an optimum time span for any indicator. However, for the
ADX, the 14-period span and those very close to it appear to offer the best
results. Chart 12-14 shows two extremes: a 6-day and a 30-day span. They
demonstrate that shorter-term time frames return an ADX that is too
volatile, while longer-term ones result in a step-like pattern.

The arrow against the 6-day series also goes to show that a reversal in direc-
tion does not always result in a change in trend. In this case, a reduction in
directional movement was accurately predicted by the reversal.
Unfortunately, the reduction was not sufficient to result in a change of trend,
merely a slowing down in the existing (downward) one. Fortunately, this
kind of action is the exception rather than the rule.

Chart 12-12 zeros in on one of these periods, but it also includes a 10-day
MA of the 14-day up and down DIs. These are displayed in order to offer
some idea as to the implication of the reversal in the ADX. In this case, the
crossing of the 50 level (note that this overbought reading is not the same
as that in Chart 12-13) is followed by a negative crossover of the smoothed
DI above its +DI counterpart. This indicates that the reversal in the ADX
is likely to be followed by a decline.

Chart 12-14 AT&T, 1998-2001, and two ADXs. (From www.pring.com.)

604
604 AT&T

ke ai

6-day ADX

30-day /ADX
Glo Wp Tes] AM VAS ON p> boom AMY UA |S [0 Np poor



252 : Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Low readings in the ADX indicate a lack of directional movement, and
these can be helpful as well when it is fairly clear that a rising trend of direc.
tional movement is underway. Consider the situation in November 1999
The ADX had been in a narrow trading range at a very low level. Then it
broke to the upside. This indicated that the price was now likely to trend,
but in which direction? The answer lay in monitoring the two smoothed Dis
and the price. In this instance, the +DI crossed above the minus series and
the price was confirmed with a nice breakout. Remember that the risin,
ADX did not signal rising prices, only rising directional movement. If the
—DI had crossed below the +DI and the price had broken to the downside,

the rising ADX would then have been associated with a declining trend in
the price. .

The Parabolic Indicator
The Concept

The Parabolic System, devised by Welles Wilder, is not a momentum indi-
cator, and so strictly speaking, it does not fall within the scope of this chap-
ter. However, it is being mentioned briefly since it has become a very
popular trading mechanism and can be used to generate timely stop-loss
signals. i.

_ One of the most valid criticisms of trend-following systems is that the
implied lags between the turning points and the trend-reversal signals oblit-
erate a significant amount of the potential profitability of a trade. The
Parabolic System is designed to address this problem by increasing the speed
of the trend, so far as stops are concerned, whenever prices reach new prof

itable levels. The concept draws on the idea that time is an enemy, and unless .

a trade or investment can continue to generate more profits over time, it
should be liquidated. Since it is a stop-loss system, it can be used with any
momentum series, once that indicator has been used to filter out a good
entry point for a trade. It is also a trailing stop-loss system, which means that
the stop is continually being moved in the direction of the position, that is,
up for a long position and down for a short one.

When the position is first initiated, it is given a relatively long leash, so t0
speak. Then, as time passes, and the price increases, the stop is gradually
tightened. The expression parabolic arises from the shape of the curve of the
stops as it appears on the chart. In a rising market, the stop is continually

being raised, never | ini ite wi
hold wrae owered. In a declining market, the opposite will

253

Individual Momenturn Indicators II

How Does It Work?

The parabolic shows up on the chart as a parabolic-shaped curve that is plot-
ted above and below the price, as in Chart 12-15. This curve is often
referred to as the SAR, which stands for stop and reversal system. This is
because the parabolic, when triggered, is often used not only to stop a posi-
tion, but to actually reverse it. Thus, a parabolic would simultaneously trig-
ger the liquidation of a long position and the entering of a short one.

Personally, I prefer to select an entry point and use the Parabolic System
for the purposes of setting the stop, rather than continually reversing posi-
tions. Remember, most losing trades develop when you go against the direction of
the main trend. Strict use of the parabolic with the stop and reversal approach
totally ignores this discipline. That’s why I prefer to use the Parabolic
System as a stop system only, and not a stop and reverse system.

Strict use of the parabolic would involve buying when the price crosses
above it, placing the stop well underneath the purchase price. This is the
downside because there is considerable risk at this point. Gradually, the par-
abolic picks up steam and the risk is dramatically reduced as upside momen-
tum increases. In Chart 12-15, the sell signal comes pretty close to the top
of the rally. The short signal in November also results in a nice profit.

Like most other indicators, the parabolic does not do as well in a trading
range. This is because it is unable to gather sufficient momentum to quickly

Chart 12-15 GM and a parabolic, 2000-2001. (From www.pring.com.}

Ragu TOPLIST TTT IT TTT TTP TT TTT TTT TINT TY TTTTTT
ugust September {October [November [December [2001



254 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 12-16 Hewlett-Packard and a parabolic. (From www.pring.com.)

reduce the risk. In Chart 12-16, we see five trades, three long (the solid
arrows) and two short (the dashed arrows). None make much money, but
the winners slightly outnumber the losers three to two.

Setting the Parameters

Most charting packages enable the user to set two parameters. These are
the acceleration factor and the maximum acceleration factor. The acceler-
ation factor is the amount the parabolic is increased every time the price
makes a new high in an uptrend (a new low in a downtrend). The maxi-
mum factor is a limit above which the acceleration factor cannot go. For
example, if the acceleration factor is .2 and the maximum is .8, after the
price has made four new highs since the parabolic began (that is, .2 times
4), the acceleration factor remains at .8 until the price crosses the parabolic
and a new (SAR) trade is begun. The level of the acceleration factor is the
most important.

With MAs, there is always a trade-off between timeliness and sensitivity. A
short-term MA gives very timely signals, but is so sensitive that it also ge"
erates numerous whipsaws. On the other hand, a long-term average has
fewer whipsaws, but crossovers are less timely. The Parabolic System works
in exactly same way, but in this case the lower the acceleration factor, the

Individual Momentum Indicators II 255

less timely the signal, and the higher the acceleration factor, the more sen-
sitive and timely are the signals. However, they result in more whipsaws.

In Chart 12-17, the upper panel features an acceleration factor of .01 with
a maximum of .2, whereas the lower chart shows a more aggressive .2 accel-
eration with a .2 maximum. The difference is very clear. The smaller accel-
eration factor featured in the top panel results in far fewer whipsaws than
that in the lower panel, but at the same time is less timely. Setting levels for
the accelerating factor is a trial-and-error process just like the process of
determining the optimum span for an MA. In my experience, the default
value provided with many software programs and Wilder’s recommendation
of .02 and .2 are quite satisfactory in most situations.

A Practical Use

There are many ways in which the parabolic can be applied. One of my
favorites is to enter a trade on an MA crossover and exit the trade on a
reverse crossover. However, if the parabolic crosses the MA, then it should
be used to exit the trade. An example is shown in Chart 12-18 with General
Motors. For a more in-depth explanation, please refer to my own
Momentum Explained book and CD-ROM tutorial.

Chart 12-17 Hewlett-Packard and two parabolics. (From www.pring.com.)

Parabolic .01/.2

vi

MAAAAadd V4 SAduuaaaaaiaias uUadaas MuuuuMuuaL uusuuruamu eer perrrererr
| uly [August [September tober [November December



256 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 12-18 GM, a parabolic versus an MA crossover. (From www.pring.com.)

Parabolic .01/.2

754

707

+ Use parabolic

604

Buy

fig ie 3 fo li7 lea Bt Ha i Bele Ai he es 2 p le bs Boe
Muly [August [September [October Novembe}

Summary

e The KST can be constructed for any time frame, from intraday to primary.

* The KST is calculated from the smoothed ROC of four time spans, each
of which is weighted according to the length of time.

* Long-term, short-term, and intermediate KSTs can be combined on one
chart to reflect the Market Cycle Model.

* The KST lends itself to numerous momentumrinterpretive techniques and
can successfully be applied to relative strength analysis.

* The +DIs and —DIs measure positive and negative short-term direction.

* When the raw or smoothed DIs cross, they trigger buy and sell momen-
tum signals.

° The ADX measures the directional movement of a trend.

* A rising ADX indicates an increase in directional movement and vice
versa.

* When the ADX reverses direction from a high reading, the prevailing
trend is likely to change.

¢ The parabolic is a stop-loss system.

* The parabolic was originally designed as a stop and reversal method.
However, itis better used as an exit mechanism due to the large risk often
associated with the initiation of a position based on an initial parabolic
stop.

13

Candle Charts

Candle Construction

Candle charts originated in Japan several centuries ago, but have recently
gained a following in other countries. This system of plotting price data is
an alternative to the familiar bar chart. Candles can be used to identify price
patterns, and they also lend themselves to trendline construction. They are
constructed from opening, high, low, and closing data for a specific period
such as an hour, day, or week.
