
After five years, earnings will be $2.01, so our shares would theoretically
trade for $2.01 X 20 = $40.20. We've also received $6.59 in dividends, which
means we have $46.79 after five years. That works out to an annualized return
of 9.3 percent, which is our investment return. Because the P/E remained at
20, we didn’t receive any speculative return.

However, if earnings and dividends grow at the same rate, but the P/E
ratio decreases from its starting point of 20 to 15, our returns change dramat-
ically. Although we still have $2.01 in earnings after five years, our shares are
worth only $2.01 X 15 = $30.15. Add in $6.79 in dividends, and annualized re-
turn shrinks to just 4.1 percent—our 9.3 percent investment return was dam-
aged by a —5.2 percent speculative return. Conversely, a rise in the P/E ratio
from 20 to 25 would yield a fat 13.6 percent annual return because the specu-
lative return builds on our investment return.

Thus, a change in the market's mood can reduce our solid 9.3 percent re-
turn to a paltry 4.1 percent or boost it to a wonderful 13.6 percent. You can
buy an excellent company that kicks out earnings and dividends like clock-
work, but the negative effects of a sharp decline in the stock’s valuation can
wipe out even the most robust investment return—and a P/E decline from
20 to 15 is hardly a worst-case scenario. In fact, declines in valuation are usu-
ally coupled with deteriorating corporate fundamentals—slowing earnings
growth or some similar setback. When this happens, the investor gets socked
with a decline in the speculative return as the valuation shrinks and a decline
in the investment return as earnings growth slows down.

Careful attention to valuation lessens the risk that something truly un-
known—what other investors will pay for our asset in the future—will hurt

the return of our portfolio. As investors, we can diligently work to identify

127


128

VALUATION—THE BASICS

wonderful businesses, but we can’t predict how other market participants will
value stocks, so we shouldn’t try.

Being picky about valuation isn’t fun. It means letting many pitches go by
and watching many stocks run—stocks that never met your strict valuation
criteria. But when it’s done properly, disciplined valuation also greatly in-
creases your batting average—the number of stocks you pick that do well ver-
sus the number that do poorly—and it also limits the odds of a real blow-up
damaging your portfolio.

Using Price Multiples Wisely

Our first stop in learning how to value stocks is traditional measures such as the
price-to-sales (P/S) or P/E ratios. Although these measures do have some ad-
vantages—for example, they're very easy to compute and use—they also have

some significant pitfalls that can lead the unwary investor to fuzzy conclusions.

Price-to-Sales

The most basic ratio of all is the P/S ratio, which is the current price of the
stock divided by sales per share. The nice thing about the P/S ratio is that sales
are typically cleaner than reported earnings because companies that use ac-
counting tricks usually seek to boost earnings. (Firms can use accounting tricks
to boost sales, but it’s much less frequent and it’s easier to catch.) In addition,
sales are not as volatile as earnings—one-time charges can depress earnings
temporarily, and the bottom line of economically cyclical companies can vary
significantly from year to year.

This relative smoothness of sales makes the P/S ratio useful for quickly
valuing companies with highly variable earnings, by comparing the current
P/S ratio with historical P/S ratios. Motorola, for example, takes special
charges so often that they're no longer very special, and, as a result, it had neg-
ative net income in three of the five years between 1998 and 2002. With such
spotty earnings, a P/E ratio isn’t going to help us very much. But over that
same time period, sales haven't jumped around nearly as much, which makes
the P/S ratio useful. In mid-2003, Motorola's P/S ratio was about 1.0, close to
a five-year low, which made the stock look relatively inexpensive compared
with where it traded in the past (see Figure 9.1).

However, the P/S ratio has one big flaw: Sales may be worth a little or a
lot, depending on a company’s profitability. If a company is posting billions


USING PRICE MULTIPLES WISELY
Motorola 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Price/Earnings NA a 34.9 NA NA
Price/Sales 1:8 3.2 12 {yf 07

NA = Earnings are negative, therefore, P/E ratios cannot be calculated.

Figure 9.1 When earnings are negative, price/sales can be a useful metric.

in sales, but it’s losing money on every transaction, we'd have a hard time pin-
ning an appropriate P/S ratio on the shares because we have no idea what
level (if any) profits the company will generate. We can see the drawbacks of
using sales as a proxy for value in the marketplace every day.

Retailers, which typically have very low net margins—that is, they convert
a relatively small percentage of every dollar of sales into profits—tend to have
very low P/S ratios. The average grocery store, for example, had a P/S ratio of
0.4 in mid-2003, whereas the average medical device firm had a P/S of around
4.3. The reason for this huge difference isn’t that grocery stores happened to be
dirt cheap—it was that the average grocery store had a net margin of 2.5 per-
cent, whereas the average medical device firm had a net margin of 11 percent.
A grocer with a P/S of just 1.0 would look ridiculously overvalued, but a med-
ical device manufacturer with the same P/S ratio would be an absolute steal.

Therefore, although the P/S ratio might be useful if you're looking at a
firm with highly variable earnings—because you can compare today’s P/S
with a historical P/S ratio—it’s not something you want to rely on very much.
In particular, don’t compare companies in different industries on a price-to-

sales basis, unless the two industries have very similar levels of profitability.

Price-to-Book
Another common valuation measure is price-to-book (P/B), which compares a
stock’s market value with the book value (also known as shareholder's equity or
net worth) on the company’s most recent balance sheet. The idea here is that
future earnings or cash flows are ephemeral, and all we can really count on is
the net value of a firm’s tangible assets in the here-and-now. Legendary value
investor Benjamin Graham, one of Warren Buffett’s mentors, was a big advo-
cate of book value and P/B in valuing stocks.

Although P/B still has some utility today, the world has changed since
Ben Graham's day. When the market was dominated by capital-intensive

129


130

VALUATION—THE BASICS

firms that owned factories, land, rail track, and inventory—all of which had
some objective tangible worth—it made sense to value firms based on their ac-
counting book value. After all, not only would those hard assets have value
in a liquidation, but also they were the source of many firms’ cash flow. But
now, many companies are creating wealth through intangible assets such as
processes, brand names, and databases, most of which are not directly included
in book value.

For service firms, in particular, P/B has little meaning. If you used P/B to
value eBay, for example, you wouldn't be according a shred of worth to the firm's
dominant market position, which is the single biggest factor that has made the
firm so successful. Price-to-book can also lead you astray for a manufacturing
firm such as 3M, which derives much of its value from its brand name and inno-
vative products, not from the size of its factories or the quantity of its inventory.

Another item to be wary of when using P/B to value stocks is goodwill,
which can inflate book value to the point that even the most expensive firm
looks like a value. When one company buys another, the difference between
the target firm’s tangible book value and the purchase price is called goodwill,
and it’s supposed to represent the value of all the intangible assets—smart em-
ployees, strong customer relationships, efficient internal processes—that made
the target firm worth buying.

Unfortunately, goodwill often represents little else but the desperation of
the acquiring firm to buy the target before someone else did, because acquir-
ing firms often overpay for target companies. Be highly skeptical of firms for
which goodwill makes up a sizable portion of their book value. The P/B may
be low, but the bulk of the B could disappear in a hurry if the firm declares
the goodwill as “impaired” (in other words, the firm admits that it grossly
overpaid for a past acquisition) and writes down its value.

Price-to-book is also tied to return on equity (equal to net income divided
by book value) in the same way that price-to-sales is tied to net margin (equal
to net income divided by sales). Given two companies that are otherwise
equal, the one with a higher ROE will have a higher P/B ratio. For example,
over the past five years, Nokia's P/B ratio has averaged about 14, whereas rival
mobile-phone giant Motorola's has averaged 3.1. One major reason for this
difference is that Nokia's average ROE of 29 percent over the same period left
Motorola's average ROE of 3 percent in the dust. The reason is clear—a firm


USING PRICE MULTIPLES WISELY

that can compound book equity at a much higher rate is worth far more be-
cause book value will increase more quickly.

Therefore, when you're looking at P/B, make sure you relate it to ROE. A
firm with a low P/B relative to its peers or to the market and a high ROE
might be a potential bargain, but you'll want to do some digging before mak-
ing that assessment based solely on the P/B.

A caveat: Although P/B isn’t terribly useful for service firms, it’s very good
for valuing financial services firms because most financial firms have consider-
able liquid assets on their balance sheets. The nice thing about financial firms
is that many of the assets included in their book value are marked-to-market—
in other words, they're revalued every quarter to reflect shifts in the market-
place, which means that book value is reasonably current. (A factory or piece of
land, by contrast, is recorded on the balance sheet at whatever value the firm
paid for it, which is often very different from the asset’s current value.)

As long as you make sure that the firm doesn’t have a large number of bad
loans on its books—see Chapter 17 for more on banks and bad loans—P/B
can be a solid way to screen for undervalued financial firms. Just remember
that financial firms trading below book value (a P/B lower than 1.0) are often
experiencing some kind of trouble, so you'll want to investigate just how
solid that book value is before investing.

Price-to-Earnings: The Benefits

Now we come to the most popular valuation ratio, which can take you pretty
far as long as you're aware of its limitations. The nice thing about P/E is that
accounting earnings are a much better proxy for cash flow than sales, and
they're more up-to-date than book value. Moreover, earnings per share results
and estimates are easily available from just about any financial data source
imaginable, so it’s an easy ratio to calculate.

The easiest way to use a P/E ratio is to compare it to a benchmark, such
as another company in the same industry, the entire market, or the same
company at a different point in time. Each of these approaches has some
value, as long as you know the limitations. A company that’s trading at a
lower P/E than its industry peers could be a good value, but remember that

even firms in the same industry can have very different capital structures, risk

levels, and growth rates, all of which affect the P/E ratio. All else equal, it

131


132

VALUATION—THE BASICS

makes sense to pay a higher P/E for a firm that’s growing faster, has less debt,
and has lower capital reinvestment needs.

You can also compare a stock’s P/E to the average P/E of the entire market.
However, the same limitations of industry comparisons apply to this process
as well. The stock you're investigating might be growing faster (or slower)
than the average stock, or it might be riskier (or less risky). In general, com-
paring a company’s P/E with industry peers or with the market has some
value, but these aren't approaches that you should rely on to make a final buy
or sell decision.

However, comparing a stock’s current P/E with its historical P/E ratios
can be useful, especially for stable firms that haven’t undergone major shifts
in their business. If you see a solid company that’s growing at roughly the
same rate with roughly the same business prospects as in the past, but it’s
trading at a lower P/E than its long-term average, you should start getting in-
terested. It’s entirely possible that the company’s risk level or business outlook
has changed, in which case a lower P/E is warranted, but it’s also possible that
the market is simply pricing the shares at an irrationally low level.

This method generally works better with more stable, established firms
than with young companies with more uncertain business prospects. Firms
that are growing rapidly are changing a great deal from year to year, which

means their current P/Es are less comparable to their historical P/Es.

Price-to-Earnings: The Drawbacks

Relative P/Es have one huge drawback: A P/E of 12, for example, is neither
good nor bad in a vacuum. Using P/E ratios only on a relative basis means
that your analysis can be skewed by the benchmark you're using.

So, let’s try to look at the P/E ratio on an absolute level. What factors
would cause a firm to deserve a higher P/E ratio? Because risk, growth, and
capital needs are all fundamental determinants of a stock’s P/E ratio, higher
growth firms should have higher P/E ratios, higher risk firms should have /ower
P/E ratios, and firms with higher capital needs should have /ower P/E ratios.

We can see why this is true intuitively, without breaking out any equa-
tions, by thinking about the basics of valuation—the three big factors that af-
fect value are the amount, timing, and riskiness of a firm’s future cash flows.

Firms that have to shovel in large amounts of capital to generate their

earnings run the risk of needing to tap additional funding, either through


USING PRICE MULTIPLES WISELY

debt (which increases the risk level of the company) or through additional
equity offerings (which may dilute the value of current shareholders’ stake).
Either way, it’s rational to pay less for firms with high reinvestment needs
because each dollar of earnings requires more of shareholders’ capital to
produce it.

Meanwhile, a firm that’s expected to grow quickly will likely have a larger
stream of future cash flows than one that’s growing slowly, so all else equal,
it’s rational to pay more for the shares (thus, the higher P/E ratio). On the
flip side, a firm that’s riskier—maybe it has high debt, maybe it’s highly cycli-
cal, or maybe it’s still developing its first product—has a good chance of hav-
ing lower future cash flows than we originally expected, so it’s rational to pay
less for the stock.

When you're using the P/E ratio, remember that firms with an abun-
dance of free cash flow are likely to have low reinvestment needs, which
means that a reasonable P/E ratio will be somewhat higher than for a run-of-
the-mill company. The same goes for firms with higher growth rates, as long
as that growth isn’t being generated using too much risk.

A few other things can distort a P/E ratio. Keep these questions in the
back of your mind when looking at P/E ratios, and you'll be less likely to mis-
use them.

Has the Firm Sold a Business or an Asset Recently? When youre looking at a
P/E ratio, you must be sure that the E makes sense. If a firm has recently sold
off a business or perhaps a stake in another firm, it’s going to have an artifi-
cially inflated E, and thus a lower P/E. Because you don’t want to value the
firm based on one-time gains such as this, you need to strip out the proceeds
from the sale before calculating the P/E. In late 2000, it looked as though
Oracle had a ridiculously low P/E based on the past four quarters’ earnings—
until you dug into the numbers and saw that the company had booked a $7
billion gain by selling part of its stake in Oracle Japan. Based on operating

earnings, the stock wasn’t all that cheap.

Has the Firm Taken a Big Charge Recently? If a firm is restructuring or clos-
ing down plants, earnings could be artificially depressed, which would push
the P/E up. For valuation purposes, it’s useful to add back the charge to get a
sense of the firm’s normalized P/E.

133


134

VALUATION—THE BASICS

Is the Firm Cyclical? Firms that go through boom and bust cycles—semicon-
ductor companies and auto manufacturers are good examples—require a bit
more care. Although you'd typically think of a firm with a very low trailing P/E
as cheap, this is precisely the wrong time to buy a cyclical firm because it
means earnings have been very high in the recent past, which in turn means
they're likely to fall off soon. For cyclical stocks, your best bet is to look at the
most recent cyclical peak, make a judgment whether the next peak is likely to
be lower or higher than the last one, and calculate a P/E based on the current

price relative to what you think earnings per share will be at the next peak.

Does the Firm Capitalize or Expense Its Cash Flow-Generating Assets? A firm
that makes money by building factories and making products gets to spread
the expense of those factories over many years by depreciating them bit by
bit. On the other hand, a firm that makes money by inventing new prod-
ucts—drug firms are the classic example—has to expense all of its spending
on research and development every year. Arguably, it’s that spending on
R&D that’s really creating value for shareholders. Therefore, the firm that ex-
penses assets will have lower earnings—and thus a higher P/E—in any given

year than a firm that capitalizes assets.

Is the E Real ov Imagined? There are two kinds of P/Es—a trailing P/E, which
uses the past four quarters’ worth of earnings to calculate the ratio, and a for-
ward P/E, which uses analysts’ estimates of next year’s earnings to calculate the
ratio. Because most companies are increasing earnings from year to year, the
forward P/E is almost always lower than the trailing P/E, sometimes markedly
so for firms that are increasing earnings at a very rapid clip. Unfortunately, es-
timates of future earnings by Wall Street analysts—the consensus numbers that
you often read about—are consistently too optimistic. As a result, buying a
stock because its forward P/E is low means counting on that future E to mate-

rialize in its entirety, and that’s usually not the case.

Price-to-Earnings Growth (PEG)
The PEG is an offshoot of the P/E ratio that’s calculated by dividing a
companys P/E by its growth rate. The PEG is extremely popular with

some investors because it seeks to relate the P/E to a piece of fundamental


SAY YES TO YIELD

information—a company’s growth rate. On the surface, this makes sense be-
cause a firm that’s growing faster will be worth more in the future, all else equal.

The problem is that risk and growth often go hand in glove—fast-growing
firms tend to be riskier than average. This conflation of risk and growth is why
the PEG is so frequently misused. When you use a PEG ratio, you're assuming
that all growth is equal, generated with the same amount of capital and the
same amount of risk.

But firms that are able to generate growth with less capital should be
more valuable, as should firms that take less risk. If you look at a stock that’s
expected to grow at 15 percent trading at 15 times earnings and another one
that’s expected to grow at 15 percent trading at 25 times earnings, don’t just
plunk your money down on the one with the lower PEG ratio. Look at the
capital that needs to be invested to generate the expected growth, as well as
the likelihood that those expectations will actually materialize, and you may
very well wind up making a very different decision.

Say Yes to Yield

In addition to multiple-based measures, you can also use yield-based measures
to value stocks. For example, if we invert the P/E and divide a firm's earnings
per share by its market price, we get an earnings yield. If a stock sells for $20
per share and has $1 in earnings, it has a P/E of 20 (*%) but an earnings yield of
5 percent (40). The nice thing about yields, as opposed to P/Es, is that we can
compare them with alternative investments, such as bonds, to see what kind
of a return we can expect from each investment. (The difference is that earn-
ings generally grow over time, whereas bond payments are fixed.)

In late-2003, for example, I could get a risk-free return from Uncle Sam
of about 4.5 percent by buying a 10-year treasury bond. Therefore, I’d want to
demand a higher rate of return from my stocks because they're riskier than
treasuries. A stock with a P/E of 20 would have an earnings yield of 5 percent,
which is a bit better than treasuries, but not much considering the additional
risk I'm taking. A stock with a P/E of 12, however, would have an earnings
yield of 8.3 percent (#2), which is much better than those poky treasuries.
Thus, I might be induced to take the additional risk.

The best yield-based valuation measure is a relatively little-known metric

called cash return. In many ways, it’s actually a more useful tool than the P/E.

135


VALUATION—THE BASICS

‘To calculate a cash return, divide free cash flow by enterprise value. (Enterprise
value is simply a stock’s market capitalization plus its long-term debt minus its
cash.) The goal of the cash return is to measure how efficiently the business is
using its capital—both equity and debt—to generate free cash flow.

Essentially, cash return tells you how much free cash flow a company gen-
erates as a percentage of how much it would cost an investor to buy the whole
shebang, including the debt burden. An investor buying the whole company
would not only need to buy all the shares at market value, but also would be
taking on the burden of any debt (net of cash) the company has.

Let’s use household-products giant Clorox as an example of how to use
cash return to find reasonably valued investments. In late 2003, Clorox had a
market cap of about $9.8 billion and carried $495 million in long-term debt
and $172 million in cash on its balance sheet. Its enterprise value was $9,800
+ $495 — $172, or $10.1 billion. That’s half of our ratio.
