
121

122

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Theoretically, investors make their decisions based on the differences between price and value. If the price is lower than its per share
value, a rational investor will decide to buy. If the price is higher than
value, any reasonable investor will pass.
As the company moves through its economic life cycle, a savvy investor will periodically reassess the company’s value in relation to market price and will buy, sell, or hold shares accordingly.
In sum, then, rational investing has two components:
1. Determine the value of the business.
2. Buy only when the price is right—when the business is selling at
a significant discount to its value.

C A L C U L AT E W H AT T H E B U S I N E S S I S W O RT H
Through the years, financial analysts have used many formulas for determining the intrinsic value of a company. Some are fond of various
shorthand methods: low price-to-earnings ratios, low price-to-book
values, and high dividend yields. But the best system, according to Buffett, was determined more than sixty years ago by John Burr Williams
(see Chapter 2). Buffett and many others use Williams’s dividend discount model, presented in his book The Theory of Investment Value,
as the best way to determine the value of a security.
Paraphrasing Williams, Buffett tells us that the value of a business is
the total of the net cash f lows (owner earnings) expected to occur over
the life of the business, discounted by an appropriate interest rate. He
considers it simply the most appropriate yardstick with which to measure a basket of different investment types: government bonds, corporate bonds, common stocks, apartment buildings, oil wells, and farms.
The mathematical exercise, Buffett tells us, is similar to valuing a
bond. The bond market each day adds up the future coupons of a
bond and discounts those coupons at the prevailing interest rate; that
determines the value of the bond. To determine the value of a business, the investor estimates the “coupons” that the business will generate for a period into the future and then discounts all these coupons
back to the present. “So valued,” Buffett says, “all businesses, from

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s

123

manufacturers of buggy whips to operators of cellular telephones, become economic equals.”2
To summarize, then, calculating the current value of a business
means, first, estimating the total earnings that will likely occur over the
life of the business; and then discounting that total backward to today.
(Keep in mind that for “earnings” Buffett uses owner earnings—net
cash f low adjusted for capital expenditures, as described in Chapter 7.)
To estimate the total future earnings, we would apply all we had
learned about the company’s business characteristics, its financial
health, and the quality of its managers, using the analysis principles described thus far. For the second part of the formula, we need only decide what the discount rate should be—more on that in a moment.
Buffett is firm on one point: He looks for companies whose future
earnings are as predictable, as certain, as the earnings of bonds. If the
company has operated with consistent earnings power and if the business is simple and understandable, Buffett believes he can determine its
future earnings with a high degree of certainty. If he is unable to project with confidence what the future cash f lows of a business will be, he
will not attempt to value the company. He’ll simply pass.

To properly value a business, you should ideally take all the
f lows of money that will be distributed between now and judgment day and discount them at an appropriate discount rate.
That’s what valuing businesses is all about. Part of the equation
is how confident you can be about those cash f lows occurring.
Some businesses are easier to predict than others. We try to
look at businesses that are predictable.3
WARREN BUFFETT, 1988

This is the distinction of Buffett’s approach. Although he admits
that Microsoft is a dynamic company and he regards Bill Gates highly
as a manager, Buffett confesses he hasn’t a clue how to estimate the future cash earnings of this company. This is what he means by “the circle of competence”; he does not know the technology industry well

124

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

enough to project the long-term earnings potential of any company
within it.
This brings us to the second element in the formula: What is the
appropriate discount rate? Buffett’s answer is simple: the rate that
would be considered risk-free. For many years, he used the rate then
current for long-term government bonds. Because the certainty that the
U.S. government will pay its coupon over the next thirty years is virtually 100 percent, we can say that this is a risk-free rate.
When interest rates are low, Buffett adjusts the discount rate upward. When bond yields dipped below 7 percent, Buffett upped his discount rate to 10 percent, and that is what he commonly uses today. If
interest rates work themselves higher over time, he has successfully
matched his discount rate to the long-term rate. If they do not, he has
increased his margin of safety by three additional points.
Some academicians argue that no company, regardless of its
strengths, can assure future cash earnings with the same certainty as a
bond. Therefore, they insist, a more appropriate discount factor would be
the risk-free rate of return plus an equity risk premium, added to ref lect
the uncertainty of the company’s future cash f lows. Buffett does not add
a risk premium. Instead, he relies on his single-minded focus on companies with consistent and predictable earnings and on the margin of
safety that comes from buying at a substantial discount in the first place.
“I put a heavy weight on certainty,” Buffett says. “If you do that, the
whole idea of a risk factor doesn’t make any sense to me.”4

Coca-Cola
When Buffett first purchased Coca-Cola in 1988, people asked:
“Where is the value in Coke?” Why was Buffett willing to pay five
times book value for a company with a 6.6 percent earning yield? Because, as he continuously reminds us, price tells us nothing about value,
and he believed Coca-Cola was a good value.
To begin with, the company was earning 31 percent return on equity while employing relatively little in capital investment. More important, Buffett could see the difference that Roberto Goizueta’s
management was making. Because Goizueta was selling off the poorperforming businesses and reinvesting the proceeds back into the
higher-performing syrup business, Buffett knew the financial returns

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s

125

of Coca-Cola were going to improve. In addition, Goizueta was buying
back shares of Coca-Cola in the market, thereby increasing the economic value of the business even more. All this went into Buffett’s
value calculation. Let’s walk through the calculation with him.
In 1988, owner earnings of Coca-Cola equaled $828 million. The
thirty-year U.S. Treasury Bond (the risk-free rate) at that time traded
near a 9 percent yield. So Coca-Cola’s 1988 owner earnings, discounted
by 9 percent, would produce an intrinsic value of $9.2 billion. When
Buffett purchased Coca-Cola, the market value was $14.8 billion, 60
percent higher, which led some observers to think he had overpaid. But
$9.2 billion represents the discounted value of Coca-Cola’s thencurrent owner earnings. If Buffett was willing to pay the higher price,
it had to be because he perceived that part of the value of Coca-Cola
was its future growth opportunities.
When a company is able to grow owner earnings without additional capital, it is appropriate to discount owner earnings by the difference between the risk-free rate of return and the expected growth of
owner earnings. Analyzing Coca-Cola, we find that owner earnings
from 1981 through 1988 grew at a 17.8 percent annual rate—faster
than the risk-free rate of return. When this occurs, analysts use a twostage discount model. This model is a way of calculating future earnings
when a company has extraordinary growth for a certain number of
years and then a period of constant growth at a slower rate.
We can use this two-stage process to calculate the 1988 present
value of the company’s future cash f lows (see Table 8.1). First, assume
that starting in 1988, Coca-Cola would be able to grow owner earnings
at 15 percent per year for ten years. This is a reasonable assumption,
since that rate is lower than the company’s previous seven-year average.
By the tenth year, the $828 million owner earnings that we started
with would have increased to $3.349 billion. Let’s further assume that
starting in the eleventh year, growth rate will slow to 5 percent a year.
Using a discount rate of 9 percent (the long-term bond rate at the
time), we can back-calculate the intrinsic value of Coca-Cola in 1988:
$48.377 billion (see Notes section at the end of this book for details of
this calculation).5
But what happens if we decide to be more conservative, and use
different growth rate assumptions? If we assume that Coca-Cola can
grow owner earnings at 12 percent for ten years followed by 5 percent

126
$1,259
15%
$1,448
0.7084
$1,026

Year
$ 1,448
15%
$ 1,665
0.6499
$ 1,082

5
$1,665
15%
$1,915
0.5963
$1,142

6
$1,915
15%
$2,202
0.5470
$1,204

7

Notes: Assumed first-stage growth rate = 15.0%; assumed second-stage growth rate = 5.0%; k = discount rate = 9.0%.
Dollar amounts are in millions.

37,129
$48,377

$ 3,349
5%
$ 3,516
4%
$87,900
0.4224

$ 1,095
15%
$ 1,259
0.7722
$ 972

4

Residual Value
Cash flow in year 10
Growth rate (g) (add)
Cash flow in year 11
Capitalization rate (k - g)
Value at end of year 10
Discount factor at end of year 10 (multiply)
Present Value of Residual
Market Value of Company

$0,952
15%
$1,095
0.8417
$ 922

3

$11,248

$828
15%
$952
0.9174
$873

2

Sum of present value of cash flows

Prior year cash flow
Growth rate (add)
Cash flow
Discount factor (multiply)
Discounted value per annum

1
$2,202
15%
$2,532
0.5019
$1,271

8

$2,532
15%
$2,912
0.4604
$1,341

9

10
$2,912
15%
$3,349
0.4224
$1,415

Table 8.1 The Coca-Cola Company Discounted Owner Earnings Using a Two-Stage “Dividend” Discount Model (first stage is ten years)

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s

127

growth, the present value of the company discounted at 9 percent
would be $38.163 billion. At 10 percent growth for ten years and 5
percent thereafter, the value of Coca-Cola would be $32.497 billion.
And if we assume only 5 percent throughout, the company would still
be worth at least $20.7 billion [$828 million divided by (9−5 percent)].

Gillette
Berkshire, as mentioned in Chapter 4, bought $600 million worth of
convertible preferred stock in July 1989. After a 2-for-1 stock split in
February 1991, Berkshire converted its preferred stock and received 12
million common shares, 11 percent of Gillette’s shares outstanding.
Now that Berkshire owned Gillette common yielding 1.7 percent
versus the convertible preferred yielding 8.75 percent, its investment in
Gillette was no longer a fixed-income security with appreciation potential but a straight equity commitment. If Berkshire were to retain its
common stock, Buffett needed to be convinced that Gillette was a good
investment.
We already know that Buffett understood the company and that the
company’s long-term prospects were favorable. Gillette’s financial characteristics, including return on equity and pretax margins, were improving. The ability to increase prices thereby boosting return on equity to
above-average rates signaled the company’s growing economic goodwill. CEO Mockler was purposefully reducing Gillette’s long-term debt
and working hard to increase shareholder value.
In short, the company met all the prerequisites for purchase. What
remained for Buffett was to determine the company’s value, to assure
that Gillette was not overpriced.
Gillette’s owner earnings at year-end 1990 were $275 million and
had grown at a 16 percent annual rate since 1987. Although this is too
short a period to fully judge a company’s growth, we can begin to
make certain assumptions. In 1991, Buffett compared Gillette to CocaCola. “Coca-Cola and Gillette are two of the best companies in the
world,” he wrote, “and we expect their earnings to grow at hefty rates
in the years ahead.”6
In early 1991, the thirty-year U.S. government bond was trading at
an 8.62 percent yield. To be conservative, we can use a 9 percent discount rate to value Gillette. But like Coca-Cola, Gillette’s potential

128

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

growth of earnings exceeds the discount rate, so again we must use the
two-stage discount model. If we assume a 15 percent annual growth for
ten years and 5 percent growth thereafter, discounting Gillette’s 1990
owner earnings at 9 percent, the approximate value of Gillette is $16
billion. If we adjust the future growth rate downward to 12 percent,
the value is approximately $12.6 billion; at 10 percent growth, the
value would be $10.8 billion. At a very conservative 7 percent growth
in owner earnings, the value of Gillette is at least $8.5 billion.

The Washington Post Company
In 1973, the total market value for the Washington Post was $80 million.
Yet Buffett claims that “most security analysts, media brokers, and media
executives would have estimated WPC’s intrinsic value at $400 to $500
million.”7 How did Buffett arrive at that estimate? Let us walk through
the numbers, using Buffett’s reasoning.
We’ll start by calculating owner earnings for that year: Net income
($13.3 million) plus depreciation and amortization ($3.7 million) minus
capital expenditures ($6.6 million) yields 1973 owner earnings of $10.4
million. If we divide these earnings by the long-term U.S. government
bond yield at the time (6.81 percent), the value of the Washington Post
reaches $150 million, almost twice the market value of the company but
well short of Buffett’s estimate.
Buffett tells us that, over time, the capital expenditures of a newspaper will equal depreciation and amortization charges, and therefore
net income should approximate owner earnings. Knowing this, we can
simply divide net income by the risk-free rate and thus reach a valuation
of $196 million.
If we stop here, the assumption is that the increase in owner earnings will equal the rise in inf lation. But we know that newspapers have
unusual pricing power: Because most are monopolies in their community, they can raise their prices at rates higher than inf lation. If we
make one last assumption—that the Washington Post has the ability to
raise real prices by 3 percent—the value of the company is closer to
$350 million. Buffett also knew that the company’s 10 percent pretax
margins were below its 15 percent historical average margins, and he
knew that Katherine Graham was determined that the Post would once

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s

129

again achieve these margins. If pretax margins improved to 15 percent,
the present value of the company would increase by $135 million,
bringing the total intrinsic value to $485 million.

Wells Fargo
The value of a bank is the function of its net worth plus its projected
earnings as a going concern. When Berkshire Hathaway began purchasing Wells Fargo in 1990, the company in the previous year had earned
$600 million. The average yield on the thirty-year U.S. government
bond that year was approximately 8.5 percent. To remain conservative,
we can discount Wells Fargo’s 1989 $600 million earnings by 9 percent
and value the bank at $6.6 billion. If the bank never earned another
dime over $600 million a year for the next thirty years, it was worth at
least $6.6 billion. When Buffett purchased Wells Fargo in 1990, he paid
$58 per share for its stock. With 52 million shares outstanding, this was
equivalent to paying $3 billion for the company—a 55 percent discount
to its value.
The debate in investment circles at the time centered on whether
Wells Fargo, after taking into consideration all its loan problems, even
had earnings power. The short sellers said it no; Buffett said yes. He
knew full well that ownership of Wells Fargo carried some risk, but he
felt confident in his analysis. His step-by-step thinking is a good model
for everyone weighing the risk factor of an investment.
He started with what he already knew. Carl Reichardt, then chairman of Wells Fargo, had run the bank since 1983, with impressive results. Under his leadership, growth in earnings and return on equity
were both above average and operating efficiencies were among the
highest in the country. Reichardt had also built a solid loan portfolio.
Next, Buffett envisioned the events that would endanger the investment and came up with three possibilities, then tried to imagine
the likelihood that they would occur. It is, in a real sense, an exercise in
probabilities.
The first possible risk was a major earthquake, which would
“wreak havoc” on borrowers and in turn on their lenders. The second
risk was broader: a “systemic business contraction or financial panic so
severe it would endanger almost every highly leveraged institution, no

130

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

matter how intelligently run.” Neither of those two could be ruled out
entirely, of course, but Buffett concluded, based on best evidence, that
the probability of either one was low.
The third risk, and the one getting the most attention from the
market at the time, was that real estate values in the West would tumble
because of overbuilding and “deliver huge losses to banks that have financed the expansion.”8 How serious would that be?
Buffett reasoned that a meaningful drop in real estate values should
not cause major problems for a well-managed bank like Wells Fargo.
“Consider some mathematics,” he explained. Buffett knew that Wells
Fargo earned $1 billion pretax annually after expensing an average
$300 million for loan losses. He figured if 10 percent of the bank’s $48
billion in loans—not just commercial real estate loans but all the bank’s
loans—were problem loans in 1991 and produced losses, including interest, averaging 30 percent of the principal value of the loan, Wells
Fargo would still break even.
In Buffett’s judgment, the possibility of this occurring was low. But
even if Wells Fargo earned no money for a year, but merely broke even,
Buffett would not f linch. “A year like that—which we consider only a
low-level possibility, not a likelihood—would not distress us.”9
The attraction of Wells Fargo intensified when Buffett was able to
purchase shares at a 50 percent discount to their value. His bet paid off.
By the end of 1993, Wells Fargo’s share price reached $137 per share,
nearly triple what Buffett originally paid.

B U Y AT AT T R A C T I V E P R I C E S
Focusing on businesses that are understandable, with enduring economics, run by shareholder-oriented managers—all those characteristics are important, Buffett says, but by themselves will not guarantee
investment success. For that, he first has to buy at sensible prices, and
then the company has to perform to his business expectations. The second is not always easy to control, but the first is: If the price isn’t satisfactory, he passes.
Buffett’s basic goal is to identify businesses that earn above-average
returns, and then to purchase these businesses at prices below their

I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s

131

indicated value. Graham taught Buffett the importance of buying a
stock only when the difference between its price and its value represents
a margin of safety. Today, this is still his guiding principle, even though
his partner Charlie Munger has encouraged him toward occasionally
paying more for outstanding companies.

Great investment opportunities come around when excellent
companies are surrounded by unusual circumstances that cause
the stock to be misappraised.10
WARREN BUFFETT, 1988

The margin-of-safety principle assists Buffett in two ways. First, it
protects him from downside price risk. If he calculates that the value of
a business is only slightly higher than its per share price, he will not buy
the stock. He reasons that if the company’s intrinsic value were to dip
even slightly, eventually the stock price would also drop, perhaps below
what he paid for it. But when the margin between price and value is
large enough, the risk of declining value is less. If Buffett is able to purchase a company at 75 percent of its intrinsic value (a 25 percent discount) and the value subsequently declines by 10 percent, his original
purchase price will still yield an adequate return.
The margin of safety also provides opportunities for extraordinary
stock returns. If Buffett correctly identifies a company with aboveaverage economic returns, the value of its stock over the long term will
steadily march upward. If a company consistently earns 15 percent on
equity, its share price will appreciate more each year than that of a company that earns 10 percent on equity. Additionally, if Buffett, by using
the margin of safety, is able to buy this outstanding business at a significant discount to its intrinsic value, Berkshire will earn an extra bonus
when the market corrects the price of the business. “The market, like the
Lord, helps those who help themselves,” says Buffett. “But unlike the
Lord, the market does not forgive those who know not what they do.”11
( Text continues on page 134.)

CASE IN POINT
LARSON-JUHL, 2001
Late in 2001, Warren Buffett made a handshake deal to buy
Larson-Juhl, wholesale supplier of custom picture-framing
materials, for $223 million in cash. It was Buffett’s favorite
scenario: a solid company, with good economics, strong management, and an excellent reputation in its industry, but experiencing a short-term slump that created an attractive price.
The business was owned 100 percent by Craig Ponzio, a
talented designer with an equal talent for business. While in
college, he worked for one of the manufacturing facilities of
Larson Picture Frame, then ended up buying the company in
1981. Seven years later, he bought competitor Juhl-Pacific, creating the company now known as Larson-Juhl. When Ponzio
bought Larson in 1981, its annual sales were $3 million; in
2001, Larson-Juhl’s sales were more than $300 million.
That is the kind of performance that Buffett admires.
He also admires the company’s operating structure. LarsonJuhl manufactures and sells the materials that custom framing
shops use: fancy moldings for frames, matboard, glass, and assorted hardware. The local shops display samples of all the
frame moldings available, but keep almost none of it in inventory. When a customer picks out a frame style, the shop must
order the molding stock. And this is where Larson-Juhl shines.
Through its network of twenty-three manufacturing and distribution facilities scattered across the United States, it is able
to fill orders in record time. In the great majority of cases—industry analysts say as much as 95 percent of the time—materials are received the next day.
With that extraordinary level of service, very few shops are
going to change suppliers, even if the prices are higher. And
that gives Larson-Juhl what Buffett calls a moat—a clear and
sustainable edge over competitors.
