
Munsell Color Test. Men cannot see blues. Period. Over 70 percent

looking with the eye. We will look at all six depth perception types,

Every employee from groundskeeper to executive was given a

So don't create advertisements that are predominantly in the blue
color spectrum. Most colorblind issues are found in men. I don't
know why. Why did Kodak need to know? We used this knowl-

Linear Perspective

an observer. The greater the distance, the closer the lines will appear

billboard image selection and much more.

parallel, such as railway tracks, converge upward as they recede from

target audience. The issues about depth perception would impact

familiar. It is common knowledge that lines or edges that are truly

Color Films and I used images that avoided weaknesses within our

Linear perspective is perhaps the one with which you are most

edge in our advertising. I was the brand manager of Professional

406

• IMPROVING INDICATOR T I M I N G AND F I L T E R I N G P R E M A T U R E SIGNALS

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimensional Charting

• 407

until they merge as one into the distance. The mathematical system
for creating the illusion of space and distance on a flat surface origi-

One Point Perspective
r14200

nated in Florence, Italy, in the early 1400s. It was an architect, Leon

•13400

Battista Alberti, who first wrote down the rules of linear perspective.

•12600

Technical analysts need to understand the mathematical components of linear perspective because these depth cues have a major
influence on how we will see signals in a chart. The example of

•100.00

\

receding railway tracks is the simplest mathematical system called
one-point perspective. When we look at charts, we will be applying
two- or three-point perspective based on the chart patterns we are

iConvergence Lines

H

/I/

•80.00
•60.00
•40.00
•20.00

Horizon Line \

viewing. So let's review one-point perspective to ensure that every-

i
VP^^^*^^.

one understands the fundamentals.

•100.00
•80.00

Vanishing
Point

-20.00

cookie or a two-dimensional chart, there will be a horizon line.

-40.00

Whatever you are looking at, a three-dimensional chocolate chip

•60.00

The basics of one-point perspective are illustrated in Figure 13.1.

If you look out at an ocean's horizon from the cockpit of a plane,
or look out from a seashore while sitting on the beach, the hori-

'0-

• 'N • • b

'98

'F

V

'A • • 'M- • ' j - •'j

'A

Figure 13.1

zon line will always be at your eye level. This invisible plane cuts
called convergence lines.

always be at eye level regardless of where you are looking. If you

be connected to suggest a line leading to the vanishing point are

through everything, including your chart! Your horizon line will
look down on the trading desk, the horizon line does not change
as your eye level remains at the height of your eyes.

In Figure 13.2 a Stochastics signal has been extracted from a larger
chart. Above it is a moving average signal. Is the slope of the average

this visual cue to create a converging line to mark a vanishing point.

swings as points to define a vanishing point. All the points that can

vanishing point is located within this chart. As a result, our eye uses

the reference points for our mind to then try to use the indicator

frame, making it easier for us to unconsciously determine where the

a chart the vertical and horizontal lines of the chart grid establish

Stochastics peak adds a point that is closer to the edge of the chart's

at the vanishing point. Verticals and horizontals stay the same. In

first Stochastics oscillator peak as additional information. The new

moving away from or to a viewer seem to recede on the horizon

ing the averages alone? Why is this difficult? Our eye will use this

lel to the viewer recede. In one-point perspective only lines that are

with the Stochastics indicator more steep than the chart display-

The vanishing point is the point to which all lines that are paral-

4 0 8 • IMPROVING INDICATOR TIMING AND F I L T E R I N G PREMATURE SIGNALS

FXUSJYMU L-Daily

The Principles of Depth Perspective AppUed to Two-Dimensional Charting • 4 0 9

We know our brains are extremely complex computers. When
we are presented with an abstract chart, our minds try to reference known variables. The placement of an object defines twopoint linear perspective. All we need is one corner and our mind
will try to complete the shape. It is the angles of the object that
define where the vanishing points are located. In Figure 13.2
our minds will assume it has located one of the angles for our
abstract puzzle to define depth. The vanishing point leads to the
right in the chart. Sometimes one vanishing point in two-point
perspective will not be on the page. Our mind will approximate
where the point falls beyond our chart dimensions. Distortions are
minimized when our mind establishes where the horizon line is
located. Some charts will have a horizon line defined. That actually adds to our problem as the visual cue becomes stronger. An
example would be the zero line for a histogram. When the object
we are looking at does not have a perpendicular or parallel point,

Figure 13.2

our mind's eye will find a "corner" within the abstract from which
to extrapolate a converging line to a vanishing point. That is what

lyzing within this chart.

Figure 13.2 becomes more important than the inner peak that is a

becomes an influential point to all other information we are ana-

edge of a chart toward the vanishing point. The Stochastics peak in

the first Stochastics peak that is not a trading signal but which

Orthogonal lines are visual rays that connect points from an outer

point. Therefore, Figure 13.2 has a dominant point predefined at

indicated as being filtered by a broken line for the Stochastics travel.

start of a convergence line in Figure 13.3 becomes the dominant

exceeds this convergence line. The peak is filtered out as noise and

is forming in Figure 13.2. Each of the corners that marks the

It does not matter that Stochastics forms a peak at a later time that

to a third vanishing point. The third vanishing point will always

ing one-point perspective is insufficient for this chart.

horizon line but there will be an upward or downward recession

was drawn in Figure B.l, shows that the mathematical system defin-

or lows. Not only will there be the two vanishing points along a

fact that the vanishing point leads to the far right, not to the center as

come into play that is normally used only with extreme heights

peak in Stochastics serves as the origin for an orthogonal line. The

Because we are dealing with an abstract image, a third point can

broken line because the first is closer to the outer frame. The first

4 1 0 • IMPROVING INDICATOR TIMING AND FILTERING PREMATURE SIGNALS

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimensional Charting • 4 1 1

Two Point Perspective
•14200
•134GG
•12600

observed angle

observed angle

W " ' D " " ' 9 8 '

'F'

'M

'A

-'M-'J

'J

^

first and then allow that pattern to recede, allowing us to view the
lighter pattern.

squiggles will provide points that lead to a projected third vanish-

Figure 13.4

Figure 13.3

be 90 degrees to the horizon line. Many complex technical chart
ing point.

The chart in Figure 13.6 can visually trick you. RSI TrendZ

a filled histogram pattern. Be aware of the visual impact when you

to point out the similarities of distortion.

The only difference is that different areas have been selected to plot

his work Sunmoon in Figure 13.5 and then return to look at a chart

clearly that RSI Trends 2 and 3 are in fact the exact same signals.

master of three-point perspective traps is M.C. Escher. Consider

However, the indicator on the bottom of the chart shows you more

trap itself applies to three-point perspective (Figure 13.4). The

and RSI Trend3 appear to give different signals at points A and B.

It is easy to catch you visually in a depth perspective trap. The

processed as an image that has height and a third vanishing point.

the correct vanishing points. Generally we see the darker image

to horizontal, and everything else that follows in your chart will be

Our mind alternates the dominant image in an effort to determine

add a histogram. The vertical lines of a histogram are 90 degrees

In Escher's work, there is frequently a play on depth of field.

412

• IMPROVING INDICATOR T I M I N G AND F I L T E R I N G P R E M A T U R E

SIGNALS

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimensional Charting • 4 1 3

FXUSJYMUL-Daily
08/19/96 C=14485 +15

14800
14200
13600
13000
12400

90.00
60.00
30.00
RSI Trend ^
•4.00
-600
RSI Trend
4.00
E-6.00

Figure 13.5

Figure 13.6

closely packed together as d e p t h that has a n increasing rate o f

this indicator evaluation.

size. O u r mind's eye sees objects that become smaller and more

be used is Trend2, and we w i l l discard Trend3 w h e n we continue

pivot—to try to determine the rate at w h i c h t h e elements change

an orthogonal line of convergence. Therefore, the pattern that must

process any element—such as a dot (parabolic), indicator peak, or

nificant because it is closest to the outer frame of the chart and is also

case i n Figure 13.6. W h e n linear lines are absent, our m i n d w i l l

T h e histogram i n RSI TrendZ at p o i n t A becomes even more sig-

change. T h i s rate n o r m a l l y depends o n the slope o f the g r o u n d .
W h e n there is no g r o u n d w i t h i n a chart, our eye may see the jux-

Texture Gradient

taposition of certain indicator patterns as depth cues. You w i l l not

clarification.

w h e n there are n o straight lines present i n a n image. T h i s is the

you to move your vertical l i n e over t o a peak or l o w for f u r t h e r

plane is called the texture gradient. T h i s cue becomes i m p o r t a n t

be caught by this p r o b l e m , b u t i t is likely to be one that motivated

A n o t h e r d e p t h cue t h a t we use to define o u r missing m e d i a n

414

• IMPROVING INDICATOR T I M I N G AND F I L T E R I N G P R E M A T U R E SIGNALS

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimensional Charting * 4 1 5

Elevation
Objects that fall between us and our horizon w i l l normally appear
higher up the farther they are f r o m us. T h e railway tracks receding
into the vanishing point w i l l always move upward to the vanishing
point. T h i s upward movement becomes a visual cue f r o m which our
eye w i l l travel w i t h i n a chart. Elevation cues are a given fact and help
to set up a visual problem when combined w i t h interposition cues.

Interposition
N o r m a l l y texture appears to be more dense i n a distant object than
i n an identical b u t closer object. However, some depth cues w i l l
be stronger t h a n others. T h i s is the case w h e n one object obscures
part of another. W e frequently obscure another indicator such as
an average w h e n m u l t i p l e studies are used as an overlay i n a chart.
T h e partly obscured object w i l l be viewed as farther away. However,
your m i n d may again trick y o u , as illustrated i n Figure B.7. T h e
farther object appears to be closer because the cutout gives us a
pseudo-interposition. It looks as t h o u g h the smaller card is i n front
of the larger w h e n , i n fact, the smaller is positioned b e h i n d the

Figure 13.7
than its counterpart o n the right. T h a t is because shadows are also
depth perception cues. W h e n you draw a trend line on a chart,
you can shift the proportional dimensions w i t h i n it. T h e y w i l l be
relative i f the line is long enough across your chart. But short lines
can contribute to visual errors or distortions.

Clarity and Aerial Perspective

ment of light's wavelength frequency spectrum.

boundary of the smaller card o n the left w i l l make it appear larger

i n a higher p r o p o r t i o n t h a n reds that fall w i t h i n the infrared seg-

the same. However, adding the w i d t h of one pixel line to the inside

frequencies f r o m ultraviolet to blue are scattered i n our atmosphere

on the left f r o m the image on the right, so all four cards are i n fact

the fact that far objects appear bluish to us because the wavelength

these t w o smaller cards are identical i n size. I created the image

aerial perspective does play a part i n chart analysis. T h i s refers to

your precision ratio compass or proportional divider—to prove that

become a factor i n a t w o - d i m e n s i o n a l chart, but its near cousin

b o t h illustrations? I suspect you w i l l have to use your PRC—that is,

us than o n identical objects that are up close. T h i s alone does not

you tell i f the card that is actually at the back is the same size i n

It is harder to see the details on objects that are farther away f r o m

larger card w i t h a cutout. Before m o v i n g away f r o m Figure 13.7, can

416

• IMPROVING INDICATOR TIMING AND F I L T E R I N G PREMATURE SIGNALS

Because we are used to associating blues as distant, these cues can
be used to our advantage or disadvantage in a chart. TradeStation

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimemional ChartiriP

•

417

your nose or sitting at the end of a table, the size of the object in
terms of visual angle is independent of distance.

get creative, and that is when distortions occur.

charting capabilities. It is essential that the technical information

derived from distance cues, our interpretive abilities may begin to

(color intensity) need to wake up and move out of the dark ages for

visual angle. As it knows it must define the missing plane of depth

that offer only colors of equal intensity (brightness) and saturation

chart is that frequently the only cue our brain has to work with is

the recessive one when viewing the technical study. The vendors

size is referred to as size constancy. How this relates to analyzing a

impact of the color you use for your signal line. It should not be

object can look the same size regardless of changing retinal image

ately fall a perceived distance behind price. Be very aware of the

on the back of our eye is changing all the time? The fact that an

data. Select a soft gray for a Fibonacci line and watch it immedi-

can judge the size of an object when the visual angle of an object

nacci lines do not have to compete for attention with your price

angle plus perceived distance can determine height. So how is it we

markings that we may add to any chart. Use them wisely. Fibo-

Figure 13.8 shows us mathematically why one degree of visual

offers 16 colors that traders can use for their drawing tools and

are separated horizontally, each eye processes different views of

can use force you to view needless noise.

nal disparity. The term refers to the fact that, because our eyes

ties. Get after your vendor to make changes if the only colors you

One of the depth cues of greatest interest to us as traders is reti-

on your chart be compatible with your depth perception capabili-

Visual Angle

V i s u a l Angle

This is the sixth depth perception cue that will have an impact
on our ability to analyze a chart. This cue requires anatomical
considerations and elementary physics to relate lens equations to
something useful that we can apply. Visual angle is a depth cue
affected by pupil size and lens power. Everyone sees differently,
and that is why it is as important to know our personal biases
as it is to know the indicator patterns and underlying formulas
themselves.
Visual angle refers to the size of the image on the retina. When

tan a = 1/57 = 0.0175
tan"^ 0.0175= 1°

we look at similar objects, the one farther away has a smaller image
on the back of our eye. Whether your computer screen is touching

Figure 13.8

likely the eye you first wanted to cover is your weaker eye.

angles and integrates them into one three-dimensional image. Over

text. One eye will handle the task easily, the other will hurt. More

brain views two-dimensional views from slightly different visual

which eye of yours is stronger or weaker. Cover one eye and read

image that forms in our eyes when we look out the window. The

visual processor and thereby reduce error. It is easy to determine

depth. Our two-dimensional image of a chart is the same as the

the back of my right eye. The purpose is to capitalize on a stronger

ity between the two pictures on the back of our eye that gives us

covering less surface area than that which is being projected onto

any object. What does disparity doforus? It is the sHght dispar-

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimensional Charting • 419

418 • IMPROVING INDICATOR TIMING AND FILTERING PREMATURE SIGNALS

work in the same way.

on other depth cues that are monocular. The aerial perspective we

why one trader may like one indicator over another although they

in our stereovision ability. If you are stereoblind, you will depend

Knowing how we process visual information helps us understand

10 percent of humans are stereoblind. There are great differences

price data. The bottom of the chart contains two histograms.

ish, will be monocular. Therefore, we have all developed different

Figure 13.10 is Stochastics with averages plotted under the

discussed, which makes distant objects appear less clear and bludepth cue dependencies that match our anatomical abilities.
One of my eyes is stronger than the other, so I always offset my
primary trading screen to the right. Figure 13.9 will show you why

08/19/98 C=14402 -68

making this change produces a smaller visual angle in my left eye.

Retinal Disparity

Figure 13.9

Figure 13.10

as only an isolated case in the chart. Signal 8 offers perfect timing

disguise its origin for just a short period of time.

there is information at this peak that we are missing when it is seen

The middle histogram with averages is called the XYZ Trend to

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimensional Charting • 421

420 • IMPROVING INDICATOR TIMING AND FILTERING PREMATURE SIGNALS

We are evaluating the combined signals in the XYZ Trend and
the study called the RSI Trend as they compare to Stochastics.

between the RSI Trend signal and the Stochastics indicator as we
have seen at other points in this chart.

above zero.

complex top in the other indicators. At signal 2 this is indeed what

a histogram. It is extremely noisy with all the long bars plotting

momentum to attempt another advance that would create a more

this idea to Stochastics itself? Figure 13.11 shows Stochastics as

displays strengths may warn that the market will have sufficient

the spread of two RSI indicators, what would we gain by applying

firms signal 1 in Stochastics. However, the fact that pattern a

If using a histogram is useful when plotting the averages from

At points a and A, divergence is present. Pattern A clearly con-

I gain anything by changing how I am presenting the Stochastics

an extremely important observation to make that the RSI Trend

We can fix this visual problem, as shown in Figure 13.12. Did

occurs. The XYZ Trend is now diverging as well with prices. It is
is failing just as it tests the zero line. We must later test other
market moves that occur in a histogram where the pivot becomes
the zero line.

FXUSJYMUL-Daily

At signal 3 the reverse is developing from what we saw at signal 1.
This mirror image between buy and sell signals is important. At
signal 3 the RSI Trend is rolling up, but the XYZ Trend is suggesting that the market may have sufficient momentum to still
attempt another bottom. At signal 4 both histograms are rolling
upward. Points p, q, and r and P, Q, and R have been discussed
in a prior chart. Signal 7 is much improved by the RSI Trend.
However, notice that the moving averages at signal 2 in this indicator had a negative spread where the shorter period average has
crossed below the longer period average. In signal 7 the averages
are positive. This is an observation that would require back-testing
to define statistically whether it is important or not. (It is.) In the
XYZ Trend, the oscillator is not diverging prior to the intervention.
However, the indicator is at a historic high peak within this chart.
Extremes would have to be back-tested in this indicator to see if

Figure 13.11

4 2 2 • IMPROVING INDICATOR T I M I N G AND FILTERING PREMATURE SIGNALS

FXUSJYMUl

The Principles of Depth Perspective Applied to Two-Dimensional Charting • 4 2 3

takes practice and patience. T h e r e are so many skills that people
b r i n g to technical analysis that it is no wonder we learn so many
different and interesting ways to t h i n k t h r o u g h market problems.
I thank you for the o p p o r t u n i t y to update this book and share a few
new lessons learned along the way.
I leave w i t h you a Z e n Story to offer a final thought:

A rich man, fond of felines, asked a famous Zen ink painter to draw
him a cat. The master agreed and asked the man to come back in
three months. When the man returned, he was put off, again and
100.00
RSI Trend

W

• 'A

'M-

'J- ••'J

again, until a year had passed. Finally, at the man's request, the
master drew out a brush, and, with grace and ease, in a single fluid
motion, drew a picture of a cat—the most marvelous image the

:4.00
-6.G0
W " ' D 9 8 '

'A

man had ever seen. He was astonished; then he grew angry. "That
drawing took you only thirty seconds. W h y did you make me wait
a year?" he demanded. Without a word, the master opened up a

Figure 13.12

cabinet, and out fell thousands of drawings—of cats.

study? I w i l l let you decide that one on your o w n . However, it is
clear one can have independent control of some of the attributes we
observed i n the Stochastics study. So what is the mystery indicator
called the " X Y Z Trend"? It is a simple spread o f two averages again
on price that define the histogram. T h e n a 9- and 45-period m o v i n g
average of this histogram was added. O n c e you t h i n k you have an
idea w i t h merit, give it some t h o u g h t on what w i l l be the best way
to display your new indicator. Sometimes an unconventional way
w i l l add to its value. Just a little different food for thought. Perhaps
you had not k n o w n that perspective enters into our business. I t does
because the m i n d works i n three dimensions at all times. O u r craft
