
15

16

A Historical Background

When Munehisa Homma's father died, Munehisa was placed in
charge of managing the family's assets. This was in spite of the fact that
he was the youngest son. (It was usually the eldest son who inherited
the power during that era.) This was probably because of Munehisa's
market savvy. With this money, Homma went to Japan's largest rice
exchange, the Dojima Rice Exchange in Osaka, and began trading rice
futures.
Homma's family had a huge rice farming estate. Their power meant
that information about the rice market was usually available to them. In
addition, Homma kept records of yearly weather conditions. In order to
learn about the psychology of investors, Homma analyzed rice prices
going back to the time when the rice exchange was in Yodoya's yard.
Homma also set up his own communications system. At prearranged
times he placed men on rooftops to send signals by flags. These men
stretched the distance from Osaka to. Sakata.
After dominating the Osaka markets, Homma went to trade in the
regional exchange at Edo (now called Tokyo). He used his insights to
amass a huge fortune. It was said he had 100 consecutive winning
trades.
His prestige was such that there was the following folk song from
Edo: "When it is sunny in Sakata (Homma's town), it is cloudy in
Dojima (the Dojima Rice Exchange in Osaka) and rainy at Kuramae (the
Kuramae exchange in Edo)." In other words when there is a good rice
crop in Sakata, rice prices fall on the Dojima Rice Exchange and collapse
in Edo. This song reflects the Homma's sway over the rice market.
In later years Homma became a financial consultant to the government and was given the honored title of samurai. He died in 1803.
Homma's books about the markets (Sakata Senho and Soba Sani No Den)
were said to have been written in the 1700s. His trading principles, as
applied to the rice markets, evolved into the candlestick methodology
currently used in Japan.

-

-

A Historical Background

NOTES
'His first name is sometimes translated as Sokyu and his last name is sometimes translated as
Honma. This gives you an idea of the difficulty of translating Japanese into English. The same
Japanese symbols for Homma's first name, depending on the translator, can be Sokyu or Munehisa. His last name, again depending on the translator, can be either Homma or Honma. I chose
the English translation of Homma's name as used by the Nippon Technical Analysts Association.
'Hirschmeier, Johannes and Yui, Tsunehiko. The Development of Japanese Business 1600-1973, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975, p. 31.

17

PART I

THE BASICS
"Even a Thousand Mile Journey Begins with the First Step"

CHAPTER

3

CONSTRUCTING
THE CANDLESTICKS
wwm < T A T W I ~
"Without Oars You Cannot Cross in a Boat"

A comparison between the visual differences of a bar chart and a candlestick chart is easy to illustrate. Exhibit 3.1 is the familiar Western bar
chart. Exhibit 3.2 is a candlestick chart of the same price information as
that in the bar chart. On the candlestick chart, prices seem to jump off
the page presenting a stereoscopic view of the market as it pushes the
flat, two-dimensional bar chart into three dimensions. In this respect,
candlecharts are visually exciting.

DRAWING THE CANDLESTICK LINES
Since candlestick charts are new to most Western technicians, the most
common Western chart, the bar chart, is used throughout this chapter as
an instructional tool for learning how to draw the candlestick lines.
Drawing the daily bar chart line requires open, high, low, and close.
The vertical line on a bar chart depicts the high and low of the session.
The horizontal line to the left of the vertical line is the opening price. The
horizontal line to the right of the vertical line is the close.
Exhibit 3.3 shows how the same data would be used to construct a
bar chart and a candlestick chart. Although the daily bar chart lines and
candlestick chart lines use the same data, it is easy to see that they are
drawn differently. The thick part of the candlestick line is called the real

22

The Basics

- H=
L=

..

..
..

. . .
. . .
..
b=
........................................................................................................................................

- L=

_

0 1989 CQG INC.

CCHO DAILY BAR

8 : 13

o=

. .
. .

1':

:

......................................
. .
.
I t . .

- ..............................

-

o=

.......

2/27/90,, . . .

. .

ti=

-L=
C=
127

'Dec
14

'Jan
111

118

126

1112

18

115

122

129

'Feb
15

112

120

126

EXHIBIT 3.1. Cocoa-March, 1990, Daily Bar Chart
CCHO DAILY BAR

EXHIBIT 3.2. Cocoa-March, 1990, Daily Candlestick Chart

@

1989 CQG INC.

1

Constructing the Candlesticks
Time Period
1
2
3
4
5

Open
20
25
30
45
25

High
30
25
35
50
40

Low
15
10
15
35
25

Close
25
15
20
40
35
Candlestick Chart

I

1

2
3
4
Time Period

5

1

2
3
4
Time Period

5

EXHIBIT 3.3 Bar Chart and Candlestick Chart

body. It represents the range between that session's opening and closing.
When the real body is black (i.e., filled in) it means the close of the session was lower than the open. If the real body is white (i.e., empty), it
means the close was higher than the open.
The thin lines above and below the real body are the shadows. These
shadows represent the session's price extremes. The shadow above the
real body is called the upper shadow and the shadow under the real body
is known as the lower shadow. Accordingly, the peak of the upper shadow
is the high of the session and the bottom of the lower shadow is the low
of the session. It is easy to see why these are named candlestick charts
since the individual lines often look like candles and their wicks. If a
candlestick line has no upper shadow it is said to have a shaven head. A
candlestick line with no lower shadow has a shaven bottom. To the Japanese, the real body is the essential price movement. The shadows are
usually considered as extraneous price fluctuations.
Exhibits 3.4 through 3.7 demonstrate some common candlestick lines.
Exhibit 3.4 reveals a long black candlestick reflecting a bearish period in
which the market opened near its high and closed near its low. Exhibit
3.5 shows the opposite of a long black body and, thus, represents a bullish period. Prices had a wide range and the market opened near the low
and closed near the high of the session. Exhibit 3.6 shows candlesticks
having small real bodies and, as such, they represent a tug of war
between the bulls and the bears. They are called spinning tops and are
neutral in lateral trading bands. As shown later in this book (in the sec-

23

24

The Basics

EXHIBIT 3.4. Black Candlestick

EXHIBIT 3.5. White Candlestick

High 1

_,High

-

Close

J

Close-L o w,------

Open

EXHIBIT 3.6. Spinning Tops

LOW'

EXHIBIT 3.7. Doji Examples

tions on stars and harami patterns), these spinning tops do become
important when part of certain formations. The spinning top can be
either white or black. The lines illustrated in Exhibit 3.6 have small upper
and lower shadows, but the size of the shadows are not important. It is
the diminutive size of the real body that makes this a spinning top.
Exhibit 3.7 reveals no real bodies. Instead, they have horizontal lines.
These are examples of what are termed doji lines.
A doji occurs when the open and close for that session are the same
or very close to being the same (e.g., two- or three-thirty-seconds in
bonds, a Yi cent in grains, and so on.). The lengths of the shadows can
vary. Doji are so important that an entire chapter is devoted to them (see
Chapter 8 The Magic Doji).
Candlestick charts can also be drawn more colorfully by using the
classical Japanese candlestick chart colors of red and black. Red can be
used instead of the white candlestick. (This could be especially useful for
computer displays of the candlestick charts.) The obvious problem with
this color scheme is that photo copies and most computer printouts will
not be useful since all the real bodies would come out as black.
Some readers may have heard the expression yin and yang lines.
These are the Chinese terms for the candlestick lines. The yin line is
another name for the black candlestick and the yang line is equivalent to
the white candlestick. In Japan, a black candlestick is called in-sen (black
line) and the white candlestick is called yo-sen (white line).
The Japanese place great emphasis on the relationship between the
open and close because they are the two most emotionally charged

Constructing the Candlesticks

points of the trading day. The Japanese have a proverb that says, "the
first hour of the morning is the rudder of the day." So is the opening the
rudder for the trading session. It furnishes the first clue about that day's
direction. It is a time when all the news and rumors from overnight are
filtered and then joined into one point in time.
The more anxious the trader, the earlier he wants to trade. Therefore,
on the open, shorts may be scrambling for cover, potential longs may
want to emphatically buy, hedgers may need to take a new or get out of
an old position, and so forth.
After the flurry of activity on the open, potential buyers and sellers
have a benchmark from which they can expect buying and selling. There
are frequent analogies to trading the market and fighting a battle. In this
sense, the open provides an early view of the battlefield and a provisional indication of friendly and opposing troops. At times, large traders
may try to move the market on the open by executing a large buy or sell
order. Japanese call this a morning attack. Notice that this is another military analogy. The Japanese use many such military comparisons as we
shall see throughout the book.

CANDLESTICK TERMINOLOGY AND MARKET EMOTION
Technicals are the only way to measure the emotional component of the :
market. The names of the Japanese candlestick charts make this fact evi- :
dent. These names are a colorful mechanism used to describe the emo- i
tional health of the market at the time these patterns are formed. After :
hearing the expressions "hanging man" or "dark-cloud cover," would you i
think the market is in an emotionally healthy state-of course not! These :
are both bearish patterns and their names clearly convey the unhealthy :
state of the market.
While the emotional condition of the market may not be healthy at the
time these patterns form, it does not preclude the possibility that the mar- :
ket will become healthy again. The point is that at the appearance of, say, i
a dark-cloud cover, longs should take defensive measures or, depending :
on the general trend and other factors, new short sales could be initiated. i
There are many new patterns and ideas in this book, but the descriptive names employed by the Japanese not only make candlestick charting :
fun, but easier to remember if the patterns are bullish or bearish. For i
example, in Chapter 5 you will learn about the "evening star" and the :
"morning star." Without knowing what these patterns look like or what :
they imply for the market, just by hearing their names which do you think i
is bullish and which is bearish? Of course, the evening star which comes :
out before darkness sets in, sounds like the bearish signal-and so it is! i
The morning star, then, is bullish since the morning star appears just :
before sunrise.

25

26

The Basics

The other pivotal price point is the close. Margin calls in the futures
markets are based on the close. We can thus expect heavy emotional
involvement into how the market closes. The close is also a pivotal price
point for many technicians. They may wait for a close to confirm a breakout from a significant chart point. Many computer trading systems (for
example, moving average systems) are based on closes. If a large buy or
sell order is pushed into the market at, or near, the close, with the
intention of affecting the close, the Japanese call this action a night attack.
Exhibits 3.4 to 3.7 illuminate how the relationship between a period's
open, high, low, and close alters the look of the individual candlestick
line. Now let us turn our attention to how the candlestick lines, alone or
in combination, provide clues about market direction.

CHAPTER

4

REVERSAL PATTERNS
--%%ImJ
"Darkness Lies One Inch Ahead"

Technicians watch for price clues that can alert them to a shift in market psychology and trend. Reversal patterns are these technical clues.
Western reversal indicators include double tops and bottoms, reversal
days, head and shoulders, and island tops and bottoms.
Yet the term "reversal pattern" is somewhat of a misnomer. Hearing
that term may lead you to think of an old trend ending abruptly and
then reversing to a new trend. This rarely happens. Trend reversals usually occur slowly, in stages, as the underlying psychology shifts gears.
A trend reversal signal implies that the prior trend is likely to change,
but not necessarily reverse. This is very important to understand. Compare an uptrend to a car traveling forward at 30 m.p.h. The car's red
brake lights go on and the car stops. The brake light was the reversal
indicator showing that the prior trend (that is, the car moving forward)
was about to end. But now that the car is stationary will the driver then
decide to put the car in reverse? Will he remained stopped? Will he
decide to go forward again? Without more clues we do not know.
Exhibits 4.1 through 4.3 are some examples of what can happen after
a top reversal signal appears. The prior uptrend, for instance, could convert into a period of sideways price action. Then a new and opposite
trend lower could start. (See Exhibit 4.1.) Exhibit 4.2 shows how an old
uptrend can resume. Exhibit 4.3 illustrates how an uptrend can abruptly
reverse into a downtrend.
It is prudent to think of reversal patterns as trend change patterns. I
was tempted to use the term "trend change patterns" instead of "reversal patterns" in this book. However, to keep consistent with other tech-

28

The Basics

EXHIBIT 4.1. Top Reversal

EXHIBIT 4.2. Top Reversal

EXHIBIT 4.3. Top Reversal

nical analysis literature, I decided to use the term reversal patterns.
Remember that when I say "reversal pattern" it means only that the
prior trend should change but not necessarily reverse.
Recognizing the emergence of reversal patterns can be a valuable
skill. Successful trading entails having both the trend and probability on
your side. The reversal indicators are the market's way of providing a
road sign, such as "Caution-Trend in Process of Change." In other
words, the market's psychology is in transformation. You should adjust
your trading style to reflect the new market environment. There are
many ways to trade in and out of positions with reversal indicators. We
shall discuss them throughout the book.
An important principle is to place a new position (based on a reversal signal) only if that signal is in the direction of the major trend. Let us
say, for example, that in a bull market, a top reversal pattern appears.
This bearish signal would not warrant a short sale. This is because the
major trend is still up. It would, however, signal a liquidation of longs.
If there was a prevailing downtrend, this same top reversal formation
could be used to place short sales.
I have gone into detail about the subject of reversal patterns because
most of the candlestick indicators are reversals. Now, let us turn our
attention to the first group of these candlestick reversal indicators, the
hammer and hanging-man lines.

HAMMER AND HANGING-MAN LINES
Exhibit 4.4 shows candlesticks with long lower shadows and small real
bodies. The real bodies are near th.e top of the daily range. The variety
of candlestick lines shown in the exhibit are fascinating in that either line
can be bullish or bearish depending on where they appear in a trend. If
either of these lines emerges during a downtrend it is a signal that the
downtrend should end. In such a scenario, this line is labeled a hammer,

1T

These Lines Can Be Either Bullish
or Bearish

EXHIBIT 4.4. Hammer and
Hanging Man Candlesticks

I

I

,
'
' P''
I

White or

Black

EXHIBIT 4.5. Hammer

I

Reversal Patterns

T<;,hite

or Black

I

EXHIBIT 4.6. Hanging
Man

as in "the market is hammering out" a base. See Exhibit 4.5. Interestingly, the actual Japanese word for this line is takuri. This word means
something to the affect of "trying to gauge the depth of the water by
feeling for its bottom."
If either of the lines in Exhibit 4.4 emerge after a rally it tells you that
the prior move may be ending. Such a line is ominously called a hanging
man (see Exhibit 4.6). The name hanging man is derived from the fact
that it looks like a hanging man with dangling legs.
It may seem unusual that the same candlestick line can be both bullish and bearish. Yet, for those familiar with Western island tops and
island bottoms you will recognize that the identical idea applies here.
The island formation is either bullish or bearish depending on where it
is in a trend. An island after a prolonged uptrend is bearish, while the
same island pattern after a downtrend is bullish.
The hammer and hanging man can be recognized by three criteria:
1. The real body is at the upper end of the trading range. The color of

the real body is not important.
2. A long lower shadow should be twice the height of the real body
3. It should have no, or a very short, upper shadow.
The longer the lower shadow, the shorter the upper shadow and the
smaller the real body the more meaningful the bullish hammer or bearish hanging man. Although the real body of the hammer or hanging
man can be white or black, it is slightly more bullish if the real body of
the hammer is white, and slightly more bearish if the real body of the
hanging man is black. If a hammer has a white real body it means the
market sold off sharply during the session and then bounced back to
close at, or near, the session's high. This could have bullish ramifications. If a hanging man has a black real body, it shows that the close
could not get back to the opening price level. This could have potentially
bearish implications.
It is especially important that you wait for bearish confirmation with

29

30

The Basics

the hanging man. The logic for this has to do with how the hanging-man
line is generated. Usually in this kind of scenario the market is full of
bullish energy. Then the hanging man appears. On the hanging-man
day, the market opens at or near the highs, then sharply sells off, and
then rallies to close at or near the highs. This might not be the type of
price action that would let you think the hanging man could be a top
reversal. But this type of price action now shows once the market starts
to sell off, it has become vulnerable to a fast break.
If the market opens lower the next day, those who bought on the open
or close of the hanging-man day are now left "hanging" with a losing
position. Thus, the general principle for the hanging man; the greater the
down gap between the real body of the hanging-man day and the opening the next day the more likely the hanging man will be a top. Another
bearish verification could be a black real body session with a lower close
than the hanging-man sessions close.
Exhibit 4.7 is an excellent example of how the same line can be bearish (as in the hanging-man line on July 3) or bullish (the hammer on July
23). Although both the hanging man and hammer in this example have
black bodies, the color of the real body is not of major importance.
Exhibit 4.8 shows another case of the dual nature of these lines.
There is a bearish hanging man in mid-April that signaled the end of the
@

BOZO DAILY BAR

7:39
Or

1990 CQG INC.

.

.

.

-Hanging
Man

240

230
Hammer

f
.

L=

C=

17

114

121

128

.Jun
14

111

118

125

.Jul
I2

.

.

4ug

19

116

123

EXHIBIT 4.7. Soybean Oil-December, 1990, Daily (Hanging Man and Hammer)

130

16

1

220

Reversal Patterns

13:26
0127122
H=2?164
. L=26743
L=26743v
- A = . .:3?6..

@

OJIS DAILY BAR

31

1989 CQG INC.
Hanging

...................I.. .....................................: ...........................................................
Hanging
Man

.

.

. . .

.

......

....

27000

................

26000

. . .
L

.". 4/20/9o... ................................................................................................................................ '-25000
,0=27122

, H=27164

L=26743
C-26743
115

122

129

'Feb
15

112

120

126

'Mar
15

112

119

126

'Apr
12

19

EXHIBIT 4.8. Dow Jones Industrials-1990, Daily (Hanging Man and Hammer)

rally which had started with the bullish hammer on April 2. A variation
of a hanging man emerged in mid-March. Its lower shadow was long,
but not twice the height of the real body. Yet the other criteria (a real
body at the upper end of the daily range and almost no upper shadow)
were met. It was also confirmed by a lower close the next day. This line,
although not an ideal hanging man, did signal the end of the upturn
which started a month earlier. Candlestick charting techniques, like
other charting or pattern recognition techniques, have guidelines. But,
they are not rigid rules.
As discussed above, there are certain aspects that increase the importance of hanging-man and hammer lines. But, as shown in the hanging
man of mid-March, a long lower shadow may not have to be twice the
height of the real body in order to give a reversal signal. The longer the
lower shadow, the more perfect the pattern.
Exhibit 4.9 shows a series of bullish hammers numbered 1 to 4 (hammer 2 is considered a hammer in spite of its minute upper shadow). The
interesting feature of this chart is the buy signal given early in 1990. New
lows appeared at hammers 3 and 4 as prices moved under the July lows
at hammer 2. Yet, there was no continuation to the downside. The bears
had their chance to run with the ball. They fumbled. The two bullish

116

32

The Basics

EXHIBIT 4.9. Copper-Weekly (Hammers)

hammers (3 and 4) show the bulls regained control. Hammer 3 was not
an ideal hammer since the lower shadow was not twice the height of the
real body. This line did reflect, however, the failure of the bears to
maintain new lows. The following week's hammer reinforced the conclusion that a bottom reversal was likely to occur.
In Exhibit 4.10 hammers 1 and 3 are bottoms. Hammer 2 signaled the
end of the prior downtrend as the trend shifted from down to neutral.
Hammer 4 did not work. This hammer line brings out an important
point about hammers (or any of the other patterns I discuss). They
should be viewed in the context of the prior price action. In this context,
look at hammer 4. The day before this hammer, the market formed an
extremely bearish candlestick line. It was a long, black day with a shaven
head and a shaven bottom (that is, it opened on its high and closed on
its low). This manifested strong downside momentum. Hammer 4 also
punctured the old support level of January 24. Considering the aforementioned bearish factors, it would be prudent to wait for confirmation
that the bulls were in charge again before acting on hammer 4. For
example, a white candlestick which closed higher than the close of hammer 4 might have been viewed as a confirmation.
Drawing the intra-day chart using candlesticks shows the high, low,
open, and close of the session (see Exhibit 4.11). For example, an hourly
