
P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

212

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

As a market specialist, you may even find that you are simultaneously
long and short (buying and selling) your currency pair, simply because you
are trading multiple timeframes and strategies. This may seem confusing or
unlikely, but if you choose to follow the path of the specialist, you may find
it makes sense to follow the short-term and long-term impulses of your
chosen market simultaneously. Perhaps buying your market on the onehour chart, and selling it on the weekly chart.
These seemingly contradictory positions make sense only to the market specialist, the trader who has intimate knowledge of the market he
trades.

Are You a Trade Specialist?
If the idea of trading one market does not appeal to you, then you may
want to consider the alternative: becoming a trade specialist. As a trade
specialist, you will focus on one trading set-up, it may be the moolah trade
or big belts, or perhaps trendy kangaroos. The set-up you choose does not
matter, you must simply be comfortable trading the system. You will gain
comfort trading this set-up across markets by back-testing. Obviously, this
will involve back-testing. It is only through back-testing that you can accumulate experience and confidence in your trading set-up to apply it across
markets consistently and repeatedly for profits. Additionally, to become a
trade specialist, you must get comfortable with all phases of the trade.
All trades are similar to a good story, they have a beginning, middle,
and an end. In the beginning, the question is: Do you want to take this
trade? Is the risk for this trade worth it in your mind? Have you seen similar set-ups in the past that have worked out? If you feel as though you simply must take the trade, because it is too good to be true, then you should
take a trade. The beginning, in some ways, is the most difficult part of the
trade. The beginning phase of your trade is when you act as a filter. You are
filtering out those subpar trading set-ups. You, as a trade specialist, know
precisely what those grade-A set-ups look like. This will obviously come
from your back-testing. You will have gained experience through your accumulation of knowledge; this only comes with exposure to charts, which
only comes with trading live accounts and demo accounts and back-testing.
Based on your trading experience, you will know which trades to filter
out. This is the most important and critical phase of the trade as a trade
specialist.
The second part of the trade occurs when you are managing the trade.
This is where Market BiofeedbackTM comes in. Does the market provide
any critical information about the trade? How do you feel about the trade,
given the price action that has printed after entering the trade? When
the market tells you what to do, make sure you are ready to act on this

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Creating Your Trading System

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

213

information. Disregarding market information is stubborn trading. If you
join the group of stubborn traders who hold onto beliefs despite contradictory market information, you too may find them to be very expensive
beliefs (see Chapter 16 for more on expensive beliefs).
The third and final part of the trade is the exit. Now, your style of exit
strategy is obviously something that is unique and special to your personality. You simply must trade and exit in a way that make sense to you, and
fits with your view of the markets. The exit is where the money is made.
Exits literally discriminate traders; traders who consistently make money
know how to apply exits. Those traders who consistently lose money usually have great difficulty with exits.
If you doubt that exits control your trading destiny, then consider this:
Have you taken the exit challenge? (Learn how to test the power of exits at
www.fxjake.com/book). If you have, you have seen the power of exit. By
applying an exit strategy, you are able to consistently pull profits, regardless of why you have entered. If you have done the exit strategy challenge,
then you know how powerful a proper exit strategy, if applied consistently,
will bring home money consistently. It is not too late to do the exit strategy
challenge, so if you have not tried it, please do it. It is a great way to put
the exit in perspective.
As a trade specialist you will become familiar with each phase of the
trade for your chosen strategy. You will learn how to discriminate good setups from poor set-ups, you will learn how to discern if a trade is going well,
or if it is not going well, and you will learn how to apply your chosen exit
strategy consistently. (Note that all trades may experience a drawdown,
but the experienced trader, a trader who understands Market Biofeedback,
will know when to pull the plug on a trade that is poorly performing)
You will have to back-test your chosen specialty, to build your confidence, and become an expert with your trading system. Experience trading
your system across a broad range of markets is important if you are to apply this system confidently and consistently. You may find, for example,
that, as a specialist trading the last-kiss trade, it works extremely well on
the four-hour charts and the daily charts, but when you apply it to the onehour charts, the win rate plummets for you. This is valuable knowledge,
and instead of trying to fight the system, knowing how you trade it, and
which timeframes are effective are important pieces of information that
you can use to improve your trading and aid your success.

Choosing Your Timeframe
Choosing your market is important—just as important as choosing your
timeframe. There are three questions to answer when considering the timeframe you are willing to trade. First, what type of person are you? Your

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

214

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

trading personality will go a long way to determine the timeframe that you
will feel comfortable trading. Second, how much time do you have during your day? Traders who have considerable time to trade may be able to
trade lower time frames (such as the five-minute or fifteen-minute charts),
but people with very busy days may not be able to trade anything other than
the higher timeframe. Third, are you a patient trader? Patient traders will
be able to endure the inevitable fluctuations in longer-term trades, but impatient traders find it very difficult, and end up trading shorter timeframes.
In fact, impatient traders make very good scalpers.
Before you decide on your chosen timeframe, remember these two
principles: First, the shorter the timeframe you decide to trade, the more
intense concentration you will need to sustain to be consistently profitable.
Second, as a rule, traders who start out trading longer timeframes and trade
those timeframes successfully for months (or years) have a much higher
success rate than those traders who jump straight into the five-minute
charts. So choose your timeframe carefully.

RISK RULES
Trading is simply a game of managing risk. How many trades will you take
at any one time? How large will your trading positions be? When thinking
about risk, there are three key aspects you should consider: (1) your risk
appetite, (2) maximum drawdowns, and (3) correlated trades.

Risk Appetite
The simplest rule to apply is to think about your sleep. If you are able to put
a trade on, place the orders in your platform, and then go to sleep, this is
the trade size that fits your risk profile. If, however, when you place a trade
you find it difficult to sleep, you find that you are always thinking about the
trade while away from your computer, then the trade is too big. You need
to reduce your trading to the sleeping point, the point at which you can
place a trade, accept the risk, and get a good night of sleep.
SLEEPING POINT
The point at which you can place a trade, accept the risk associated with the
trade, and get a good night of sleep. If a trade is constantly on your mind or if
you ﬁnd yourself checking a trade at odd hours in the night, there is too much
risk associated with the trade, and it should be reduced to the sleeping point.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Creating Your Trading System

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

215

Maximum Drawdown
Your appetite for risk will help determine the size of your trade, but so will
your maximum drawdown. The maximum drawdown is the amount you
are willing to lose over a period of time. An easy way to track the maximum drawdown is to look at it from the point of view of one trading week.
For example, you may risk 1 percent of your account on each trade. If you
set your weekly maximum drawdown to 5 percent, you can withstand five
losing trades in a row. After five losing trades, you have hit your maximum
drawdown for the week. You may decide to stop trading once your maximum drawdown is hit.
How you decide to apply the maximum drawdown rule may depend
on the timeframe you decide to trade. You may decide to have a maximum
drawdown per month if you trade a longer timeframe. If you trade shorter
timeframes, you may decide to have a maximum drawdown amount for
one day. It is up to you to decide. Note that your maximum drawdown will
affect how many trades you are able to take at any given time.
For example, you may decide to have a maximum drawdown of 5 percent for each trading week. If you have six daily trade signals on the first
trading day of the week, and you risk 1 percent on each of these trades, you
could have a drawdown of 6 percent should all those trades go bad at once.
The implication, of course, is that you should reduce your risk so you are
unable to reach your weekly drawdown on the first day of the week if all
of the trades end up losers. So, if you have a 5 percent drawdown rule per
trading week, and you have six trading signals in one day, perhaps instead
of risking 1 percent per trade you risk 0.65 percent per trade for an overall
risk of 3.9 percent. This way, you have another 1.1 percent to risk the rest
of the trading week should all 6 trades become losers.
Another critical question you must ask about your trading system is
this: How will you deal with drawdowns? Will you use a stop-trading rule?
How will you recharge your batteries and jump back into trading after a
drawdown? Perhaps you believe that a “drawdown retreat” is a good idea.
You may decide to get away from the charts, and, if possible, get away
from your trading station and take a trip out of town after experiencing
a drawdown. The theory behind this is if you get away from trading for
a while you will (1) avoid revenge trading (a quick way to blow up your
account), and (2) come back to the charts with a fresh perspective.
The best way to come back to the charts fresh is to simply follow a
planned sequence whenever you experience a maximum drawdown. For
example, you may decide to follow this five-step sequence: (1) Go away.
You will get away from your trading station and away from your home or
trading office. Even if only for the weekend or couple of days. It is important to remove yourself from the place where you have experienced

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

216

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

the drawdown. (2) Back-test your system. This should be a predetermined
number of trades (e.g., 200 trades) or a set time period (e.g., EUR/USD
daily chart from 2009 through 2011). (3) Evaluate your trading statement.
What has been working well? What has not been working well? Is the drawdown due to bad luck? Or is the drawdown due to a lack of discipline; are
you following your trading rules? Perhaps there are a few currencies that
account for 85 percent of your losses? Take a good look at your trading
statement to see what seems to be working and what needs improvement.
Make sure that you go back far enough with your statement to see what
was working for you before the drawdown. (4) Decide if your system still
works. You have back-tested and you have examined your trading statement. If your trading statement reveals nothing more than bad luck, and
back-testing suggests your trading system still works, it is time for another
test. Test your trading system on recent market data. This way you can be
sure that your trading system no longer works. If your drawdown has occurred over the past three weeks, take a close look at recent market data
from the past three months to see if the system is profitable. If you have
found that the system is no longer profitable, it might be best to stick to a
demo account when you begin trading again.
DEMO ACCOUNT
Short for “demonstration account”—many forex brokers oﬀer free practice
accounts, also called demo accounts. These accounts allow forex traders to
become comfortable with the trading platform (the broker’s trading software),
and they also allow traders to test trading systems with real markets. These
accounts will keep track of winning and losing trades because they are funded
with an amount of simulated money such as $50,000.

Demo trading will ensure that you do not lose money if the trading system no longer finds consistent profits. You must be careful of jumping back
into the cycle of doom when doing this. If your trading system no longer
turns a profit (and you are applying the rules consistently), it is time to
find another system. (5) Work on you. You are the most critical aspect of
your trading system. When your confidence is shaken after a serious drawdown you should transition back into trading carefully. The goal should be
to build up confidence. The two easiest ways to build confidence are to
back-test your system (see it working over historical data) and to create a
positive mindset. (Specific tools for improving your trading psychology are
covered in Chapter 16.)
Decide and plan for your approach to a drawdown. Nearly every trader
will have to sit through one of these difficult times. Professional forex

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Creating Your Trading System

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

217

trader Ashkan Bolour suggests that there is always time for making money
in the markets. He says, “If something is not working, step away, re-analyze
your trades, and then come back to the markets. Stepping away from the
markets will give your mind and your body time to rest, and you will be
much better for it when you come back to the markets.”
Coming out of an extended drawdown your goal should be to slowly
build up your confidence. It is necessary to have a regimented routine
for getting through these drawdowns. Without a strong structure, without
rules designed to keep you from emotional revenge trading after a drawdown, you’re almost certain to fall into undisciplined trading and to take
on excessive risk. Design a plan today so that if a drawdown appears, you
are ready for it, because you will not feel like designing a drawdown plan
in the midst of a drawdown.

Correlated Trades
Correlated trades are perhaps the most obvious threats to your trading account. For example, from time to time the markets may print daily kangaroo tails on many of the yen pairs. If I decide to take the daily kangaroo tail
on the USD/JPY, AUD/JPY, NZD/JPY, CAD/JPY, EUR/JPY, and GBP/JPY, I
must be careful. What will happen if each of these trades are available on
the same day, and I have a maximum drawdown limit of 5 percent for the
week? With a risk of 1 percent per trade, I quickly reach my weekly drawdown limit simply by taking these trades should they all end up as losing
trades.
One obvious solution is to reduce the per-trade risk when several correlated currency pairs offer trading set-ups. If you have a background in
statistics, you understand what a correlation is, but if you do not understand correlation very well, take a look at the correlation video at
www.fxjake.com/book. You will learn how to measure the correlation between any two currency pairs. Once you have determined that two currency pairs are correlated, the next step is to reduce your overall risk for
correlated trades.
Here is an example of a plan for managing correlated, simultaneous
trades.
Bullish kangaroo tails print on the daily charts for the following pairs:
USD/JPY, AUD/JPY, NZD/JPY, CAD/JPY, EUR/JPY, and GBP/JPY.
The standard risk per trade is 1 percent.
The maximum weekly drawdown is 5 percent.
For simultaneous trades with a correlation of 0.65 and above, the risk
is reduced to 0.5 percent per trade.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

218

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

The correlations are run on the six currency pairs and all are correlated above the 0.65 level, so the overall risk per trade is set to
0.5 percent, for an overall risk of 3 percent on the day.
Even if all six trades end up as losers, the drawdown will only be 3 percent, so there will be 2 percent of additional risk available for the
week (two standard trades at 1 percent risk each).
Decide how you will manage the risk on correlated pairs. As with every
other aspect of your trading plan, if you decide on a plan of action before
you are in the midst of a high-pressure trading decision, you and your trading account will be much better off.

MANAGING YOUR TRADES
The way you manage your trades is completely a personal decision. There
are two parts to managing the trade. The first part is managing the entry
price. The second is managing the exit. Both decisions may be personalized
depending on the way you decide to approach your trading.
As for the entry price, there are several possible methods of entering
a trade. You may take a market order (executing the trade at the current
market price). You may take a limit order (executing the trade after the
market retraces, or moves in the “wrong” direction). Or you may decide
to use the recommended buy stops (or sell stops for sell trades), executing the trade entry only once the market moves in the expected direction.
Additionally, you may also decide to use an alternative entry strategy: You
may wait for the market to offer a clue. In other words, you enter your
trade once you receive market feedback, once the market suggests it will
move in the expected direction.
Managing the exit is also critical. There are many exit strategies available to you, many of them listed in Chapter 11. However, you may also
decide to manage your exit based on market activity.
Some traders believe that all trading decisions should be made before
the trade is triggered. In other words, the entry price, the stop-loss placement, and the profit targets are all determined in the beginning, before the
trade is initiated. This way, there is no thinking after the trade is triggered.
Traders who adhere to this philosophy attempt to get out of the way, and
allow the market to rate the trade as a winner or loser. Some traders take
this approach because they have jobs outside of trading. This restricts their
availability for managing the trade. This limited exposure to charts can be
a good thing. Sometimes traders get in the way.

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

Creating Your Trading System

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

219

Traders may get in the way during the analysis of the markets, when
decisions are made concerning which trades to take. Many traders have
found that too much market analysis is counterproductive. It is often easier
and more efficient to have a quick look at the markets, decide on a course
of action, and then to simply set the trades and forget them.
Abe Cofnas, a renowned trader who deals in both spot forex and
forex options, has this to say about market analysis: “It is so fascinating
to see—but for me I often find my best trading results occur when I do
minimal analysis, and let my visual sense of price action let me react to
and not anticipate conditions.”
Cofnas is certainly not alone. There are many traders who follow this
same philosophy. Sometimes traders can simply out-think themselves, and
it may also come during the exit phase of the trade. Colin Jessup, a naked
forex trader in Canada has this to say about managing his trades: “If price
action retraces more that 61.8 percent towards my stop, I will close the
trade to minimize the loss. Usually the 70 percent level is my line in the
sand if I’m watching a trade live. That said, due to my schedule, my trades
usually either hit my target or stop me out.”
Decide for yourself how much management you will do when trading.
Stick to these rules. Try to duplicate your back-testing in your live trading. This will ensure that your live trading results will resemble your backtesting results.

Managing Stops and Profits
How will you take losses? Will you wait for the market to hit your stop
loss or will you close out the trade manually before your stop is hit? Will
your profit targets be achieved automatically, or will you wait to see if the
market can push through a zone before exiting?
Are you a runner or a gunner? If you are a runner, your stop loss and
your profit target may be one and the same (for example, if you are using
the three-bar exit). If you are a gunner, will you leave your profit targets in
your trading platform and walk away?
Your disposition and your lifestyle will probably answer these questions for you. If you are at work during the day and are unable to manage your trades, you may need to let your trading platform do the managing for you. If, however, you are a full-time trader or have access to your
charts nearly all day long, be careful. It may seem like a good idea to be
able to watch the charts all the time; it may seem like a good idea to have
your trades available on your phone at all times. Sometimes watching your
trades unfold may mean you exit a trade prematurely. The rule of thumb
here is to trade your system just as you back-test it. You must make sure

P1: OTA
JWBT642-c13

JWBT642-Nekritin

January 11, 2012

220

22:15

Printer: Courier Westford

NAKED FOREX

that your back-testing duplicates how you will trade in your everyday life.
If you get very nervous watching your trades, then it is probably best that
you walk away. It may be best for you to let your trading platform manage
your trade if you find yourself making poor decisions when watching the
live markets.
The forex trading platforms today are brilliant, and they offer many opportunities for trailing exits, the ability to move a stop loss based on market
action, and so forth. Know who you are as a trader, and what your weaknesses are. If you find yourself doing better, capturing more profits when
you step away to allow your trades to either hit the take profit or the stop
loss, without your intervention, perhaps you should stick to this hands-off
approach to managing your trades. Perhaps you are able to manage your
trades successfully and cut your losses before they hit the stop loss. The
important thing to remember is that a few poor trades do not mean you
should redesign your trading system (beware the cycle of doom).
