
A Practical Guide to Trading

489

In addition, what happens between input (skills) and output (results) is
subject to the interaction of the person with the environment. In the case
of the teacher, the environment is mainly the students and the school’s
culture; for a lawyer, it is clients and coworkers; for a bricklayer, it is the
job site, the tools, and other subcontractors.
But the perception of success in any given occupation can be fudged
quite a bit. You can be a lousy Congressman but still seem quite competent
and get elected repeatedly. You can be a crummy teacher but thrive simply
because your students like how permissive you are.
A trader, though, really has just one asset: their ability to apply their
edge, whatever it might be, in the never-ending turmoil that represents a
given market. Their edge might be skillful charting, insightful fundamental
analysis, or a deep understanding of a certain industry.
But since a trader’s measurement of success is simple—their profit/
loss statement—there’s no fudge factor allowed. All you’ve got is talent,
and all you’ve got to show for it is a numeric result.
So let’s say you were hired to sit on a manhole cover to prevent zombies from coming out of it. You are being paid 100 percent for your time.
You are applying no talent at all to this occupation; the only asset you are
bringing to the job is your body’s mass. (It could be argued that some folks
are more talented than others even in this respect, but let’s keep it simple!)
If you are a salesclerk at a high-end clothing store, you are being paid
partly for your time (someone needs to be there to make the place look
open for business and to make sure people don’t just steal things) but also
partly for your talent (your knowledge of clothes, what looks good on a
particular person, etc.).
No one is going to pay for a trader’s time. You can sit there all year
long, working your tail off, and if the talent isn’t there, you’re not going to
get a stipend. In fact, you are going to work very hard for the privilege of
losing money.
Of course, the market’s behavior has a direct relationship to what kinds
of results your talent brings, but that is the biggest task of all: honing your
skills so that the market’s behavior becomes, ultimately, irrelevant to your
ability to generate profits.

THERE IS NO HOLY GRAIL
My philosophy on trading has this important premise: it’s all about the relationship between you and the market. The market you cannot control,
but yourself—to a degree—you can. And it is the complexity of yourself
vis-à-vis an ever-changing market that makes the entire enterprise of being
a trader simultaneously fascinating, exasperating, and thought-provoking.

490

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Instead of latching on to one particular trading method, I have, over
the years, adopted a handful of methods, and I’ve put them into my own
unique trading stew. I am refining it all the time, weighting some vectors I
am monitoring more, weighting some less. But the concoction is best suited
for me and who I am. It wouldn’t work as well for most other people.
It’s important to embrace one’s perpetual ignorance. I seek mastery by
considering myself a dunce who is in search of knowledge. By no means
am I suggesting piling on rule after rule, method after method. I view the
act of trading as not much different than making an ongoing series of bread
loaves. I’m changing the recipe a little each time, and I’m kneading, kneading, kneading the dough (that is, my positions, their weighting, and their
stops) to try to get the result I’m after: metaphorically, a delicious loaf of
bread; realistically, a nice, outsize profit.
The fact that learning to be a great trader is a very personal journey is
why I stopped buying business books many years ago. When I was in my
late teens and early twenties, I bought business books all the time. I figured they would help me become a more successful businessperson. They
didn’t.
I’ve got shelves of these books, and I don’t think I learned a thing from
any of them. It’s not because I didn’t read them carefully. But most how-to
books are based on the notion that if you do what this person did, you will
be like this person. But you know what? That person is that person. He
isn’t you. And the circumstances he found himself in (whether he’s Jack
Welch, Tom Peters, Steve Jobs, Mark Zuckerberg, or God-knows-who-else)
are unique to that person. If you want to read a biography, great, read a
biography. But if you want to be like that person, well, that spot’s already
been taken.
This isn’t to say there’s nothing to learn from books. But I think books
related to business or trading are best applied to either (1) the actual mechanics of trading techniques and their application and (2) learning from
the successes and failures of others in order to template those events to
your own personal experience. I don’t have any illusions that I’m going to
be a Paul Tudor Jones, but I do draw inspiration from his resilience in the
face of defeat and his successful use of past markets to understand present
ones.

CHARTING YOUR WAY TO PROFITS
Making money in the market isn’t easy. So much of human nature is geared
to poor trading habits that it is difficult to overcome the challenges to being
a good trader.

A Practical Guide to Trading

491

You have some advantages on your side now, however. You have a
very powerful charting tool at your disposal to calmly and rationally judge
securities. You have seen hundreds of examples of technical analysis in
real-life charts to understand how to observe and apply these lessons. And
you know some critically important rules of the road that lead to sound
trading.
Good luck in your endeavors, and make a point of revisiting this book
whenever you need a refresher. I hope it will be a powerful guide as you
chart your way to more profitable and consistent trading.
And stay in touch! You can learn more by visiting my blog (www.
slopeofhope.com), and if you want to write me, I am at trader.tim.
knight@gmail.com.

APPENDIX

A

The Kirk
Report Interview

Charles Kirk is the widely read blogger who writes The Kirk Report (www.thekirkreport.com/). In August 2009, he conducted a
lengthy interview with me, which he has kindly permitted me to
republish here. I think this interview does a good job of answering
a lot of questions about my trading style.
eople read trading blogs for all sorts of reasons. Some do it to learn
something new, others do it to find new trading ideas and many do
it simply for entertainment. For me, Tim Knight’s Slope of Hope has
been a great source of interesting perspectives as well as pure enjoyment.
Tim is an interesting fellow and his blog is worthwhile. He has been
actively trading since 1987 and uses technical analysis as a key part of his
approach. However, you can expect to see much more than charts there. In
fact, every time you visit his blog you can count on Tim saying or sharing
something that is likely to amuse you and/or at least get you thinking about
something. His perspectives are always fresh, witty, and clearly different
than the typical “we’re always in a bull market” garbage found within the
mainstream financial press. That’s why Tim’s blog has always been among
the blogs I read and one of the main reasons why I’ve invited Tim to participate in this month’s Q&A.
Tim’s “Slope of Hope” is one of those must-read blogs for anyone interested in the market.
We sincerely hope you find this Q&A both enjoyable and helpful.

P

492

Appendix A: The Kirk Report Interview

493

Q&A WITH TIM KNIGHT
Kirk: Hi, Tim. Thank-you for taking the time away from your daily trading
routine to answer our questions. I speak for many members who have
a great deal of respect for you and we sincerely welcome you to this
Q&A series!
Tim Knight: Thanks, Kirk. It’s just about impossible to look at a list of top
trading blogs and not see the Kirk Report, so it’s really an honor for me
to be mentioned on your site.
Kirk: For those who don’t know you, please tell us a little about your professional and educational background.
Tim Knight: My educational background is nothing glorious—I was eager to get into the world of work, so I got my four year degree in two
and a half years from Santa Clara University, which is a Jesuit college in California (and the state’s first higher education institution).
My experience with computers, though, began long before that—I got
serious about computers back in 1980, and I wrote my first book
about them—The World Connection—when I was 16 years old. I went
on to write twenty different books about computers, which allowed
me to pay for my own college education and living expenses, and I
had a brief stint with “real” jobs at Apple Computer and Montgomery
Securities.
The first trade I ever placed was on Black Monday in 1987; perhaps that experience etched bearishness into my head permanently.
I traded casually for years, but I didn’t get really serious about it
until 1992 when I founded Prophet, which is where I’ve been ever
since.
Kirk: How did you get interested in trading?
Tim Knight: This may seem like a random reference, but it’s not. When I
was a young boy growing up in Louisiana, where it rains a lot, I would
always get mesmerized by the beads of water bobbing up and down
the side of the car’s window. Since the car was in motion, the water
droplets would jiggle up and down, clinging to the window, and watching the random movement of the water fascinated me.
Maybe that’s why I was predisposed to technical analysis. I like to
see relationships of time and motion, and I find the ability to predict
the future to be empowering. I fail at those predictions part of the
time, obviously, but I am on a constant quest to improve my skills
as a trader, one of the most important being to draw probabilistic
conclusions from a given chart.
Kirk: How would you describe your style of trading?

494

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Tim Knight: I guess the words I’d use to describe my trading would be
“technical analysis-based,” “swing,” and “broadly directional.” I use
charts pretty much exclusively as the basis of my rationale on any
given position, and I’m looking for broad moves either up or down.
I don’t get fancy with my positions—just straight-up equity plays or
options.
Kirk: In an average week how many trades do you make? What is your
average hold time and how many positions do you have open at any
given time?
Tim Knight: It really depends on the week, but I’d say a weekly range
would be anywhere from a couple dozen trades to maybe a hundred.
The number of positions I have open at any one time can range from
as few as eighty to as many as a couple hundred.
Kirk: That’s pretty active, Tim. I’d go crazy trying to manage a portfolio of
more than a dozen stocks! What would you say is your average win/loss
ratio for your trades?
Tim Knight: That’s something I’ve never really tracked, since I’m much
more interested in my equity curve. I’ve got plenty of losers, believe
me, but I go out of my way to keep them on the small side.
Kirk: How has your overall performance been recently, as well as the past
few years?
Tim Knight: I’ve been doing pretty well, but so far 2008 was my standout year. At the end of 2008, my personal account was up something
like +180 percent, and my 401(k), which is self-directed, was up about
+438 percent.
Kirk: No doubt your bearish perspectives helped generate those recent returns! Tell us a little about your initial learning process and anything
significant you learned within the first year or two of trading.
Tim Knight: My learning process was a lot longer than a year or two—I’ve
been at this twenty years, and I’m still learning! I think the most important thing I’ve learned is this—the synopsis of what it takes to be
a good trader can easily fit on one page, if not one paragraph. But actually executing those principles consistently is something which runs
completely against basic human nature, so it is a tremendous challenge
for most people to actually adhere to those principles. The paradox of
trading is that what feels right is usually the wrong decision.
Kirk: Indeed, this is something we’ve learned from others like William
Eckhardt who said that “if you’re playing for emotional satisfaction,
you’re bound to lose, because what feels good is often the wrong
thing to do.” So, where do you think most traders go wrong in the first
couple of years?

Appendix A: The Kirk Report Interview

495

Tim Knight: All the “classic” mistakes one hears about—off the top of my
head, I’d say averaging down, not having stops, over-committing to a
particular position. At its core, however, the biggest mistake is that
people take the most important rule of trading—Cut Losses Short and
Let Winners Run—and do exactly the opposite. Taking profits quickly
(because it feels good) and letting losers run (because it is hard to admit defeat) is how most people operate, and it’s understandable, given
the way human beings tick.
Kirk: After the initial learning curve, what do you think marked the next
stage of your progress in becoming a successful trader?
Tim Knight: The real sea change for me came when I started blogging. After I sold Prophet, my wife thought people might find it interesting to
read what I had to say about the market. Since I didn’t have an audience, I thought it would be a waste of time, but I finally started doing
a post a day. The blog grew really slowly, at first just read by friends
and family. But I made a real habit of it, and the pressure of being “on
stage” with my trading made me a much more astute trader. I had to
think hard about what I was doing, because I don’t get my jollies out of
looking foolish, and I wanted to write things and do things which made
sense in the long run.
Kirk: So, in a way, the blog held you accountable for your ideas and analysis
much like many find through trading journals.
Since you began trading in 1987, do you feel like you have perfected
your system?
Tim Knight: I don’t have a system, and even if I thought I did, I’d never
claim to have perfected it. The markets are ever-changing, just like
anything else. An amazing campaign manager from 1968 might find
himself completely lost in today’s political world, and a superb mutual
fund manager from 1975 might be a colossal failure today. To me,
the entire act of trading is a constant examination of the relationship
between (1) you and (2) the market. That may sound simple, but to
my way of thinking it’s just as complex and challenging as any deeply
personal relationship.
Kirk: Over the past few years, what would you say is the most significant
lesson you’ve learned about yourself and trading?
Tim Knight: Speaking for myself, I’d say the biggest lesson—or, more accurately, challenge—is fighting my bearish tendencies. I’m sure the
“permabulls” had a devil of a time in 2000–2002 and mid 2007–early
2009, but by the same token, we bearish types had it really rough in
all the other years. I’ve worked really hard to open my eyes up to both
bullish and bearish opportunities, going so far as to add a feature in

496

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

