
A : They try to make it a science. Theyre stubborn and losing
trades bother them too much. They're afraid to push the keys on
the keyboard.

102


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

Q.: When you look at somebody who has promise, what would
be the primary characteristics of that trader?

A : If you give me someone who wants to be the best at what
ever they do, and I don’t care if it’s ditch digging, building houses,
or whatever they will do, whatever is necessary to learn to win or
succeed, I can make a trader out of that person.

Q.:s0 it’s really the inherent desire to be a winner in whatever
activity you're involved in?

A: That’s true. If you took guys like Michael Jordan or a successful
businessman, they will learn to be the best at whatever they do or
the best they can be, and theyll do whatever they have to do to
achieve those goals.

Q: Do you like athletics, do you follow sports?

A: Yes.

: Do you find that the prototype of a successful trader or
successful day trader in futures tends to be someone who is highly
competitive and has some kind of athletic background in their
history?

A : Yes. I know most about golf because I play a pretty good
game of golf. I think that I could take almost any person whom I
have played golf with, who is exceptionally good at it. I can probably
teach them to trade because, by definition, if they are a good golfer,
they are very disciplined. They're adaptive and they make the best
of it. They don’t take excessive risk. Theyre always calculating that
best way to win.

103


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q : This is a question we’ve asked many day traders: Are you
competitive against yourself or against everybody else?

A : Myself.

Q : For you it’s a matter of self-discovery and self-improvement.
You don’t care about anybody else and what the market is doing
and the fact that some other guy is making 10 million or losing
10 million today?

A : No, that doesn’t even enter my mind.

Q.: were you always interested in sports and had a competitive
nature?

A. Yes, and what I find interesting is I don’t enjoy playing racquet-
ball or basketball or golf just for the hell of it. I like the competitive
side of it, like a lot of men do.

: So it’s not the art of the game that interests you, it’s the
practical results?

A: Nes.

: Very interesting. These are questions we ask everybody for
the book and we'll just ask them of you. So answer them with first
thing that comes to your mind.

A : Okay.

Q.. what is your number one rule for trading?
A : Don’t be stubborn.

104


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

Q.- what was your best trade ever?

A : You know, it’s odd because it happened this summer. We had
particularly volatile markets in June and July. We had a market that
was just screaming “Up” on news. I couldn’t even tell you what it
was, and I faded that market, and it took a little while but I made
$69,000 on that trade.

Q, : Because the market retraced the whole up move?

A : The whole up move, yes.

Q:80 that was sweet. The converse of that—what was the worst
trade that you can remember?

A : It was this summer when Bernanke opened his mouth and
started talking about the easing of interest rate rises and the market
started creeping up, and then it jumped. I was already in a trade,
and I got stubborn when, in reality, I should have just taken the hit
at the first time. But that stubbornness made me have a bad, bad
trade.

Q.: pia you average into the position before you threw in the
towel?

A : Unfortunately, in that case, I was already in the position when
he said it. I was short 200 contracts for the ER, and as soon as he
said it, you know it automatically just spiked up four points, and
that’s pretty costly. Typically, when you get a spike like that, you
hope it will retrace 50 percent and you're going to get out. In this
case it just continued to go up. And all you have to do is shake those
off and come in the next day and make good trades. I just don’t
want it to turn into a life-changing situation. I bailed. I walked away
from the market that day and came back the next day.

10S


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- You take that big hit then you close the screen and you walk
away?

A: Two things: Sometimes there’s nothing you could do about it.
Sometimes you have situations in the ER where somebody wanted
200 and they entered 2,000, and it will crush the market. There is
nothing you can do other than walk away and make good trades.
And most traders really struggle with that. You watched me trade
enough to know that my strength is coming back from a bad trade
because I just try to make more good trades, do the same thing
over and over again. Physically, if I’m struggling, what I like to do
is trade size for a very small profit. I'll maybe trade 50 or 100 lots
for a half point and do the same thing over and over again.

Qs just to get the rhythm back and to regain some loses?

A : That’s right. String together some winners, some singles.

Q.:s0 clearly the one thing you never do is you don’t try to get
everything back at once. Let’s say for argument sake you dropped
five points on a trade and then your methodology is ’'m going to
take half a point, three-quarter of a point to constantly chip away
at that loss?

A : Over and over again.

Q.: How did you come across that kind of a methodology? Was
it natural? Or is this something you really consciously realized was
the right thing to do?

A : You know, I think I learned the hard way. Revenge trades
are the most costly trades. If you have a bad trade and you try and
make it all back in one time, you're going to lose more money. I

106


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

think I learned from experience that the best thing to do is to try
and get back to even over a little bit at time. It’s a whole easier to
make a half point on 100 contracts than it is to make 10 points on
10 contracts.

Q. what was the most interesting part of this job?

A : You know, people would think that the answer would be
making a lot of money or the short work day. But that’s not it at all.
Winning the game is really important to me. Working with some
good traders is important to me. The rest of the things take care of
themselves. If people get into business because they think it’s easy,
they're kidding themselves. It’s the toughest game in the world.
And trading for an hour and half or two hours a day is probably far
more work than the average person puts in their eight hour office
job. It is very, very tough. It’s tough emotionally. But I liked to
try and teach people to succeed and learn to do this, knowing very
well that only 1 in 10 are going to make it.

: What about drudgery? Is there anything unpleasant about
his job?

A: No. I look forward to it everyday.

Q.: The wide array of trading that you've done over the last six
or seven years, what would you say was the most humbling trading
experience for you? The one that really taught you the most?

A : [Laughter.] I don’t know. I think I probably learned far more
from trying to teach new traders to trade than anything that I did
myself. One of the things that I’m sure you know—I've realized
that all new traders are going to go through some experiences that
are similar. They will have some dumb luck. They will triumph and

107


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

then they'll have some failure. They'll modify their plans. They'll
get punished a couple of times by the market. They'll get tentative.
Everyone I’ve ever taught went through the same progression. It’s
the people who know how they react to that adversity that tells
you whether or not they're going to make it. Have you ever seen
anyone who just made it from day one?

QO: Never for long. We've seen people literally take $10,000 and
run it to a quarter of a million. But we’ve never seen anybody
hang on to it unless they were able to master the skills. Usually the
same attributes that were responsible for that massive gain — greed
and fearless risk taking, also become the reasons for their downfall
when markets turned against them.

A : Exactly,

LESSONS FROM CHUCK HAYS
Know If You Are Better at Being a Short or Long Trader

Just as few people are ambidextrous, very few traders can trade
equally from both sides of the market. Typically, some traders
are much more comfortable being long while others have a much
stronger preference for being short. There is no right choice in
this matter. The distinction is really a function of your individual
personality and taste. However, as Chuck Hays points out, knowing
your strengths can often be the difference between success and
failure. Just as throwing left handed for a righty can be an extremely
uncomfortable experience, trading long for a short biased trader
can be highly unpleasant—even if the trade is ultimately a good
one. Being a short-biased traders ourselves, during the peak of
internet bubble we remember making four profitable short trades
in Inktomi (INKT) in one day as the stock climbed 16 points from
open to close. The issue wasn’t whether the stock was going up
or down, but how we handled each trade. Because we were much

108


THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM

more comfortable on the short side, we executed with confidence
and precision and walked out a net winner at the end of that day,
proving Chuck’s point.

Traders Who Absolutely Have to Make Money Never Do

This is perhaps one of the wisest pieces of advice in our book.
Many retail traders get into the business expecting to make money
right away. The irony of this profession is that the more you need
to make money to pay your bills, the less likely you can do that.
The main reason that trading is difficult to master is that it is the
only profession in the world that actually punishes you for non-
performance. Most workers who work on a salary have the peace
of mind knowing that they will be paid their weekly paycheck
whether they accomplish their tasks or not. Even salespeople who
work strictly on commission, risk only the loss of their time, not
their money, if their deals go bust. Trading is the only profession
in the world where a wrong decision will result in an instant loss
of your money. Few people truly appreciate the negative pres-
sure of this dynamic. Chuck Hays, lost $50,000 in his first year
on the job. Therefore, if you are going to trade full time, it is
absolutely critical to understand that success takes both time and
money.

Focus on the Next Good Trade

As human beings we are all highly influenced by our surroundings.
As traders we are especially vulnerable to big emotional swings,
cycling from depression to euphoria depending on the outcome of
our last trade. Yet real pros never look back. What happened on
the last trade has absolutely no impact on what happens on the
next one. The markets do not care if you just lost or made a million
dollars. They only focus on the future. That’s why good traders are
able to totally divorce themselves from their emotions. As Chuck
says, he only wants to concentrate on making the next good trade,
ignoring the good or the bad that preceded it.

109


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

It Takes Time to See Different Type of Markets

One of the reasons why trading takes a long time to master is that
market environments are not static. Markets do not simply go up
or down, but rather cycle between trending and ranging phases.
It takes a very long time to learn to understand the nuances of
each regime and to make proper adjustments to your trading style.
In fact, the markets are littered with stories of traders who made
a fortune right out of the gate because they caught a very strong
trend only to give it all back when the market started ranging. That
is why in trading there is just no substitute for experience.

Timing Is Everything, But You Will Rarely Be Right
on the First Try

At its core trading is nothing more than timing. However, timing
the entry is an extremely difficult skill to master and few short-
term traders ever get it right on the first try. That is why Chuck
Hays will often add to his positions. He even coined new terms
for his style of trading: SHADD for short add and LADD for long
add. This practice is a very controversial because it flies in the face
of the long-accepted market wisdom that traders should never
add to their losing position. However, like all trading rules, this
one is meant to be broken when properly executed. The key is
not to allocate all of your risk capital to the trade at once, but
rather to distribute it properly so that you achieve a good blended
price on the trade. As Chuck says, “I firmly expect to add to [the
trade] anyway. You increase your chance of success a great deal
when you understand that trying to make perfect entries and book
them ...” more often means that the markets are going to“... take
your money and you're going to lose.”

110


CHAPTER 5

RAGS TO RICHES
HOOSAIN HARNEKER

Imagine losing your life savings in a partnership gone wrong and
having to pick yourself up from such a calamity. Hoosain Harneker
took seven months to save up $1000—an amount that most col-
lege students can easily earn working for a few weeks at local
restaurant—and started to trade foreign exchange. Hoosain is as
conservative as it gets. He refuses to trade a strategy until he has
tripled his demo account three times in a row. He goes for 10-pip
trades once a day, which may seem miniscule to most, but in the last
three years he has turned that approach into an average profit of
$500 a day. With his systems engineering background, he has been
able to design his own automated trading system, which makes sure
that he never turns a winner into a loser. His cardinal rule is tonever
trade his system during news. Having been broke before, making
money on a consistent basis is far more important to him than
becoming rich overnight so he locks in profits as often as he can.

From his office in South Africa, Hoosain sat with us to share
his story of how he managed to go from rags to riches.

111


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q - How did you get started in the financial markets?

A : As a South African, back in the 1980s our education system
did not include any subjects related to finance or investing. We had
a subject called accountancy, which is basically like bookkeeping.
But we did not cover anything to do with investments. The cur-
riculum of those previously disadvantaged did not include these
subjects at all. So, with little or no experience, these opportuni-
ties were virtually nonexistent to disadvantaged communities and
people in those communities, including myself.

Q: Do you live in South Africa right now?

A : Yes. I’m currently an information technology (IT) systems
engineer. I originally studied mechanical engineering and then
switched to IT. I was quite successful as an IT engineer and I have
worked for two companies. Both of them were liquidated, and after
the last liquidation, I decided that was it, P’'ve had enough. I'll start
a company on my own, and I went into a partnership with five other
guys. After a year or so that partnership went horribly wrong, and
I ended up losing significantly both financially and in terms of self-
esteem. At that point of my life, I was at an absolute low. I don’t
think I’ve ever sunk any lower than that. I was truly down and out.
I was obviously unemployed. I remained unemployed for almost a
year and honestly, having been brought up to believe that a man
is the only breadwinner in the family, one of the most humiliating
things was lying in bed sleeping while my wife had to get up and go
to work. Looking back now, I learned some very valuable lessons
during that period, which has still stood with me for the past few
years.

Q.: Like what?

A : Lessons about planning, being careful, about managing
money, about trust, and having trust in other people. Documenting
things, signing them, making sure you have witnesses to absolutely

112


RAGS TO RICHES

everything that you do when it comes to business. I think those
are some very, very valuable lessons that I learned that have stood
with me since then. It also taught me about compassion, basically
feeling for other people as well because up until that point I was,
I would say, fairly successful. Being in that situation, you never re-
ally think too much about other people and what their situation is
until you end up in it yourself. After the partnership blew up, I had
huge debts to pay, and I was not getting anywhere close to settling
them. At the time, I had a friend in the United States, whom I had
met a while back, who used to trade currencies. For no apparent
reason one afternoon, he suddenly just popped into my head, and I
thought of contacting him to see if he can assist me in anyway. So I
got a hold of him. He asked me for $1,000, which he said he would
invest for me to help me improve my financial situation. The only
problem was that I did not have $1,000. I wrote back to him and I
told him, “Listen Steven, let me save up for it, and once I’ve got a
thousand, I'll give it to you and then you can trade it.” He actually
wrote back to me and he said, “I will loan you the money and I'll
help you out.” I told him that I was in so much debt already that
I would not take another loan from anybody—I had reached the
bottom line. I said give me a chance, let me save up for it, and it
eventually took me I think seven or eight months to save up $1,000.
When I finally did, I e-mailed him again and told him that I had
the money. He then turned around and told me, “Listen, instead
of me trading for you, I would rather teach you how to trade.” This
was something that, I must say, I truly appreciated because it gave
me a skill that I would have for the rest of my life, and one that
I would be able to share as well. So that is basically how I started
trading currencies.

: It must have been frightening for you in the beginning be-
cause you had spent so much time saving up that money. How were
you able to trust this friend given all that you had gone through in
the past? Did he show you a track record?

A : Yes, he did show me what he what he was doing. He basi-
cally sent me the printouts of his trading records and his account

113


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

statements, etc. As far as I was concerned, this guy was making
huge money.

Q.- was he doing it for other people as well?

A : No way, strictly for himself. Generally, he would not touch
other people’s money, I suppose in my case he was going to make
the exception to the rule. But then, on second thought, he decided
to teach me his skills instead. Effectively, it was technical analysis
with an emphasis on moving averages. At the beginning, I first
demo traded it. I did very well on the demo, then went live, and
that was when the rude awakening came.

Q_: How did you learn from him when he was in the United
States and you were in South Africa?

A : He used to take print screens of charts and put them into
PowerPoint. He would then illustrate the images and write on
top of them and basically give me slides of the graphics. When I
received them, I would replicate what he told me on the demo
account. For example, I would plot a moving average of 5 and a
moving average of 13 to look for a moving average cross. I was such a
novice that I had no idea what this guy was talking about at the time.

Qztm sure there was a very steep learning curve. Did he explain
to you what moving averages were or did he just say okay these are
moving averages and I recommend that you use them?

A : He basically advised me on what they were. I would then
figure out for myself how to apply them. If you’re basically looking
at crossovers, then you want the faster line to cross the slower line
from the bottom up, creating a buy opportunity. If it crossed from
the top down, that’s a sell. I actually battled with it in the begin-
ning, but I somehow slowly but surely and through perseverance
managed to get the hang of it.

114


RAGS TO RICHES

Q_- pia you read any books about technical analysis to get a
better grasp?

A : At that point, nothing at all. I became quite successful at
demo trading and that was when I went live, which was when I
got the shock of my life. The first day, I'll never forget it, it was
a Friday. I placed my first trade on a mini-account, and it was a
nerve-wracking experience, but I walked away with six dollars on
my first trade. On my second one, I made five, and at the end of
the day, I had made 18 dollars in total.

Q:s0 your friend was basically a mentor to you. How often then
would you talk to him in the beginning?

A. Yes, that’s right. In the beginning, I spoke to him about once or
twice over the telephone and then the rest of our communication
was all done via e-mail.

Q.: would you correspond over e-mail every single day or every
few days?

A. Initially almost on a daily basis. I estimate that it lasted for just
over a month or so.

Q.: 80 it sounds like you traded exclusively on technicals in
the beginning. Did you ever incorporate fundamentals into your
trading?

A : It was probably five to six months down the line before I
discovered the importance of fundamentals. Although Steve was
very good at teaching me technical analysis, he did not explain
the importance of news. I only learned this by knocking my head
several times. To give you a simple example, if I was in a buy
trade, which I’'d opened at 9 A.M. and suddenly, at 10:30 A.M.,
my time, that trade would turn against me horribly, and I could
never figure out why this was happening. At one point I actually

11S


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

stopped trading because I had lost three times in a row and that
petrified me. I became so scared that I could not trade anymore
and I would only look at charts on a daily basis. Every single day
in the afternoon, I would call up charts, and I would study them.
That was when I realized that roughly 10:30 A.M. and 2:30 P.M.
something would happen in the market. I didn’t know what, but
I would suddenly see a big spike either going upwards or another
spike going downwards, etc. I asked the question on one the forums
about why it was happening and I never got an answer until about
two weeks later, when somebody mentioned one word: “News.”
That’s all they said and I thought to myself how on earth can it be
news. When I saw the word “news,” I was thinking about a bomb
explosion somewhere or a terrorist attack, which obviously is not
what this person meant. It was only through further research did
I discover the actual news release indicators and learned that they
came out on a daily basis. I went out and tried to find as much
information about them as I could, such as GDP, NFP and so
on, and what I would then do is avoid trading during those times.
Even if my signals came up and if I saw that it was close to let’s say
10:30 A.M. or 2:30 P.M., I would not enter the trade. I would
