
Monetary policy conducted by the central bank of Switzerland termed
the Swiss National Bank (SNB) is based on a target to ensure prices align
with inﬂation. The target for the Swiss is the three-month Swiss franc

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

93

LIBOR called SARON, the Swiss Average Overnight Rate. The current rate
is 0.12 and the target range is 0.00 to 0.75. SARON is ﬁxed daily at 12:00
noon and calculated by SIX Swiss Exchange, Switzerland’s stock market (SIX
Swiss Exchange 2010).
To manage the inﬂation target in the repo market, the Swiss employ the
Swiss Average Rate, the Swiss Current Rate, and the Swiss Average Index.
The Swiss Average Rate is volume weighted and calculated and reported every
10 minutes by SIX Swiss Exchange (SIX Swiss Exchange 2010). Fixing times
occur at noon, 4:00 p.m., and 6:00 p.m. Swiss time.
The Swiss Current Rate is calculated and reported every three minutes
and is based on quotes that appear on the Eurex repo platform and further
reported on Eurex Zurich. This is the most important rate due to its market
sensitivity and because it creates a ﬂoor of rates for Swiss franc/U.S. dollar.
The Swiss Average Index Overnight is based on daily yields of SARON.
Repo trades are generated through the Eurex Repo platform for the Swiss
General Collateral and Special Repo market, payments and conﬁrmations
reported and handled by SIX SIS, properly termed SegaInterSettle, and settled
through SIX Interbank Clearing (Eurex Repo 2010).
Both the SNB and Swiss banks perform repos and interbank lending
through this system. The SNB conducts daily one-week repo auctions as a
function of its open market operations that begin at 9:00 a.m. Zurich time
daily with a prior 10-minute bidding process. Through Eurex Repo, the SNB
also conducts GC repos with collateral denominated in U.S. dollars, euros,
British pounds, Danish Kroner, and Norweigan Kroner. The majority of
these transactions are Swiss franc, euro, British pound, and U.S. dollar (Eurex
Repo 2010). Kraennzlin and Schlegel report in a 2009 paper titled “Bidding
Behavior in the SNB’s Repo Auctions” that 35 percent of SNB Swiss franc
repo transactions are passed through Eurex Repo and 65 percent are handled
by the interbank market. Market operations begin at 7:00 a.m. and end at
6:00 p.m. Swiss time.
During the crisis, the SNB established the Liquidity Shortage Facility
but borrowers needed 110 percent of collateral plus payment 200 basis points
above the prior day’s overnight repo index. The overnight repo index has been
replaced by the Swiss Average Index.
Swiss Repo and Spot Currency

Open-market operations are vitally important for any central bank because
transactions determine not only funding costs but market size and liquidity

94

Inside the Currency Market

levels. Success or failure of open-market operations connotes an economic
expansion or contraction, up or down markets both long and short term that
cover a wide range of ﬁnancial instruments. The Swiss issue their ﬁnal repo
rate at the 6:00 p.m. close. This is the rate that will determine how the Swiss
markets and the Swiss franc will react on their next day trading day, yet it sets
a price for other overnight markets. It is the rate that sets the standard for
swaps, forwards, ﬁxed-rate instruments such as bond prices, yields, and yield
curves. Yet the current rate will determine direction throughout the day as
that rate is calculated every three minutes. Because Swiss repo markets allow
for overnight, tom/next, Spot /next, and one week to 12 months out on the
curve, Swiss francs will act in conjunction with these rates. Higher rates in
the repo market will send the Swiss franc down as funding costs increase and
up when rates fall as funding costs decrease. U.S. dollar/Swiss franc and Swiss
franc/U.S. dollar must then be evaluated.
Eurex Zurich Clearing

Consistent with changes to major nation’s repo markets, Eurex Zurich is the
ﬁrst exchange worldwide to institute changes to its risk data. As of March
15, 2010, interested parties can monitor margins, position information, cash
ﬂows, and margin requirements on any surplus or shortfall. All can be viewed
in real time on the site (Eurex Zurich 2010).
Great Britain

The repurchase agreement market in England is governed by the Securities
Lending and Repo Committee that was established in 1990 and the sterling Money Markets Liaison Group established in 1999. New changes were
implemented in the repo market that began June 15, 2010.
Bids are accepted for two types of auctions, narrow collateral and wider
collateral. Wider-collateral bids are accepted for high-quality debt and are
longer lending terms. Narrow collateral bids are accepted for short-term
repos. Bidders can bid on each or both sets of collateral.
After the bidding process, a clearing rate is issued for wide and narrow
collateral. These auctions now occur once a month for a three-month and
six-month operation. Repo rates are now indexed to the Bank of England’s
(BOE) Bank Rate, currently 0.5 percent. Great Britain’s Bank Rate is like the

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

95

Fed funds rate in the United States. It is the price commercial banks pay on
reserve balances held in banks overnight. The interest rate earned equals the
bank rate at the close of the day.
The ﬁrst repo auction saw 83.37 percent collateral allotted to the narrow
set and 17.63 percent to the wider set of collateral. Changes in repo markets
stem from the 2008 economic crisis.
For the BOE, a shortage of gilts was recognized in the repo market.
This led to a shortage of liquidity. Because all central banks had liquidity
shortages during the crisis, Central banks of England, Switzerland, Canada,
and the ECB entered into swap agreements with the Federal Reserve to
obtain U.S. dollars for central bank-funding operations. Central banks
exchanged Treasury Bills for U.S. dollars. dollar-swap auctions began anew in
May 2010 for the BOE, ECB, SNB, and the Canadian Central Bank. Every
Wednesday, the BOE conducts seven-day repurchase agreements with the
Federal Reserve as needed. The purpose of the new system, based on the
2010 Quarterly Bulletin, is to limit volatility and ensure yield curves remain
at acceptable levels.
Canada

During the crisis, Canada established the Standing Liquidity Facility which
is employed to supply liquidity to banks and the markets. Many changes
occurred at the Bank of Canada (BOC).
The Bank either eliminated whole classes of securities used as collateral or
implemented higher margin requirements to prevent collateralization. The preferred list of collateral includes either Canadian dollar assets or U.S. Treasuries.
Margin requirements for U.S. Treasuries are consistent with Canadian assets
such as Canadian bonds, but a 4 percent rate is charged to account for FX risk.
Yet margins were raised. For example, Canadian Government Securities are
scheduled for 0.5 percent margin up to one-year maturities, 1.0 percent for
one to three years, 1.5 percent for three-to-ﬁve years, and 2 percent for 5 to 10
years. For Canada guaranteed securities, 1.0 percent up to one year, 1.5 percent
for one-to-three years, 2 percent for three-to-ﬁve years, and 2.5 percent for
5 to 10 years. These changes became effective in July 2010.
August 2010 saw a Bond Buy Back program implemented on most
Tuesdays at 11:15 a.m. Up to 18-month maturities can be sold back where
the total amount is greater than $5 billion. The Canadian overnight repo rate
is a weighted average rate of overnight GC repo trades. The market is open

96

Inside the Currency Market

from 6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. eastern time. If $500 million is reported, the
repo rate is set at the BOC overnight rate. This translates to the BOC LIBOR
rate, termed OMMFR. Canadian repo trades settle through the Long Value
Transfer System (LVTS).
The BOC maintains its target rate between CORRA and the Overnight
Money Market Financing Rate, a weighted average of repo-funding costs of
major money-market dealers. While swap lines are open from the Federal
Reserve since it reopened, the BOC has not used this facility.
One method to track Canadian repo rates is by the overnight Repo Rate
Futures contract traded on the Montreal Futures Exchange and called ONX.
It is modeled after the Federal Funds Futures contract in the United States.
The ONX contract determines what the CORRA rate is expected to average over one month’s time (Johnson 2003). It is quoted as 100 minus the
monthly average overnight repo rate for the contract month and priced as
0.005, which equals CAD 20.55 (1/2 of 1/100 of 1 percent of 5,000,000 on
a 30-day basis). The Canadian dollar is priced within this context and represents the ﬂoor for rates.
Europe

GC trades go through Eurex Repo. Europe comprises a series of rates that
govern their operations. Much has been written about the channel or corridor
of rates that governs their markets. The Main Reﬁnancing Operation (MRO)
provides weekly liquidity based on minimum bid rates to the banking system.
The current rate is 1 percent. This ﬁxed rate has been higher than EURIBOR
and GC rates for 2010 (ECB yearly report 2010). The Marginal Lending
Facility provides overnight credit to banks. This rate is currently 1.75 percent
and the Deposit Facility is 0.25. Factor in the base rate at 0.12 presently, and
the corridor is established. Minimum bid rates normally establish Europe’s
Eurepo rate or deposit rate.
Australia

Australia’s top Cash Rate is the same as the Prime Rate in the United States
and is currently 4.50 percent. This rate hit a low of 3.00 percent in February
2009 and has been rising ever since. This says Australia’s economy has weathered the ﬁnancial storm since the Lehman Brothers collapse far better than
its counterparts.

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

97

What further helped Australia was this quote from the March 2010
Financial Stability Report, “Six months to January 2010, total deposits in
Australia increased by an annualized rate of 4 1/2 percent, 2008 to 2009 saw
total deposits increase by 25 percent.”
Australia’s central bank, the Royal Bank of Australia (RBA), conducts
open-market operations at 9:30 a.m. Bank repo bids and offers begin at 9:30
Australia time and end at 9:45. All bank operations conducted by repo transactions are incorporated by GC trades.
During the crisis, bank funding operations expanded to daily through
the Intraday Liquidity Facility beginning at 7:30 Australia time and ending
at 5:30 p.m. Sydney.
Repo rates begin at 0 and are determined by the market value of securities offered in the ﬁrst leg of the repo transaction. The second leg determines
ﬁrst-leg monies plus transaction costs. Margin calls are made when the value
of securities falls under 1 percent. If a security trades above the 1 percent
threshold, a return is made. Trades settle on an Actual/360 basis through
Austraclear on a delivery-versus-payment basis.
U.S. dollar Term Repo Operations rates are published at 10:15 a.m.,
settled on an Actual/360 basis and reported at 10:15 a.m. The minimum bid
is $5 million. The RBA employs the 10:00 a.m. William Reuters Australian
ﬁx for Aussie dollar equivalents. Yet the RBA charges an additional 10 percent
margin for foreign exchange risk.
The Guaranteed Scheme for Large Deposits and Wholesale Funding was
employed during the crisis but closed in March 2010. Historic repurchase
agreement totals in Australia-dollar terms forecasted a warning for market
direction, then signaled an all-clear sign. In Australian billions of dollars,
2004 to 2005 saw 4,461 in repurchase agreement deals, 2005 to 2006 saw
4,421, 2006 to 2007 saw 4,415, 2007 to 2008 saw 3,885, and 2008 to 2009
saw 5,147 (2009 Australian Financial Markets Report).
For the Australian dollar, the OCR would always serve as the deposit rate
in the Aussie market.
Repo Rates and Spot Currencies

Recognize that two repo rates and two different markets exist, one for an ofﬁcial government rate and one for the private interbank market. This was created by osmosis, by necessity due to market stress before and after Lehman,
but proceeded further with other crisis announcements of bank failures, bank
stress tests, and the Greek debt crisis. A crisis of conﬁdence existed.

98

Inside the Currency Market

As important as this market is to inform other rates, all central banks
had to review this market. Changes will occur. One obvious change is the
renewed daily focus for central banks to guide market operations toward their
target rates. This translates to guiding monetary policy toward the Consumer
Price Index. This can only mean repo rates may be steered toward the target
of inﬂation. Targets have a range but a small window. This may require a
restriction to the repo market as higher margins and quality collateral may
be the cost of business. Most important about this scenario is that repo rates
establish a ﬂoor, the bottom of interest rates. Spot prices can’t fall below this
ﬂoor, regardless of the pair.
For spot-currency traders, the way to gauge this market is to monitor
repurchase agreement rates, reverse-repurchase rates, and bid/ask spreads.
Negative spreads mean the same masses of liquidity will only swirl around
without direction in deﬂationary environments. Falling repo rates mean the
same. Because repo rates are the shortest of rates, they can provide early
signs toward recovery and higher policy rates or deﬂation and lower rates.
Either way, this situation in turn will send currency pairs back to trends, up
or down.
Another method is to gauge repo rates against deposit rates as deposit
rates are the risk-free rate. The Japanese chart a trend line of repo rates against
repo trades that range from overnight to one year to gauge market direction.
The Bank of England charts an implied repo rate in two ways.
The ﬁrst is to compare repo rates based on Government bond gilt
yields because gilts were the preferred collateral. The second method is to
calculate the implied three-month LIBOR rate. This is deﬁned by the BOE
as the average difference between the three month LIBOR rate and a bank
repo rate. The difference between these two rates is both are the shortest of
rates and repo rates are secured loans while LIBOR is the next open-market
rate that is unsecured. Market circumstances dictate preferred methods of
evaluation, yet market circumstances also dictate trends or ranges in spot
currency prices.
Eurepo Charts

Provided in Exhibit 4.1 is a 12-month chart from the European Banking
Federation’s EURIBOR section that tracks repo rates. Trades and repo rates
range from Tom/Next to 12 months.

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

99

EXHIBIT 4.1 12-Month Chart of Eurepo: 2008

Maturity

Today

Previous day

TN

0.354
(05/08/2010)

0.36
(04/08/2010)

1 Week

0.461
(05/08/2010)

0.433
(04/08/2010)

2 Weeks

0.474
(05/08/2010)

0.45
(04/08/2010)

3 Weeks

0.479
(05/08/2010)

0.459
(04/08/2010)

1 Month

0.488
(05/08/2010)

0.472
(04/08/2010)

2 Months

0.517
(05/08/2010)

0.506
(04/08/2010)

3 Months

0.547
(05/08/2010)

0.538
(04/08/2010)

6 Months

0.61
(05/08/2010)

0.599
(04/08/2010)

9 Months

0.662
(05/08/2010)

0.648
(04/08/2010)

12 Months

0.714
(05/08/2010)

0.696
(04/08/2010)

Source: European Banking Federation Note: Permission granted with attribution.

Intercapital

Intercapital (ICAP) touts itself as the world’s premier voice and interdealer
broker in spot foreign exchange, swaps, derivatives, credit, precious metals,
and interest rates. This service in turn allows ICAP to be a premier information service to news providers around the world.
Each month ICAP provides average daily volume and historic reports in
U.S. Treasuries, spot foreign exchange, and European and U.S. repo markets.
More importantly, anyone can subscribe to the host of services and platforms ICAP offers and view streaming market information to allow informed

100

Inside the Currency Market

trading decisions. For the repo market, to know what types of collateral are
offered and accepted, and the direction of rates, can provide valuable insight
to direction in swaps, derivatives, ﬁxed income, and spot foreign exchange.
For example, suppose last week or last month German Bonds were offered
and accepted in the repo market at X rate. But this week, only U.S. Treasuries
were offered and accepted at X rate. Does that scenario warn of a credit problem, either temporary or long term, and would the euro/U.S. dollar, British
pound/U.S. dollar, Australian dollar/U.S. dollar, and New Zealand dollar/
U.S. dollar experience sell orders streaming? Absolutely.
Dollar Repos or Swap Lines

The proper name of these auctions is termed Reciprocal Currency Arrangements.
When crisis grips the world or any associated ﬁnancial problems, foreign central
banks borrowing costs in their own currency in both LIBOR and Overnight
Indexed Swaps rise, particularly those liabilities that are funded in U.S. dollars.
To meet these obligations, the U.S. Federal Reserve established currency
swap lines to alleviate foreign central banks high borrowing costs. Throughout
2007 to 2009, swap lines were open every Tuesday for the BOE, BOJ, SNB,
BOC, and ECB, with the results of auctions reported every Thursday on
the Federal Reserve web site. This schedule remains the same. As of May 10,
2010, the Fed announced the reopening of swap lines until Jan 2011 but has
since been extended to August 2011. It remains a monetary “tool” based on
the Federal Reserve Act 1913, section 14 to be reopened if crisis again grips
world banking systems.
Swaps entail each central bank to ﬁrst sell their own currency to the Fed in
exchange for U.S. dollars at current market rates and buy back their currency
at a speciﬁed time at the agreed-upon rate in the ﬁrst leg (Fleming 2009).
These are periods of volatility for spot pairs, due ﬁrst to market uncertainties
then to a normalization of the market when LIBOR and other associated rates
stabilize thanks to Fed auctions. Currency markets experience selloffs at the
ﬁrst sign of crisis but trend back up when the auctions materialize (Goldberg
2010 and 2011). Interesting is the recent development of the ECB and BOE
to establish swap lines among each other, a ﬁrst which deserves attention.
Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization

Chiang Mai was established from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Chiang Mai was adopted and signed by the ASEAN  3 ﬁnance ministers and
central banks that include China, Japan, and Korea. The purpose is to assist

Short-Term Interest Rates and Money Market Instruments

101

and address short-term liquidity needs and provide currency swap arrangements (EMEAP 2010 Report). Initial funding was considered at $80 billion
U.S. dollars, but ﬁnal funding was $120 billion U.S. dollars. Final agreements were reached at the May 2009 meeting, signed in December 2009,
and became effective in March 2010. What this means in terms of currency
funding is a guess. Consider Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Japan, the
European Union, and the United States are all members of ASEAN. Where
this agreement will lead is another question. Some speculate on an Asian
Currency Unit such as the euro. Yet another swap line may be an open and
viable vehicle that contrasts with the Fed’s Swap Lines.
Conclusion

Provided in this chapter was a detailed nation-by-nation look into the repo
market outlined by histories and parameters of the market from an overall perspective due to economic conditions that forced the market to halt.
A detailed perspective on the operational parameters for each market was
then provided. Each nation holds a vastly different view of their repo lending
and borrowing activity with various methodologies that ensure the repo and
reverse market function. Repo market participants vary from market to market as well and the times lending and borrowing occur, because a wide differentiation of time zones exist from nation to nation. Examples of repo trades
were provided, as well as various calculations of interest. Formulas were provided that allow anyone to calculate the same interest as market participants.
An insight into each nation’s futures market as a guide to repo trades and
market intelligence was provided. For the spot trade, repo markets provide
the ﬂoor, the bottom of interest rates, and the bottom for a particular nation’s
currency price. To understand factors of interest will assist in the understanding of the next interest rate and the ﬁrst open market tradeable rate, LIBOR.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 5

LIBOR
LIBOR is an imperative chapter because it represents the shortest-term
open-market interest rate after a General Collateral (GC) repo rate that is
widely anticipated, widely viewed, and widely traded every trading day. It is an
open market rate and the ﬁrst rate to inform other rates in all markets. Because
LIBOR is priced to the currency, it is one of the most important of rates as a
trading day begins. This chapter addresses the various types of LIBOR and the
various interest rates associated with each rate in order to understand a spot
price. LIBOR may begin in the United Kingdom but LIBOR interest travels
to all markets and is informed by an internal LIBOR inside each nation’s
bank market. Two types of LIBOR are released and each are associated with a
different interest rate. The chapter begins with details of the LIBOR process.
When major banks submit bids and offers through the British Bankers
Association (BBA), what is represented is London banks that borrow and
lend money in terms of various nations’ currencies from their reserves to each
other. Bank A may have more reserves due to daily transactions and is willing
to lend, while Bank B found a deﬁcit due to transactions and is willing to
borrow. As lender, Bank A will submit a high offer to earn revenue while
Bank B will submit low bids to cover their deﬁcit at a low cost.
Banks must meet daily reserve requirements due to each nation’s laws and
regulations that address such issues as how much deﬁcit is allowed and how
much reserves can be lent, so what occurs at the BBA every day is the bid and
offer for unsecured currencies in terms of a particular nation’s deposit rates.
The ﬁgure released is the day’s interbank dealing rate, called LIBOR, a term
to denote deposit rates.
LIBOR, the most sensitive of open-market rates, is the rate that allows
other investment instruments the world over to be priced in the market for
that day and over a term of 12 months such as spot currency prices, swaps,
