
SECTION FIVE

OPTIONS

159




CHAPTER 1 1

A FEW WORDS ABOUT
USING OPTIONS WITH
SWING TRADES

The setups and concepts described in this manual are designed to capture
explosive short-term moves in stocks. As such, they often lend themselves
well to option trading. Be warned, however, options are an extremely com-
plex vehicle and you must use utmost caution when trading them. Make
sure you fully understand the nuances and risks involved. There are entire
texts devoted strictly to option trading, pricing models and volatility. I
strongly urge you to learn as much as possible about options before at-
tempting to trade them. ;

It has been estimated that as much as 90% of those who trade options
lose. Why? Because most who buy options do not have a strategy, a
money-management plan in place, and tend to buy extremely speculative
out-of-the-money options. The following guidelines, while by no means
exhaustive, will help improve your odds when using options to initiate
swing trades.

Avoid Out-of-the-Money Options—One of the main reasons most peo-
ple lose when trading options is that they buy mostly out-of-the-money
options. Although cheaper in absolute dollars, these options are normally

161


LE
162 Chapter 11

very expensive in terms of true value. And more often than not, they ex-
pire worthless. Even if the underlying stock price rises sharply, these op-
tions often do not increase enough in value to make trading them
worthwhile.

In order to avoid the pitfalls associated with out-of-the-money options, a
good rule of thumb is to buy options that are 1 to 2 strikes in the money.
These options will tend to trade in tandem with the underlying stock.
For instance, if the stock rises 1 point in value, an in-the-money call op-
tion would also rise one point in value. In option lingo, this is known as
having a delta of 100. This means the option trades in a similar manner
to 100 shares of outright stock.

Buy the Nearby—As a swing trader we are looking to position ourselves
for the next two to seven days. We do not have to increase our risk by
buying longer-dated, higher premium options. Therefore, look to trade
the front-month options unless the expiration is less than seven trading
days away. In these cases, go to the following month’s expiration.

Those familiar with options may argue that nearby options have worse
time-decay profiles than longer-term options. I understand this argu-
ment, but believe that the potential of the patterns in this manual to
make an immediate move far outweigh these drawbacks.

No Tickie, No Tradie—As discussed in Chapter 2, Landry’s Rules and
Money Management for the Swing Trader, you should not buy or sell
short a stock unless it triggers a setup. The same holds true for buying
options. Only buy options if, and only if, a setup triggers in the underly-
ing stock. Be warned, however, if the stock is in a fast move when it trig-
gers the setup, the spreads on the option will likely widen. In these cases
you may have to be willing to forgo an options position.

Consider Options as a Stock Replacement on Profitable Stock Posi-
tions—Once a swing trade entry is triggered, in most cases, it’s much
easier to enter the underlying stock than it is to buy options. This is espe-
cially true during fast markets that often occur when setups are trigger-
ing. Therefore, you may want to consider options as stock replacement
after you have entered the underlying stock and only if the position
shows a reasonable profit.

For instance, if after entering a swing trade, you are fortunate enough to
have a large profit, rather than carry a large stock position overnight, you
might look to sell the position and buy options with a piece of your prof-
its. This is, of course, provided the options are reasonably priced. This



I
A Few Words About Using Options with Swing Trades 163

way, you have banked a profit and will still have the potential for a
windfall profit on the option position with defined downside risk.

If You Hit a Double, Bank Half—Option prices often fluctuate wildly.
Therefore, whenever you initiate an option position, you should immedi-
ately place a limit order to sell half of the position at twice your original
cost. For instance, suppose you buy four options for $5 each, you would
then place a limit order to two options at $10 (or slightly higher to cover
commissions). Should the option spike higher, you’ll get filled on this
limit order and have covered the cost of the entire position. You should
then look to scale out of these remaining options by following manage-
ment principles outlined in this manual.

O&A

Q. You mentioned buying calls to replace stock in order to help reduce
the risks of holding overnight. Why not just buy puts to hedge the po-
sition?

A. You could but often the premium on the puts is often quite high be-
cause many with profits will be looking to hedge off risk. Also, if you
buy puts, you now have to manage a hedge along with your original
position. In other words, you have two positions to deal with. For in-
stance, what if the stock continues to rise? You now have to buy
higher strike puts in order to remained hedged. For me, it’s easier to
think and manage one position in one direction.

Q. You don’t mention option pricing models in your guidelines. Do you
use them?

A. As I said earlier, there are entire texts devoted strictly to option pricing
models and volatility. My goal with this manual was to provide a
complete manual for the stock trader. I do look at the implied volatil-
ity on the options and compare it to the historical volatility. I use this
as a general guideline to gauge how expensive the option is. However,
keep in mind that no option pricing model or technique can accurately
predict future volatility. There are (albeit rare) times when options
may appear expensive on the surface but are actually a bargain in re-
ality.

Q. Can you give us an example of when this occurs?



a
164 Chapter 11

A. Sure, in a blow-off market, no one knows how far and how long it
will go. For instance, in early 2000, call options were fairly priced but
in reality, due to the extreme nature of the market, were actually
cheap. Many at-the-money options became 10, 20, 30 or more points in
the money in a matter of days. No option pricing model could have
accurately predicted this.

Q. Do you have a favorite pattern for trading options?

A. The best setups are those that occur during a low-volatility situation
(see Chapter 9, Finding Explosive Moves: An Advanced Lesson in
Swing Trading). In these cases, option premiums tend to fall right be-
fore a large increase in volatility and stock price. This is the best of
both worlds for the buyer of options.

Q, What about covered calls, spreads and other option strategies?

A. As mentioned earlier, the focus of this manual is predicting the
short-term directional moves in stocks and not options trading. I pre-
fer to keep it simple: I’ll occasionally use calls if I’m bullish or puts if
I’m bearish.



SECTION SIX

PSYCHOLOGY





CHAPTER 12

TRADER’S PSYCHOLOGY

The Speculator’s chief enemies are
always boring from within.

~—Edwin LeFevre,
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator

I'm afraid that some times
you'll play lonely games, too.
Games you can't win

‘cause you'll play against you.

—Dr. Seuss, Oh! The Places You'll Go!

In trading, there are many psychological barriers that you must overcome.
The first step you must take is to realize that the trading world is much dif-
ferent than the “real world.” For instance, in the “real world,” as long as
you perform your job to the degree expected of you, you'll continue to re-
ceive a paycheck on schedule. In trading, however, you can work hard, do
everything “correct” and occasionally still lose money. Even worse, the mar-
kets will sometimes lull you into a false sense of security by rewarding “bad
behavior” such as being careless and taking excessive risk.

In the real world if something goes awry on the job, it can be covered up,
the blame can be shared and in some cases, insurance will cover the

167


a
168 Chapter 12

losses. In trading, however, there is no safety net and nowhere to hide.
You must take responsibility for your actions. Your account balance does-
n’t lie.

In the real world, you are expected to stay busy. After all, theyre not
paying you to sit on your butt. In trading, however, sometimes the best
thing to do is just that—nothing. Trying to make something happen in
these environments can be detrimental to your account. The old saying,
“Don’t confuse activity with accomplishment” applies here.

Obviously, operating in the unstructured environment of the trading
world versus the real world can be difficult. You have to manage your-
self and your emotions. Below we will look at ways to recognize and
overcome the psychological pitfalls of trading.

Realize That Losses Are Part of the Game—You can’t take a loss person-
ally. If you think about it, the guy on the other end of your trade has the
exact opposite opinion of you. You can’t both be right. Therefore, every
trade has the potential to be a loser.

Money Management, Money Management, Money Management—
Proper money management will help solve many of the psychological
pitfalls of trading. For instance, if you are only risking 1% to 2% per
trade, then any individual loss should be of little consequence.

Have Confidence—You ‘must be comfortable with your methodologies.
You develop this comfort through historical research, real-time observa-
tion and trading. This does not mean that you are confident to the point
that you are infallible on any one trade. Rather, you know that through a
consistent approach, you will make money in the long run.

Remain Humble—This may seem like a contradiction to confidence but
a good trader must also be humble. The best traders are confident about
their methods but humbled by the fact that market can do anything it
wants in spite of their opinions.

Realize That You Have No Control Over the Markets—The market can
do whatever it wants. It is made up of millions of individuals who you
have absolutely no control over. The best setup in the world won’t work
if some hedge fund or large trader decides to dump his position (for
whatever reason) right after you enter the market. Also, you have no
control over outside influences. This doesn’t have to be something obvi-
ous like a war or even an off-the-cuff remark from a world leader. It can
be something as simple as the actions of some lunatic. For example, |
once was knocked out of a perfectly good and profitable S&P futures



Trader's Psychology

trade because some psychopath decided to start shooting people in our
nation’s capital building.

Forget About Being Right—In swing trading as many as half of your
trades will result in a loss. Yet through controlling those losses, the win-
ning trades will more than make up for the other half. Your goal is not to
be right. Your goal is to make money, period.

Realize That No Methods Are Perfect—Be a student of the markets but
realize that there is no “Holy Grail”—an infallible system that will lead
to riches without risk. Stick with simple conceptually correct methods
such as those outlined in this manual. In the past, many have made bil-
lions on simple systems such as those developed by Donchian. In his
words: “In this field of technical study, it is probably safe to state that the be-
ginning of wisdom comes when you stop chasing rainbows and admit that no
method is perfect. When you find yourself willing to settle for any comparatively
simple method that, in tests over a long period, makes money on balance, then
stick to the method devotedly, at least until you are sure that you haven't discov-
ered a better method.”

Be Consistent—You must be consistent in your approach to the markets.
You will never be successful as long as you are jumping from method to
method. Find something that works and stick to it.

Keep Emotions in Check—Those who become euphoric when things are
good are also those how tend to fall the hardest things turn bad. Strive to
stay on an even keel in good times and bad.

In Times Of War Prepare For Peace
In Times Of Peace, Prepare For War

—Sun Tzu

In good times, you must realize that’ you are just around the corner from
a string of losses. Conversely, after a string of losses, better times often
follow.

Embrace Who You Are—We are all individuals with our own psycholog-
ical makeup. Recognize and embrace what makes you different and use
it to your favor when trading. For instance, I was raised with a strong
work ethic. Phrases such as “There’s no free lunch” were common in my
household when I was growing up. However, as mentioned previously,
sometimes in trading, the best thing to do is nothing. This goes com-
pletely against my upbringing. At these times I would feel lazy and

166



170

Chapter 12

guilty for “not working.” I would then try to make something happen by
establishing positions even though I knew I shouldn't. I finally realized
that during poor market conditions, I must channel my energy into
something other than trading. I’ve discovered that if I used this time to
conduct market research, I felt productive without having to expose my
equity unnecessarily.

Treat Profits as Your Own Money—Chances are, if you are a successful
trader, you have worked very hard to achieve this goal. Therefore, when
you make money trading, you are being paid for that hard work. It’s
your money and should be treated no differently than a paycheck. Do
not become careless and violate your rules because it is the “market's
money” or a “free” position. It’s ok to occasionally press a little when you
have windfall profits, just make sure you keep the lion’s share.

Only Trade When You Are Of Sound Body And Mind—Do not trade
around major life events or when you are sick, distracted or simply not
prepared.

Only Trade When You Have an Edge—The best times to trade are the
times when the overall market and individual sector(s) are suggesting a
clear direction. It is at these times you will find yourself having trouble
choosing between all those wonderful setups. Other times, when its ex-
tremely difficult to determine market and sector direction, it will be
nearly impossible to find decent setups. And when you do, you'll often
find yourself quickly stopped out. At these times, you must be patient
and wait for better times.

Be Positive in Life But Skeptical in the Markets—In life, we are taught
to be positive. “Look on the bright side,” “Things normally work out”
and “Have faith” are phrases we have all heard over and over. However,
having faith and hope for a losing position is fruitless. The best traders
don’t focus on what they will make on a trade but rather how much they
can lose and how to manage that risk. Successful traders are positive in
life and confident that their methodologies will work over the long haul
but remain skeptical on any given trade.

Don’t Expect Immediate Success—Some of the worst novice traders I
know are medical doctors. Why? Because they are successful in what
they do and automatically assume they can transfer their success to trad-
ing. They forget that it took an intense study of 10 years before they were
allowed to cut on their first patient.



Trader’s Psychology

My intent is not to pick on doctors, I also know incredibly successful
lawyers, engineers and even a rocket scientist that think that they can
quickly pick up trading because they have become masters in their ca-
reers. What they fail to remember is that it took them more than a few
weeks to become successful in their professions.

Learn from Your Losses—A loss in the market is not a total loss as long
as something is learned. For instance, after getting stopped out numerous
times only to watch the trend resume, I discovered the Trend Knockout
(TKO) (Chapter 6).

Work Hard and Love What You Do—You should be passionate about
trading. It is not something you should do casually. Because money is the
ultimate motivator, I can assure you those on the other sides of your
trades have dedicated the better part of their lives to trading. And, they
are all too happy to take money away from those less serious.

Keep a Journal—Other than finding a methodology that makes sense to
you and applying strict money-management principles, the best way to
become a better trader is to monitor yourself and your own performance.
I strongly urge to you keep a trading journal. Whenever you enter a
trade you should write: What motivated it? What was the setup? What is
the overall market doing? What is the sector of the stock doing? If the
trade is a larger- (or smaller-) than-normal position size, why? Print and
label any charts that support you claim. Once all the mechanics are
down, make sure you include a little about yourself. Are you feeling
well? Are their any stresses weighting you down? Have you experienced
any major life changes recently? Have you been making money lately?

Plot Your Equity—The value of your trading account does not lie. If you
made it this far in this manual then by now you should know what a
trend is. Therefore, if your equity curve is trending steadily higher, then
you are doing something right and/or market conditions are favorable.
On the other hand, if your equity curve is trending lower, then you are
doing something wrong and/or market conditions are unfavorable. Stop
trading and reevaluate the situation with a clear head. The name of the
game is long-term survival. The markets will always be there.

I know several traders who know very little about market timing, yet are
always out of the markets when conditions are at their worse. How?
They stop trading after a string of losses, wait for better times and then
slowly ease back in.

17)



a
172 Chapter 12

Reflect At the end of the day, take a few minutes to quietly reflect on
your trading. Mentally rehash the day’s events. What did you do right?
What did you do wrong? What could you have done better? Did you
keep losses in check? Did you honor your stops? Did you take partial
profits if they were offered to you?

SUMMARY

The trading world is vastly different from the real world. There are many
psychological barriers that must be overcome. However, if you strive to
become successful, I can assure you that it will be well worth the effort.
With hard work and devotion, there is no limit to what you can achieve.
Think about it. How many times at work have your accomplishments
gone unnoticed and un-rewarded? How many times have others taken
credit for your actions? This will never happen in the trading world. You
and only you control your own destiny.



CHAPTER 13

LESSONS LEARNED

eocaseea#eee8#aescsesaeaeearesoea#zepeagegacseseedeae

Over the years, I have learned many lessons about trading through the
school of hard knocks. In more recent times, by being a public figure in the
trading world, I have been able to re-learn these and new lessons through
fellow traders. The following are some of my favorites.

START TRAINING ON MONDAY,
COMPETE ON WEDNESDAY

My wife Marcy asked me if I would discuss trading with two of her cli-
ents and their spouses. She explained to me that they are all going to
plop down $3,000 dollars each on a weekend seminar that would teach
them “everything they needed to know to immediately start earning a
living trading.” Marcy knew that none of these individuals had every
traded and feared the seminar would be a waste of their money. And
worse, she was concerned that they would lose much more money
should they decide to jump into the markets. I agreed and we all had
dinner the following Sunday night.

After patiently listing to a regurgitation of the motivational speech that
had been given to them, I studied the materials that were to be covered.
To my surprise, it involved technical analysis and didn’t involve any
“magic” systems. However, much of the material was dated and wasn’t
anything you couldn’t get from a good $50 primer on the subject. Fur-

173


a
174 Chapter 13

thermore, it certainly wasn’t enough for a novice to become a full-time
trader a few days later.

I tried to talk them out of the seminar in several different ways. I offered
to loan them books, suggested they get a free trial to
TradingMarkets.com and even was willing to give them private lessons
for free—provided of course they were serious about learning. I empha-
sized that they should do this before plopping down money on a get-rich
seminar. All of this fell on deaf ears as they once again repeated the sales
pitch to me.

As I watched them drink their water and eat their bland chicken and
vegetables, finally it hit me, I had to speak in their terms. The gentlemen
were body builders and their wives were fitness fanatics. All had the ut-
most discipline and had been training for years. One of the men held
several regional bodybuilding titles and the other was preparing to com-
pete in his first amateur competition. For dramatic effect, I put a whole
jumbo shrimp into my mouth, took a big slurp of my 25-ounce beer and
slammed it down on the table. Talking with my mouth full, I then said,
“You know what? I’m going to finish this beer, my fried shrimp appe-
tizer, my 14-ounce steak and fries and on Monday I’m going to start
training and dieting (1 was about 30 pounds overweight at the time).
Then, on Wednesday, I’m going to compete in a bodybuilding contest.”

Follow-Up: Couple A heeded my advice and avoided the seminar. In-
stead, they continued to focus on growing the business they owned. In
fact, the business has grown so much that they have recently considered
franchising.

Couple B attended the seminar, quit their jobs, and after a brief stint at
trading, are now searching for the next get-rich-quick scheme.

The moral: Becoming a successful trader is possible, but it takes more
than a weekend.

ENJOY THE RIDE

Joe is a successful long-term trader who decided to try his hand at swing
trading. I began working with Joe and he became quite successful in a
short period of time. The fact that he started during the greatest bull
market blow off in last 20 years didn’t hurt either.

One day we were discussing the markets and he said that he had already
made over $35,000 and it wasn’t even noon. He was bragging that this


