
the freedom to take bigger risks, because it’s only $10,000 of your $50,000. And if your $10,000 gets wiped out, then you have another $10,000 to put in and try
again until you’ve got the hang of it.
Naturally, not everyone is going to have $50,000 in starting capital. If $5,000 or $10,000 is all you can manage, that’s fine. Just be careful not to piss your capital
away on undeserved risks, trades that are typically taken out of boredom. Wait for the “Porsche setups” and pass on the “Pinto setups” that I talk about later, and
establish a trading plan that insists on only the highest-probability trades. And now you know you’ll keep your word and follow your plan, because you’re committed
to trading with integrity, remember?
The plateau method works because it assumes that you have passed the first few phases of the trading journey and are now content to simply wait for the best
setups that work with your plan. As with any trade, you’ll want to consider the market within more than one time frame, always “zooming out” to see the bigger
picture, which helps you maximize runners (more on this later). And remember that there will be days when nothing is setting up for you. When those days come and
go, review your charts at the end of the session and take a good, hard look at all the crappy trades that some poor bastards stuck in Phase II took, and then pat
yourself on the back as you think about all the money they lost that you held on to (because you have learned how not to lose). Some of the best trades are the ones
not taken.
People who overtrade or trade without money management plans are trading an incomplete system and fall into that category we’re all so eager to avoid—the 90
percent of traders who are going to lose their accounts to those of us who have trading plans in place that include quantifiable and specific money management plans.
Trading with small sums—ideally just a part of your trading capital, not all of it—on a limited number of reliable, proven setups opens up the opportunity for
extraordinary results. When you add the plateau method of managing your gains, you have the added benefit of holding on to the capital you worked so hard to acquire.
When you have a working methodology to focus on, you’re not just looking for the next winning trade. Though individual trades are obviously critical, when viewed
through the lens of your grander plans, each trade becomes just a brick in the wall of wealth you are building. Yes, some of those bricks will fall off the wall, but you
are building tools to replace those bricks and continue building.

When Trading and Investing, What Are the Best Ideas to Keep in Mind?
A trader’s relationship with the market is really like a dance, and it’s best to let the market lead. It’s important not to come into the market with an overly bullish or
overly bearish outlook. The more strongly a trader believes in an idea, the easier it will be for her to get suckered into taking the wrong side of a trade. In an upcoming
chapter, I talk about how to read market internals, and this is a great way to get a reading on what’s happening in the markets. Instead of coming into the day a raging
bull or a roaring bear, I just come in as an interested observer. The “radar screen” that I watch keeps me in the loop and gives me odds on the path of least resistance.
As long as we’re dancing together, I’d like to know when my partner is going to try to dip me.
The reality is that the markets do move in cycles. M y studies in history had a huge impact here. I could clearly see that since the beginning of modern civilization,
the world had gone through a number of repetitions of similar events, all driven by human decisions. This insight really changed my focus and how I looked for
opportunities in the markets. I stopped looking for the next great indicator and started looking for repeatable market patterns based on human nature.
A great book that falls within this theme is The Secret Life of Real Estate and Banking, by Phillip J. Anderson. The dry title does not do this book justice. It’s a great
and fascinating read, and the author is incredibly passionate about his subject matter. With great stories and examples, he documents how a real estate price cycle that
has repeated every 18 years since the United States was formed peaked right on schedule in 2008. M ore fascinating is how the actions of speculators, bankers, and
politicians—all of whom are reacting to the price movement of real estate—were all nearly exactly the same during each one of these 22 cycles. In other words, none of
the stuff you are seeing on TV today is new. Politicians, banks, and speculators have been reliving their lives and policies right on cue in predictable, 18-year cycles.
This knowledge is priceless when it comes to financial planning and real estate investing—not to mention keeping the latest headlines in perspective.
And there’s a little saying that I always like to remember; it’s called “discipline before vision,” which is something I first heard from Peter Borish, the former head of
research for Paul Tudor Jones. I may think that the market is going to crash today, but I’m still going to have a stop in place in case I’m wrong. The vision of being
short during a crash is a pleasant one, and the thought of a big move leads traders to do stupid things, like doubling up and adding to losing positions. Disciplined
traders live to fight another day. Through most of 2004 and 2005, I heard many traders who were “staying positioned for the next, inevitable terrorist attack.” After
the events of September 11, they saw how that had affected the markets, and they wanted to get positioned for the next attack. (Yes, this is a terrible way to look at a
disaster, but this is how traders think. If there is a hurricane in Florida, then it’s time to go long lumber because they will have to rebuild a lot of houses.) The funny
thing is, this vision of being positioned for a crash totally clouded their judgment. The only thing the market hates is uncertainty. The events of September 11 were
unexpected, and the market got crushed. However, terrorist activity is now a certainty. It is no longer an unexpected event, and therefore the market has already priced
in future terrorist attacks. Sound insane? On July 7, 2005, America woke up to the news of the London bombings. At one point, the Dow was down more than 200
points before the market open. All of these people got heavily short. The markets rallied and closed positive on the day, and these “waiting for the next disaster
traders” got crushed. Discipline before vision.
This also ties in with one of the main themes of this chapter: do you want to be right, or do you want to make money? Just think if you had kept buying the dip on
the day of the flash crash. You would have been wiped out.
Another reason to rely on discipline before vision is that a stock or a market can move for any reason. It doesn’t have to be logical or rational. It could be world
events: war in the M iddle East, a fragile European economy, or politicians who refuse to work together. But it could be something completely different—something
that M aria Bartiromo can’t tell you, can’t predict, and can’t figure out.
For example, one day when I logged into my trading account to set up some buy orders, I was told that my buying power had been exhausted. I keep solid mental
track of my stock and option positions, and I knew that I should have plenty of buying power. I checked my records, knowing that I’d be flat. But what I saw on my
computer was that I’d depleted my buying power on 60,000 shares of IAG, a gold stock. I called to confirm that and was told that, yes, I’d made that trade. But I
knew I hadn’t.
Then I got an instant message from a new employee named Henry Gambell. Henry, who’d recently set up a demo trading account, told me that his “demo” account
had come up nicely on 60,000 shares of IAG he’d purchased.
Really?
I started looking at all gold stocks. Every one was down except for IAG, which was up by 50 cents.
I looked at the markets, and I couldn’t figure out why IAG was up. Was there news? No. So I went back to a one-minute chart and found a huge volume spike—
right at the open—in IAG. Henry, having thought that he had logged into my demo account but in fact having actually logged into my real account, had purchased
60,000 shares of IAG at the open, at the market price. To this day, I’m convinced that other black box systems saw this “volume spike” and started buying the stock
39

based on “unusual activity.” Single-handedly and inadvertently, Henry, a demoaccount trader for all of two weeks, had driven up the price of IAG, while all other gold
stocks were going down. I brought Henry into my office and explained what had happened. He turned white as a sheet and got very nervous, very quickly. I told him
he needed to manage the trade now and get out of the position. He started to sell all 60,000 shares at market, but I stopped him. I explained the need to scale out of the
trade 1,000 shares at a time, waiting a few minutes in between sell orders. He did that for the next hour and eventually closed out the entire position for a nice profit—
it covered his salary for a year.
It was a good lesson for me—watch those demo account logins. It was a good lesson for Henry as well—market movements are not rational, so control your risk on
each and every trade.
Toward the end of the day, he did ask, “So do I get to keep any of the profits?” M y response? “If it had lost that much money, would you have been able to help
cover any of the losses?” We called it even.
Since market moves can be irrational, one needs to focus on limiting one’s risk on every trade, not obsessing over why the stock price is going up or down. It is also
important to remember that there is no need to spend wasted years looking for complicated setups or the next Holy Grail. There are very simple setups out there to
use. Some of the best traders I know have been trading the same setup, on the same time frame, on the same market for 20 years. They don’t care about anything else,
and they don’t want to learn about anything else. This works for them, and they are the masters of this setup. They have nothing else coming in to interfere with their
focus. If a setup doesn’t happen that day, then they don’t take a trade.
Other successful traders I know have learned to discipline themselves whenever they break their stop loss rules. One trader I know would jump into his Chicago
outside swimming pool … in January. It took two times, but he hasn’t broken his stop loss rule since. Another trader writes a check to a charity he doesn’t support, in
this case the ACLU. (That’s going to be different for everyone.)
When Jesse Livermore was in the process of making his fortune, one of his favorite quotes was, “If I bought a stock and it went against me, I would sell it
immediately. You can’t stop and try to figure out why a stock is going in the wrong direction. The fact is that it is going in the wrong direction, and that is enough
evidence for an experienced speculator to close the trade.” Small losses make all the difference, and traders must learn to reward themselves for doing their job in this
regard.
It is important to remember that traders are not trading stocks, or futures, or options. Traders are trading other traders. There is another person or system out there
that is taking the opposite side of the trade. One side is going to be right, and the other side is going to be wrong. Whoever has the better psychological perspective and
money management system in place on this trade is going to win. Is the trader on the other side of the trade an amateur or a professional? That trader should be
wondering the same thing about you. The next time you succumb to greed and chase a trade, remember that there is a professional somewhere else in the world who has
been waiting patiently for this setup and is doing just the opposite.
I have found that the most important step in becoming a successful trader is just learning how to accept a loss without any anger or frustration or shame. It’s just
part of trading. It’s not a big deal. I take losses every day, and I do it live in front of people all the time. It’s just part of the process. Okay, this trade just hit its stop.
Next. It’s like Tom Hanks’s character in the movie A League of Their Own, who screams at his female player and makes her cry. “Are you crying?” he asks, shocked.
“There’s no crying in baseball!”
And there’s no crying in trading and no throwing your coffee cup against the wall or screaming at your monitor. Losses and missed trades are just part of the deal.
On some days, things are just not going to come together. If I’m using a setup and I’m stopped out two times in a row, then I just stop using that setup for the rest of
the day. For whatever reason, it is out of sync with the markets on that particular day. It’s no big deal. There is no need to reformat the M ACD. It’s just part of
trading.
The key is to have two specific sets of rules. First, there needs to be a trading methodology. For this setup, do the traders go all in or scale in? Do they scale out or
get all out at a specific target? Do they trail a stop or leave it? Where is the stop placement in relation to the target? These are all things that have to be set in stone
before the trade is placed. Once the trade is placed, there is no room for rational thought. The setup has to be followed the same way each and every time, or the
traders will never be able to gauge whether the setup is going to help them or hurt them in their trading. Without that information, they are just making impulse trades,
and those are the sucker trades. Second, there has to be a money management rule. How many shares or contracts does a trader allocate toward this setup? How much
equity is a trader willing to risk on this setup over the course of a day, a week, a month, or a year? After traders do this for a while, what happens is that they develop
the habit of following their rules and they eventually learn to trust themselves.
Once traders learn to trust themselves, they can then free their mind to focus on the market opportunities that present themselves, instead of being wrapped up tight
in a ball of fear, frustration, and doubt. This is where traders make the transition out of the first three phases and begin to really have an opportunity to do this for a
living. The transition involves focusing on developing their own trading skills instead of focusing on the money. And the skills are easy—keep your emotions in check
and have the discipline to follow the setups. Don’t focus on making $1,000. That is what the amateurs do. Focus on developing your skills and executing the setups
the same way each and every time. It sounds simple enough, but I’ve worked with enough traders to know that most of them can’t do it over the long haul. They get
impatient and don’t want to miss out on the action, so they jump in and chase without a clear setup. Once they do this, they go back into the barrel with all the
amateurs.
M ost of trading involves waiting. First, it involves waiting for a setup. Once the setup occurs, then the professional trader takes it without hesitation. The skill
comes in waiting for it to set up and not succumbing to an impulse trade. Then, once she is in a setup, a trader has to have the discipline to wait for the exit parameters
to be hit and not cave and bail out too early. Waiting is the hardest thing for many traders to do, but it’s the waiting that separates the winners from the losers. Even
for a day trade, it can be hours before a setup happens or a parameter is hit. And that’s the whole key: just being patient and waiting. The person who chases four
rabbits catches none.
Also, it is important to realize that professional traders are not in every move. It is okay to have the market leave the station without you. Catching every move is
impossible, but chasing every move is the mark of an amateur. This is why it is imperative for traders to have a set of rules to follow for both entries and exits, as
opposed to relying on their own gut feelings to manage a position. Develop a set of rules and have the discipline to follow them; they exist for your protection.
For me, the biggest difference in my trading occurred when I learned to ignore my brain and just focus on a handful of good setups. Once I learned the setups, the
next challenge was to have the discipline to follow them the same way each and every time. No thinking, no hemming and hawing. I did this by recording my trading
activity and grading myself on how well I executed each setup, instead of on how much money I was making or losing. Whereas focusing on the P&L automatically
encourages the bad habits that plague many traders, a setup-based approach encourages habits that can push a trader into the realm of consistent profitability.
In the end, professional traders focus on limiting risk and protecting capital. Amateur traders focus on how much money they can make on each trade. Professional
traders always take money away from amateurs. Amateur traders start to turn into professional traders once they stop looking for the next great technical indicator and
40

start controlling their risk on each trade.
For additional information on trading psychology, visit www.tradethemarkets.com/psych for updated free videos on the business of getting into the right frame of
mind for trading.

You cannot be disciplined in great things and undisciplined in small things.
Brave undisciplined men have no chance against the discipline and valor of other men.
Have you ever seen a few policemen handle a crowd?
GENERAL GEORGE S. PATTON

Quotes by Paul Tudor Jones
Every day I assume every position I have is wrong.
Losers average losers.
There is no training, classroom or otherwise, that can prepare for trading the last third of a move, whether it’s the end of a bull market or the end of a bear
market.
You adapt, evolve, compete, or die.
Trading is very competitive and you have to be able to handle getting your butt kicked.
Failure was a key element to my life’s journey.
Where you want to be is always in control, never wishing, always trading, and always, first and foremost protecting your butt.
At the end of the day, the most important thing is how good are you at risk control.

41

3
Hardware and Software—
Top Tools for Traders
Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
ARTHUR C. CLARKE

Let’s put some lipstick on this pig!
M ERRILL LYNCH STOCK ANALYST
(As per Former Attorney General Eliot Spitzer)

Hardware: When It Comes to Your Trading Computer, What Are the Most Important Things to Know?
First off, I want to thank Henry Gambell for updating the technology part of this chapter. When I first wrote this book, I did pay some attention to technology, but
now that I’m working with Henry, I let him handle it, as he pretty much knows everything there is to know about it. The first time I met Henry was when I called the
Geek Squad. I was having some problems with my PC that I couldn’t figure out, and they sent him over, a wide-eyed kid from Odessa, Texas. We got to know each
other, and about six months into our knowing each other, I offered him a job. In addition to keeping our office up to speed on the latest and greatest computer hardware
and software, he is cutting his teeth in the world of options trading and learning just like everybody else—the hard way! Let’s dive in.
This chapter is about creating a level playing field for all traders with respect to the equipment and software they are using to tackle the markets. If traders can get
this part right, they are at least going to have a fighting chance to compete on a level playing field with everybody else. If traders are behind the technology curve, they
are going to be at a distinct disadvantage in their trading. In trading, someone without an edge in terms of equipment, mental outlook, and methodology is like a
newborn, wounded wildebeest trying to snatch a drink at the edge of a crocodile pond. In other words, he ain’t gonna make it. Why would people deliberately create a
weakness in their trading plan by having trading software or technology that is outdated? It would be like entering the Daytona 500 with a Winnebago. This is the
easiest part of a solid trading plan, and it is 100 percent under a person’s control.
The amount and type of trading equipment that a trader has is going to depend a little on her own financial resources, and a lot on the type of trading she is doing.
There are several things to remember when purchasing a new PC, the first being that you’re purchasing a depreciating asset. Intel cofounder Gordon E. M oore stated in
1965 that the number of transistors that could be placed on a circuit board would double every two years. His prediction was uncannily accurate, and processing speed
continues to grow exponentially. The semiconductor industry uses this law in its long-term planning, and you should too. As this law continues to hold true, cost
continues to drop, and the PC you buy today is likely to be eclipsed in three to four years, if not sooner. Rather than spending $5,000 on a be-all and end-all system, a
trader can buy a well-equipped PC for under $2,000 (not including displays), upgrade in two years, and still be ahead of the pack.
There are several key components of a PC’s performance. For traders, the most important is RAM . Random-access memory is the storage medium used for running
applications. Every chart, Word document, or Internet browser you open occupies RAM . If you notice that your PC runs great when you have a single application
open, but is sluggish or unusable when you are running several charting platforms, RAM is probably the culprit. RAM prices continue to fall rapidly. As I’m writing
this on August 10, 2011, Newegg.com boasts 8 GB of DDR3 (very fast RAM ) for $48.99. That’s 10 double lattes at Starbucks. These prices make it very feasible for
you to have a desktop that’s stuffed to the gills with RAM , and this is one investment you won’t regret. Now, before you go out and order three pallets of the stuff,
be sure to check your existing system specifications. RAM is limited physically by the number of available slots in your PC and limited in software by what’s referred
to as the 4-GB limit. In short, traders who are looking to use more than 4 GB of RAM should make sure that their motherboard and BIOS support it and be running a
64-bit version of Windows. (Now you understand why I have someone like Henry helping me out instead of trying to figure this out for myself. Keep reading,
however, as this will get easier.)
The next component to decide on is your processor. In the mid-2000s, the focus of chip manufacturers was all about speed, or how many gigahertz they could
squeeze out of a chip. The focus has now shifted to the number of cores, and as a result, overall performance has grown exponentially. Think of this as follows: would
you rather commute to work on a 1-lane highway with a 70-mile-an-hour speed limit, or on a 12-lane highway with a 60-mile-an-hour speed limit? The new chips have
12 lanes, making getting to your destination that much faster.
