
Analyzing the trade setup to determine position size
The starting point for any successful trade is developing a well-conceived trading plan. And the
most important element of a trading plan is the size of the position that will be traded. Position
size will determine how much money is ultimately at risk, as well as the overall viability of the
trade.
But position size is only one half of the equation that determines how much money is at risk. The
second half of the equation is the pip distance between the entry price and the stop-loss level.
Wait a minute, you may be thinking. Why didn’t I mention the upside potential or the pip distance
between the entry price and the take profit? Why aren’t I looking at how much money I can make
on the trade?
Save the rose-colored glasses for buying lottery tickets. When you’re plunking down a dollar or
two, it’s okay to focus only on the upside and dream about winning millions. But when you’re
trading in any financial market, you have to remember the market is not there to give you money.

I know you’re not drawn to currency trading for the chance to lose money. You’re interested
in making money, and you’re prepared to take some risks to do that. The question is how
much risk are you prepared to accept. Because you’re dealing with finite resources in your
trading — the amount of risk capital you’ve devoted to your trading — you have a definite
limiting factor to your trading. If you eat through your trading capital, you’re done. So the
starting point of a risk-aware trading plan has to focus on the downside risks.
That brings us to the trade setup, which I cover in greater detail in Chapter 12. A trade setup is a
trade opportunity that you’ve identified through either fundamental or technical analysis, or a
combination of both.
In every trade setup, you need to identify the price point where the setup is invalidated — where
the trade is wrong. For example, if you’re looking to sell a currency pair based on trend-line
resistance above, price gains beyond the trend line would invalidate your rationale for wanting to
be short. So the price level of the trend line is the line in the sand for the overall strategy.

Now comes the entry point for the trade. Let’s say that current market prices are 50 pips below the
trend-line resistance you’ve identified. That means the market could move higher by 50 pips and
your trade setup would still be valid, but you’d be out of the money by 50 pips. You now have a
clear delineation of how much risk your trade setup would require you to assume. If you get in
now, you’re risking at least 50 pips.
Alternatively, you could reduce that risk by waiting and using an order to try selling at better
levels — say, 25 pips higher. If the market cooperates and your limit-entry order is filled, you’re
now risking only 25 pips before your trade setup is negated.
So how large a position should you commit to the trade? From a risk standpoint, it all depends
where you’re able to enter the trade relative to your stop-out level (see the following section).

Doing the math to put the risk in cash terms
After you’ve identified where your stop-loss point is — where the trade setup is negated — and
where you’re able to enter, you’re able to calculate the amount of risk posed by the trade. Let’s
say you’re inclined to enter the position at current market levels, and your stop is 50 pips away.
For example, if you’re trading a standard-size account (100,000 lot size), and the trade is in
NZD/USD (where profit and loss accrues in USD), each lot would translate into risking $500
(100,000 × 0.0050 NZD/USD pips = $500).
If your margin balance is $10,000, you’re risking 5 percent of your trading capital per lot in this
trade, which is frequently cited as the maximum risk in any one trade.

There are no hard and fast rules as to how much you should risk in any single trade, but I
recommend limiting your risk to no more than 10 percent of your account balance.
If you’re able to enter the position at a better level (say, using the order to sell 25 pips higher),
you’re now risking only 25 pips on the trade. You could double the position size and still be
risking the same amount of trading capital. Or you could stick with the single lot and cut your risk
in half.

Devising the trading plan in terms of risk
Risk in the trading plan is not confined simply to losing money on the trade. There are also
opportunity risks from trade setups that you’re not able to enter. Another old market saying is that
some of the best trades are the hardest to get into. You may be eyeing a trade setup that involves
buying a dip toward rumored buying orders or significant technical support. But what happens if
the dip never comes?

Identifying the trade entry points
Winning or losing on a trade is difficult if you never get into the position in the first place, which
makes identifying where to get into the trade one of the most important steps in any trading plan.
I like to use technical analysis as the primary means of identifying entry levels. When looking to
identify entry points, I focus on the following technical levels:
Trend lines in various time frames (daily, four-hour, and hourly)
Hourly highs and lows for short-term intraday position entries
Daily highs and lows for medium- to longer-term positions
Congestion zones
Fibonacci retracements of prior price movements (38.2 percent, 50 percent, 61.8 percent,
and 76.4 percent)
Spike highs and lows
After you’ve identified a price point to enter into the trade, double-check the level. Is the entry
level realistic? If you’re looking to enter a short-term trade, is your entry point likely to be
reached in the short-term time frame (minutes to hours)? You can use momentum readings to help
gauge the likelihood of an order level being reached. For example, if hourly momentum readings
are moving lower, a buy entry to the downside probably stands a better chance of being reached
than a sell entry above.
What happens if your entry level is never reached? Do you have a backup plan? If you were
planning on selling on further rallies, for example, but the market moves directly lower, is there a
price level below that you would consider selling at on a stop-entry basis? What does that backup
plan mean for your overall trade stop level? Should you reduce the position size to compensate for
the worse entry rate?

Establishing stop losses with foresight
The stop-loss level is the starting point in any trade plan from an overall risk perspective. It’s the
point where the trade setup is negated and the strategy fails.

When considering where to place the stop level, be aware that the currency market, like
most financial markets, has a tendency to try to take out levels where stop losses are likely to
be located. Nothing is worse than having the right strategy but being taken out by a short-term,
stop-loss-driven price move that eventually reverses and goes in the direction of your
outlook.

To guard against the risk of being unnecessarily whipsawed out of a position, you need to
approach selecting your stop-loss level from a defensive point of view. Anticipate that the market
will test the level where the trade setup is invalidated, such as trend-line support or hourly lows.
Then consider if the market tests that level, how far must it go through before it’s really considered
a break?
No set formula exists for this calculation, but allowing for a margin of error can sometimes
prevent a stop loss from being triggered unnecessarily. The margin of error you apply will depend
on the general volatility of the currency pair you’re trading, as well as on the overall market
volatility at the time of the trade.

Above all, you need to balance the risk of being taken out on a false move with the larger
risk that your overall strategy is wrong. You can be flexible up to a point, but you still need to
set your ultimate stop loss and then stick to it.

Setting take-profit objectives dynamically
When it comes to establishing the take-profit objective, a lot of trading books recommend using
some sort of risk/reward ratio, like 2:1 (meaning, if you’re prepared to risk 50 points on a trade,
you should be aiming to make 100 points). That approach is all well and good in theory, but it fails
to account for the realities of the market. Just because you’ve identified a trade opportunity that
risks x amount, why would the market necessarily “reward” you with twice that amount in profit?

Instead, I suggest using a much more dynamic market-based approach, one that considers
where the market is likely to go based on where it’s been (technical analysis) and overall
market conditions. The idea is to be realistic about how much you can take out of the market,
not idealistic about how much the market will reward you.
I focus on technical support and resistance levels as the primary guideposts in the progress of
market movements. If you’re looking to buy based on a Fibonacci retracement level as support, for
example, you’re going to be looking at technical resistance levels above for your take-profit
targets. Chart formations, such as channels and flags, also suggest relatively predictable and
attainable price targets.
I look to momentum indicators like Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD) and
stochastics as gauges of the underlying speed of the price movement. If short-term momentum is
accelerating in the direction of the trade, stay with it, and consider revising your take-profit
objectives to capture a larger move. But if short-term momentum in the direction of the trade is
slowing or stalling, consider scaling back your profit targets and adopting a more defensive,
profit-protecting stance, like raising your stop loss or taking partial profit.

Time is another important consideration in dynamically managing your profit objectives. You need
to be aware of and anticipate upcoming events and market conditions. If you’ve been long for a
rally during the North American morning, what’s likely to happen when European markets begin to
close up for the day? If you’re positioned in USD/JPY in the New York afternoon, and Japanese
industrial production is slated to be released in a few hours, what can you expect in the interim?
Stay flexible and dynamic, just like the market.

Choosing Your Trading Broker
With the explosion in online currency trading over the past several years, dozens of forex
brokerage firms now operate all over the world. Competition among various brokerages is fierce,
and there’s no shortage of advertising seeking to win you as a client. In this section I look at some
of the differences between forex brokerages from a risk perspective, because where you trade can
sometimes influence your trading outcomes.
In case you skipped the introduction to this book, I think it’s important in the interest of full
disclosure to note that I am affiliated with FOREX.com. Before you choose a broker, I recommend
you take a look at the Cheat Sheet, where I provide a list of questions to ask.

Different business models of brokers
Most online forex brokers function as the market-maker for your trading, meaning that the broker is
on the other side of every trade — when you buy, you’re buying from the broker; when you sell,
you’re selling to the broker. Brokerage firms that are market-makers typically provide both
consistent liquidity and execution, which allows you to trade your desired amount at all times.
Market-makers typically offer either fixed spreads or variable spreads:
Fixed spreads remain constant all the time, regardless of what’s happening in the market.
Because the broker must assume the additional market risk of quoting a fixed spread all
day long (including in thinly traded or volatile markets, when interbank spreads tend to
widen), fixed spreads tend to be slightly wider than variable spreads.
Variable spreads fluctuate depending on market interest. In highly liquid periods — such
as the overlap between the London and New York sessions — variable spreads will be
the tightest (as low as 1 or 2 pips in EUR/USD and the other heavily traded currency
pairs). In slower periods (such as 6 p.m. eastern time [ET], when New York is closed and
Asia is not yet fully online), spreads will tend to be wider.

Whether you should choose fixed spreads or variable spreads largely depends on your

trading style. If you’re a short-term trader looking to make just a few pips on each trade,
you’re probably better off with variable spreads, which are tightest in liquid markets. If you
trade around news, fixed spreads will allow you to avoid the inevitable widening of spreads
(sometimes by a significant amount) that typically happens around fundamental
announcements.
Another model being promoted by a few brokers is the nondealing desk model. The term is meant
to differentiate these brokers from market-making brokers — who have trading, or dealing, desks
— that manage the firm’s market exposure. Nondealing desk brokers will tell you that the price
you’re trading on is coming directly from the interbank market and that they route all your trades
directly to the banks. But if that’s the case, why is the nondealing desk broker even needed? Online
forex brokers have emerged precisely because the large institutional players did not have the
capacity to process tens of thousands of individual trades.
More important, if the nondealing desk is commission free and routing every trade to a bank, how
does it make any money? A legitimate nondealing desk firm will offer very tight bid/offer spreads
and charge commissions for each trade.

Commission-free forex brokers are compensated by the spread between the bid and the
offer. If you buy from a broker at 15, for example, and another trader at the same time sells to
the broker at 14, 13, or 12, the broker realizes a profit from the spread.

The reality with the nondealing-desk approach is that such trading platforms may display
wider prices and sharper price gaps during periods of volatility, all the while claiming no
control over the prices being shown. Be careful about promises of dealing in the interbank
market —if it sounds too good to be true, it usually is.

Financial risks of brokers
The main financial risk posed by forex brokerages involves the brokerage firm’s failing due to
mismanagement or fraud, as happened in the case of Refco in early 2006. If a brokerage collapses,
your trading account could be frozen and your funds tied up in bankruptcy proceedings for months
or lost forever.

To reduce that prospect, you need to make sure your broker is registered with the
appropriate financial authorities in the jurisdiction where it operates. In the United States,
forex brokers are required to be registered as a Futures Commission Merchant/Retail Foreign
Exchange Dealer (FCM/RFED) with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
and are ultimately subject to CFTC rules and regulations. The National Futures Association

(NFA) is the self-regulating body for forex brokers, similar to FINRA (formerly known as
NASD, or the National Association of Securities Dealers), which oversees stock brokers
regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

You can visit the NFA’s website at www.nfa.futures.org to check on the regulatory status of
a prospective broker. You should also review the brokerage firm’s regulatory history and its
overall financial condition. Go with firms that have solid histories and strong financials.

Technology Issues and Contingency Planning
Online currency trading presents its own host of potential technological problems that you need to
be prepared for. We cover the primary technology risks originating from the broker’s side in the
previous section, but plenty of things can go wrong on your side of the connection.
Unfortunately, it’s the Catch-22 of today’s technology: Without it, you couldn’t access the forex
market in the first place — but when there’s a problem, it’s just another example of modern
technology making your life more difficult. The trick is to anticipate what can happen and be
prepared for when it does.
Contingency planning is the name of that game, and redundancy is the solution. By redundancy,
we mean having a backup plan for your backup plan, with a backup plan in case the other backup
plan fails. Now try saying that three times fast.

In particular, have backup plans in place for the following contingencies:
If your Internet connection is disrupted: Make sure you’re able to call your brokerage’s
trading desk; memorize its phone number and any account numbers or passwords you need
to verify your identity, in case you need to trade or place orders over the phone.
If the power goes out: You may not be able to log on via computer, and your landline
phone may be disabled, so make sure your cellphone is reliably charged. (Note: Cordless
phones are the only landline phones that require electricity to run. That’s all the more
reason to have access to at least one corded phone.)
If your cellphone fails: Know where you can access a landline phone, and make sure you
have your brokerage’s phone number memorized. Saving the number in your cellphone is
no good if the phone’s battery is dead or the phone isn’t working.

Above all, make sure to do the following:

Always have a stop-loss order in place for any open positions. This is your first and
ultimate backup plan for any and all contingencies. Also, make sure your stop-loss order
is good until canceled, so it’ll never expire while the position is open.
Write down your open positions and orders. Keep a hard copy of all your trades and
orders in a notebook or trading journal so you can refer to it in the event of an emergency.
If you can’t access your brokerage’s trading platform, you won’t be able to see your
exposure.

Part IV

Executing a Plan

In this part . . .
This is what it all comes down to. You’ve done the research, you’ve looked at the charts, you’ve
developed your strategic trade plan, and now it’s time to put it to work. If you thought economic
data mining and chart analysis were the hard part, wait until your adrenaline starts pumping after
you’ve entered the trade. Here, I take you through the concrete steps of opening a position,
monitoring the trade while it’s active, closing it out, and doing a post-trade analysis to refine your
trading going forward.

Chapter 14

Pulling the Trigger
In This Chapter
Opening up trading positions
Averaging into trade setups
Trading on breakouts
Dealing online and placing orders
“You gotta be in it to win it” is a favorite saying that currency traders like to throw around. The
“in it” part refers to being “in” the market, having the right directional view expressed with an
open position (long/short) in a currency pair.
But there’s always a trade-off between having the right position and getting into that position at the
most advantageous price. For example, being short AUD/USD may be the correct position to have,
but if you enter at the wrong price, you may have to endure some pain before the trade moves your
way.
In this chapter, I walk you through some of the different ways of entering trades and establishing
the position to fit your overall strategy.

Getting into the Position
You can make trades in the forex market one of two ways: You can trade at the market, or the
current price, using the click-and-deal feature of your broker’s platform; or you can employ
orders, such as limit orders and if/then contingent orders. (I discuss order types in Chapter 4.) But
there’s a lot more to it than that. Certain trade setups suggest a combination of both methods for
entering a position, while others rely strictly on orders to capture rapid or unexpected price
movements. Then there’s the fine art of timing the market to get in at the best price at the moment.

Buying and selling at the current market
Many traders like the idea of opening a position by trading at the market as opposed to leaving an
order that may or may not be executed. They prefer the certainty of knowing that they’re in the
market. Actively buying and selling is also what makes trading as fun and exhilarating as it is hard
work.

Deciding whether to enter now (at the market) or wait for better price levels (using orders)
depends greatly on the nature of your strategy. If you’re aiming to trade short term
(minutes/hours) on news or economic data reports, for instance, you’re going to be trading
mostly at the market. If you’re looking to position for a larger price adjustment over the next
day(s), you’re better off using orders to execute your market entry.
For short-term trade entry at the market, you want a good handle on the recent price action, which
means knowing where prices have been over the past several hours. Just because you’ve settled on
a strategy to buy USD/CAD doesn’t mean you have to close your chart window, open your trading
platform, and pay the offer.
Take a step back and look at shorter-term charts, such as 5 or 15 minutes, to get an idea of where
prices have been trading recently. Chances are you’ll observe a relatively narrow range of price
action, typically between 20 and 30 pips. Unless the situation is urgent, a little patience can go a
long way toward improving your entry level. Why buy at 1.0550 when you have a viable chance to
buy at 1.0535?

Let the routine price fluctuations work to your advantage by trying to buy on down-ticks and
sell on up-ticks in line with your overall strategy. Selecting your trade size in advance helps
— so when the price gets to your desired level, you need to click only once to execute the
trade. You can also use limit orders to buy or sell just a few pips from the current market,
letting the broker’s platform execute automatically in case the price moves are too quick to
click and deal manually.

As you watch the price action, keep a disciplined entry price in mind, both in your favor
and in case prices start to move away from your desired entry level. If the market cooperates
and moves to your desired trade entry price, stay with your plan and make the trade. If prices
move away from you, have a worst-case entry level in mind and be prepared to pull the
trigger so you can still execute your overall strategy. You may not be able to enter at better
prices every time, but I think you’ll be surprised how often you can.
