A casino does not like to see a bettor wager a large amount of money on one
outcome, whether at roulette or any other casino game. The odds are still in the casino’s
favor. But, if the bet is large enough, and the bettor is lucky, short-term bad luck can
overwhelm the casino. Indeed, if a bettor knows that the odds are against him, and he
waits the greatest chance of showing a profit, his best course is to wager the maximum
amount on one outcome, and hope that in the short run he gets lucky. If he continues
to make bets over a long period of time, the laws of probability will eventually catch up
with him and the casino will end up with the bettor’s money. The ideal scenario from
the casino’s point of view is for 38 players to place 38 bets of $1,000 each on all 38
numbers at the roulette table. Now the casino has a perfect spread position. One player
will collect $36,000, but with $38,000 on the table the casino has a sure profit of
$2,000.

The option trader prefers to spread for the same reason that the casino prefers the
bets to be spread around the table: spreading maintains profit potential but reduces
short-term risk. There is no perfect spread position for the option trader, as there is for
a casino. But the intelligent option trader learns to spread off his risk in as many different
ways as possible in order to minimize the effects of short-term bad luck.

New traders are sometimes astonished at the size of the trades an experienced
trader is prepared to make. For example, an independent floor trader in Treasury Bond
options at the Chicago Board of Trade who buys 100 calls at 2-00 ($2,000) each has
taken a position worth $200,000. How can he afford to do this? His capital resources
certainly play a role in the risk he is willing to accept. But equally important is his ability


Introduction to Spreading 135

to spread off risk. An experienced trader may know a wide variety of ways to spread off
the risk associated with the 100 calls he purchased, either using other options, futures
contracts, cash bonds, or some combination of these instruments. He may not be able
to completely eliminate his risk. But he may be able to reduce it to such an extent that
his risk is actually less than that of a much smaller trader who does not know how to
spread, or knows only a limited number of spreading strategies.


x 8 oO

Volatility Spreads

To take advantage of a theoretically mispriced option, it is necessary to hedge the
purchase or sale of the option by simultaneously taking an opposing market position. In
the examples in Chapter 5, the opposing market position was always taken in the
underlying instrument. It is also possible to hedge an option position with other options
which are theoretically equivalent to the underlying instrument. For example, suppose
we feel a certain call with a delta of 50 is underpriced in the marketplace. If we buy 10
calls, giving us a total delta position of +500, we can hedge our position in any of the
following ways:

*% = Sell five underlying contracts

* Buy puts with a total delta of -500

“+ Sell calls, different than those which we purchased, with a total delta of +500
“+ Combine several of these strategies, such that we create a total delta of -500

With many different calls and puts available, as well as the underlying contract,
there are many different ways of hedging our ten calls. Regardless of which method we
choose, each spread will have certain features in common:

“* Each spread will be approximately delta neutral.

+ Each spread will be sensitive to changes in the price of the underlying
instrument.

“+ Each spread will be sensitive to changes in implied volatility.

“+ Each spread will be sensitive to the passage of time.

Spreads with the foregoing characteristics fall under the general heading of volatil-
ity spreads. In this chapter we will define the basic types of volatility spreads and look
at their characteristics, initially by examining the expiration values of the spread, and
then by considering the delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho associated with each spread.

Before defining the primary types of spreads, it should be noted that spreading
terminology is not uniform. Traders sometimes use different terms when referring to the
same spread; they sometimes use the same term when referring to different spreads. An
attempt has been made to use the most common terminology, but alternative spread
definitions are also given where appropriate.

137


138 Chapter 8

BACKSPREAD
(also referred to as a ratio backspread or long ratio spread)

A backspread is a delta neutral spread which consists of more long (purchased) options
than short (sold) options where all options expire at the same time. In order to achieve
this, options with smaller deltas must be purchased and options with larger deltas must
be sold. A call backspread consists of long calls at a higher exercise price and short calls
at a lower exercise price. A put backspread consists of long puts at a lower exercise price
and short puts at a higher exercise price.

Typical backspreads and their values at expiration are shown in Figures 8-1 and
8-2. (These, and the example spreads in the following sections, are taken from the
option evaluation table in Figure 8-20.) In each case, a move away from the long
option’s exercise price will increase the value of the spread. Depending on the type of
backspread, movement in one direction may be preferable to movement in the other
direction. In a call backspread the upside profit potential is unlimited; in a put
backspread the downside profit is unlimited. But the primary consideration is that some
movement will occur. If no movement occurs, a backspread is likely to be a losing
strategy.

Typically, a backspread is done for a credit. That is, the amount of premium
received for the sold options is greater than the premium paid for the purchased options.
This ensures that the backspread will be profitable if the market makes a large move in
either direction. If the market collapses in the case of a call backspread, or the market

Figure 8-1: Call Backspread

sall the

buy the

lower higher
exercise exercise
price price
o <a |
8 long 30 March 105 calls (24)
g short 10 March 95 calls (78)

long 25 June 110 calls (23)
short 10 June 100 calls (61)



Volatility Spreads 139

Figure 8-2: Put Backspread

buy the sell the
lower higher
exercise exercise
price price
i
a
n
6 long 80 March 90 puts (-6)
a

short 10 March 100 puts (-48)

Jong 45 June 95 puts (-30)
short 30 June 100 puts (-46)

explodes in the case of a put backspread, all options will expire worthless and the trader
will keep the credit from the initial transaction.

A trader will tend to choose the type of backspread which reflects his opinion about
market direction. If he foresees a market with great upside potential, he will tend to
choose a call backspread; if he foresees a market with great downside potential he will
tend to choose a put backspread. He will avoid backspreads in quiet markets since the
underlying contract is unlikely to move very far in either direction.

RATIO VERTICAL SPREAD
{also referred to as a ratio spread, short ratio spread,
vertical spread, or front spread)

A trader who takes the opposite side of a backspread also has a delta neutral spread, but
he ts short more contracts than long, with all options expiring at the same time. Such a
spread is sometimes referred to as a ratio spread or a vertical spread. However, these
terms can also be applied to other types of spreads. In order to avoid later confusion, we
will designate the opposite of a backspread as a ratio vertical spread.

Typical ratio vertical spreads, and their expiration values, are shown in Figures 8-3
and 8-4. From these graphs we can see that a ratio vertical spread will realize its
maximum profit at expiration when the underlying contract finishes right at the short
(sold) option’s exercise price. Since a ratio vertical spreader assumes the opposite risks
of a backspreader, his risk is unlimited on the upside in a call ratio vertical spread, and


140

Chapter 8

Figure 8-3: Call Ratio Vertical Spread

long 20 March 96 calls (78)
short 30 March 100 calls (51)

= long 10 June 95 calls (67)
° short 30 June 110 calls (23)
ao
~~?
n
D
° .
S :
buy the sell the
lower higher
exercise exercise
price price

Figure 8-4: Put Ratio Vertical Spread

5

long 20 March 95 puts (-21)
short 60 March 90 puts (-6)

long 15 June 105 puts (-62)

= : short 20 June 100 puts (-46)
5 /
x i
oa 1
a .
sell the buy the
lower higher
exercise exercise
price price



Volatility Spreads 141

unlimited on the downside in a put ratio vertical spread. While a ratio vertical spreader
expects the market to remain relatively stable, he will tend to choose either a call or put
ratio vertical spread in order to limit his losses if he is wrong. If he is primarily worried
about a swift rise in the market, he will choose a put ratio vertical spread; if he is
primarily worried about a swift fall in the market, he will choose a call ratio vertical
spread. In both cases, if the market does make a big move, his loss will be limited since
the calls can only collapse to zero if the market falls, and the puts can only collapse to
zero if the market rises.

STRADDLE

A straddle consists of either a long call and a long put, or a short call and a short put,
where both options have the same exercise price and expire at the same time. If both
the call and put are purchased, the trader is said to be long the straddle; if both options
are sold, the trader is said to be short the straddle. Typical long and short straddles, with
their expiration values, are shown in Figures 8-5 and 8-6,

While most straddles are executed with a one-to-one ratio (one call for each put),
this is not a requirement. A straddle can also be ratioed, so that it consists of unequal
numbers of calls and puts. Any spread where the number of long market contracts (long
calls or short puts) and short market contracts (short calls or long puts) are unequal fs
considered a ratio spread. The most common types of ratio spreads are backspreads and

Figure 8-5: Long Straddle

buy
= calls and puts
© at the same
oa exercise price
on
3
a

long 10 March 100 calls (51) : long 10 June 95 calls (67)
long 10 March 100 puts (-48) Y long 25 June 95 puts (-30)



142 Chapter 8

Figure 8-6: Short Straddle

short 30 March 105 calls (24) A short 20 June 100 calls (51)
short 10 March 105 puts (-75) short 20 June 100 puts (-46)

Profit

sell
calls and puts
at the same
exercise price

Loss

ratio vertical spreads. But other spreads, including straddles, can be ratioed. This is
usually done to ensure that the spread is delta neutral.

A long straddle has many of the same characteristics as a backspread. Like a
backspread it has limited risk and unlimited profit potential. With a long straddle,
however, the trader’s potential profit is unlimited in either direction. If the market
moves sharply up or down, the straddle wil! realize ever increasing profits as long as the
market continues to move in the same direction.

A short straddle has many of the same characteristics as a ratio vertical spread. The
spread will realize its maximum profit if the market stays close to the call and put
exercise price. The spread has a limited profit potential, and unlimited risk should the
Market move violently in either direction.

The new option trader often finds long straddles attractive because strategies with
limited risk and unlimited profit potential offer great appeal, especially when the profit
is unlimited in both directions. However, if the hoped for movement fails to materialize,
he soon finds that losing money little by little, even a limited amount, can also be a
painful experience. This is not an endorsement of either long or short straddles. Under
the right conditions either strategy may be sensible. But the intelligent trader’s primary
concern ought to be the total expected return. If the strategy with the greatest expected
return also entails unlimited risk, a trader may have to accept that risk as part of doing
business.


Volatility Spreads 143

STRANGLE

Like a straddle, a strangle consists of a long call and a long put, ora short call and a short
put, where both options expire at the same time. In a strangle, however, the options
have different exercise prices. If both options are purchased, the trader is long the
strangle; if both options are sold, the trader is short the strangle. Typical long and short
strangles are shown in Figures 8-7 and 8-8.

Strangles have characteristics similar to straddles, and are therefore similar to
backspreads and ratio vertical spreads. Like a long straddle, a long strangle needs
movement to be profitable, and has unlimited profit potential should such movement
occur. Like a short straddle, a short strangle has unlimited risk in either direction, but
will show a profit if the underlying market remains in a narrow trading range.

If a strangle is simply identified by its expiration month and exercise prices, there
may be some confusion as to the specific options involved. A June 95/105 strangle
might consist of a June 95 put and June 105 call. But it might also consist of a June 95
call and a June 105 put. Both these combinations are consistent with the definition of
a strangle. To avoid confusion a strangle is commonly assumed to consist of out-of-the-
money options. If the underlying market is currently at 100 and a trader wants to
purchase the June 95/105 strangle, it is assumed that he wants to purchase a June 95
put and a June 105 call. When both options are in-the-money, the position is sometimes
referred to as a guts.

Figure 8-7: Long Strangle

oe lt calls ‘euts)

puts (calls)

at a lower at a higher
£ exercise price exercise price
— i . i
£ i
a : i
2
3

long 20 March 105 calls long 30 June 110 calls
long 20 March 95 puts fong 1 June 100 puts



144 Chapter 8

Figure 8-8: Short Strangle

short 30 March 110 calls short 10 June 95 calls
short 40 March 90 puts short 10 June 105 puts

Profit

Loss

sell sell

puts (calls) calls (puts)
at a lower at a higher
exercise price exercise price

Tn the absence of other identifying information, strangles, like straddles, are usually
executed with a one-to-one ratio (one call for each put). However, there is no law
against executing a strangle with some other ratio. If the call has a delta of 15 and the
put has a delta of —30, and a trader wants to be delta neutral, it is perfectly acceptable
to trade two calls for each put.

If we ignore the limited or unlimited risk/reward characteristics of backspreads,
long straddles, and long strangles, these spreads essentially differ in the degree of desired
movement. A backspread needs some market movement to show a profit, a long straddle
needs more movement, and a long strangle needs even greater movement. Indeed, a
strangle is usually considered the most highly leveraged of all option positions because
out-of-the-money options are cheap relative to other options. Several strangles can often
be purchased for the price of just one straddle. If significant movement occurs with such
a position, its value can increase dramatically. But there is a tradeoff. If movement fails
to occur, the position will swiftly lose its value through the passage of time.

The same considerations of degree are also true for ratio vertical spreads, short
straddles, and short strangles. A ratio vertical spread, a short straddle, and a short
strangle all want the market to sit still. But again, the strangle is considered the most
highly leveraged of these positions. If a trader sells several strangles and the market does
sit still his profits will usually be greater than if he had sold one straddle or done a
moderate sized ratio vertical spread. If, however, the market makes an unexpectedly
large Move, short strangles also entail the greatest risk. All option positions are a tradeoff



Volatility Spreads 148

between risk and reward. If the reward is great, so is the risk; if the risk is small, so is
the reward.

Based on their similar characteristics, it is sometimes convenient to classify long
straddles and long strangles as special types of backspreads. This follows logically from
the definition of a backspread: long more contracts than short, with all options expiring
in the same month. A long straddle or strangle consists only of long options {long calls
and long puts), with all options expiring at the same time. Hence, these positions are
backspreads. (Even though the owner of a put has a short market position, he is said to
be long the put because he has purchased it.}

The same reasoning leads us to classify short straddles and strangles as special types
of ratio vertical spreads. Short straddles and strangles consist only of short options, with
all options expiring at the same time. Hence, the positions conform to our definition of
a ratio vertical spread.

BUTTERFLY

Thus far we have looked at spreads which involve buying or selling two different option
contracts. However, we need not restrict ourselves to two-sided spreads. We can also
construct spreads consisting of three, four, or even more different options. A butterfly
consists of options at three equally spaced exercise prices, where all options are of the
same type (either all calls or all puts} and expire at the same time. In a long butterfly the
outside exercise prices are purchased and the inside exercise price is sold, and vice versa
for a short butterfly.! Moreover, the ratio of a butterfly never varies. It is always 1 x 2
x 1, with two of each inside exercise price traded for each one of the outside exercise
prices. ff the ratio is other than 1 x 2 x 1, the spread is no longer a butterfly. Typical
examples of long and short butterflies are shown in Figures 8-9 and 8-10.

Since a butterfly consists of equal numbers of long and short options, it does not fit
conveniently into the backspread or ratio vertical spread category. However, as com-
monly traded, a long butterfly tends to act like a ratio vertical spread and a short butterfly
tends to act like a backspread. To understand why, consider a trader who buys a
95/100/105 call butterfly (long a 95 call, short two 100 calls, long a 105 call). What
will be the value of this position at expiration? If the underlying contract is below 95 at
expiration all the calls will expire worthless, and the value of the position will be zero.
If the underlying contract is above 105 at expiration, the value of the 95 and 105 calls
together will be identical to the value of the two 100 calls. Again, the value of the
butterfly will be zero. Now suppose the underlying contract is somewhere between 95
and 105 at expiration, specifically, right at the inside exercise price of 100. The 95 call
Will be worth 5 points, while the 100 and 105 calls will be worthless. The position will
therefore be worth 5 points. If the underlying moves away from 100 the value of the
butterfly will decline, but its value can never fall below zero.

1, The inside exercise price is sometimes referred to as the body of the butterfly, while the outside
exercise prices are referred to as the wings.


146

Chapter 8
Figure 8-9: Long Buiterfly
7
long 10 March 95 calls (78) long 30 June 90 puts (-17)
short 20 March 100 calls (51) short 60 June 95 puts (-30)
long 10 March 105 calls (24} long 30 June 100 puts (-46)
=
e
2
oa
o ~« —_
6
buy a buy a
call (put) call (put)
at a lower r [ at a higher
exercise price exercise price exercise price
Figure 8-10: Short Buiterfly
sella sell a
call (put) call (put)
at a lower at a higher
exercise price exercise price exercise price
° i
a _— al
n
i
a

short 20 March 100 puts {-48)
long 40 March 105 puts (-75)
short 20 March 1410 puts (-91)

short 25 June 95 calls (67)
long 50 June 100 calls (51)
short 25 June 105 calls (36)



Volatility Spreads 147

At expiration a butterfly will always have a value somewhere between zero and the
amount between exercise prices. It will be worth zero if the underlying contract is
below the lowest exercise price or above the highest exercise price, and it will be worth
its maximum if the underlying contract is right at the inside exercise price.

Since a butterfly has a value between zero and the amount between exercise prices
(5 points in our example), a trader should be willing to pay some amount between zero
and 5 for the position. The exact amount depends on the likelihood of the underlying
contract finishing right at or close to the inside price at expiration. If there is high
probability of this occurring, a trader might be willing to pay as much as 414 or 414 for
the butterfly, since it might very will expand to its full value of 5 points. If, however,
there is a low probability of this occurring, and consequently a high probability that the
underlying contract will finish outside the extreme exercise prices, a trader may only be
willing to pay 14 or %, since he may very will lose his entire investment.

Now we can see why a long butterfly tends to act like a ratio vertical spread. Ifa
trader feels that the underlying contract will remain within a narrow range until
expiration, he can buy a butterfly where the inside exercise price is at-the-money. If he
is right, and the market does stay close to the inside exercise price, the butterfly will
expand to its maximum value (Figure 8-9). A long butterfly tends to act like a ratio
vertical spread since it increases in value as the underlying market sits still.

In contrast, the trader who sells a butterfly wants the underlying market to move
as far away from the inside exercise price as possible so that the position will expire with
the underlying contract either below the lowest exercise price or above the highest
exercise price. In this case, the butterfly will expire worthless and he will be able to
keep the full amount he received when he sold the butterfly (Figure 8-10). A short
butterfly tends to act like a backspread since it increases in value with movement in the
underlying market.

Why are the strategies in Figure 8-9 referred to as “long” butterflies, and the
strategies in Figure 8-10 referred to as “short” butterflies? It is common practice to refer
to a spread which requires an outlay of capital as a long, or purchased, spread. Ifa trader
initiates a butterfly by purchasing the outside exercise prices and selling the inside
exercise price, he has a position which can never be worth less than zero at expiration.
The trader can therefore expect to lay out some amount of capital for the position when
he initiates it. When the trader does this, he has purchased, or is “long,” the butterfly.
(If a trader can initiate a long butterfly for a credit, he should do it as many times as the
law will allow; he can’t lose.) When the trader sells the outside exercise prices and
purchases the inside exercise price, he can expect to receive some amount of capital.
He has sold, or is “short,” the butterfly.
