
Figure 10.5 Buying bonds on TDM 18.

153

Figure 10.6 Bond TDM 18 buy signals backed by gold.
Although total profits dip $2,000, the accuracy slightly increases while our "all important" average
profit per trade jumps up over $100 per trade and drawdown improves substantially by being cut almost in
half!

Better and Better
We can do even better than the preceding results by delaying our entry until TDM 22. There are a lot
less trades as the Figure 10.7 shows, only 50, but a

Figure 10.7 Bond TDM 22 buy signals.

154

Figure 10.8 Bond TDM 22 buy signals backed by gold.
higher accuracy, 76 percent, an amazing $496 average profit per trade, and very livable drawdown of a little
over $4,500.
I know, I know, you want to know what happens when we back this trading opportunity with the trend
of Gold. Well, Figure 10.8 shows the answers and they are very impressive, $20,156 of profits. Again, the
trend criteria is that Gold close lower than 24 days ago, same stop and exit as in the previous results.
Although our drawdown has a major improvement, crashing all the way down to $1,500, the accuracy
skyrockets to 89 percent and average profit literally zooms to $719 per trade.
This is an exceptional trading opportunity; the problem is not many months have a TDM 22, but when
they do, I will be buying. Check out the string of winners with the Gold filter, 17 winners in a row, whereas
without the filter, we only had 5 winners in a row.

A Time to Sell as Well
Bonds have also dipped around mid-month most of the time, as Figure 10.9 reveals. The rules called
for selling on the open of TDM 12 with our usual 3-day exit and $1,400 stop. From 1986 to the middle of
1998, this dip has been profitable to trade 76 percent of the time with an average profit per trade of $133 on
the 152 trades. Drawdown is acceptable at $6,093, but larger than the ideal ratio of profits to drawdown.
Ideally, drawdown should be no more than 15 percent of the profits of $20,281. In this case, the drawdown
was 20 percent profits. So, although we are certainly onto something here, I would like a shot at making it
better.

155

Figure 10.9 Bond sells TDM 12.

Whereas traditional commodity market analysts would try to filter this trading opportunity with
technical "junk" like the trend, oscillators, or momentum flows, I would rather go back to what matters;
fundamental relationships, that of Gold to Bonds. After all, charts and oscillators do not move the market,
underlying conditions do.
In addition to now having a real way to trade this mid-month dip, we are also able to again see the
power of fundamentals in Figure 10.10. The trade entry and exit rules are exactly as in the previous clip, the
only difference-and what a difference it makes-is that trades were only taken when Gold had closed greater

Figure 10.10 Bond sells TDM backed by gold.

156
than the close 10 days ago. In other words, Gold was in an uptrend, which suggests to us that sell signals
should be more effective in this monetary environment. The average profit per trade more than doubles,
profits get bumped up $6,000, accuracy goes from 76 percent to 78 percent, no big deal, but our drawdown
to profit percentage is just about halved from 20.9 percent to 11 percent. Perhaps best of all the average
profit per trade jumps to $359 from $133.
Here we have a very tradable opportunity. All one need do is have the patience to wait for the
mid-month time periods when Gold has been in an uptrend: that is the fundamental setup that created these
results.
Patience seems to be the one commodity commodity traders have in short supply. Most people must
like to trade for the heck of it, I guess. I want to wager or speculate only when I have a distinct advantage in
the game. If it is not there you know where I will be ... on the sidelines . where I belong. I hope you will be
there with me!

Chapter 11

When to Get Out of Your Trades

Never begin anything until-you have reflected upon the end of it

I have three rules for you to follow to get out of your trades:
1. Always use a dollar stop on all trades so in the event all else fall,. you will have protection.
2. Use my, "bailout" profit-taking technique developed with the help of Ralph Vince. The basic rule is to
exit on the first profitable opening if the profit is only one tick, take it.
This works best for the S&P; for slower moving markets I will delay the bailout a day or two to give
the market time to grow thus increasing my average profit per trade.
3. Exit and reverse if you get an opposite signal. If you are short and get a buy signal, don't wait for the
stop or
bailout exit, go with the most curent signal.
That is all I have to tell you about exits. Don't get greedy, let the rules, not your emotions, take care of your
trades.

157

Chapter 12

Thoughts on the Business of Speculation

Speculation is not bad, but bad speculation is a disaster.

It is one thing to correctly call the twists and turns of the markers. but that is not how long-term
wealth is created, nor is that talent sufficient. in and of itself, for a career in this business.
Career success does not mean you have ferreted out a winning trade or two. Anyone can do that at any
given time That is not a career that is either getting lucky or getting good. The business end of speculation
amounts to consistently. doing the right thing-not getting off track. down in the dumps over the current
losing trade or floating in the sky because you have had two winners in a row. I am much more interested in
the career aspect of this art than I am in the last trade or two. Anyone can drive a nail or two into a board, but
that is not what builds a house. To build a house you need not only the skills, but also a plan, the intentions
to follow and complete the plan and the ability to show up every day, rain or shine.

159

160

What Speculation Is All About
The art of speculation is about figuring out the most probable direction the future will take. The future is
seldom predictable to any precise level or event, yet all such investment predictions will entail three
elements: selection, timing, and management of the prediction. Mastering one of these aspects is not
adequate, you must understand and be proficient in all three of them, so let's take a look at each element.
There are two aspects of selection: one is selecting a market ready to move; the other is selecting so you
can focus. just because a market trades, don't expect your favorite commodity to suddenly have a rip-roaring
move that will enrich your bank account. A study of any charted history of any stock or commodity will
divulge an amazing secret that separates the wouldbe speculators from folks like you and me; price usually
moves sideways in meandering back-and-forth pattern, perhaps with a slight trend direction. There are only
three or four optimum times a year to take advantage of immediate and substantial changes in price. Go
ahead, check some charts, see and learn for yourself that big price changes do not occur every day. In fact,
they are less likely, rather than more likely, to take place ... they are the exception, not the rule.
That is why trade selection is so important. You don't want to get stuck in the mud of a choppy,
trendless market; it will wear you out or shake you out. In either event, you lose. If not money, time. It is
imperative, then, that you learn to know when a market has been set up and is ready to roar.
I have given you numerous setup considerations in this book that include TDM, TDW, holidays, and
intermarket correlations. There are others, such as the net long or short positions of the largest (and therefore
smartest) traders, the invariably wrong positions of the public, even major news events that alter market
activity. A successful speculator plays a waiting game. Most people can not wait, they would rather wager.
The sooner the better. Speculator kings and queens have the patience to put off taking action until the
tumblers have clicked into place, knowing profits are then more likely to prevail.
There is another reason selection can be paramount to profits. I have always done the best when I have
traded just one or two markets. By eliminating all the others, the distractions, I have been able to thoroughly,
learn how my selected markets operate, what moves them, and perhaps of even greater importance, what
does not move them. No great accomplishment has ever come about without focusing talent, intentions, and
action. This business is no different. The more focused you are on what you are doing, the more successful
you will become.
This thought fits well with the way business works. Heart specialists make more money than general
practitioners. In this day, and age of complexity, specialization has a large payoff. Years ago, I heard about a
wise trader who made millions in the stock market. He lived high in the Sierra Mountains and would call his

161
broker about three times a year always to buy or sell the same stock. His broker told me the man had
indeed amassed a fortune, all from this one stock, by using financial focus.

It's about Time
If you are now focused on a specific commodity that your new tools, techniques, and dreams say
should soon have a tradable move, it is still not time to rush in. Selection is about what should move;
timing, the next element of speculation, is about precisely when that should happen. Timing is about
narrowing down when price change should begin. Tools you can use here are simple trendlines, volatility
breakouts, patterns, and the like. The essence of timing is to let the market prove to you that it is ready to
explode in Your selected direction.
Just what does that mean? In case of wanting to go long, I can tell you this; a decline in price sure as
heck does not mean the upside explosion has begun. Au contraire! A price decline suggests further price
decline: it is that simple Newtonian idea that an object once set in motion continues to stay in motion.
Traders have a great conflict going at all times, we want to buy, thus conventional logic says to buy at the
cheapest possible price. Yet trend analysis says don't buy what is going down! My advice is to forget
buying cheap. Buy when the explosion has begun. Yes, you will miss catching the low, but that is far better
than having new lows in price catch you!

Trade Management
The third aspect of speculation has to deal with how you manage the trade itself as well as the
money you are committing to the trade. Traditional wisdom is that you should not trade with money you
cannot afford to lose. Maybe.
But consider this, if your mind-set is that this is play money, I assure you that you will play with it.
And probably lose. If it is real money-money you cannot afford to lose-the chances that you will pay close
attention are much greater, and so are your chances of winning. Necessity is not only the mother of
invention but also the control of speculation.
Trade management goes beyond money management as it relates to how long you will stay in the
trade and how much profit to take. It directly concerns itself with your emotions: this means not getting
carried away; it means not overtrading, not undertrading., it means doing the right thing and managing your
emotional state during the trade.

162
Knowing how to trade is not the same as knowing how to win at trading. The art of trading combines
selection and entry techniques with money management. That is the essence of what needs to be done, but
the superior trader understands that it is the management-the control or the use of these techniques-that
maximizes market profits.

Essential Points about Speculation
Rich People Don't Make Big Bets
Rich people, who are generally smart, have learned that you don't bet the farm on one spin of the wheel,
investment deal, or trade. Wannabe speculators are consumed with the notion that they will amass tons of
money very quickly by making a killing. They become the hapless victims, as in the process they have
become plungers. Yes, you can plunge once or twice in your life, but if you consistently plunge, you will
lose on one of these wagers, and since you are betting it all, you will lose it all. That is why rich people don't
make big bets.
They are far too shrewd to risk all they have on an investment, as they know investment decisions can
be random. In their wisdom, they know the future is somewhat unpredictable; hence they play the game that
way. Years ago, I was on the board of directors of a small bank in Montana and in that position reviewed
many loan requests. The business applications always included a pro forma, a projection of how the business
would do, and how the loan could be repaid.
I don't think I ever saw any pro forma of what should happen become a reality! They were always off
target, and as you might imagine, the reality of the business was not as prosperous as the pro forma would
have led one to believe. An old-time banker had a great saying, "Nothing good ever comes in certified mail
and pro formas are never right."
Rich people make more money by finding a good investment or two, and investing an optimal amount
in those investments. There is no need to take the risk of being wiped out in exchange for the thrill of
plunging; it simply is not worth it.

To Make a Thousand, You've Cot to Bet a Thousand
This is a favorite expression of pit bosses in Las Vegas and is a subset to the idea that rich people don't
bet big.

163
That's the favourite expression of Las Vegas pit bosses, and it's dead wrong.
Here's the right way to "make a thousand. "
There is not that much difference between gambling and speculation. The big compelling contrast is
that gamblers can never get a leg up on the game, the odds are against them all the time (unless they count
cards and play blackjack). It has always amazed me that in a game where the odds are against us, we flock
to the table to play.
Las Vegas stays open 24 hours a day for a simple reason; players won't quit and in any endeavour
where you have an advantage, especially a slight one, the longer you play the more certain you are of
winning. So they never stop. To casinos, the public is the bank account they tap every minute of every day
Weaknesses of the Pit Boss Adage. Pit bosses are supposed gurus of gambling knowledge; after all,
they have seen it all. But the advice that to make a thousand you need to bet a thousand is "house talk" that
will get you into serious trouble.
Last year, my daughter traded $10,000 to $110,000, while I took an account from $50,000 to over
$1,000,000. At no time did we make "a big bet." It was quite the contrary, our bet size was small, never
risking more than 20 percent of our stake and that was larger than it should have been or needed to be.
If you have an advantage in the game, as a speculator must before he decides to play, then play by the
real rule that has kept Las 'Vegas building all those extravagant Meccas of money; risk little and play
around the clock.
The problem with betting a thousand to make a thousand is you can lose that thousand just as quickly.
So why not seek out a strategy that makes a thousand by the natural growth of the game, not by the luck or
lack of it on the next trade. There is plenty of money to be made trading and the game is not going to get
shut down anytime soon, so learn to harvest your winnings over time, not on one roll of the dice.
In my 36 years of following the markets, I have seen more people lose fortunes than make them. The
losers-all of them---did the opposite of the winners, they bet big thinking they could make a killing on one
or two trades. The winners made their fortunes by consistently doing the right thing. When you step out to
make a killing, you are more likely to be killed than to survive.
Rich People Don't Make Big Bets. Really rich-and smart-people don't make big bets. First they are not
out to "prove" anything, they are out to make more money, and second, they know that risk control is as
important as the other two legs of speculation, selection and timing. That is all this business Of commodity
trading gets down to, selection, timing, and risk control.

164

Speculation Is for People Who Love Roller Coasters
Trust me on this. If you don't like the thrill and up-and-down gyrations of a roller coaster, put this
book down, ask for your money back and go on with your humdrum life. The life of a speculator is literally
one roller coaster ride after another; it is a series of ups and downs, highs and lows where hopefully the
lows are progressively higher, but the reality is often the lows are lower. Worse yet, so are the highs!
Although many are attracted to the life of speculation because of the thrill, they don't envision the ups
and downs, they think it will be a steady stream of Rolls Royce limousines and lollipops. It is not; it's a
steady stream of unknown, free-form verse that at times seemingly leads nowhere. In this business, thrill
kills.
You must, at heart, be a thrill seeker. But you cannot let that take over your trading style; indeed, if you
do not learn to corral or harness your thrill seeking nature, you will never make it as a speculator. That is
probably what makes this business so difficult; while it takes a thrill seeker to speculate, it takes a
risk-aversive person to make a career out of speculation. What you must have to succeed in this business,
you also must learn to regulate, to control. Clamp down on the roller coaster or it will jump the track. My
advice to be a long-term winner in the game of speculation is this; kill thrill.

If You Don't Have the Patience to Wait, There Will Be Nothing to Wait For
This is one of the elements of thrill you must learn to control. Thrill seekers, like you and me (I
include you because you didn't put this book down and are still reading), enjoy the rush we get from the
experience so much that we want it all the time; hence the neophyte speculator will trade, wager, at the drop
of a hat. Set up a proposition and he or she will plunk down her money, simply because win or lose, there's a
sure payoff-the rush.
The core problem new commodity traders have is what we call "overtrading." This comes about when
traders look more for an adrenaline high than for market profits. They find this by either (a) trading more
often than they should, or (b) trading more contracts than they should.
It is really a question of intensity: the more contracts you have on, the more thrill you will experience.
The more often you trade, the more often you will get an injection of endorphins pumping through your
brain. These, then, are your mortal enemies: too many trades or too many contracts. Rich people don't bet
big and they don't bet every day.

165
Patience dictates that you trade for a reason beyond the rush, beyond the swashbuckling images we
carry in our minds of what a speculator does and thinks. Frequency and intensity, in my world of
speculation, are not bigger and better. I want to be selective, to wait for the ideal time to take my very best
shot. This is certainly not a business of scattergun shooting; we are like hunters waiting in the bushes until
our game is in full view and about three feet away. Then and only then should we fire away!
Impatient traders literally use up all their ammunition, money, and emotions, so when it is time to
shoot, their guns are empty.

If You Can't Follow It, What Good Is a System or Strategy?
Technicians and the like are forever developing trading systems to beat the pants off the market.
They spend thousands of hours and dollars in pursuit of profits. That is good; I do the same thing almost
every day of my life in an attempt to seek greater understanding of the markets.
The difference is once they have arrived at their "master system" they take a trade or two and then
begin either tinkering with the system or overruling what it is telling them to do. Years ago, my long-time
friend Lin Eldridge put it best, "Why keep a system and do all that work if you're not going to follow it?"
Be honest with yourself. If you are not going to abide by the rules you create, why create the rules?
You should be spending your time doing something else. When it comes to speculation, rules are not made
to be broken unless you want to end up broke. The rules of speculation exist to tell the ideal time to get in
and out, but more importantly the rules exist to protect us from ourselves.
Maybe you think this is not your problem, that following a system is an easy thing to do. It isn't.
Last year in America almost 52,000 people were killed-about 1,000 a week-in car accidents because
they failed to obey one of two very simple rules, don't speed and/or don't drive if you have been drinking.
Those are easy rules, not complex, not chock-full of emotions like the rules of speculation. Yet families
went through major turmoil and grief due to those unexpected wrecks caused by not following a very
simple system. Should you choose to speculate in a swashbuckling fashion, trust me, the financial results
will be the same. There most assuredly will be carnage and ruin on your speculative highways.
The law of gravity always prevails and the law of gravity in our business must be obeyed.

166

Christmas Doesn't Come in December
Here is the real rub with this business of being a commodity trader or speculator; we never, ever,
know when we will make our money for the year.
Jewelry storeowners know they will make most of their money around the holidays or at Christmas.
That is true of most retail stores, they know when the money is going to roll in and can plan for that event.
We cannot. That's one reason why I have written books and published a newsletter, I wanted a sense
of some steady income in my life, plus it is profitable! I may make money hand over fist for 12 months
running or make nothing, in fact lose money, for the first 6 or 7 months of the year then hit the jackpot.
One never knows in this world of roller coasters what will happen.
That is why commodity fund managers take a flat percentage of the assets under management. That
way, they have steady income to offset their costs, despite the typical 20 percent of the profits they charge.
They, like anyone else, need to have a consistent income stream.
To my way of thinking, most of you should not quit your jobs and become traders. Your job, as bad as
it might be, is your security, your source of income, the guaranteed Christmas. Yes, I know you don't like
your job, but you know what? I don't like mine every day either. It is no piece of cake getting beat up in the
markets for 2 to 3 months. It is no joy to have a series of bad market calls in a newsletter where everyone can
see the errors of my way-errors my enemies love to magnify and my best friends chuckle over.
But, none of that matters. In my world, I know you don't have to like it, you just have to do it. That
means I must continue following a system, even while it is in a drawdown losing money, I must use stops
when I don't feel like it, and I must keep telling myself Christmas may be delayed this year. What is more, I
had better budget and plan my personal life accordingly; I must have enough cash to get me through an
extended Christmas drought. And finally, if I do get lucky and find Christmas comes this year in January or
February, I sure as heck can't expect it will be Christmas every day until December 25. There are no straight
paths to heaven, my account equity is not a straight-up line, it is a meandering backroad that encounters
plenty of peaks and valleys. That is why I never know when Christmas will come. I just know if I do the
right things, eventually Santa will find my chimney.
