
Nurture versus Nature

5

versus-nurture debate, Eckhardt was the unapologetic biological determinist, certain that his partner was a savant, an introverted genius with
special genetic talents.
Today, there are plenty of people who would still argue against Dennis, insisting that “biological determinism,” or the notion that genetics
predicts the physical and behavioral nature of an organism, can’t be
overcome.5 That’s bad news for a potentially successful trader or entrepreneur in any ﬁeld who doesn’t have the so-called pedigree or right
IQ score. The irony is that even though Dennis’s experiment proved
otherwise over twenty years ago, success in the markets is still perceived
by many as a virtual IQ caste system.
Skeptics of Dennis’s Turtle experiment have long rolled out barrages
of excuses about how serendipitous answering that little ad was. They
argue it would have been impossible for anyone, except insiders, to
have known that ad was the ticket to cracking Wall Street’s Top 100
paid traders (like Jerry Parker did). How could anyone know that an
ad could potentially bypass what Warren Buffett has affectionately
called “the ovarian lottery” and give a random group of people the
chance to make millions? It’s hard to accept that fact. It’s too much like
a Hollywood script.
It’s a Small World
Richard Dennis wanted a mishmash of personalities, similar to MTV’s
Real World and their diverse casting calls. He selected both far-rightwing conservatives and bleeding-heart liberals. A high school graduate
and an MBA were picked from the thousand-plus applicants who threw
their hats into the ring. The wild cross-section of his ﬁnal Turtle picks
demonstrated Dennis’s diversity desires.
There were college graduates from the State University of New York
at Buffalo (business), Miami University in Ohio (economics), the New
England Conservatory of Music (piano, music theory), Ferrum College in Virginia (accounting), Central Connecticut State University
(marketing), Brown University (geology), the University of Chicago
(Ph.D. in linguistics), Macalester College (history), and the United
States Air Force Academy.
Others Dennis students had recently held jobs at Cushman/Wake-

6

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

ﬁeld (security guard), Caterpillar Tractor (salesperson), Collins Commodities (broker), the Ground Round Restaurant (assistant manager),
A.G. Becker (phone clerk), Palomino Club (bartender), and Dungeons
and Dragons (board game designer). One student simply declared his
status as “unemployed.” Earlier job histories of those who made the ﬁnal cut were even more mundane: kitchen worker, teacher, prison
counselor, messenger, accounting assistant, and waiter.
Dennis selected one woman from the ad, a rarity in the 1980s “all
boys” world of Chicago trading. He also selected gay students, whether
he knew their orientation at the time or not. His picks ran the gamut
from mild-mannered, professional academics to regular-guy blue-collar
types, to some with wildly volatile personalities.
There were certain things Dennis was looking for. He wanted students who showed a willingness to take calculated risks. Those who
stood out from the herd in some kind of an unconventional way had a
leg up. This wasn’t a normal hiring process in the early 1980s, nor
would it be normal now. Today, MBA types, for example, are geared to
the intellectual rigors of running a company but are reluctant to get
their hands dirty. They are the ones who think IQ and connections are
all they need. They don’t want to do the hard work. They don’t want to
really take a risk.6
Dennis didn’t want those people. He was searching for people who
enjoyed playing games of chance. He was looking for people who could
think in terms of “odds.” Think like a Vegas “handicapper”? You were
more likely to get an interview. None of this was surprising to those
who knew Dennis. Reacting to opportunities that others never saw was
how he marched through life.
With a story like this, it’s not hard to imagine the legend that has
built up over the years. The experiment has inspired a cultlike reverence, often passed along by word of mouth. However, Charles Faulkner,
a modeler of great traders, was instantly struck by the deeper meaning
of Dennis’s experiment. He wondered how Dennis knew, saying, “I
would have sided with Bill’s skepticism. Even if . . . it was teachable, it
certainly should have taken more effort and a much longer time than
Dennis allowed for learning it. The experiment, and more signiﬁcantly
the results, violated all of my beliefs around effort and merit and reward. If something was that easy to learn, it shouldn’t pay so well and

Nurture versus Nature

7

vice versa. I marveled at the range of thinking, awareness, and inference, this implied.”
Dennis and Eckhardt taught their students everything they needed
in only two weeks to trade bonds, currencies, corn, oil, stocks, and all
other markets. Their students did not learn to trade from a screaming
mosh pit on the trading ﬂoor with wild hand signals, but rather in a
quiet ofﬁce with no televisions, computers and only a few phones.
Each student received $1 million to trade after his classroom instruction. They were to get 15 percent of the proﬁts, while Dennis got
85 percent. No surprise that he would get the lion’s share; it was, after
all, his money.
Dennis was honest about taking the majority of the proﬁts when he
said in November 1983, right before launching the experiment, that
there would be no charity involved. He viewed the experiment as a way
to diversify his portfolio. While he knew his “no experience necessary”
students could be wiped out, he viewed it all as a way to gain more
control of how his millions were being put to use, saying, “I’m tired of
investing in someone else’s condominium in Timbuktu.” 7
Replacing condo investment ideas with a group of surrogates was
a smart move. Many of his students went on to make 100 percent
or more per year over four years. That’s monster moneymaking. Even
more important than those successes from the early 1980s is the current
track record of three of the participants. Long after the experiment’s
ending, Eckhardt, along with two of Dennis’s former pupils, Jerry
Parker and Paul Rabar, manage in excess of $3 billion in 2007. They
still trade in a very similar fashion to how they did back in the day.
Beyond Turtles-related successes, there are hundreds of others, traders of big achievements, who owe a debt of gratitude to Dennis for
sharing his knowledge and experience. Additionally, men considered
to be trading peers of Dennis (not trained by him), men of similar
macro trading backgrounds such as Bruce Kovner, Louis Bacon, and
Paul Tudor Jones, are to this day regularly the highest paid on Wall
Street.
Of course, the $3 billion traded by Dennis’s trading progeny doesn’t
seem that large when headlines today scream out with stories of new
hedge funds launched with billions out of the gate. When Jon Wood,
formerly of UBS, started his new fund with more than $5 billion and

8

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

when Jack R. Meyer, the former investment manager of Harvard University’s assets, raised more than $6 billion for Convexity Capital, the
$3 billion from Dennis’s associates sounds less impressive.8
In fact, some argue that Dennis’s “lack of pedigree” approach has
been passed by. One recent story proﬁled a twenty-seven-year-old trader
from Goldman Sachs. A “well-bred” product of Massachusetts’s tony
Deerﬁeld Academy and Duke University, he was described as having
all of the ingredients of a grade-A trader. One of his peers gushed. “He’s
smart, competitive, and a hard worker. Keep your eye on this kid.” 9
That praise has to be put into perspective. If a trader starts a career
with a prominent investment bank, he becomes valuable by using
Goldman Sachs’s money, ofﬁces, and connections. The access he has
sitting in the catbird seat at a top bank is a major secret of his success.
Investment banks were simply never the career paths of the great
entrepreneurial traders. That is why Dennis brings hope. Independentminded rebel traders, like him, never got to where they were by moving
up bureaucratic ladders. They did not bide their time for twenty years
engaging in ofﬁce politics. Dennis and his peers were never part of a
Fortune 500 hierarchy. They had one objective: to make absolutereturn money trading the markets on their terms. It was high risk and
high reward.
Dennis’s Turtle experiment proved, all things being equal, that his
students could learn to trade to make millions. However, all things being equal, after they learned the “right” trading rules to make those
millions, if they did not exhibit, like Boston Red Sox slugger David
Ortiz does in baseball, a “walk-off home run” mentality every day, they
would fail. Great training alone was not enough to win for the long
run. In the end, a persistent drive for winning combined with a healthy
dose of courage would be mandatory for Dennis’s students’ long-term
survival.
Before getting into what really happened with the Turtles, who the
winners and losers were and why, it’s crucial to get acquainted with
what made Dennis tick in the ﬁrst place. Knowing how a regular guy
from the South Side of Chicago made $1 million by the age of twentyﬁve in the early 1970s and $200 million by the age of thirty-seven in
the early 1980s is the ﬁrst step toward understanding why nurture
won out.

2
Prince of the Pit
“Great investors conceptualize problems differently than other
investors. These investors don’t succeed by accessing better information; they succeed by using the information differently than
others.”
Michael J. Mauboussin,
chief investment strategist of Legg Mason Capital Management

Nineteen eighty-six was a huge year for Richard Dennis. He made
$80 million (about $147 million in 2007 dollars). That kind of moneymaking put him squarely at the center of Wall Street alongside
George Soros, who was making $100 million, and then junk bond
king Michael Milken of Drexel Burnham Lambert, who was pulling
in $80 million.1
Proﬁts like those for Dennis came with heartburn. He was down $10
million in a single day that year before bouncing back, a roller-coaster
ride that would have made mere mortals lose serious sleep. Yet Dennis
cockily said that he slept like a baby during all that volatility.2
His moneymaking style was about mammoth home runs and many
smaller strikeouts. If there was a “secret,” he knew that you had to be
able to accept losses both psychologically and physiologically. Still,
1986 was a long time ago, and memories dull when an old pro starts
talking about the beneﬁts of taking “losses.”
During his heyday in the 1970s, 1980s, and mid-1990s, Dennis was
described in a number of ways by those who knew of him. There was
Dennis the legendary ﬂoor trader, Dennis the trading system’s trading
guru, Dennis who started funds with investment bank Drexel Burnham, Dennis the philanthropist, Dennis the political activist, and Dennis the industry-leading money manager.3 He was a difﬁcult man to
stereotype, and he liked it that way.

10

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

“Dennis the gambler” was the only label that offended him, because
he never considered himself a gambler in the Las Vegas sense. He understood ﬁnancial Darwinism (read: “odds”) through and through. He
always played the “game” knowing that everyone else was out to beat
him. Financial futures pioneer Richard Sandor put Dennis in perspective: “The name of the game is survival when the markets are this chaotic. From that perspective, he may go down as one of the most
successful speculators in the 20th century.” 4
Dennis’s success started long before he launched the Turtle experiment. He grew up in Chicago during the 1950s, a street kid from the
old South Side neighborhoods. There was no privileged childhood
with wealthy parents and well-placed friends. He did not have a silver
spoon or the right connections.
The teenage Dennis was introverted and wore thick glasses and
polyester pants. His ﬁrst stab at trading, while attending the all-boys’
St. Laurence Prep School in Chicago, was to buy ten shares of a
$3 “phonograph” stock. The company folded. While his ﬁrst attempt
at trading failed, he was a natural at poker, intuitively understanding
the odds.
His teachers did not forget him. James Sherman, who taught theology and European history to Dennis, said that he never would take
anything at face value. Dennis and his friends enjoyed the mental
gymnastics of taking sides in an argument. Sherman added, “If somebody had said back then that Richard Dennis would become a
very wealthy man as a commodity trader, I probably wouldn’t have
believed them.” His former teacher would have predicted Dennis to
be in front of the ﬁre, with a sweater and a pipe, expounding on the
cosmos.5
At seventeen, Dennis landed a summer job as a runner ($1.60 an
hour) at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Each day the exchange
ﬂoor was mobbed by hundreds of traders ﬁghting and screaming to
place their trades. They were exactly like auctioneers buying and selling their wares except that they were in a trading pit battling it out.
An indoor game of tackle football would be a good description of the
scene.
Dennis longed to be there, but to trade on the ﬂoor you had to be
twenty-one. He found a way over that hurdle by talking his father into

Prince of the Pit

11

trading for him. A blue-collar worker for Chicago’s city government,
the father became a proxy guided by his son’s hand signals from the
sidelines.
Despite some trading success in his teens, Dennis headed off to
college at DePaul University, where his passion for philosophy (after
ﬂunking out of an accounting class) from high school days was rekindled. He was most taken with British philosophers David Hume
and John Locke, who had a relatively simple way of viewing the world.
“Prove it to me” was their basic perspective.
Hume thought the mind a blank slate (tabula rasa) on which experience could be written. He believed that since human beings live and
function in the world, they should try to observe how they do so. Discovering the causes of human belief was his key principle.6 Locke,
on the other hand, argued that there were no innate ideas. He asked
the question, “How is the mind furnished?” He wanted to know where
reason and knowledge came from. His answer was one word: “experience.”
Both Hume and Locke belonged to the school of thought known
as Empiricism. Empiricism is rooted in the notion that knowledge is
derived from experiment, observation, and experience. Little nuggets
of simple common sense from these two eighteenth-century British
philosophers connected with an impressionable college student. They
became his idols.
Dennis was not shy about his leanings, asserting, “I’m an empiricist,
through and through. David Hume and Bertrand Russell. I’m solidly
in the English tradition.” Dennis saw Hume as ruthlessly skeptical.
Hume took on the sacred cows of his generation, and Dennis loved
that attitude.7
It wasn’t only British philosophy that turned Dennis into a skeptic.
Growing up in the late 1960s and early 1970s gave him an antiestablishment view of the world. He witnessed protesters being beaten
by the Chicago police during the 1968 riots, right next to the venerable
Chicago Board of Trade. It was a turning point in his life:
Trading has taught me not to take the conventional wisdom for
granted. What money I made in trading is testimony to the fact
that the majority is wrong a lot of the time. The vast majority

12

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

is wrong even more of the time. I’ve learned that markets, which
are often just mad crowds, are often irrational; when emotionally
overwrought, they’re almost always wrong.8
After graduating from DePaul University he received a fellowship
to Tulane University graduate school, but promptly dropped out and
returned to Chicago within days to start trading full time. Dennis
bought a seat on the MidAmerican Commodity Exchange with money
borrowed from his parents (part of it from a life insurance policy in
his name). He still needed cash to trade, however. His initial war chest
of $100 came from his brother Tom’s earnings delivering pizzas.
This was not a family of market operators. Dennis was always honest
about his father’s “hatred” of the market, explaining, “My grandfather
had lost all his money in the stock market in the Depression. The urge
to speculate kind of skipped a generation.” He knew his father’s perspective would never work for him:
You can’t have a standard attitude about money and do well in
this business. What do I mean by that? Well, my father, for instance, worked for the city of Chicago for 30 years, and he once
had a job shoveling coal. So, just imagine coming from his frame
of reference, and thinking about losing $50 in a few seconds
trading commodities. To him, that means another eight hours
shoveling coal. That’s a standard attitude about money.9
It didn’t take long for his father to recognize Dennis’s unique abilities to make money. By the beginning of 1973, at twenty-four, Dennis
had made $100,000. Around that time he cockily preached to the
Chicago papers, “I just wanted to be able to get up and say, ‘I once
made $100,000 a year, and I still think you are an ass.’ That rhetoric
may not be wholesome motivation, but I do think it’s part of what
drives me.” 10 He was making so much money fast that whatever
the context or content of an interview, it was outdated in weeks or
even days.
A rebel at heart, Dennis cultivated being a character from the outset.
He was fond of saying that he never liked the idea of sharing a birthday

Prince of the Pit

13

with Richard Nixon—a gentle stab at all those conservative traders surrounding him in the pits on LaSalle Street. He was an anti-establishment
guy making a fortune leveraging the establishment, while wearing
jeans.
Society was splintered during the time Dennis earned his ﬁrst big
money. Nineteen seventy-four was a difﬁcult year in which to focus.
What with G. Gordon Liddy having been found guilty of Watergate
charges and the Symbionese Liberation Army kidnapping Patricia
Hearst, it was a wild time of constant turmoil. To top it off, Richard
Nixon became the ﬁrst President of the United States to resign from
ofﬁce.
Current events did not stop Dennis from leveraging a 1974 run-up
in the price of soybeans to a $500,000 proﬁt. By the end of the year, at
age twenty-ﬁve, he was a millionaire.11 Even though he downplayed his
success, he couldn’t hide it. When he showed up late one day to the
soybean pit explaining that his beat-up 1967 Chevy had broken down,
other traders gave him ﬂack, knowing full well he could afford a new
car hundreds of times over.
Not only was his persona different, his trading was different. Dennis
read Psychology Today (no government economic or crop reports for
him) to keep his emotions in check and to remind him of how overrated intuition was in trading. He took delight in boasting, in contrast
to most traders who got up early to read all they could from weather
reports to daily Department of Agriculture assessments, that he stayed
in bed until the last minute before getting to the exchange just as trading started.12
At one point during this time, Dennis was in the middle of an interview with a reporter as he went to the bank to make a deposit. He
was depositing a $325,000 check (in 1976, that represented two to
three weeks of work for him). Depositing an amount like that in the
mid-1970s was not normal. Dennis always got hassled when he tried
to deposit checks that size.13 He was oblivious to the fact that that the
teller was looking at a check that likely would exceed her total career
earnings. Yet Dennis, probably younger than she was, couldn’t sign his
name straight.14
As his notoriety continued to grow, national newspapers like the

14

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

Chicago Tribune, the New York Times, and Barron’s trumpeted his
youth and success. This was not standard operating procedure in a
tight-lipped world where the big Chicago traders typically kept silent.
Dennis enjoyed and even reveled in his upbringing and the unique
perspective it afforded him:
I grew up in an Irish-Catholic family on the South Side of Chicago. My institutional values were very strong, if somewhat confused. My holy trinity consisted of the Catholic Church, the
Democratic Party, and the Chicago White Sox. I would describe
my early value system as nourishing, if limited. When my father
took me to Hurley’s Tavern, I saw people falling off their bar
stools—about what you’d expect from people who called whiskey
“Irish pop.” 15
The Church, baseball, Democratic politics, and Irish drinking
weren’t only an inﬂuence on his youth:
How much of my holy trinity informs me as an adult? In the
White Sox I have a deep and abiding faith. In the Democratic
Party I have shallow and fading faith, which is almost never rewarded. In the church, well . . . I fear 16 years of Catholic education left me a skeptic.16
Look at that 1976 New York Times photo of the then twenty-sixyear-old multimillionaire, lounging on the couch with his dad seated
to his left, seemingly oblivious to the photographer, and it is easy to
see anti-establishment staring into the camera. The photo caption only
reinforced Dennis’s differences: “He drives an old, inexpensive car, he
dresses in cheap knits; his money tends to pile up, unused.”
However, all this press at such a young age left Dennis confronted
by something he probably wasn’t expecting: people with their hands
out, asking for money. “Most of them were very sad,” he recalled.
“One person said, ‘Help me to learn how to trade. I’m in debt.’ Some
people made it sound as if $5,000 or $10,000 were all they needed to
make them happy. Those were the only letters worth answering—to
explain that money won’t really make a difference.” 17

Prince of the Pit

15

Not many twenty-six-year-olds would have been mature enough to
handle the press using such folksy wisdom. Yet Dennis never let the
swirl around him interfere with what he was doing to make money.
Quite simply, his trading technique was to trade seasonal spreads. In
other words, he wanted to take advantage of seasonal patterns in markets like soybeans—his initial specialty. Dennis would hold “long”
(bets to proﬁt as the market increased) and “short” (bets to proﬁt as the
market decreased) positions in futures contracts simultaneously in the
same or related futures markets.
The MidAm Exchange Experience
Once he had his MidAm seat (formerly called the Chicago Open
Board), Dennis was off and running. Initially he had no clue what he
was doing, but he was a fast learner who learned to think like a casino
operator:
When I started out, I had a system called “having no idea whatsoever.” For four years, I was just taking edges. If someone was giving me a quarter cent edge to buy an Oat contract, I didn’t think
he knew anything either. I just knew that I was getting a quarter
cent edge, and at the end of the day, the edges would approximately equal my proﬁt. Obviously, on an individual basis that
doesn’t have to happen, but over a longer period of time, it will. I
tried to be like the house in the casino. It wasn’t that novel. People at the Board of Trade had been doing it forever. But for the
MidAm, it was kind of revolutionary because no one would understand that you could balance your risk with a lot of volume.
That’s how I started.18
Dennis went from zero to sixty on the MidAm in record time, and
no one knew how he learned to do what he was doing. He knew that
traders had a tendency to self-destruct. The battle with self was where
he focused his energies: “I think it’s far more important to know
what Freud thinks about death wishes than what Milton Friedman
thinks about deﬁcit spending.” 19 Go down to Wall Street today after
work with the hot-shot traders all earning $500,000 a year at the big
