
228

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 9.4 This graph shows a small amount of expansion, allowing you to see
about six weeks into the future.

FIGURE 9.5 This is a more extreme example of showing the future, since this
Fibonacci time series has its next data point decades away.

Expansion and Channels

229

this analysis is possible, even though the next line in the series is decades
in the future, in approximately 2043.
As a practical matter, it is useful to leave the chart permanently expanded, and although the amount of expansion is up to you, allocating approximately the rightmost 10 percent and the uppermost 5 percent of the
chart to a “price-free” chart area is usually enough. You will find it invaluable in being able to speculate on future price movement, particularly since
all the objects you have drawn (such as trendlines, Fibonacci studies, and
so forth) will project into the future. You can use those as guides to predict future support and resistance levels, and when combined with the data
line, you can pinpoint those predicted dates and prices.

PARALLEL LINES
In Chapter 8, you learned how to use and draw trendlines. The tool next
to the trendline tool, which is the channel tool (Figure 9.6), lets you draw
two parallel trendlines easily in order to bound price data in a channel
pattern.
Channel patterns are rarer than trendline patterns, simply because it is
much easier to find prices bouncing off a consistent support or resistance
level than it is to find prices bouncing within both support and resistance
in a parallel fashion. In the case of a supporting trendline, you will probably see prices touching the trendline below and not having any particular
pattern above it, and with a resisting trendline, you will see prices touching
the trendline above and not having any meaningful shape below. In other
words, trendlines bounce off either the upper or lower price action, and
otherwise the price action may be just noise.
With a channel, however, prices are confined within parallel trendlines.
Because this pattern is much more unusual, it is also much more meaningful. The prices are obeying more complex mechanics, and thus when prices
exit that channel in either direction, the move up or down will likely be
more potent. As always, the longer the pattern, the more meaningful the
breakout from the pattern, and a breakout from a channel is usually more
significant than a breakout from a single trendline.

FIGURE 9.6 The channel tool is represented by two small parallel trendlines.

230

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

Drawing a channel is very similar to drawing a trendline. You follow
these steps:
1. Click on the channel tool.
2. Click in the chart area where you want to begin your first trendline.
3. Drag the mouse to where you want this trendline to end and click once

more.
4. At this point, another parallel line will appear. As you move the mouse

up and down, this parallel line will follow your mouse movement.
5. Place the line at its destination and click the mouse button to complete

the drawing. You will now have a drawn channel.
As with the trendline, you can right-click on a drawn channel (Figure 9.7) to make use of other features, one of which is unique to the channel. Here is what each item from the menu does:
Move: Allows you to move the channel or change its angle. When you
select this, three handles appear: one at the start point of the first
trendline, another on the end point of the first trendline, and another on the end point of the second trendline. You can drag any
of these handles to change the angle of the channel (the full 360
degrees of a circle are available) or to adjust the distance of the
second trendline from the first.
Duplicate: This creates an identical channel (same size, angle, color)
near the first one, and this duplicate channel will have all three
handles preselected so you can immediately move it to the desired
location.

FIGURE 9.7 When you right-click on a channel, this popup menu appears.

Expansion and Channels

231

Change Style/Color: Brings up the same dialog box as was shown in
Figure 8.16, allowing you to change the color, opacity, weight, and
pattern of the channel. You can also preserve these settings so they
are used as the default for all future channel drawings.
Extend: As with the same option for trendlines, the Extend function
makes the trendlines (and the median line, if selected) extend infinitely into the future. This is especially useful if you are using an
expanded chart, as described earlier in this chapter.
Show Median Line: This option is unique to the channel tool. It creates
another parallel trendline exactly between the upper and lower
trendlines of the channel. There are instances (such as with Figure 9.4) in which not only the prices are bounded by a channel but
also tend to cling to the middle line between the upper and lower
trendlines. This can make for more insightful and precise analysis.
Delete: Choosing this deletes the selected channel. If you make a mistake, you can always undo your decision with the Undo command
(Ctrl-Z).
Delete All Drawings: Choosing this deletes all the drawn objects on the
current chart. If you make a mistake, you can always undo your
decision with the Undo command (Ctrl-Z).
Being able to spot channels on a chart can be challenging, because you
have to ascertain whether price action is intended to fit a uniform, parallel
pattern. Experimentation with drawings is the best approach when you
are learning, since there is no harm in creating and deleting channels if you
find that you were wrong. And if your drawing doesn’t quite conform to the
price action, you can also use the Move command to adjust the position of
the channel so prices line up within the boundaries.
The application of channels is very similar to that of trendlines. If you
are in a position, you should stay in that position so long as the prices stay
within the boundaries (Figure 9.8). And if you are not in a position, you
may want to wait until the price breaks above (bullish) or below (bearish) the channel before taking action. You should also keep in mind that
breakouts are more potent if they are contrary to the primary trend of the
channel. In other words, a breakout above a descending channel is especially bullish, and a breakdown below an ascending channel is especially
bearish, because in each case, the breakout is in opposition to the former
trend.
As mentioned before, channel patterns are unusual, but they do happen, and the longer they last, the more meaningful they are. Any price
trend will eventually change, so as a channel gets progressively old, the
likelihood of its staying within that channel diminishes, and the potency of
the move once it escapes that channel increases. As Figure 9.9 shows, it is

232

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 9.8 An open position can be held as long as the price action remains
bounded by the support and resistance levels.

FIGURE 9.9 Prices can remain within channels for many months, or even years.

Expansion and Channels

233

hazardous to try to anticipate the breakout from a channel until is actually
happens, since prices can stay within the confines of a channel for months
or even years.

BREAKDOWNS AND BREAKOUTS
When prices do finally leave their channels—and they always will,
eventually—those holding positions in those securities are wise to close
them out, and those looking for an entry point should examine the chart as
an opportunity. Figure 9.10 illustrates typical action after a channel is broken. In this instance, prices were trending slowly lower, making a series
of lower highs and lower lows. A person exploiting this channel may have
seized on opportunities to buy the stock when it was at the lower support
line and sell the stock short when it was at the upper resistance line. But as
the chart shows, the fourth time it touched the support line, it subsequently
broke it, and the downfall in price from there was fast and powerful.

FIGURE 9.10 This channel shows how swiftly prices fell after prices violated the
lower support line.

234

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 9.11 In a bullish move, prices pushed above support in this chart and
moved signiﬁcantly higher.

Prices can move out of a channel in either direction, of course. Figure 9.11 shows a channel made of two horizontal, parallel trendlines. This
also happens to be an inverted head and shoulders pattern, which you will
read about in Chapter 13. After prices moved above resistance, they swiftly
more than doubled, and a person purchasing this stock after the breakout
would have had a profit almost immediately after the trade since prices
never dipped beneath the former resistance line.
Channels appear in three different forms: ascending (a series of higher
highs and higher lows), descending (lower highs and lower lows), and horizontal (equal highs and equal lows). A stock breaking above its ascending channel or breaking below its descending channel isn’t usually a good
trade, because it is simply moving in the same direction at a faster rate. The
better trades are those where a reversal pattern takes place.
Figure 9.12, for example, shows a stock that was moving higher
within an ascending channel. When it finally broke beneath support late
in October, it lost about 20 percent of its value, and the stock was clearly
in a downtrend versus its prior uptrend.
Because channels are made of a trendline pair, the same guidelines can
apply. The idea of prices moving back toward the trendline after a breakout

Expansion and Channels

235

FIGURE 9.12 Channels do not have to be horizontal to be eﬀective. Breakouts
contrary to the prior trend are often the most potent.

is still true. For example, when prices break beneath a channel’s supporting line, they can move higher (in spite of the bearish signal) and touch
the line that used to represent support (Figure 9.13). It is also helpful, after a channel violation, to watch for the formation of new patterns, since
the channel by definition has become a pattern of the past. Looking at Figure 9.13 once again, the prices formed a clear topping pattern spanning
nearly a year once prices cut beneath support in October. In addition, you
can see prices moving from $36 to $46 even after this pattern failure, since
prices were clinging to the underside of the former support line before they
succumbed to the new pattern’s direction.
Another interesting thing about channels is that they often represent
temporary changes in trend. Figure 9.14 offers a real-life example. At the
beginning of the chart, the stock was moving down badly, descending from
$15 to $8.50 per share. Following this weakness, the stock began a countermove lasting nearly two years, and the prices nearly tripled. Once the
channel was broken, the descent in prices began anew. What’s particularly
interesting about this channel is that the channel itself was defined early

236

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 9.13 After prices fell below support, they gradually weakened over the
months ahead.

on: The price points established in the first few months of the channel accurately predicted the entire move. Had a trader made use of this channel,
he would have benefited from virtually the entirety of the price move, since
by and large the stock went up until it broke beneath the support line.
The very best channel-based trades are those where prices break out
in the direction opposite the channel. Figure 9.15 provides a fitting example. Prices had been moving steadily lower, bottoming at less than $2.50.
When prices more than doubled after that, they were up against the upper
resistance line. Once they broke above that line, however, the subsequent
move nearly quadrupled prices from that level. Although a person entering
this trade might begrudge the fact that they had already missed a 100 percent move (from $2.50 to $5.00), the fact is that until the prices are outside
the channel, there is no basis for that trade. There were many other occasions when the price was at resistance and could have broken out, but
it did not. Only until the reversal is confirmed with a breakout is there a
rational reason to place the trade.

Expansion and Channels

237

FIGURE 9.14 This channel was entered into when the stock was much weaker.
The channel represents a time of consistent strength.

FIGURE 9.15 Breaking above a descending channel usually precedes signiﬁcant
upward moves.

238

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 9.16 Other patterns may form within channels, which can oﬀer more
thorough insight into a stock’s future behavior.

Just because prices are bound by a channel does not mean that a channel is the only pattern that can take place during that timespan, especially if
a channel is somewhat lengthy. There are many instances where patterns
can appear within other patterns, and having an awareness of those can
yield fresh insight into the stock’s future behavior.
In Figure 9.16, the price of the Russell 2000 index moved within the
confines of a very large channel for many months. But inside the channel,
a series of different patterns appears: The three horizontal lines indicate
breakouts from smaller bullish patterns. By having an awareness of these
smaller patterns, you could look for repeated behavior. So not only would
you be aware of a broad-based uptrend, but you could make predictions
based on the smaller patterns—in this case, bullish patterns within a much
larger bullish pattern, which made the case especially strong for holding
onto this winning position.

SUMMARY
In this chapter and the prior one, you have studied line-based patterns: that
is, trendlines and channels. Understanding and using these are essential to

Expansion and Channels

239

good charting. But these straight-line patterns are relatively easy to find,
and there are many other kinds of patterns that are important to your
knowledge of technical analysis but may not be so obvious.
In the next chapter, we will begin this journey into more ambiguous
patterns by studying rounded tops and rounded bottoms. These are patterns which can help you predict reversals of a security from which you
can profit.

CHAPTER 10

Rounded Tops
and Saucers

wo of the most important events that occur repeatedly in technical
analysis are breakouts and reversals. A breakout is the act of a price
escaping from a relatively tight price range, either to the upside (a
breakout above resistance) or the downside (a failure below support). A
reversal is the act of a price changing directly either from (1) up to down
or (2) from down to up. What is going on in each case is the same—an
escape from a price range. The terminology differs only to state what has
happened prior to that escape.
Breakouts and reversals are crucial events to discern on a chart since
they can make you money, and two of the most common patterns found
on charts that relate to these events are rounded tops (at the peak of a
chart) and saucers (at the bottom). There are many terms used for this
phenomenon. A rounded top, as the name suggests, is price action at the
upper end of a chart, and it is sometimes called a distribution top or an
inverted saucer. A saucer, which is typically at the low end of a chart’s
recent price range, is also referred to as a rounded bottom, a basing pattern,
or a dish pattern.
Tops and bottoms are not always as clean and neat as saucers and
tops, so we will begin by examining the more fundamental price breakouts, which are the progenitors of saucers and tops. A breakout is the
escape from a price range bounded by a lower line (support) and an upper line (resistance). Figure 10.1 illustrates a breakout pattern in which the
price action had been around $7 to $9 for many months. When prices broke
above the resistance line in mid-June, the stock swiftly moved up several
hundred percent.

T

240

Rounded Tops and Saucers

241

FIGURE 10.1 This stock bounced between $7 and $9 for a year before ﬁnally
breaking above its resistance level. Notice the pullback to the former resistance level
after the breakout, after which the price soared.

A longer-term chart is provided by Owens Illinois (Figure 10.2), whose
stock was forming a base from 1992 through 1996. Traders sometimes refer
to this price action as hammering out a base, because there is a tug-of-war
happening between buyers and sellers as they try to establish a fair price
for the stock. This is a search for equilibrium or price discovery, since the
market is working at discovering what the proper price is for the security.

FIGURE 10.2 Owens Illinois (symbol OI) tripled after it broke above this breakout
pattern.

242

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

As this goes on—especially over a period of years, such as with this
example—the stock amasses a larger and larger group of owners of the
stock within a fairly narrow price range. Once external events finally push
prices out of this range, the momentum behind that push will be strong,
because so many holders will be in a winning position, eager to acquire
more shares.
The psychology behind a mass of buyers holding a security at a particular price is important, and in a way it is the very basis of technical analysis.
Generally speaking, traders prefer profits to losses. Owners of a security
whose price moves higher will feel increasingly positive about that stock
and will feel compelled to buy more, because their profits are increasing. If
there is a large mass of such buyers, this kind of buying can feed on itself.
A stock that has been trapped within a small price range for a long term
will have two important ingredients for a potential upside move: (1) a large
quantity of buyers within that price range, eager to add to their position
if the stock breaks out of the range, and (2) a strong support level at that
price range, which will create a firm floor for prices if an initial breakout
weakens. If a stock breaks above its price range and then starts sinking,
that same mass of owners of the stock is going to be reluctant to sell their
holdings as the price softens, which will cause the price to firm as sellers
dry up. This army of security owners within that price range is a potent
force, both for pushing the stock higher and for protecting the stock from
falling through the well-established price range.
An extraordinary example of the power of a long-term base is shown
with Newport Corporation in Figure 10.3. The stock hammered out a

FIGURE 10.3 Newport Corporation (symbol NEWP) exploded in both price and
volume in 2000, going up almost twentyfold in a very short time.

Rounded Tops and Saucers

243

gargantuan base over nearly two decades, from 1983 to 1999. When it finally
broke above $10, the ascent was fast and furious, with a nearly twentyfold
increase in value within just over a year. Notice also the gigantic increase
in volume during this time, which is illustrative of the ascent feeding on
itself. Having waited so many years for the stock to finally wake up and do
something, buyers were falling all over themselves to acquire more shares
once it finally did burst above its well-established resistance level.

PRICE PULLBACKS
One nice feature of breakouts is that they often give traders a second
chance to get in after the breakout. This temporary softening in prices after
the breakout is known as a pullback, and it is caused by a portion of the
owners of the stock anxious to bank their profits on their stock’s newfound
price activity.
Imagine a hypothetical group of 1,000 people, each of whom owns
shares in a company that has been trading between $10 and $12 for years.
If the stock finally breaks out and hits $15, you can understand the excitement of these owners, since they have been holding a do-nothing stock for
years and it is finally showing signs of life.
Although most of these owners may be patient enough to let their profits build, a subset of this group is going to want to get out of the stock
immediately and take their profits. The psychology behind this group is understandable, too—after all, their stock has done absolutely nothing, and
now it is giving them an opportunity to get out with some extra cash. So
some people—let’s say 100 of the group of 1,000—immediately place orders to sell the stock at the current market price.
This influx of selling is going to cause the price to soften, at least temporarily. It usually will head back to the upper end of its former trading
range, at which point selling will dry up since any newfound profits the
group enjoyed have now vanished, eliminating the compulsion to sell the
stock for a quick profit. This temporary softening of prices is the pullback,
and those people watching the stock chart closely can take advantage of
this by acquiring the stock at the prebreakout price. It is an especially attractive opportunity because the stock has, in a manner of speaking, tipped
its hand about its price direction since it has finally broken out of its price
range.
The stock of the company Potash, shown in Figure 10.4, broke above
the upper end of its price range and swiftly moved from $38 to $44. It then
started slipping back to $38, and for the first few months of 2004, the stock
bobbled between a miniature price zone of $38 to $44 before doubling in

244

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 10.4 Potash (symbol POT) more than doubled after this beautiful saucer
breakout.

