SELF-DISCIPLINE
Self-discipline is a word used to describe a process of learning how to take
145

conscious control of your actions. It is not a personality trait or something
you are born with. It is a specific thought methodology, a mental resource,
that allows you to change a belief or belief system when it is in conflict
with some goal or objective. Self-discipline is a more direct method of
effecting some change because you would be purposefully acting in a
manner that is in direct conflict with whatever you want to change.
So I would define self-discipline as willfully behaving outside of the
boundaries of some belief (dealing with the emotional discomfort your
actions will produce) to accomplish a certain goal or task that is inconsistent
with that belief. If you work outside of that belief long enough, it will
eventually de-energize. The rate at which the underlying belief will deenergize is really not a function of time but rather intensity. In other words,
the greater the intensity of our willingness and resolve, the faster the
conflicting belief will lose its power.
For example, let's say you want to quit smoking or lose weight. These are
conscious goals. Your beliefs (at least some of them) will be in conflict with
these goals. The belief system supporting the smoker definition will
probably have a great deal of power in your mental system. You can gauge
the power of these beliefs or any beliefs by paying attention to how much
discomfort and resistance you feel when you attempt to act (a conscious
decision) in a way that is inconsistent with them. It is very difficult thing to
do. It's as if beliefs take on a life of their own and demand expression both
in our thoughts and behavior.
You can change these or any other definitions of yourself. However, you
must first identify them and then determine how useful they are in helping
you get what you want. You could ask yourself, "Is this belief a resource or
obstacle to the successful fulfillment of my goal?" One way you can change
these definitions is to build a mental resource for the sole purpose of
changing beliefs that are not useful. I am going to call this mental resource
"self-discipline."
Here is an exercise that will help you learn specifically how to develop
and use self-discipline in your life. The purpose of this exercise is to help
you learn how to use your mind in different ways. You'll be training your
mind to stay positively focused on what you consciously want. You will also
learn how to gauge internal resistance from belief systems, and how to build
mental resources for taking conscious control of your life.
1. Make a list of several things you dislike doing, feel you can't do, or
would like to stop doing or some things you have never done before
and think you might enjoy You could start a jogging or exercise
program or take out the garbage on a regular basis, for example.
2. Once you have your list, look it over and pick a task that has a very
low priority in your life or one of the least important items.
3. Next, tell yourself in the most positive way that doing this new task you
have consciously decided upon is something you now want in your
146

life. Don't say you are going to try and do it. A commitment to try to
fulfill a goal is not strong enough.
4. Set up a rigid schedule for yourself to accomplish this new goal.
5. With each attempt to adhere to your schedule, keep track of your
thought process or stream of thoughts by writing them down. At this
point you might be saying to yourself, "How do I keep track of my
thought process?"
In the physical environment we are constantly being bombarded with all
sorts of information competing for our attention. We are aware of many
things going on around us simultaneously. In effect our consciousness is
split in many different directions at the same moment. Use a part of your
consciousness to pay attention to what is going on inside of your head. You
will be using a part of yourself to monitor your stream of thoughts as if they
didn't belong to you. If you can temporarily act as if you were monitoring
someone else's stream of thoughts, it may be much easier to gather the
information you need to make this exercise meaningful.
6. As you attempt to adhere to your schedule, do you find yourself
experiencing resistance, excuses, or rationalizations? If so, notice how
these thoughts divert your conscious attention away from your
goal. This is a classic example of a conflict between the conscious
goal you have set for yourself and your belief system that doesn't have
a belief or definition that corresponds with what you consciously
want to do.
7. At this point you need to redirect your attention to the task you
have chosen for yourself. What is most important is that you
understand the necessity of directing as much energy toward the
fulfillment of your goal as possible. You will have to generate more
power toward keeping your attention focused on your goal than the
amount of energy being directed through the beliefs that distract
your attention away from your goal.
However, there is one aspect to this exercise I must caution you about.
Redirecting your attention away from what distracts you to what you
consciously want, does not mean that you suppress or deny what may be
distracting you. Acceptance and acknowledgment of what exists within you
will allow you to work with it. Suppression and denial require a lot of
energy; this has the effect of supporting the beliefs you are trying to
suppress. Be gentle with yourself.
Each time you set out to accomplish your task, and do so, you create a
resource that helps you do it again. Each success will draw some energy
away from the beliefs that acted as obstacles. With each success you will
also be allocating energy to the new definition of yourself. This new
definition allows you to start the task each time with greater and greater
147

ease until the definition becomes a fundamental part of your mental
system. When that happens, your actions concerning this task will seem
automatic.
The most important aspect of this exercise is the experience you gain in
understanding the process of changing beliefs. Each time you set out to
change a belief or set of beliefs, you'll gain a resource that enables you to do
it again. Each success you experience will help develop another set of
beliefs that allow you to change more beliefs if and when it suits your
purposes. You will establish a new definition of yourself that says: "I
believe I can identify and change any belief about myself that may be in
conflict with my conscious goals." For this exercise to be effective, you must
keep a few rules in mind. First, start the exercise with a task or goal that is
truly insignificant and has little meaning in your life. The objective of the
exercise is learning how to manipulate your inner environment consciously
and direct your conscious focus of attention. The goal you decide upon as
the object of the exercise should not have a lot of value attached to the
outcome. If it does, that would be an indication you may be taking on some
very powerful and entrenched belief systems. This is something you
definitely want to avoid until you have developed the necessary skills and
resources.
Then, recognize that from the moment we are born, we are taught how to
manipulate the outer physical environment; however, you may not have the
resources to be even minimally effective at manipulating the mental
environment. As a result, it is extremely important that you do not judge
your ability to execute the schedule you set up according to the standards
of performance you expect of yourself in the physical environment. If you
expect too much and judge your ability harshly, it will only negate your
efforts and set up a fear and inadequacy cycle. The less you expect of
yourself, the faster you will progress. An expectation can easily become a
demand that it be fulfilled. Demands usually generate a certain amount of
fear that the demands will not be met. When you are working in the inner
environment, fear will always negate your positive efforts unless your
intent is to identify the source of your fear.
Finally, not having any expectations from your efforts to carry out your
plan will also have the secondary benefit of helping you to learn to accept
whatever you accomplish as being all right. Any step, no matter how small,
is a step. Just deciding you want to do this exercise is significant, even if
you don't follow through with it right away. You may come back to it some
day when you have more of a "sense" of the power you will acquire from the
ability to manipulate your inner environment consciously to be consistent
with your goals. So, to keep yourself from having any expectation about how
well you should do at this or any other exercise I offer you, I suggest you
consider yourself an infant in a brand new environment. You will have to learn
how to stand up before you can begin to walk or run.
148

SELF-HYPNOSIS
Self-hypnosis is a relaxation technique that allows one to bypass the reasoning
process of the conscious mind to make it easier to accept some message. So it is
an excellent technique for establishing new beliefs or collapsing old beliefs. For
those of you who are interested, I have a self-hypnosis tape specifically designed to
make it easier to learn how to cut your losses, reverse yourself, trust your
intuition, and value yourself more. For more information, you can contact me at
Trading Behavior Dynamics, Inc., in Chicago or through the publisher.
POSITIVE AFFIRMATIONS
When you are in a trade and start to experience anxiety about what is happening
in the market, you will likely take those anxious thoughts and start running
them through a negative loop—like thinking about money instead of the
structure of the market or what the market is doing to you. Eventually you will
run enough thought energy through your consciousness that it will cause you to
act in a way that is not in your best interests. A positive affirmation will work the
same way. Formulate a positive affirmation of some trait or characteristic of the
way in which you want to be. For example, you may want to become a more
patient person and wait for the market to give the signals to act. With an
affirmation like "I am becoming a more patient person every day," you will
eventually become that person. In other words we will behave in a manner that is
consistent with the affirmation, if we run enough thought energy through that
affirmation. Eventually, the affirmation becomes a belief with enough energy to
affect our behavior.
The following are affirmations that, once turned into beliefs, will be very
effective resources in helping you to work in your inner environment.
1. All beliefs are about reality, and are not necessarily predominate
characteristics of reality. I will examine and question my beliefs in
relationship to their usefulness in achieving my goals.
2. I believe in the power of my conscious mind to make available to me
all the information I need to know.
3. I have the power to change any belief in a way that would make it
more useful in achieving my goals of happiness, harmony,
financial wealth, and being more productive.
4. I believe I am free to change the way I feel about any past
experience.
5. I believe I have the ability to examine the contents of my mind.
6. I trust that all my beliefs about the way I trade will become known to
me.
7. I place no particular importance on these beliefs about trading other
149

than the fact that they exist.
8. I have chosen these beliefs at certain points in my life and accepted
them as true at the time. As I examine them, I realize that they may
not be particularly useful or true for me now. I accept this and I feel
free to change all those beliefs that are inconsistent with my current
goals.
9. My first and immediate goal is to identify all my beliefs that may be
in conflict with my long-term objectives of_______________.
10. I trust myself to become consciously aware of these beliefs in many
different ways. Once I become aware of these beliefs, I can just as
easily let them go to make space for new beliefs that are more
consistent with my current goals.
11. I believe that changing and expanding my awareness and comfort
zones are a necessary aspect of my growth and survival, and I
welcome these opportunities to identify old beliefs and consequently
grow and expand.
12. I feel an intense desire to succeed and achieve my goal of ___________.
Consequently I have an intense desire to clear my inner path of any
resistance or obstructions that stand in the way of the fulfillment of my
goal.

150

PART IV

How to Become a
Disciplined Trader

151

CHAPTER 15

The Psychology of
Price Movement

My objective for this chapter is to break down and analyze the dynamics
and psychology of price movement, first, at its most fundamental level, that
of the individual trader; then I will broaden the explanation by examining
the behavior of traders collectively as a group. I want to demonstrate that, if
you understand the psychological forces inherent within traders' actions,
you can easily determine what they believe about the future by just
observing what they do. Once you know what traders believe about the
future, it's not that difficult to anticipate what they are likely to do next,
under certain circumstances and conditions.
What is really important about this insight is that it will help you to
understand the distinctions between wishful thinking and the actual
potential that exists for the market to move in any given direction. You will
be learning to let the market tell you what to do by understanding the
forces behind its behavior and then learning to differentiate between pure,
uncontaminated market information and how that information is distorted
once it starts doing something to you.
The most fundamental component of the markets is traders. Keep in mind
that traders are the only force that can act on prices to make them move.
Everything else is secondary. What makes a market? Two traders willing to
trade, one wanting to buy and one wanting to sell, who agree on a price and
then make a trade.
What does the last posted price represent? The last posted price is what
someone was willing to pay and what someone was willing to sell for at the
moment the two traders agreed on the trade. It reflects an agreement in
152

present value between those traders acting at that price.
What is the bid? A trader announcing the price at which he is willing to
buy. What is the offer? A trader announcing the price at which he is willing
to sell. How do traders make money? There are only two ways to play this
game to make money. To buy at a price you believe is low relative to
where you can sell it back at some future point in time. Or to sell at a price
you believe is high relative to where you can buy it back at some future
point in time.
Now, let's take a look inside the pit to see what has to happen for prices
to move off equilibrium and how this will tell us what traders believe.
98-18

The offer, sellers attempting to sell high.

98-17

Equilibrium, the last price.

98-16

The bid, buyers attempting to buy low.

Since the only object to trading is to make money we can assume that a
trader will not knowingly enter into a trade believing he is going to lose.
And for a trade to exist requires two traders who agree on a price. However,
from the moment two traders agree to the trade, they are both subjecting
themselves to market risk. In other words, the next tick is going to make
one of them a winner and the other a loser. Since we know that both
traders want to win and neither trader wants to lose, we can assume that
both traders have completely opposite beliefs about the future value of the
contract. So for two traders to agree on a price and make a trade, they have
to have diametrically opposing beliefs about the future. The buyer believes
he is buying low relative to where he can sell back at some point in the
future, and the seller believes he is selling high relative to where he can buy
back at some point in the future.
If the next tick is going to make one of them a winner and one a loser,
we can assume that neither one of them believes he is going to be that loser.
If the seller believed the next tick was going to be up, why wouldn't he have
waited to sell it higher? The same is true for the buyer. That is the object of
the game and the only way to make money. Basically what we have is a
situation where two opposing forces are clashing; both believe they are right
about the future, and only one side can profit at the direct expense of the
other.
If the last price of a bond future was 99-14, what has to happen for the
price to move to 99-15? Very simply, some trader has to be willing to bid
and pay higher than the last price. This means that relative to the last
posted price, he has to be willing to do the opposite of buying low. Any
trader or group of traders willing to buy high or sell low relative to the last
posted price is very significant for several reasons.
First, a trader willing to buy high or sell low instead of buy low or sell
high has to have a stronger conviction in his belief in the future value, even
if his conviction is out of panic. Second, he is making the last price a bottom.
153

Third, he is aggressively taking the initiative and is making losers out of
everyone who sold at the last price and deepened the losses of those who
sold lower. Fourth, he is creating price movement that can possibly gather
momentum if other traders perceive the new price as low relative to the
future. This will also be true for the trader who is paying up to liquidate a
position. On the other hand, the seller on the other side of his trade is
being lured into the market by the attractiveness of the high price at which
he can sell. He believes he is getting the edge. He is in fact selling high, but
he is not creating movement or much of a possibility for momentum in his
direction. He is picking a top and waiting for something to happen, hoping
it won't go any higher.
Now, what do the actions of the two traders represent about the market
in its collective form? First, this trade tells us that nobody had a strong
enough belief in the future value to risk selling it to him at the last price or
lower. Second, nobody was aggressive enough to want to enter the market
short or liquidate an existing long position by offering to sell it at the last
price or lower. A consummated trade at the next higher level creates a new
equilibrium. This new equilibrium makes winners out of all the buyers at
the last level and losers of all the sellers at the last level.
All of the losers at the last price level or lower would have to maintain a
belief in the future value to stay in their position or demonstrate a
conviction in this future value by adding on to their positions. This is
because each new level the price is bid up makes it that much more
attractive to them. If they believed it was high at lower levels, at each higher
level, it's even a better trade. However, at the same time, each move the
market makes against their position invalidates the sellers' expectation of
future value. Each move clearly demonstrates that the sellers are passive,
that the buyers are the aggressors, and that the buyers have a greater
potential to move the market in their direction.
The fact that buyers are aggressively bidding up the price and paying
more and more again tells the observer something. It tells him there aren't
enough sellers to meet the buyers' demand for a trade at each new price
level. If there is a limited supply of sellers, those traders wanting to buy
will have to compete among one another for the limited number of sellers
available willing to take the other side of the trade.
Just observing this price action tells you that at the present moment, the
momentum is in favor of the buyers. Prices would not be bid up unless
there were fewer sellers in relation to the buyers. If traders continue to pay
more and more, the price gets further away from old sellers. Eventually
their belief in future value will erode, and one by one the sellers will join
the existing pool of buyers competing against one another for the fewer and
fewer traders willing to sell. As long as the ratio between buyers and sellers
remains as I have just described, there is very little potential for downward
price momentum to be established.
Now what will start to tip the balance to cause the market to fall back?
154

For one thing, old buyers will eventually take profits. When they do, they
will be joining the existing pool of sellers, thereby increasing the number of
traders available to sell. If a move gathers enough steam, it can become
similar to a frenzied shark feeding. Eventually, prices will be driven way out
of line with some economic factors other traders perceive as relevant
compelling them to enter the market in the opposite direction. If these new
traders enter with enough force, it will likely cause old buyers to panic
adding to the downward momentum.
Maybe you can visualize this back and forth action. When there are more
sellers than there are buyers to take the other side of the trade, the balance
will be tipped. Sellers will then aggressively offer to sell lower than the last
price, responding to what they perceive as a limited number of buyers to
take the other side of the trade.
All price movement is a function of group behavior. The market prices
flow back and forth like a tug of war between those who believe and
expect the market to go up—and consequently buy— and those that
believe the market will go lower—and consequently sell.
If there is no balance between the two forces, one side will gain
dominance over the other. As prices move farther and farther away from
the weak group, the emotional pain of admitting they are wrong will be in
direct conflict with their need to avoid losses. Eventually, one by one they
will lose faith in their position and liquidate their trade, adding to the
momentum of the dominant force.
The prevailing force will continue to dominate until there is a general
perception that prices have gone too far and are out of line with other
related factors. The members of the dominant force will have to switch
sides to liquidate their positions, creating momentum in the opposite
direction.
As individuals, if we do not have the strength actually to move prices in
the direction we would most benefit from, then the next best thing is to
learn to identify and align ourselves with the side that has established
dominance until the balance shifts and again align ourselves with the side
establishing the strength.
As prices move back and forth in this tug of war, it creates an ebb and
flow that is easily identifiable in price charts or point and figure charts.
These charts will show us in graphic terms how the forces interact and
counteract. They are a visual representation of traders' beliefs in the future
and the intensity in which they have been willing to act on those beliefs.
If, for example, a market has been making consistently higher highs and
higher lows, to determine what is likely to happen next, ask yourself the
following questions:
1. What kind of price action will sustain the buyers' beliefs that they can
