
157

158 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
News trading
News trading is possibly the most traditional form of day trading. This type
of trader doesn’t pay much attention to charts. Instead, he waits for information that will drive prices. This information may come in the form of a company announcement about earnings or new products; a general economic
announcement about interest rates or unemployment; or just a lot of rumors
about what may or may not be happening in a given industry.
Traders who do well with news trading usually have some understanding of
the markets they’re working in. They’re not hard-core fundamental researchers, but they know enough to know what kind of news would be taken well
by the markets and what would be taken poorly. They also have the attention
span needed to pay attention to a few different news sources simultaneously,
as well as the ability to place the order when the time comes.
The downside of news trading is that really good events may be few and far
between; more often, the hype is already built into the price by the time you
see it. Also, news trading is difficult to automate, although more and more
computer programs draw signals from news and social-media feeds. You can’t
place a limit order to buy when a price level is hit; you have to wait until you
see the news and then place the order yourself. Thus, news trading works
well only for traders who can commit to placing the order.

Pairs trading
A pairs trader looks for two related assets and goes long on the stronger
one and short on the weaker. Many pairs traders work with stocks and look
for two companies in the same industry, but a pairs strategy can be worked
in futures and currency markets, too — going long on metals and short on
interest-rate futures, for example, or long on the dollar and short on the euro.
The idea is to get the maximum return possible from a trend that affects both
assets. For example, if one retail stock does really well, it may be because the
company is taking market share from a weaker one. These trades are a little
more complex because you have to plan both sides.

Developing a Program
Most modern day traders find that they need to program their trades. By this,
I mean that they need to determine what they are trading, identify the signals
they use to buy and sell securities, and set their trading platform to execute
the orders automatically. Instead of working on your reflexes, you do the
work of planning and testing.

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
Of course, a program is only as good as its inputs, and even the biggest of the
big trading firms have had huge losses because of trading glitches.
You don’t need to be a software engineer to develop trading programs. Many
of the charting services offer program templates that you can follow or
adapt; the brokerage firms that work with day traders offer trading platforms
that can be programmed without too much effort, usually by clicking on
icons or inserting widgets of prewritten code.
How do you get started?
✓ If you already know a programming language, look for a broker or
trading platform that uses it.
✓ If you don’t know a programming language, expect to spend a lot of time
and trial and error learning it. The broker probably has online tutorials; spend time with them. If you’re stuck on something, ask the broker’s customer service rep for help and look for additional tutorials on
YouTube.
✓ Write out your process step by step with a pen on paper before you
attempt to convert it to code.
✓ Buy a book or take a class if you need more help.
And if the very idea of programming gives you the heebie-jeebies, consider
another way to make money!

159

160 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies

Chapter 9

Increasing Risk and Potential
Return with Short Selling and
Leverage
In This Chapter
▶ Making money with other people’s money
▶ Garnering tall profits from short sales
▶ Using leverage in every market you can imagine
▶ Borrowing for business and personal needs
▶ Considering the consequences of leverage

I

n a certain sense, day trading isn’t risky at all. Day traders close out their
positions overnight to minimize the possibility of something going wrong
while the trader isn’t paying attention. Each trade is based on finding a small
price change in the market over a short period of time, so nothing is likely
to change dramatically. But here’s the thing: Trading this way leads to small
returns. Trading full time is hard to justify if you aren’t making a lot of money
when you do it, no matter how low your risk is.
And some days, there aren’t many good trades to make. You may be looking
for securities to go up, but they don’t. Zero trades lead to zero risk — and
zero return. For this reason, savvy traders think about other ways to make
money on their trades, even when doing so involves taking on more risk. That
risk is what generates the return that many traders crave.
In this chapter, I cover two techniques for finding trades and increasing
returns: short selling and leverage. Both involve borrowing, and both
increase risk.

162 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
The Magic of Margin
The dollars you make from trading depend on two things: your percentage
return on your trades and the dollars you have to start out with. If you double
your money but have only a $1,000 account, you’re left with $2,000. If you get
a 10 percent return but have a $1,000,000 account, you make $100,000. Which
would you rather have? (Yes, I know, you’d rather double your money with
the $1,000,000 account. But I didn’t give you that choice, alas.)
The point is that the more money you have to trade, the more dollars you can
generate, even if the return on the trade itself is small. If you have $500,000
and borrow $500,000 more, then your 10 percent return gives you $100,000
to take home, not $50,000. You’ve doubled the dollars returned to you
by doubling the money you used to place the trades, not by doubling the
performance of the trade itself. Clever, huh?
Here are two important things to remember about borrowing, which is known
in trading as leverage:
✓ Leverage gives you more money to trade, which helps you generate
more dollars for your account — or lose more dollars, if you aren’t
careful or have a string of reversals.
✓ When you borrow money or shares of stock, you have to pay it back, no
matter what happens. That’s why borrowing can be risky.
Day traders and other short-term traders aren’t looking to make big money
on any single trade. Instead, the goal is to make small money on a whole
bunch of trades. Unfortunately, all those little trades don’t easily add up to
something big. That’s why many day traders turn to leverage. They either
borrow money or stock from their brokerage firm or they trade securities
that have built-in leverage, such as futures and foreign exchange.

Making margin agreements
Leverage not only adds risk to your own account but also adds risk to the
entire financial system. If everyone borrowed money and then some big
market catastrophe happened, no one would be able to repay their loans, and
the people who lent the money would go bust, too.
As a result, an incredible amount of oversight goes with leverage strategies.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, the different exchanges, and even the U.S. Treasury Department
regulate how much money a trader can borrow. Many brokerage firms have

Chapter 9: Increasing Risk and Potential Return with Short Selling
even stricter rules in place as part of their risk management, and they’re
expected to demonstrate to FINRA and the National Futures Association that
they follow their practices.
This extensive oversight means that you have about as much flexibility when
you borrow from your broker to buy and sell securities as you would have
if you borrowed from your friendly neighborhood loan shark to play a highstakes poker game. In other words, not much. Margin loans, which are loans
from your broker that increase your buying power, are highly regulated, and
you must meet the broker’s terms. If you fail to repay the loan, your positions
will be sold from underneath you. If you try to borrow too much, you will be
cut off. No amount of begging and pleading will help you.
Your brokerage firm makes you sign a margin agreement, which says that you
understand the risks and limits of your activities. You probably can’t have a
margin account unless you meet a minimum account size, maybe $10,000 or
more, and the amount you can borrow depends on the size of your account.
Generally, a stock or bond account must hold 50 percent of the purchase
price of securities when you borrow the money. The price of those securities
can go down, but if they go down so much that the account ends up holding
only 25 percent of the value of the loan, you get a margin call. (Some brokers
call in loans faster than others; their policies are disclosed in their margin
agreements.)
Brokerage firms handle margin trades all the time. You do the paperwork
once, when you sign a margin agreement. Then each time you place an order,
you’re asked whether you’re making the trade with cash or on margin. Click
the box marked “Margin,” and you’ve just borrowed money. It’s that easy.

Understanding the costs and fees
of margin
Every brokerage firm charges interest on margin. The stated number is
usually an annualized rate; if the rate given is 8 percent, for example, then
you’d owe that much if your loan was outstanding for the entire year.
(Some investors have margin loans in place that long.) A day trader, whose
loan may only be outstanding for a few hours, probably has to pay interest,
too. Some brokerage firms charge by the day; others may charge interest
over three days because it takes three days for a trade to settle.
On top of margin interest, some firms charge a higher commission on margin
trades than for cash trades. They justify this policy with the higher levels of
paperwork and risk management required on margin accounts. Some firms

163

164 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
go with the higher commission rather than charge interest on intraday loans.
Your trading life will be easier if you find out your firm’s policies and fees
before you open a margin account.
If you trade derivatives, margin works differently. The contract itself is
leveraged, so you aren’t charged interest. You have to settle your profits
and losses at the end of the day, however (don’t worry; the exchange’s
clearinghouse does it for you). You can’t use the money held as margin for
other trades.

Managing margin calls
If the value of your account starts falling and it looks like it’s falling below
the 25 percent maintenance margin limit, you get a margin call, in which your
broker calls you and asks you to deposit more money in your account. If you
can’t make the necessary deposit, the broker starts selling your securities
to close out the loan. And if you don’t have enough to pay off the loan, the
broker closes your account and puts a lien, which is a claim on your assets,
against you.
Most brokerage firms have risk-management limits in place, so you’ll
probably get plenty of warning before you get a margin call or see your
account closed out. After all, neither you nor your brokerage firm wants
to lose money. Just keep in mind that a margin call is a possibility. If your
account falls to the maintenance level, ask yourself, as objectively as you
can, whether your idea is still good or whether you’re just wishing and
hoping that it is.
At least one brokerage firm advertises that, as a service to you, it will close
out your account as soon as you lose the amount in it in order to keep you
from losing more money. This service helps the brokerage firm as much as it
helps you, because it keeps the firm from dealing with the hassles of chasing
down additional margin. This is one example of the built-in risk management
policies that firms use to limit risks to everyone.

Enjoying margin bargains for day traders
Day traders are often able to avoid margin calls because they borrow money
for such short periods of time. Good day traders look for small market moves
and cut their losses early, which minimizes the risk of using other people’s
money. And by definition, day traders close out their positions every night.

Chapter 9: Increasing Risk and Potential Return with Short Selling
If you qualify as a pattern day trader, you get two benefits. First, your brokerage
firm probably won’t charge you any interest as long as you don’t hold a margin
loan balance overnight. Second, you may be allowed to borrow more than
50 percent of the purchase price of securities. Some firms allow pattern day
traders to borrow 75 percent or more of their trade value.
The Financial Industries Regulatory Association defines a pattern day trader as
one with a margin account holding at least $25,000. This trader must also buy
then sell, or sell short then buy, the same security on the same day four or more
times in five business days. The number of day trades should be more than
6 percent of the customer’s total trading activity for that same five-day period.

The Switch-Up of Short Selling
Traditionally, investors and traders want to buy low and sell high. They buy a
position in a security and then wait for the price to go up. This strategy isn’t a
bad way to make money, especially because, if the country’s economy continues
to grow even a little bit, businesses are going to grow and so are their stocks.
But even in a good economy, some securities go down. The company may
be mismanaged, it may sell a product that’s out of favor, or maybe it’s just
having a string of bad days. For that matter, maybe it went up a little too
much in price, and investors are now coming to their senses. In these situations, you can’t make money buying low and selling high. Instead, you need a
way to reverse the situation.
The solution? Selling short. In short — hah! — selling short means that you
borrow a security and sell it in hopes of repaying the loan of the shares by
buying back cheaper shares later on.
In trading lingo, when you own something, you are considered to be long.
When you sell it, especially if you do not already own it, you are considered to
be short. You don’t have to be long before you go short.

Selling short
Most brokerage firms make selling short easy. You simply place an order to
sell the stock, and the broker asks whether you’re selling shares that you
own or selling short. After you place the order, the brokerage firm goes about
borrowing shares for you to sell. It loans the shares to your account and
executes the sell order.

165

166 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
You can’t sell short unless the brokerage firm is able to borrow the shares.
Sometimes so many people have sold a stock short that no shares are left to
borrow. In that case, you have to find another stock or another strategy.
When the shares are sold, you wait until the security goes down in price, and
then you buy the shares in the market at a bargain. You then return these
purchased shares to the broker to pay the loan, and you keep the difference
between where you sold and where you bought — less interest, of course.
The stock exchanges are in the business of helping companies raise money, so
they have rules in place to help maintain an upward bias in the stock market.
These rules can work against the short seller. The key regulation is what’s
called the uptick rule, which means you can only sell a stock short when the
last trade was a move up. You can’t short a stock that’s moving down.
Figure 9-1 shows how short selling works. The trader borrows 400 shares selling at $25 each and then sells them. If the stock goes down, she can buy back
the shares at the lower price, making a tidy profit. If the stock stays flat, she
loses money because the broker will charge her interest based on the value
of the shares she borrowed. And if the stock price goes up, she not only loses
money on the interest expense but also is out on her investment.

The trader borrows 400 shares of SuperCorp shares to sell. The shares are trading at $25 each. She sells them for $10,000.

Figure 9-1: The brokerage firm charges 10% interest.
Looking at Beginning Shares
Proceeds
Repurchase
Price
short selling Price Borrowed from Sale
400
$ 10,000
$ 40
in the equi- $ 25
$ 25
400
$ 10,000
$ 25
ties market. $ 25
400
$ 10,000
$ 15

Repurchase
Cost

Loan Value

$ (16,000)
$ (10,000)
$ (6,000)

$ 10,000
$ 10,000
$ 10,000

Net Profit

Interest
Expense

Rate of
Return

% Change
in Stock
Price

$ (6,000)
$
$ 4,000

$ 1,000
$ 1,000
$ 1,000

-70%
-10%
30%

60%
0%
-40%

The interest and fees that the broker charges traders who borrow stock
accrue to the broker, not to the person who actually owns the stock. In fact,
the stock’s owner will probably never know that his shares were loaned out.

Choosing shorts
Investors — those people who do careful research and expect to be in their
positions for months or even years — look for companies that have inflated
expectations and are possibly fraudulent. Investors who work the short side
of the market spend hours doing careful accounting research, looking for
companies that are likely to go down in price some day.
Day traders don’t care about accounting. They don’t have the time to wait for a
short to work out. Instead, they look for stocks that go down in price for more

Chapter 9: Increasing Risk and Potential Return with Short Selling
mundane reasons, like more sellers than buyers in the next ten minutes. Most
day traders who sell short simply reverse their long strategy. For example,
some day traders like to buy stocks that have gone down for three days in a
row, figuring that they’ll go up on the fourth day. They’ll also short stocks that
have gone up three days in a row, figuring that they’ll go down on the fourth
day. You don’t need a CPA to do that!
Trading strategies are covered in more detail in Chapters 7 and 8, if you are
looking for some ideas.

Losing your shorts?
Shorting stocks carries certain risks because a short sale is a bet on things
going wrong. Because, in theory, there’s no limit on how much a stock can go
up, there’s no limit on how much money a short seller can lose. Two traps
in particular can get a short seller. The first is a short squeeze due to good
news; the second is a concerted effort to hurt traders who are short.

Squeeze my shorts
With a short squeeze, a company that has been popular with a lot of short
sellers has some good news that drives the stock price up. Or, maybe some
other buyers simply drive up the price in order to force the shorts to sell,
which is a common form of market manipulation. When the price goes up,
short sellers lose money, and some may even have margin problems. And the
original reason for going short may be proven to be wrong. Those who are
short start buying the stock back to reduce their losses, but their increased
demand drives the stock price even higher, causing even bigger losses for
people who are still short. Ouch!

Calling back the stock
All is not sweetness and light in the world of short selling. Many market
participants distrust those folks who are doing all the careful research, in
part because they are often right. Company executives are often optimists
who don’t like to hear bad news, and they blame short sellers for all that
is wrong with their stock price. Meanwhile, some short sellers have been
known to get impatient and start spreading ugly rumors if their sale isn’t
making money.
Many companies, brokers, and investors hate short sellers and try tactics to
bust them. Sometimes they issue good news or spread rumors of good news
to create a squeeze. Other times, they collectively ask holders of the stock to
request that their brokerage firm not loan out their shares, which means that
those who shorted the stock have to buy back and return the shares even if
doing so makes no sense.

167

168 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Leveraging All Kinds of Accounts
Leverage is the use of borrowed money to increase returns. Day traders use
leverage a lot to get bigger returns from relatively small price changes in the
underlying securities. And as long as they consistently close their positions
out at the end of the day, day traders can borrow more money and pay less
interest than people who hold securities for a longer term.
The process of borrowing works differently in different markets. In the stock
and bond markets, it’s straightforward: When you place the order, you just
tell your broker you’re borrowing. In the options and futures markets, the
contracts you buy and sell have leverage built in to them. Although you don’t
borrow money outright, you can control a lot of value in your account for
relatively little money down. The following sections go into more detail on
these points.

In stock and bond markets
Leverage is straightforward for buyers of stocks and bonds: You simply click
the box marked “Margin” when you place your order, and the brokerage firm
loans you money. Then when the security goes up in price, you get a greater
percentage return because you’ve been able to buy more for your money.
Of course, that also increases your potential losses. (For more detail on the
margin process, head to the earlier section “The Magic of Margin.”)
Figure 9-2 shows how leverage works. The trader borrows money to buy 400
shares of SuperCorp. If the stock goes up 4 percent, she makes 8 percent.
Whoo-hooo! But if the stock goes down 4 percent, she still has to repay the
loan at full dollar value, so she ends up losing 8 percent. That’s not so good.
A trader buys $10,000 of SuperCorp with $5,000 of her own cash and a $5,000 loan.
SuperCorp trades at $25/share, so the trader purchases a total of 400 shares. The trader
closes out at the end of the day, so no interest is charged. What happens as the stock
price changes?
% Change
Trader’s
in Stock
Ending
Ending
Loan
Net
Rate of
Price
Price
Value
Value
Equity
Return
Figure 9-2:
$
26.00
$
10,400
$
5,000
$
5,400
8%
4%
An example
$ 10,200
$ 5,000
$ 5,200
4%
2%
of trading $ 25.50
$ 10,000
$ 5,000
$ 5,000
0%
0%
stocks on $ 25.00
$ 9,800
$ 5,000
$ 4,800
-4%
-2%
margin. $ 24.50
$ 24.00
$ 9,600
$ 5,000
$ 4,600
-8%
-4%

Chapter 9: Increasing Risk and Potential Return with Short Selling
If you hold your margin position overnight or longer, you have to start paying
interest, which cuts into your returns or increases your losses.

In options markets
An option gives you the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell a stock or
other item at a set price when the contract expires. A call option gives you
the right to buy, so you would buy a call if you think the underlying asset
is going up. A put option gives you the right to sell, so you would buy a put
if you think the underlying asset is going down. (You can read more about
options in Chapter 3.) By trading an option, you get exposure to changes
in the price of the underlying security without actually buying the security
itself. That’s the source of the leverage in the market.
A day trader can use options to get an exposure to price changes in a stock
for a lot less money than buying the stock itself would cost. Suppose a call
option is deeply in the money, meaning that its strike price (the price at which
you would buy the stock if you exercised the option) is far below the current stock price. In this event, the obvious thing to do is to set option price
at the difference between the current stock price and the strike price, which
is more or less what happens — more in theory, less in practice. When the
stock price changes, the option price changes by almost exactly the same
amount, enabling you to buy the price performance of the stock at a discount, with the discount being the strike price of the option.
Figure 9-3 shows the performance-boosting leverage from this strategy. The
trader buys call options with an exercise price of $10 on a stock trading at
$25. The option price changes the same amount that the stock price does,
but the call holder gets a greater percentage return than the stockholder.
