
long-term business performance when taken to extremes.


WHAT'S NOT TO LIKE IN CONSUMER PRODUCTS

Sell Products Overseas
Facing slow top-line growth in a mature domestic market, many consumer
product makers have chosen to expand internationally to supplement domes-
tic growth. This allows a firm such as Procter & Gamble to launch Pepto-
Bismol in Argentina and Brazil, where stomach remedy medication is still a
new category experiencing accelerated growth, even though the same prod-
uct has been in the United States for more than a century and hasn’t seen
double-digit growth in years. Consequently, many multinational consumer
products companies derive a substantial portion of their business from over-
seas. For example, Coca-Cola gets 77 percent of its operating profits from
abroad, and Avon earns 65 percent of the same from overseas markets.
Selling overseas can lead to currency risk (for example, if the euro declines
relative to the dollar, reported sales for U.S.—based companies selling prod-
ucts in Europe will suffer). But most consumer goods companies use hedging

instruments to mitigate this risk.

What's Not to Like in Consumer Products

At first blush, it might seem a company that has racked up a century-old
track record, survived industry consolidation, and can look forward to steady
(albeit relatively slow) growth would be a good investment choice. However,
investors should also carefully consider some of the potential risks that con-

sumer goods companies face before jumping into a stock.

Increasing Power of Retailers

As Wal-Mart has increasingly come to dominate the U.S. retail landscape, con-
sumer goods manufacturers have lost much of the pricing power they used to
enjoy. Everybody wants their products in Wal-Mart’s stores, which means that
Wal-Mart is able to dictate many of the terms under which it will sell these
products, including price. Other retailers have also been squeezed. They've had
to improve their cost structures to compete with Wal-Mart, but haven't been

able to pass along price increases to consumers.

Litigation Risk
This risk mainly concerns tobacco companies, but it’s a big one. After suc-

cessfully defending itself in court for years, Big Tobacco has suffered a

309


310

CONSUMER GOODS

number of legal setbacks, which raise the specter of a bankrupting settlement
down the road. The industry has lost a handful of lawsuits filed by individual
smokers and been ordered to pay amounts it can easily afford; the fear is that

such outcomes will unleash a torrent of costly new lawsuits.

Foreign Currency Exchange Risk

As mentioned earlier, many consumer goods companies conduct a consider-
able portion of their businesses internationally. For these multinational firms,
a strong American dollar can depress overseas sales. American goods become
relatively more expensive in foreign markets, and foreign currencies are trans-
lated back into fewer dollars for the same number of euros, pesos, or yen (be-
cause it takes more foreign currency to buy a strong dollar). On the other
hand, when the American dollar weakens, the process works in reverse, and
these companies can benefit from an earnings tailwind.

Expensive Stocks

Strong brands and reliable financial performance mean that well-known con-
sumer goods stocks often sell at premium valuations. Especially during peri-
ods of weak economic growth, consumer goods shares may be bid up to levels
that imply unrealistic growth rates. Remember that growth will always be a
challenge for these mature companies, and approach them with the same val-

uation discipline that you would any other stock.

Economic Moats in Consumer Goods
Despite the risks, one very attractive feature of this competitive sector is that
consumer goods companies often have wide economic moats or at least a nar-

row moat—and this helps preserve pricing power.

Economies of Scale

The handful of giant firms that dominate each consumer goods industry
enjoy such massive economies of scale that it would be virtually impossible
for a small new entrant to catch up. Anheuser-Busch, the largest brewer in
the world with 12 breweries in the United States, consistently invests in up-
grading its plants with new technology that makes it possible to brew and

package vast quantities of beer at lower costs.


ECONOMIC MOATS IN CONSUMER GOODS

Case Study: Chewing up the Gum Market

