
8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 260

• 260 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Nadia Krasnova was also included and settled in the bankruptcy.
What no one knew was that Livermore, through his friend
Alexander P. Moore, had secretly given her $5,000 to help her
move to California.
On his lawyer’s advice, Livermore had borrowed $100,000 from
Harriet. The loan was secured by the interest from his $1 million
trust fund—a trust fund that he had set up in such an ironclad way
that he could never touch the principal. This trust fund survived
the bankruptcy.
On March 7, 1934, the bankrupt Livermore was automatically
suspended as a member of the Chicago Board of Trade. It was
never disclosed to anyone what had happened to the great fortune
he had made in the crash of 1929, five years earlier. He had lost
it all.
Livermore was, of course, depressed and disoriented. He was on
the brink of personal disaster, as well. On December 1, 1934, he
set sail on the Italian ocean liner Rex. He said to the New York
Times on his departure, “This is a long-belated wedding present
for me and my wife. I intend to study the European commodity
markets as a basis for my comeback.”
“Do you think you’ll come back this time Mr. Livermore?” a
reporter asked.
“I have made comebacks before, but this one will take longer
because world market conditions are worse,” he answered. What
he really meant was that it would take him longer to get back on
his feet because he had lost his emotional balance, and he was not
sure if he would ever get it back.
“What will you deal in?” he was asked.
“I expect I will deal in wheat and other commodities.”
Rumors and stories were constantly spread about Livermore. He
was always fascinating to the press and the Wall Street crowd. For

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 261

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 261 •

example, there was the “black cat” story spread by a Wall Street
stockbroker who said he knew how Livermore had called the crash
of 1929. The broker claimed he had found a cat with magical
powers. The broker took the cat home, and his luck changed. He
immediately made a big hit on the market, and every time the cat
had a litter of kittens, he would call Livermore, who would reverse
his position in the market—if he were long he would go short and
vice versa.
“That damn cat made Livermore a fortune,” the broker said.
“Then one day a year ago my cat died, and it destroyed Livermore.
That’s why he went bankrupt and lost his fortune!”
Livermore also languished under the cloud of being the Great
Bear of Wall Street. He had been blamed as one of the main causes
of the crash of 1929. But he found this ridiculous, because he
believed that no one person or group could ever change the overall direction of the market or even drive a stock down for a sustained period of time. He knew that it was ultimately the sales and
profits of a stock, the financial backbone of a company, that won
out in the end, even though there could be a bumpy ride in the
journey. Nevertheless, people still blamed him, sometimes yelling
at him in public.
“Companies that make money consistently rise consistently,”
Livermore told all who would listen.
For the public, the nonprofessional stock players, there was
always the famous gray they in the market. They were raiding Steel
today. They were behind General Motors all week, pushing it up.
They had a full-fledged bear raid going on with Standard Oil. They
were distributing stock right now because they knew the market
was finished. They were led by that bastard Livermore and his bastard friends.
The public believed there was a club, headed by a powerful person or group, that ran the market. The club supposedly consisted

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 262

• 262 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

of people like Livermore, James Keene, John “Bet-a-Million”
Gates, Bernard Baruch, William Durant, Arthur Cutten, and the
Fischer brothers. These people were believed to simply manipulate
the market as they desired, so the small trader was always the
sucker.
The public also had a strong view on price movements. Any
influences that pushed the market up were “positive” influences
and any influences that forced the market down were “negative”
influences. This was based on the premise that it was always good
for prices to rise, because when prices were rising, the brokers,
customers, company executives, and investing public were happy
and getting rich. But any person who was involved with the decline
of stock prices or making a profit from that decline was therefore
a monster, and most likely was unpatriotic to boot.
For Livermore, this attitude toward bears in the market was
ludicrous. It ignored the facts of what really happened. Livermore
said to the New York Times: “The public believes that this group of
elite men can drive a stock far below its ‘real value,’ its basic value.
If such a stock goes down, the public then erroneously presumes
that there is a group of super-traders, super-speculators, super financiers who are severely punishing the stock, pushing it below its
‘real value,’ to create an ‘absolute bargain.’ The public wrongly
assumes that smart speculators will not step in and buy it at the
depressed prices.”
There were people who firmly believed that if the bear in the
stock market could be declawed and caged forever, the markets
would go in only one direction—up, up, up!
No one has ever been able to prove that short selling damages
markets. In fact, there is a strong belief among many speculators
that a large short position actually represents a large reserve of buying power, because all that stock must be bought to cover the
shorts at some future date.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 263

LIVERMORE ’ S LUCK SOURS

• 263 •

There is also a contrarian theory that states that most investors
are wrong most of the time in foreseeing the direction of a stock
or the overall market. So if the short interest rises past a certain
point, contrarian speculators believe that this is a valid signal that
indicates it is the time to go long.
Livermore was an independent thinker. He believed that the
market was set up to fool most of the people most of the time.
Certainly there was no one who could call the market direction or
the direction of a stock all the time. If that was possible, that person would already be the richest person on the planet.
Livermore believed in the free market system with limited government interference. He said: “In a free market system, prices
fluctuate. They never go up all the time and they never go down
all the time. This is good.”
All this did not stop people from tarring Livermore with accusations of being a ravaging bear and having caused the Great Crash.
He was ready for his trip to Europe. He needed it to regain his
sanity.
But he did not know that his greatest personal tragedy was just
ahead of him.

8467_Smitten_13_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 264

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 265

*

chapter fourteen

*

The Shooting of Jesse
Livermore Jr.

He remembered poor Julian and his romantic awe of them.
And how he had started a story that began:
“The very rich are different from you and me.”
“Yes, they have more money.”
Ernest Hemingway, The Snows of Kilimanjaro

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 266

• 266 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

THANKSGIVING DAY, NOVEMBER 29, 1935. IT WAS LATE.

They were both drunk.
Jesse Jr., 16 years old but looking 20, stood tall and defiant in the
living room, unsteady on his feet, wavering slightly from drink. He
looked athletic in his tan slacks and white shirt, with his white tennis sweater casually tied around his shoulders.
Dorothy sat pie-eyed drunk on the couch.
There had been a Thanksgiving party at Dorothy’s rented pink
stucco mansion in Santa Barbara, where she had moved permanently after her house in Great Neck had been auctioned. She had
divorced Jim Longcope, the prohibition agent, in August and was
now having a fling with D. B. Neville—who, like Longcope, was
handsome, charming, and had a deep interest in her money. Some
of her “companions” blatantly stole from her.
Both Jesse and Paul were home for the holidays and would be
returning to school shortly. Paul would head back to the Hotchkiss
School in northwest Connecticut, a tough, highly disciplined
environment, and Jesse would be going to his new school, the
exclusive Laguna Bianca, which he desperately did not want to
attend. He had finally left Choate, where it was almost obligatory
for every student to have his own horse for polo. For years, both
his mother and his father had labeled him as incorrigible. He only
laughed when they told him to straighten out.
Jesse did not want to return to school—any school. He told his
mother that he wanted to go to Europe instead and have some fun.
After the party, he took off in his 16-cylinder dual-exhaust
Chrysler convertible, which was equipped with cutouts to bypass
the mufflers. There was no mistaking when Jesse was behind the
wheel and the cutouts were engaged. He could be heard throughout the quiet neighborhoods of Santa Barbara. Livermore had
called his good friend Walter Chrysler to buy the prototype sports
car and have it shipped to California for Jesse—nothing was too

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 267

THE SHOOTING OF JESSE LIVERMORE JR .

• 267 •

good for his favorite son. Jesse drove fast and skillfully, drunk or
sober.
After the Thanksgiving party, Jesse had gone out for a drive to
see a girl and stop at the Biltmore Hotel for a few drinks. Afterward, Jesse dropped the girl off and stormed into the house, blazing drunk, after midnight. His mother was in the living room,
drinking with Neville, when Jesse walked in.
Her son saw her and her companion in the living room.
“You’ve been drinking,” she said.
“You’re drunk, Mother. So don’t tell me I’ve been drinking.”
Jesse walked over to the bar and raised a full bottle of whiskey to
his lips. “I’ll show you that a man, a real man, can outdrink any
woman.”
Dorothy jumped from the couch and smacked the bottle out of
his hands. “I’d rather see my son dead than drinking himself to
death.”
Livermore bolted out of the room to the nearby small guesthouse on the property. He returned brandishing a shotgun. He
handed the stock of the shotgun to his mother and said, “Here, go
ahead and shoot me. I dare you!
Neville leapt from the couch and intervened. He wrestled the
gun from Dorothy’s hands. He quickly ran from the room to hide
the shotgun. As he did, Jesse bolted up the steps and flew into his
brother’s bedroom.
Paul awoke and looked at his brother. “What’s going on?” he
asked.
“Your mother wants to kill me.”
“Why?”
“Never mind why, where’s your rifle?”
“In the closet.”
“Ammo?”
“Right next to it. Twenty-two longs,” Paul said, studying his

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 268

• 268 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

brother. He watched as his brother quickly slipped a round
expertly into the chamber and locked it. It was a bolt-action,
single-shot rifle. Everyone in the family was a crack shot and knew
all about guns.
Jesse turned as he reached the bedroom doorway. “Go back to
sleep, Paul. There’s something I have to do.”
This was not the first dramatic drunken scene Paul had witnessed
between mother and brother. Jesse flipped off the light switch, and
Paul rolled over in his bed, pulling the covers over his head.
Jesse raced down the circular stairwell, rifle in hand.
His mother stood at the foot of stairs. She looked up at him. He
flipped the gun around and thrust the stock of the rifle into her
hands. She was adept with weapons; her small finger automatically
wrapped around the trigger as the stock slipped down her forearm.
“Now’s your chance, Mother! Your chance to kill me. But you
don’t have the nerve to pull the trigger.” With her finger around
the trigger, Jesse suddenly pulled the barrel toward himself. Fire
shot from the muzzle. The bullet entered his chest one inch from
his heart, traveled past his liver, and rested near the spine. He collapsed on the stairs and rolled bleeding to the floor.
Neville entered after disposing of the shotgun and found the
boy slumped at the foot of the stairs.
Dorothy bellowed at the top of her voice over and over again:
“Oh, my God, I’ve shot my son. I’ve shot my boy. I shot my boy,
Oh God! God! God!”
Paul bolted out of bed at the sound of the gunshot. He ran
down the stairs to see his brother in a heap, bleeding. He ran to get
Lucien, Dorothy’s friend and employee, who was asleep in the
guestroom. Paul woke him and brought him to the living room.
Lucien immediately called Dr. Neville Usher, who came immediately to the home. As he arrived, so did Deputy Sheriff Jack Ross.
Dorothy was still shouting “I’ve shot my boy!” over and over.

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 269

THE SHOOTING OF JESSE LIVERMORE JR .

• 269 •

An ambulance appeared just ahead of the doctor and the sheriff.
Jesse was taken immediately to Cottage Hospital. As he was slipped
into the ambulance, he whispered to the paramedics: “I’m all right.
It’s nothing. Don’t blame mother.”
At the hospital, he was still drunk and in great pain when they
gave him a whopping dose of morphine to kill the pain. Before he
was lost to the drugs, he told the police investigators: “It was an
accident. That’s all I wish to say about it. I’m too tired to talk now,
anyway.” He then slipped away into sleep.
Livermore was in Saint Louis, Missouri, with “Nina,” as he
called his new wife, Harriet, when he got the news. He chartered
a plane to take him to Los Angeles. A chauffeur-driven Ford
Phaeton was waiting at the airport to pick him up and speed him
to Santa Barbara. The case was covered in great detail by the New
York Times and the New York Daily News. In Los Angeles, he told
the press with clenched teeth, “If anything has happened to that
boy, I will see that she pays!”
Santa Barbara District Attorney Percy Heckendorf and Deputy
Sheriff Jack Ross questioned Dorothy for two hours but found her
dazed and in shock, not making any real sense. She was put in a
private room in the hospital and given a shot to quiet her down
and put her to sleep. When she awoke, she was placed under arrest
and taken to the county jail for more questioning.
The next day the doctor issued a press statement: “Jesse Livermore Jr. is slightly improved, but little change in his basic condition is expected for several hours.”
District Attorney Heckendorf made a statement of his own:
“Pending the outcome of the boy’s final condition, she will be
charged with assault with intent to kill.” He was implying that he
was waiting to see whether Jesse would die. In that event, they
were going to charge Dorothy with murder.
When Livermore arrived on the scene, he went directly to see

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 270

• 270 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

the doctors and then his son. He looked down at him and said,
“Fight, son. Please fight. I’m standing by you, my boy.”
On December 2, 1935, while Jesse was still fighting for his life
against incipient pneumonia and shock, Dorothy was arraigned on
a charge of assault with a deadly weapon with the intent to commit murder. She pleaded not guilty, and the following Monday was
set for a preliminary hearing. Her bail was set at $9,000. The
authorities were convinced she would not go far from her son,
even if she had shot him.
The story was big news, carried on all the wire services and in
all the important papers in the country. The Boy Plunger, the
Great Bear of Wall Street was in the news again, only this time it
was a tragedy, a real tragedy.
Livermore checked into the El Mirasol Hotel in downtown
Santa Barbara.
When Dorothy was released from jail, she went immediately to
the hospital and pleaded with the doctors: “I want to see my son,
my boy! I must see him.”
But the surgeons refused.
“Just for a moment!” she begged.
“No, not even for a moment. His condition is very sensitive,”
the surgeons replied. They had decided not to operate to remove
the bullet from where it was lodged near his spine until he was
stronger. The bullet had missed his heart by scant inches.
The news spread like wildfire. Dorothy got a call from Edward
J. Reilly, a famous lawyer who had defended Bruno Hauptman in
the Lindbergh kidnapping case, wanting to represent her. But Harrison Ryon, vice chairman of the California Bar Association, was
selected, and Livermore paid his fees. Ryon had acted for Livermore in his divorce from Dorothy.
When Ryon was asked if Livermore thought his wife was guilty
of trying to kill her own son, Ryon was quick to point out that “It

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 271

THE SHOOTING OF JESSE LIVERMORE JR .

• 271 •

should be obvious that Mr. Livermore, by retaining my services, is
himself interested and active in his ex-wife’s defense on these
charges. That speaks for itself.”
Ryon was a powerful California lawyer. He said that he and Livermore had already designed her defense. “It’s the ‘unloaded gun’
defense. It is clear to myself and Mr. Livermore that the discharge
of the gun was purely accidental. The defense will prove that Mrs.
Livermore did not do the shooting on purpose. Mrs. Livermore
had no knowledge or suspicion that the gun was loaded.”
Then Jesse’s physicians announced that Jesse had said: “I don’t
want to see either my mother or my father. I want to lie here and
think things over for a week or so. And I don’t want to see the district attorney either.”
The district attorney went along, “In deference to the boy’s
request, and his doctor’s concurrence, I will agree to put off the
questioning. I have plans to assemble more details of the shooting
over the next few days.”
Livermore took action. He sent an airplane to pick up Dr.
Joseph d’Avignon, a gunshot-wound expert from Lake Placid. It
was also announced that Dorothy would not be arraigned until
after the Christmas and New Year’s Day holidays. The final
announcement informed the public that Livermore had filed suit
to recover custody of both of his sons. He was given custody of
Paul immediately on a temporary arrangement.
On December 6, 1935, there was a piece on the shooting in the
New York Times.
The 16-year-old boy, Jesse Livermore Jr.’s physical wound is
not the only wound. From the stories that have been told so
far by the press it is plain that the boy was caught in a crossfire between his unhappy and embittered elders. As a result,
he has suffered intense spiritual hurt.

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 272

• 272 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The various articles covering the shooting were read avidly by
those on Wall Street.
Then a turn for the worse came on December 16, as the Times
reported.
The condition of Jesse L. Livermore Jr., was reported as
“exceedingly grave” at Cottage Hospital. After a week of
slow but steady progress toward recovery from a bullet wound
inflicted in a quarrel by a shot fired by his mother, the youth
took a turn for the worse yesterday. He spent today under an
oxygen tent while the doctors studied new X-ray photographs and made lab tests of the fluid from the wound area in
his lower chest.
It was not until January 6, 1936, that Jesse was declared out of
danger. But for months, it was still necessary for his doctor or an
attending nurse to tap his chest for fluid every other day to prevent
infection. Later in his life, Jesse would tell his wife Pat that the
doctors and nurses would come into his room, ream out the
wound using an antiseptic and a Q-tip, and then drain it. Every
time, he would scream in pain at the top of his lungs, cursing his
mother for shooting him and his father for ignoring him all his life.
Even the morphine did not help.
Finally, on March 5, 1936, Dorothy was exonerated of all
charges before Ernest Wagner, a justice of the peace. It was Judge
Wagner who had ordered the complaint charging Dorothy with
assault with intent to kill after the preliminary hearing in January.
Jesse testified that he would assume all blame for the shooting,
which had followed an argument over his drinking. Dr. Neville
Usher, who was first on the scene and attended Jesse through his
long convalescence, testified that Dorothy had been under the

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 273

THE SHOOTING OF JESSE LIVERMORE JR .

• 273 •

influence of alcohol and was incapable of remembering anything
she might have said at the time.
When specifically questioned about her having said: “I have shot
my boy! I’ve shot my son,” the respected physician replied he
could not recall that he had ever heard her say that.
Months later, on March 25, the bullet lodged near Jesse’s spine
was finally removed at Post-Graduate Hospital in New York City.
Dr. John Moorhead, chief of surgeons at the hospital, performed the
operation. But Jesse would always have a scar and a slight curvature
of the spine, which he did his best to hide. He was also, because of
this wound, rejected for military service in World War II.
Livermore was given permanent custody of both boys.
In 1935, Livermore had moved into the Sherry Netherland
Hotel on Fifth Avenue across from Central Park. The Sherry
Netherland was an exclusive elegant hotel-residence for some of
the most prominent people in the world. Livermore took an entire
upper floor. The apartment suite was spacious, furnished with Livermore and his new wife’s favorite things. There was a kitchen,
living room, dining room, den, and two bedrooms, including one
for Paul when he was home, which was rarely. A maid who also
cooked came every day—and, of course, there was always room
service available to provide anything they wanted.
Paul lived with his father and Harriet when he was not at boarding school or away at summer camp. Paul hated living there and
called his father’s new wife “the Bitch-Witch.” He found her a
dark and depressing presence. He could feel her hatred for him and
his brother. She wanted his father’s undivided attention.
One afternoon, he was playing soccer on the fields of
Hotchkiss, his boarding school in Lakeville, Connecticut, when
one of his friends came up to him. He said, “Paul, isn’t that your
mother coming up the drive?” The boy pointed at a black Rolls,

8467_Smitten_14_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 274
