
I

Rule Number One: Don’t Become Cocky
John laughed. “I’ve got one of those, too. And he’s right. I’ve made
some bad mistakes in my trading by being too cocky.”
Yeah, right, I thought. Whatever. If I was making $100,000 per month,
I’d have my shoes shined at my desk and my wife would have a hundred
iPods. I’d work for a month and take the rest of the year off.
I wondered if John had met Craig’s secret mentor. From the way that
John was looking at me, I got the feeling that he was wondering if Craig
had mentioned this same friend. I wanted to talk about it with John, but we
45

book_c06.qxd

46

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 46

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

had the FOMC report in just a little while, and I decided that I needed to get
my trading account up and ready.
“So are you trading still?” I asked, hoping to get a bit more information
about John’s plans.
“Yes. I’m having some trouble pulling the trigger on my trades. Some of
the best ones in fact. But it will pass. I am down for the year still, but I am
confident that will change. And you?”
“I only have a small account. But it’s positive right now.”
“How much?”
“I don’t know,” I answered. And then I calculated the percentage gain
in my head. “Seventy percent so far.”
He nearly choked. “Seventy percent? Your account is up 70 percent for
the year?”
What was the big deal? At the rate I was going, it would be up 100 percent by today. I told him, yes, it was up that far but I really still had a lot
to learn. I felt badly that I was doing so much better than he was doing.
Now I felt my leg start to shake a bit. I wanted to start trading again as
soon as possible. I had profits to make, and all this talk was driving
me crazy.
I raced back toward my desk, thinking about how great the day had
been. A great day in a great week in what was going to be the most Amazing great year of my life so far.
And now I was going to trade.
Or at least that is what I thought I was going to do. Scott Needleway
was standing at my cubicle when I got back from lunch. He did not look
happy.
“Herbie is pissed and wants to see you now.”
I didn’t care if Herbie was experiencing chest pains and shortness of
breath. I was going to be trading for the next half hour and there was nothing that could be done to stop me. Scott did not share my enthusiasm.
“You should see him now. He’s not happy.”
I shrugged it off. “We both know it’s just another missing document
and that he’s doing twenty-five things at the same time right now. He won’t
even care that I take my time getting over there.”
Scott did not share my confidence in the matter. But it didn’t occur to
me that his usual laissez-faire attitude had been replaced by an expression
of serious concern.
From all the running around that day and the day before, it seemed like
an eternity since I had last traded. All that profit lost! I could have taken another two or three trades at least. It felt good that now I was going to have
the chance to make up for all that by trading when the FOMC minutes were
released. From what Craig said, this could really shake up the market, and
I was going to be ready. I felt like I had a secret weapon: A real Wall Street
trader, who was probably a millionaire, had given me a heads-up. My fin-

book_c06.qxd

12/20/06

2:03 PM

A Turn for the Worse

Page 47

47

gers twitched with anticipation for the trading they would do. My right leg
started hopping on the floor. This was a good feeling. This was the rush of
adrenaline that the traders on the 31st floor felt every day. Trading for a living was never going to be boring.
Scott was feeling it, too. The look of concern disappeared, replaced by
what could only be described as bliss: He knew that we were going to witness something amazing.
“You going to turn on the Amazing Forex software?” he asked.
“Oh, yeah,” I told him. “I almost forgot. I have a feeling that all we need
to do is follow the direction of the market right after the minutes are released. From what Craig said, this economic report can move the market
100 pips in just seconds.”
“Gotta have a quick trigger finger, then.”
“You bet. I might make up for all the lost opportunities that I had this
week.”
It was 2:14 P.M. Eastern Time when the Amazing software triggered a
sell order on the GBP/USD. The current price was 1.8135. I had my finger
on the trigger to take the trade, and then boom! All of the sudden, the price
on my trading platform started to skyrocket upward. Scott gasped, and I
took my hands off the keyboard. Whoa! It was flying up 10, 20, 30 pips instantly! I wanted to be a part of that. Once before, the software had been
wrong, and we had profited from inadvertently trading in the opposite direction of the signal. So that’s what I did this time. With absolute confidence, I bought the GBP/USD at 1.8170.
I traded two standard lots, or $200,000 worth of currency, which
equaled $20 for every pip the market moved (see Figure 6.1).
“Doubling up!” Scott exclaimed. “Sweetness!”
I was automatically in the red on the trade, because of the spread. So I
was losing $100 right now, or 5 pips (the spread) times $20. I had seen this
on the other trades we had taken, so I was mentally prepared. No freaking
out just because I started off at a small loss.
We checked back with Amazing Forex Profits. It had a boatload of orders popping up on the screen. Here they were:
Buy USD/JPY,
Buy USD/CHF,
Sell EUR/USD,
Sell GBP/USD,
Buy USD/CAD,
Buy USD/SEK,
Sell NZD/USD,
Sell AUD/USD.

book_c06.qxd

12/20/06

48

FIGURE 6.1

2:03 PM

Page 48

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Harry trades two standard lots.

And many more. I had never seen that many orders popping up at the
same time. And they were all going in one direction: buying U.S. Dollars
and selling other currencies. Not one order went the other way.
Now I felt conflicted. Craig had told me the market could jump really
fast, even 100 pips in 60 seconds. That meant I still had plenty of profit potential on the trade—it had only moved up 35 pips when I bought. So that
left at least 65 more pips to come. At $20 per pip, I was looking at a profit
of $1,300. That was easily enough to cover the extra money we needed to
make our rent payment. With enough left over to give my wife a gift certificate for some online music. While I felt more nervous about this trade than
the others, it was just because of the amount of money that I stood to gain.
I had never made this much money this fast before.
Then I glanced at the Amazing software. What was I to do when it was
telling me to go the other way? And with so many orders? I wondered if I
could call Craig. I didn’t have his number, but I am sure that John Murphy
had it. I half sat up in my chair to leave. Scott backed away a bit. He suddenly remembered that Mr. Johnson wanted to see me. I saw the trade dip
down to negative 10 pips—$200 in the red. That was more money than I
had lost on a trade before. My right leg was bouncing, and I held onto it
with my hand.
“You gotta go see Herbie,” Scott told me.
He was right. Damn! This was happening again—a forced choice between watching the trade and doing my job. I couldn’t wait for the day
when I could walk away from the office and never come back. Just trade
full time. Especially now that I had an open trade that had the potential to

book_c06.qxd

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 49

A Turn for the Worse

49

bank at least $1,300. It was unprofitable now. Maybe I could trade the other
direction on another currency pair, and that would mean that no matter
what, I would stand to profit from one trade immediately, while I waited
for my first trade to make money.
“Harry, you really gotta go,” he said.
“I will, I will,” I replied testily. “I don’t want to leave the trade. If he
wants to see me so badly, he can walk over here.”
Then I heard a terrible, familiar, angry growl from the entrance to my
cubicle.
It was Mr. Johnson.

A GOOD DAY GOES BAD
Herb was not happy. Every vein in his forehead was visible and pulsating,
supplying needed oxygen to the brain that would form the words that
would come flying out of his mouth any second: “You got something you
wanna talk with me about?”
Did he find out I was trading on company time? Had Scott said something? John? Or maybe this was another case of a missing letter. Lost files,
misplaced papers, disappearing disks, it didn’t matter, perhaps he was
calling on me (with an angry booming voice) to find something he needed
10 minutes ago. This tirade would pass like all the others and in 15 minutes he would have his file, I’d have my peace and quiet, and we’d both be
happy. I would be able to go back to my trade, which by the time I’d
helped him would probably be profitable and closed.
Maybe the interruption was a good thing. Now I would focus on something else for few moments.
I could imagine Craig downstairs, pushing buttons, making trades,
earning more money in a few minutes than I could all year long. Had
he bought the GBP/USD? Had he sold? Did he have an Amazing Forex
software tool, something the company had built for him? I wondered
if his charts were showing big support or resistance levels or yearly
highs or lows.
All these thoughts about Craig convinced me that the reward for passing through this predictable storm of tempers over lost files would be to
find Craig’s number and call him. Surely an hour from now he’d be out of
his trades and we could talk about what he did, and what I did, and compare notes. Two traders just hamming it up after a day of hard-won profits
in the currency trenches.
“Mr. Johnson,” I started, “I did ask Scott to completely go over all the
Anderson files to make sure that nothing was out of place. I’ll make sure
we get whatever you need right away.”

book_c06.qxd

50

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 50

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Scott nodded quickly and heartily, eyes wide open. I thought he might
suddenly jump out of my cubicle and go running down the hall screaming.
Mr. Johnson huffed. He did this in the way the boss does when you’re
talking about something so remote from whatever had caused him to be
angry in the first place, that he cannot possibly believe how stupid you are.
After a furious mental inventory of every file I had stored away in the last
week, I began to realize that I might not be able to cut this conflict short. Not
a good sign. Not with my trade doing who knew what (there was no way I
was going to glance behind me at the computer screen at this moment).
With every pulse of the veins in Mr. Johnson’s forehead, I thought I
could hear his heart pounding. Or maybe it was mine.
My right leg was now shaking.
“Anything else about the Anderson case you wanna talk about?” The
grunting, growling, and huffing had ended, replaced with words that just
came out as a bark. I had never seen him this angry. Certainly not at me.
Both his tiny hands formed fists at his side, and I guessed from the way he
stood that his butt cheeks were clenched hard enough to crack a walnut. I
don’t know why I thought about that at the time, but I did. My emotions were
all over the place. The pulsing in my chest increased. My leg would not stop
shaking. I could have set it underneath a car and it would have not stopped.
At that moment I realized that Herb Johnson was going to kill me. He
barked again: “I said, is there anything else you wanna tell me about the
Anderson files?”
I looked at Scott. His face was white.
Turning back to Mr. Johnson, I shook my head like I had years before
when my mother asked me if I had been peeing in the neighbor’s backyard.
I could remember standing on the black and white checked linoleum floor
in the kitchen of our small home in Queens, right leg shaking, mind searching for exactly the right half-truth to get me out of this mess:
MOM: Were you back there in the Gonzales yard going pee?
ME: [silence]
MOM: Well, were you?
ME: [silence]
Now, in the office, I could pretty much replace “Mom” with “Herb.” You
can understand why I was preparing my behind for a spanking. I wanted to
reply: Do I know anything about the files? Hell no. I’m just the filing manager! Talk to Scott! I make him do all my work!
Now I was flat-out petrified. I couldn’t talk. His evil barking, his
clenched butt cheeks, the near-bursting veins, his ability to summon my
mother from the dark recess of my childhood—it was all too much for me
to handle.

book_c06.qxd

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 51

A Turn for the Worse

51

I couldn’t believe this was about the Anderson files. I had made sure
that the files were in order just that morning, and then I had gone to lunch,
and now Herbie was barking at me. Maybe this was about my extended
stay on the trading floor? About my lunch with Craig? Maybe he didn’t like
me fraternizing with members of Ernest Wellington while we were representing them?
Pretty much all day I had been scheming not only to enrich myself with
a new job as a trader, and also to benefit the firm with a $2 million fee. And
the thanks I got!
Then I realized why he was so angry.
He knew. He knew about the deal with John and Craig, about me trying
to get a job at Ernest Wellington & Company, about me brokering a clientfor-job-interview deal. He was like my mother! He could see what I did at
all times, he was Momnipresent. No wonder this man had frightened me
for 10 years.
A job-spanking for John Murphy, and possibly the loss of his cushy
new corner-office location. For me? Maybe fired. Maybe worse. Gosh, I
thought, I had even put Craig Taylor’s job in jeopardy. Maybe he was down
there on Floor 31 getting beat down, and totally missing out on tasty pips
from the FOMC interest rate decision.
What had the FOMC decided?
Maybe I should have checked that before I traded.
Craig said it could move 100 pips in one minute. What about after that?
Would Anderson interview me for a job now?
How could I get myself out of this mess and back to looking at my
trade?
My mind raced onward, toward nothing in particular. My brain had
been melted by the white-hot rage coming from Herbie (Herbie? I was
going to kill Scott) and my body had given absolute control of itself over to
my heart, which seemed to have grown to the size of a watermelon and
with every beat, was causing my body to shake.
MOM: I saw you, so don’t you try to tell me you didn’t do it.
ME: [silence]
MOM: Do you have anything to say for yourself?
ME: [silence]
MOM: Well, do you?
Only the truth could save me now!
ME: I had to go real bad!
MOM: Do you think that is an excuse?
ME: It really hurt!

book_c06.qxd

52

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 52

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Wait a minute. I couldn’t tell him that it hurt when I peed.
HERBIE: Well, do you have anything to say for yourself? I want to know
where you get off with behavior like this.
ME: [silence]
ME: I promise I delivered the letter like you asked me to do.
My only answer: the truth. Oh, I would have given up all the profit in
my trading account just for a good lie. The only thing that I could do was
talk. Talking could save me. Continued conversation would soothe the
beast.
“I did talk to Anderson about the forex fund, sir.” I was not in the habit
of calling anyone sir, but I did it this time. Sir Herbie. “Sir, I talked with him
about the fund and he did tell me that I should mention it to you.”
“What fund?” he asked. Now he was confused on top of angry. The idea
to use extended dialog to return Herbie to a happy state had failed.
He didn’t know that I hadn’t told him about the fund? Then what in the
world was this all about?
“Well, Banes,” he grunted. “What the hell are you talking about?”
I stated in the most confident manner possible, with my right knee
jerking around like it was trying to send me flying to the floor: “The florex
fund. They’re starting an in-house florex fund and they need the firm’s
help.”
I said it wrong because many, many synapses in my brain had snapped
and my communication skills were flushed down the toilet of neurological
implosion, along with physical control of my shaking body.
“Anderson told me that they’re going to need legal help to get the fund
started. He doesn’t know that I am telling you this, but it sounds like it
could be a two-dollar job for the firm. And he offered me a job.”
Yes, I actually said two dollars, as in $2. And yes, I really did say that
Anderson offered me a job. I was living proof that your IQ can move up and
down depending on how afraid you were.
“Two dollars, Banes? What are you talking about?”
“Uh, I mean two million.”
“How would you know something like that? And what’s this about him
giving you a job?”
“Well, he did,” I said, protesting even further that I was telling the truth
when in fact I was serving up whoppers one after the other.
This was like having to go down the entire road of deception just to
avoid one spanking. Why was I lying? When I did something like that, there
were disastrous and unintended consequences.
Mr. Johnson could tell I was lying. “We’ll get him on the phone right
away about that, you can be sure of that, but first you and I have business to
settle. You’ve got me off track now and I’m putting us back on the subject.”

book_c06.qxd

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 53

A Turn for the Worse

53

Over the years I had seen at least 20 people fired from Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey. Firings there fell into two categories, much like hurricanes: amicable firings, like when someone had been incompetent but was
so good-looking or otherwise likable that human nature demanded it be
done respectfully (the type of firing that Craig Taylor would presumably
get); and angry firings, where someone always ended up with spittle on his
face and his life destroyed because he had put himself in the path of such a
disaster.
Herb was giving me category number two. Now he would yell at me
until I walked away, then he was going to accuse me of walking away while
he was “talking” to me, and then he was going to tell me to gather my
things together and leave. He might even throw something.
Suddenly I had visions of credit card companies coming to take my
furniture, my car, my wife, my kids—then kicking me in the crotch—and
then it would, in fact, start hurting when I peed. And suddenly it was 20
years ago again:
MOM: It hurts when you pee? And you were bleeding?
ME: [nodding head sheepishly, unable to expand the lie with words]
MOM: We’ll, let’s take a look then.
Uh oh.
Certainly the forex fund was juicy news to Herbie, but he was so incensed that he wasn’t giving me any points for scoring him inside information. Ten feet away from us, a fire hydrant hung from the wall. I thought
that he glanced over at it. He was going to grab it, swing it at me, and take
my head right off. He would murder me and then fire me! Twice as bad! So
I tried one last strategy. I would beg him to back it up. To start over. This
would unquestionably return us to calmer waters. So I said, “I have no idea
what you’re yelling at me about.” I paused. Then my mouth opened to finish the thought and extinguish all hope of continued employment at Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey. “Herbie, I’m telling you the truth.”
Herbie. That was it. I had ended my life at the firm with that one word.
Herbie. No one around there called him Herbert, let alone Herb. But Herbie. That was a blunder of classic proportions, to be logged forever in the
annals of verbal mistakes. Herbert Walker Johnson III might have been
shaped like a Volkswagen Love Bug, but he was outfitted with dirt-racing
tires, a supercharged engine, and now was going to steamroll over me.
He bellowed: “Banes, gather up your things.” No more words. No explanation. No “this is why I am firing you” speech. He stormed away and I
couldn’t blame anyone but myself, even though I still had no idea why he
had been angry in the first place.
When he left, I looked at Scott. He was a ghost. Totally emptied of all
thought, feeling, and life. I struggled to remember important details like my

book_c06.qxd

54

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 54

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

own name, where I was, and what I was doing. I looked around my cubicle.
These were my things. The possessions that I would be taking back home
with me today.
“Are you going to check your trade?” Scott asked.
I did. Maybe some happy news awaited me about the trade.
The GBP/USD was trading at 1.8155. I had lost only 15 pips. Negative
$300. Not a big deal still. It should be moving a lot more than this, I
thought, but I had to give it time. For sure, I wasn’t going to eat a $300
loss just to see it go up and move far enough to have given me $1,300. I remembered well what Craig had said about letting my good trades run to
profitability.
Now that I thought about this trade in light of Craig’s advice, I realized
I didn’t need the stupid job anyway. I would hold on to this trade and make
more money in a day than I’d ever made before. Three or four times as
much. Soon I would be making serious money from trading. Soon I would
be $1,300 richer; by the end of the hour for certain. I determined that the
last thing I would do before I left Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey forever
would be to bank my hard-earned profits on the trade.
“I’m going to wash up,” I told Scott. “Watch the trade if you don’t mind,
and then I’m coming back to gather up my stuff.”
When I returned, Scott had vanished. On top of my desk was a box,
just about the right size for all of my belongings, and inside the box, an envelope. The envelope contained a check made out to me for the sum of
$3,386.75 (after taxes), and a release form for me to sign that gave me the
money in exchange for a promise not to sue the firm. Sue them for what?
Boss abuse?
I fell into my chair and put my head into my hands. The trade was
going good, but what was I going to tell my wife? Why had I been fired?
For a moment I forgot all about the FOMC report, about Craig, about
trading. I just thought of my wife and kids. How was I going to explain
this? My financial life flashed before my eyes: We had $40 in a savings account, and negative who knew how much in our checking account. We had
some savings in an IRA. We had some nice furniture that our parents had
bought for us when we were married. We had a big screen television. We
had kids. We had pictures on our walls of faraway places my wife dreamed
of visiting.
What if the trading didn’t work out? What if I couldn’t repeat the success I had? What if Craig was right, that success at the beginning of a trading career was the worst thing that could happen to me?
I started to list everything I owned. At the moment, I was probably
half-insane, and probably just wanted to remember the possessions I had,
the stuff that I could still call mine. It helped put my feet back down on
earth and my mind back into the present.
