
238

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.21
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 8.22
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Setups and Triggers

239

the downtrend resumes. During the consolidation period, notice that
prices do not close above the high of the last reactionary low point. In fact,
notice the doji as the sideways channel develops; prices do not close
above that high either.
The low close doji pattern, when combined with the three elements
using pivot point analysis, is a very effective trading system. You are not
simply relying on predicting a top, but rather waiting to see a conditional
change occur in the market. By following the flow of the markets—lower
highs, lower lows, and lower closing lows—you can really stay in the trade
and, more important, on the right side of the market. Examine Figure 8.23,
which is a 5-minute chart on the CBOT mini-Dow contract. You will notice
that it is not the same chart as in Figures 8.19, 8.20, or 8.22 and that the signals are triggered at different points in time and in different time periods,
just to prove the frequency and effectiveness of this pattern. Here we see
the market trade up just past the daily projected pivot resistance target.
While the high was actually formed by a shooting star, the real trigger to
sell occurred at the time period that established a close below the doji’s
low. Notice the three elements that help confirm a trend reversal: price
close below both moving average values and the two moving average components crossed, with the short-term moving average below the longer-

FIGURE 8.23
Used with permission of esignal.com.

240

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

term moving average. The trigger to sell short occurred at 10523, and the
exit was confirmed with the high close doji signal at 10483, for a tidy gain
of 40 Dow points, or $200 per contract, based on a day trading margin of
$500. (Day trading margins vary; initial margin requirements to hold a futures position overnight is $2,632 as of 2/1/2006.) That is a trade setup I
watch and wait for, day in and day out; and it works on most markets in
most time periods.
The low close doji setup combined with pivot points and the moving
average component really allows you to see the change in price momentum.
As a screen-based day or swing trader, you have superior advantage over
floor traders or other traders when using charts, pivot points, and the progression of a moving average component. In Figure 8.24, we have a 60minute e-mini–S&P chart showing the price deteriorating once the trigger
was made by a close below the doji low. Notice, too, that the moving averages crossed and prices closed below the moving averages as well. This signals a trigger to sell short at 1278; and by the end of the day, the market was
at 1264. There was never a signal to exit the short position, which resulted
in a 14-point gain, or $700 per contract. Now, this is over 140 percent gain
on a 500 margin in a single day.

FIGURE 8.24
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Setups and Triggers

241

Case in Point
Combining the statistical data that we went over in Chapter 7 (which indicated the frequency with which dojis, hammers, and shooting stars form)
with the correlating markets (such as the S&P, the Dow, gold, and currency) gives you high-performing patterns; and trading using these patterns
should not be ignored. If the markets outlined here have both a high frequency and a strong tendency to form tops and bottoms by the developing
doji candle and if you learn to wait for that specific setup and act on a trigger rather than guessing or anticipating when a market is ready to turn, you
may see a significant improvement in your trading results.

Triggers on Stocks
In Chapter 1, I gave an example of how an exchange traded fund may not
react as much or at all compared to a stock in that group or sector. One
such stock I showed was in Figure 1.15—Toll Brothers. If you broke that
monthly chart down to a weekly and then a daily time frame and used the
combination of the techniques taught so far with pivot point analysis in conjunction with these specific candle patterns, you would have been alerted
to a top in the market in the summer of 2005.
Why don’t traders act on these signals? Most traders do not realize
what pivot point calculations are and how the markets react to them. The
resistance target levels are “hidden,” meaning you cannot see a projected
high because it is not drawn from a past chart pattern; rather, it is derived
from a mathematical calculation. This gives a projected price expansion on
a measured-increase based on the previous time period’s range according
to the pivot point formula. Using the monthly pivot point method, taking
the trading data for Toll Brothers from June would have helped predict the
high for July. Figure 8.25 shows the Pivot Point Calculator with the high,
the low, and the close from the month of June. Notice that the R-2 target
number was 58.12. The exact high in July was 58.67!
The chart in Figure 8.26 illustrates the low close doji trigger. In addition, we had the moving averages cross over, and prices traded beneath
both moving averages to help confirm that the market had lost its bullish
momentum.
To some traders, the tall white candle at the top may have appeared to
look like a buying opportunity, especially as the market made a slight correction. The low close doji against the longer-term monthly pivot point resistance told a different story. Identifying the doji at or near a pivot point is
a great guideline to alert you almost every time that there is a potential
price change or reversal coming. Once the market makes that lower closing

242

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.25
Used with permission of www.nationalfutures.com.

low, that is the trigger to sell. That will hold as a valid statement until the
market closes back above the doji’s high.

The Best Predictive Indicator
The best predictive market analysis tool is the pivot point, especially when
using the higher time periods, such as the monthly and weekly time frames.
We did cover the power of confluence, which should never be ignored.
Using the monthly time frames, any investment vehicle like forex, futures,
and stocks, especially after a market starts to form a doji on a daily chart,

Setups and Triggers

243

FIGURE 8.26
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

is a sure sign that there is a strong possibility that a price or trend change
is about to occur. A great example of using this method to help uncover a
potential disaster in the stock of clothing retailer American Eagle Outfitters
was used in mid-July. Taking the trading data from June as shown in Figure
8.27, the Pivot Point Calculator shows the monthly R-1 was 32.86 and the
R-2 was 35.07. The actual high was 34.04, right in the middle of the target resistance levels.
One thing interesting here is that in Figure 8.28, the variation evening
doji star does create the low close doji setup and indicates that the bullish
momentum, or uptrend, had stopped. However, the market traded in a consolidation range for two weeks before the trend reversal occurred. The trigger to go short was not elected because there were two elements missing:
(1) The market did not close below both moving average values; (2) the
shorter-term moving average did not cross below the longer-term moving
average. Those variables came later, as you can see on the chart. But the
fact is that the monthly pivot point kept the market from establishing further gains; and the low close doji trigger was a significant warning to exit
longs, buy put options, or at least tighten stops or move stop orders up to
protect profits from long positions. The initiative to sell short was also a

244

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.27
Used with permission of www.nationalfutures.com.

very viable action. Using a stop-close-only above the doji’s high, a trader
would not have been knocked out of the short position at any time.
One of the more popular stocks in 2005, which mystified traders as it
made a stratospheric rise, was Google. Figure 8.29 shows the price move
that many thought would never end. Stock analysts were making upgrades
calling for 600 per share in the first week of January 2006, and some were
claiming as high as 2000. As you can clearly see, the low close doji pattern
foretold of the market top; more important, it traded near the monthly R-2
resistance level of 466.95. Once again, here was a high-profile stock that
formed a major top with an LCD trigger at a monthly pivot point target resistance number.

Setups and Triggers

FIGURE 8.28
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 8.29

Google rise
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

245

246

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.30

THE JACKHAMMER
In my experience, the one candle pattern that is associated or synonymous
more than any other with the word capitulation is the hammer as Figure
8.30 shows. In Chapter 7, we identified the frequency or the percentage of
times over a course of the year on a 15-minute time interval when the hammer candle pattern formed at or near the low of a given day. The jackhammer, however, develops in the middle to the end of the trading session.
Usually immediately following the hammer is a bullish candle, or a marabuzo, a tall green positive (+) assigned candle.
What specifically describes the jackhammer? The jackhammer pattern
is a hammer candle, but it occurs in the middle to the end of a trading session. I call it “the search and destroy” stop-loss order pattern. The general
market characteristics of this pattern starts off with the market establishing a low, then consolidates or trades sideways for a bit, and then without
warning sells off abruptly. It is generally that particular sell-off that creates
a hammer pattern. Therefore, anyone who had intraday stops too close,
under what is considered the primary low for the day, got “bagged and
tagged.” In other words, stop-loss orders were elected, and longs were
jacked out of their positions and money—as in hit over the head with a billy
club and “jacked” (robbed).

Trading Rules Defined
The jackhammer formation is an extremely powerful intraday reversal formation that requires immediate action to enter a long position. The sequence of events that occur for this pattern is:

Setups and Triggers

247

• The hammer formed is a secondary low with the close at or near the
primary low’s low.
• It does not matter whether the real body is formed with a higher close
than open or positive assigned value; however, it is generally a more
solid signal when the close is above the open.
• This action generally completes a bullish convergence in the stochastics or MACD oscillator.
• Buy on the close of the hammer or the next time periods’ open; initial
risk is a regular stop below the hammer’s low.
• Give additional importance if this pattern develops near pivot point
support targets, especially if there is a confluence of pivot support targets from different time frames.
• Stock traders should watch for an increase or a volume spike, which indicates an exhaustion bottom is confirmed.
Figure 8.31 shows a 5-minute chart on the CBOT mini-Dow. Notice that
the “midsession” is defined by the middle of the day. The first intraday low
has been established, nearly three hours pass by, and the market makes a
nosedive as prices hit a new low for the trading session. In this example, the
hammer closes back within the primary low’s range. The trigger to go long
is on the hammer’s close or on the open once the hammer formation is con-

FIGURE 8.31
Used with permission of esignal.com.

248

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

firmed. Generally, the jackhammer is followed by a blast-off secondary
candle as prices surge ahead. What we also have happen is that the market
crosses above both moving average values, thus signaling confirmation that
this is a valid buy signal. The trigger to buy was at 10393; as you can see, the
market ran straight to 10473 before giving an LCD trigger to exit at 10443
for a 50-point Dow move, or $250 per contract.
So far in this book, I have given you several patterns that work well for
great day trading vehicles, such as the stock index futures contracts. The
electronic markets offer retail traders a competitive advantage because
they can use a home computer with a DSL or a broadband connection to integrate charting software packages and equal access to markets. The stock
index futures contract, such as the mini-Dow contract, has what technical
and fundamental traders need: News-driven events and other technical
trading market participants both provide volatility and liquidity. Many of
the chart examples contained in these pages are a great representation of
an average day’s trading patterns. That’s not to say the other stock index
markets, such as the e-mini–S&P and the Russell, perform differently; they
interact extremely well with each other. In fact, at times I may have a trigger in the mini-Dow and take the trade in the S&P, and vice versa. Most
times, when the Dow gives me a trigger, that is the market I will trade in.
Consider that the e-mini–S&P have an influence from the tech sector. Dow
at times may or may not have a similar dollar value move as the S&P. Both
markets are great day trading vehicles, as is the Russell. The Dow more
times than not has more distinct trading signals; for that reason, I have illustrated these setups with using the Dow.
As another example of spotting a jackhammer pattern, look at Figure
8.32, which is another 5-minute chart in the Dow. Here you see the secondary low bounce right off a pivot point support; and as the white or positive assigned values show, the candles’ closes are above the opens and
what is indicated immediately after the hammer forms. Notice the immediate reaction of the market as the sequence of higher highs, higher lows, and
higher closing highs occurs. You can also see confirmation of the buy signal with the moving averages crossing over and with the second candle
after the hammer is formed—it closes above both moving average values.
This is the confirmation that should give you the confidence to maintain a
long position. The stop is initially placed below the hammer’s low. This
should not be a stop-close-only as this setup should see an immediate positive reaction. The trigger to go long here was at 10935; the first sign that
the bullish drive lost momentum was the lower closing low at 10965, which
resulted in a quick 30-point gain.
There are times when we see this pattern late in the trading session.
But keep in mind that the CBOT Dow contract trades continuously until 4

Setups and Triggers

249

FIGURE 8.32
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

P.M. (CT), whereas the e-mini–S&P closes at 3:15 P.M. (CT) and reopens at
3:30 P.M. (CT). This offers day traders more time to play those short
squeeze plays that tend to occur toward the end of the day. More important,
I covered why I do not look to sell at support levels. These short squeeze
plays occur as those who may have sold at higher levels look to cover and
take profits, as we see at certain times when the secondary low was rejected, which is what the hammer represents. Prices tend to move sharply
higher in a very short period of time, signifying a rejection of lower prices.
It is that price action that shows buyers attracted to the market, and bears
start buying back or covering their shorts.
Therefore, when you are looking for a pattern such as the high close
doji or the jackhammer in this situation, it is a more fruitful venture. One
great example is in Figure 8.33, where the jackhammer forms near the end
of the session. The trigger to go long was at 10784, which we see as almost
an immediate reaction for prices to move sharply higher to nearly 10830.
This was another quick 40-point-plus gain, or $200 per contract. Again,
this does not sound like big money; but when you consider that the day
trading margin is $500 at most online brokerage firms, that is a healthly
percentage gain.

250

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.33
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

Trading Tips
• If the stop level is too great a distance, lower or reduce your contract
size.
• Place hard stop below the low of the hammer candle.
• Scale out of positions when the market gives you a windfall profit, and
move stops on balance of position above your entry price.

Bullish Convergence Pattern
In Chapter 4, we went over how the market price makes lower lows, but not
by significant measures, and that when prices are at oversold extremes, we
should be cautious for market reversals. We went over the market condition of bullish convergence and how to use the stochastics and MACD indicators to confirm buy signals when that market condition exists. The
jackhammer is a formation that seems to be present in such a situation.
Therefore, it is a great method for setting up a potential buy signal once the
pattern is confirmed. Look at Figure 8.34, which is a 5-minute chart on the

Setups and Triggers

251

FIGURE 8.34
Used with permission of esignal.com.

e-mini–S&P 500 futures. As you see, the midsession of the trading day at
12:30 shows on the charts that the market takes a secondary decline, forming that spike bottom hammer pattern. Notice that the very next candle
after the hammer is a tall engulfing candle that forms a higher high. Prices
then continue on in the sequence of higher highs, higher lows, and higher
closing highs, while continuosly trading above the moving averages. If you
examine the stochastics at the bottom of the chart, notice that when the
price made a new lower low, the reading from the stochastics made a
higher low, identifying that bullish convergence existed. If you watched for
the stochastics to close back above the 20 percent line to confirm the price
reversal and the trigger to go long, you would have had a stress-free trade
that resulted in immediate returns.
In Figure 8.35, you see another example of the e-mini–S&P, this time
with the aid of the MACD study. The jackhammer occurs past the midsession and actually closer to the close of business. Here we see both the moving average and the histogram components alerting us to the fact that the
price action was oversold and that a reversal was likely. The one-two combination of the jackhammer and then the bullish engulfing pattern revealed
a forthcoming price reversal.

252

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 8.35
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Stocks Get Jacked, Too
The psychological aspect of this formation occurs in stocks as well. Believe
me, they are not immune to the ravages of human emotion. The example in
Figure 8.36 is Comcast Corporation and is a great illustration of how the
stochastics indicator confirms that the jackhammer, or secondary low buy
signal, was triggered as confirmed with a bullish convergence signal. The
fast stochastics indicator shows the timing of both %K and %D closed back
above the 20 percent line, confirming a bottom was in place. The trigger to
go long here is on the close of the hammer at 26.63; and before the close at
4 P.M. (ET), the market price is at 26.84.

The Jackhammer’s One-Two Punch
Figure 8.37 shows a 30-minute chart on United Technologies that illustrates, depending on the time period, that the jackhammer pattern can exist
from one day to the next, like a one-two knockout punch that attacks the
stops and immediately pops up. Since many traders look at the obvious low
point to place their stop-loss order, as this example shows, the jackhammer
took out the prior day’s low; and then once again, the one-two pattern develops with the hammer and then the next candle being the tall white, or

Setups and Triggers

FIGURE 8.36
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 8.37
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

253

254

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

bullish, engulfing candle. This starts the immediate price reversal, with the
sequence of higher highs, higher lows, and higher closing highs. See how
the market also closes above and continuously trades above both the moving average values.
If you know what to look for, trading for a living is a great opportunity;
but with opportunity comes responsibility. Prior to entering a trade, you
should have your “pregame” setup, complete with your market analysis and
rules for entering a trade. Certain rules should start with the techniques
covered in this book so far, which include:
• Identifying what the market condition is—overbought or oversold bullish, bearish, or neutral.
• Identifying the levels that the pivot points lines are at, using the various
time frames—monthly, weekly, and daily periods.
• Setting up your charting software parameters with these specific pivot
points moving average values.
• Experimenting with variation settings on your own.
Then you need to watch and identify when and at what price points the
dojis, hammers, and shooting stars develop. Knowledge of these items will
arm you with critical information that can help provide protection from
overtrading as well as from adverse moves and such pitfalls as reacting on
emotions rather than on actual trading signals.

SUMMARY
The method of market analysis described in this book is designed so you
will be educated on the importance of developing your personal trading
system and so you can apply the techniques on a consistent basis, which
will allow you to make decisions in a mechanical and nonemotional way.
Common mistakes that traders make are not testing a strategy and not making a logical determination of whether the strategy is viable for their trading style. Many traders adopt a new strategy, trade with it, and immediately
start tweaking different components of the strategy. The best approach
that I have found in trading is to establish trading rules and to test those
rules until an outcome is determined based on a reasonable number of
trades. Also, I have several different trading strategies for different markets
or conditions. The high close doji, the low close doji, and the jackhammer
patterns are just a few of my proprietary setups that I watch for meeting
these conditions.
If you are in a declining market, once an apparent bottom occurs near
