
116

Currency Strategy

monetary instability. The peg imposes a harsh policy discipline, but it also acts as a straight
jacket on inﬂationary pressure. Even if a currency has a hard peg regime, it is also important to
have an exit strategy in case of a major change (deterioration) in economic conditions which
requires a similar change in the exchange rate regime. A hard currency peg should not be seen
as permanent. If a country chooses to de-peg, this is best done when the currency is under
pressure to appreciate.
While this idea of a “bi-polar” world of exchange rates appeared to provide an answer to the
vexing question of how countries could cope with increasingly mobile capital ﬂow, the example
of Argentina would appear to challenge this view. Not only was it the ﬁrst currency board in
history to be “defeated”, but this example appears to prove that even the hardest pegs could be
forced to de-peg. Certainly, the idea that a currency board cannot be defeated, once prevalent
in the ﬁnancial markets, has now gone. Going forward, it seems likely therefore that markets
will charge a higher risk premium on currency board regimes than was previously the case as
a result of this precedent. Not only is a hard currency peg no panacea, it can also be defeated.
Countries are therefore left with the question of the most appropriate exchange rate regime in
the face of a global market economy consisting of high capital mobility and instant information
availability. For both developed and emerging market economies the choices left are:

r Freely ﬂoating exchange rates
r Adopt a base currency (US dollar or Euro)
r Adopt a regional currency
While some such as John Williamson of the Institute for International Economics have long
argued that intermediate exchange rates are unjustly neglected and “corner solutions” are not
immune to crisis — as the case of Argentina indeed proves — it remains to be seen whether
ﬁnancial markets will tolerate anything other than freely ﬂoating exchange rates or alternatively
adopting a base or regional currency.

5.5 THE REAL WORLD RELEVANCE OF THE
EXCHANGE RATE REGIME
Up to now, this chapter has largely focused on exchange rate regime theory. This section deals
with how the choice of exchange rate regime actually affects currency market practitioners
in practice. As the exchange rate regimes of both developed and emerging markets are still
evolving, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd deﬁnitive answers. That said, based on what we have already
looked at we can draw some useful conclusions. For a start, “ﬁxed” currency pegs are not
necessarily ﬁxed forever — if you get caught long a currency that has just devalued it can kill
your balance sheet or portfolio. For instance, on February 19, 1982, the Mexican peso lost
some 29% of its value. Some 15 years later, on July 2, 1997, the Thai baht lost 10% of its value
in a single day. How do we avoid the kind of portfolio or balance sheet losses such disastrous
events imply? Currency market practitioners within ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate regimes
need to consider the following points:

r Does the currency peg contribute to economic stability or instability? Currency pegs
can provide monetary credibility by using the exchange rate to force inﬂation lower, but they
can also attract substantial and potentially destabilizing capital ﬂows.

Exchange Rate Regimes

117

r To what extent is a country open to global capital ﬂows? If a country allows high capital
mobility, a currency peg may not be appropriate unless it abandons monetary independence
and adopts the hardest of pegs, such as a currency board. Capital ﬂows are less easily
anticipated than trade ﬂows, but much more quickly reversed.
r Is the currency pegged at the correct level? This has been an important question not just
for emerging but also for developed economies, notably with the ERM. Currency market
practitioners should use the lessons learned in Chapters 1 and 2 to judge whether the currency
peg level is appropriate. Corporations with subsidiaries in the countries concerned are well
placed to do this given local pricing and demand knowledge.
r Are there clear patterns of distress ahead of a peg’s collapse? Currency market practitioners can use the CEMC model (see Chapter 6) as a test of market conditions.
r What do you do if a currency peg collapse appears imminent? The trick of course is to
try to anticipate this before the rest of the ﬁnancial market does. Remember the lessons of
the Asian crisis, where the preceding depreciations of the yen and yuan helped make Asian
currencies uncompetitive. Remember also that PPP and REER may not be useful over the
short term, but they are useful over a long-term horizon in suggesting currency over- or
undervaluation. Also, don’t ignore common sense! Did it make sense in 1998 for Russia,
a country which was going cap in hand to the IMF for more money, to have some of the
most expensive residential property in the world in Moscow? Every boom is characterized
by incidents and anecdotes, which after the bubble bursts seem acts not of folly but of sheer
lunacy. Look for signs of these.
r Currency risk may not be the only consideration. Within the emerging markets in particular, there may be other important considerations as well, such as convertibility and liquidity
risk. Is a currency convertible on the capital account? Also, emerging market currencies are
by nature much less liquid than those of developed economies. While USD200–300 billion
may go through the Euro–dollar exchange rate every day (spot, forward, swaps and options),
only USD10 billion goes through the South African rand, the second most liquid emerging
market currency in the world behind the Singapore dollar. Finally, there is also political risk,
which is a more important consideration in emerging markets.
r Hedge when the market doesn’t want to (and neither do you!). When market conditions
are benign is clearly when liquidity is best and pricing potentially most favourable. This is
also the best time to hedge currency risk, particularly if one is potentially concerned about
the sustainability of the currency regime. However, precisely because market conditions are
benign this is not the time when markets are looking to hedge currency risk. The temptation
to stay with the pack (or rather the ﬂock!) should be strenuously avoided. If valuation
considerations suggest a currency peg may be overvalued, hedging should be seriously
considered. It is a question of cost vs. risk rather than risk vs. reward. For the cost of an
option of around 1–2%, you hedge yourself against the potential risk of a devaluation of
around 30–40%. Granted, options are not available in some markets, but in all markets there
are benign and also malign market conditions and seasoned currency market practitioners
should be able to tell the difference and take the opportunity when it is at hand.
r When the market wants to hedge currency risk it is too late! There is no use complaining
about adverse pricing and liquidity developments when the market is scrambling to hedge
currency risk. By that time, forwards have screamed higher and option risk reversals have
blown out. Take the opportunity of favourable pricing and market conditions when it presents
itself, based on valuation considerations.

118

Currency Strategy

Most of the ideas presented in the bullet points above focus largely on pegged or ﬁxed exchange
rate regimes. A different set of considerations may be required when looking at freely ﬂoating
exchange rates:

r Freely ﬂoating exchange rates imply high capital mobility. The two tend to go together.

The combination should mean in theory that capital ﬂow reversals are transmitted through
the exchange rate more efﬁciently and with less volatility.
r Freely ﬂoating exchange rates can however still see major bouts of volatility. While they
tend to be rarer these days, particularly if there are no major economic imbalances involved,
freely ﬂoating exchange rates can also see signiﬁcant bouts of volatility. This is not just
the case within the emerging but also within the developed markets. A case in point is the
collapse in the dollar–yen exchange rate in the autumn of 1998 from around 135 to 114 in
the space of 36 hours. Speculative trends always reverse and when they reverse they tend to
do so violently.
r As pegged exchange rates may be temporary, so freely ﬂoating rates are no panacea.
Freely ﬂoating exchange rates also exact costs and involve risks on the part of the currency
market practitioner in seeking to manage currency risk.

5.6 SUMMARY
To sum up this chapter, we have looked at the various types of exchange rate regime, how they
developed in the wake of the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, how they developed from
ﬁxed to pegged to ﬂoating, and in line with this looked at some of the major factors — such as
capital and trade deregulation — that helped bring this transition about. The aim has been to
acquaint currency market practitioners with the various issues involved with different exchange
rate regimes and how they might deal with these in their business and investment decisions.
In the wake of the emerging market crises of the 1990s, a conventional wisdom has developed
suggesting only a “bi-polar” world of exchange rates, involving either freely ﬂoating exchange
rates or the hardest of currency pegs, may be appropriate. If the history of economics or
ﬁnance teaches us anything, it is that the conventional wisdom is frequently debunked. In this,
exchange rates are no different. The Bretton Woods exchange rate system itself represented
the conventional wisdom for almost 30 years, only to collapse under the weight of its own
contradictions. Intermediate exchange rate regimes, in the form of soft or crawling pegs, were
at one time the conventional wisdom only to be blown away by the irresistible force of capital
ﬂows. For centuries, the medium of exchange was not coloured paper but hard metal, in the
form of either gold or silver. Who is to say this might not return? Granted, it seems extremely
unlikely, but currency market practitioners should take nothing for granted. In this regard, the
price not of democracy but of ﬁnancial security is eternal vigilance. Equally, the price of a lack
of vigilance is a balance sheet or a portfolio in tatters. The type of exchange rate regime is an
extremely important consideration for currency market practitioners.
In this chapter, the focus has been on the type of regime rather than the extent of market
conditions. The ultimate expression of market volatility however is the currency crisis, which as
we have seen can occur frequently. To many these may seem chaotic and utterly unpredictable.
This is however not necessarily the case. In the next chapter, we seek to build models to predict
the exchange rate equivalent of the storm or the hurricane, the currency crisis.

6
Model Analysis:
Can Currency Crises be Predicted?
The type of exchange rate regime is important for normal market trading conditions, but it
is especially important for abnormal periods of market stress that may lead ultimately to a
“currency crisis”. In this chapter, we look speciﬁcally at the phenomenon of currency crises
and whether or not they can be predicted.
In the wake of the emerging market crises in Mexico (1994–1995), Asia (1997–1998),
Russia (1998), Brazil (1999) and Turkey (2001), considerable effort has been made by the
academic and ﬁnancial communities to create models that might be able to predict such crises
in the future. As with long-term valuation models aimed at ﬁnding a currency’s “equilibrium”
level, most of these are based on highly complex mathematical formulae and make certain key
assumptions about human behaviour and psychology. Equally, like the equilibrium models, the
results of these have been mixed at best to date. No-one has as yet come up with the deﬁnitive
model capable of predicting currency crises ahead of time on a consistent basis. The best that
has been achieved is some degree of success, albeit claimed after the fact.
For my part, I make no claim either as to a deﬁnitive breakthrough. What I would lay claim
to however is having approached the issue of currency crisis from a different angle. Most of
the existing models focus largely on the rationality of human behaviour. In a ﬁnancial context,
this implies rational investors investing where the best returns are to be found. If those returns
diminish or if better returns are available elsewhere, it is assumed that they will leave. Such
a rationally-dominated view does not allow for herd behaviour, that buying may continue
long past the point at which yield returns have diminished signiﬁcantly. There is an emotional
hang-up, both within economic theory and within the ofﬁcial community, which labels buyers
as investors and sellers as speculators. Yet, buyers can also be speculating. Indeed, some of
the best examples of speculative excess gone mad have come from buying rather than selling,
notably the internet bubble. Markets are ruled by such fundamental sentiments as greed and
fear, and it is safe to say that in 1999–2000 greed was running rampant. Easy money was to be
had — as it always is during such periods of market hysteria. The ﬁnancial bubble got bigger
and bigger and then burst spectacularly in mid-2000. We are still feeling the after-effects of
the bursting of the economic bubble, that tidal wave of increasingly unproﬁtable investment.
This is just one example of the “speculative” excess with which human history is littered.
In trying to create a model to predict currency crises, my aim has not been to ﬁt economic
theory around the facts, but rather to start the other way around, examining patterns within
those facts and then aligning the theory to ﬁt. The effort has been that of a forensic detective,
rather than a psychic. Thus, the rather simple — though hopefully not simplistic — model that
I created in 19981 is based not on complex mathematical formulae, but instead on the sum of
those patterns that have been seen in the emerging market currency crises of the past 10 years.
For want of a more pithy title, I called it the Classic Emerging Market Currency Crisis (CEMC)
1
Callum Henderson, The Classic Emerging Market Currency Crisis model, 1998, as in Asian Dawn: Recovery, Reform and
Investing in the New Asia, McGraw-Hill, 2000.

120

Currency Strategy

model, a title that is long-winded but hopefully captures the repetitious nature of currency crisis
patterns. Our detective did ﬁnd if not a smoking gun, then at least enough forensic evidence
to discover the “how” and the “why”.
The model focuses on emerging markets and more speciﬁcally the Asian currency crisis in
large part because I witnessed the latter at ﬁrst hand, having lived and been involved in the
ﬁnancial markets in Hong Kong during the second part of the 1990s. Because the model’s
initial aim was to discover patterns that speciﬁcally reﬂected the Asian crisis, it was de facto a
model that focused on ﬁxed or pegged exchange rate regimes and how those broke down. This
is not to say it is only reﬂective of the Asian crisis. CEMC should be viewed as a template
for emerging market currency pegged regimes generally. Indeed, it works remarkably well in
explaining the key dynamics behind the currency crises in Mexico, Russia, Brazil and Turkey.
The model is based on ﬁve key phases that appeared to take place during the Asian crisis,
and were also mirrored in subsequent emerging market crises in Russia, Brazil and Turkey.
Throughout, I use Thailand, seen as the catalyst for the Asian currency crisis, as an example of
the general phenomenon at work. Outside of my work, I ﬁrst expressed this model in published
form in a previous book, Asian Dawn — Recovery, Reform and Investing in the New Asia. Here,
I present the same CEMC model, albeit in a revised and expanded format.

6.1 A MODEL FOR PEGGED EXCHANGE RATES
6.1.1 Phase I: Capital Inﬂows and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation
Theory
The very purpose of having a local currency pegged to a base currency (usually the US dollar)
is to provide a foundation for economic and ﬁnancial stability. A currency peg reduces or even
eliminates the issue of currency risk, and therefore attracts capital inﬂows. Those capital inﬂows
become a self-fulﬁlling prophecy, since they help generate ever higher growth rates, which in
turn attract further capital inﬂows. There are two monetary effects of these inﬂows. First, the
local currency comes under mounting upward pressure. Second, interest rates paradoxically are
forced lower. On the ﬁrst of these, the currency is pegged so it cannot appreciate beyond a certain
point. In order to maintain the peg, the central bank intervenes, selling its own currency for the
base currency. In the money market, the central bank also conducts open market operations,
sterilizing the effect of these inﬂows by withdrawing excess liquidity. Relative to the size of
the inﬂows coming in, the ability of an emerging market central bank to conduct both of these
monetary operations indeﬁnitely is clearly limited. Meanwhile, precisely because interest rates
are low and emerging market economies are not fully open, inﬂation rates are relatively high,
higher that is than the inﬂation rate of the base currency. This should ordinarily mean that the
local currency depreciates on a real basis in order to offset the higher inﬂation rate. The sheer
weight of the capital inﬂows means this cannot happen. Indeed, the opposite happens. The
local currency continues to appreciate on a real, inﬂation-adjusted basis. In turn, this causes
widening external imbalances and loss of export competitiveness.
Practice
Asian countries pegged their currencies to the US dollar in order to provide a foundation for
economic stability, while they got on with the job of growing their economies. In a sense these
dollar pegs did their job too well. With Asian currencies pegged to the US dollar, it appeared
@Team-FLY

Model Analysis

121

that the idea of currency risk had been all but eliminated. Asia in the 1980s and early 1990s
had been growing strongly in any case. Thus the Asian currency pegs together with strong
domestic growth rates provided the platform for a veritable tidal wave of capital inﬂows to the
region, both of the portfolio and foreign direct investment kind. The lack of currency volatility
lulled investors into a false sense of security — though that false sense of security in some
cases lasted for more than a decade.
Many Asian countries had relatively high inﬂation rates, higher than the US whose currency
they were pegged to. Ordinarily, this should mean that a currency depreciates to offset its
higher inﬂation rate, however in the case of Asia the sheer weight of massive capital inﬂows,
combined with the currency pegs, meant that Asian currencies appreciated on a real (inﬂationadjusted) basis, which was greatly exacerbated by the 35% devaluation of the Chinese yuan
in 1994 and the depreciation of the Japanese yen from 1995. The result was widening Asian
trade and current account deﬁcits. Put simply, Asian countries were slowly but surely losing
export competitiveness. High inﬂation and currency pegs meant high interest rates, despite the
fact that most Asian countries ran healthy ﬁscal surpluses. This was not a problem for Asian
governments since most were not seeking to expand domestic borrowing, but it was a problem
for the private sector. Those currency pegs provided the illusion of exchange rate stability,
encouraging corporations to borrow offshore at lower interest rates and swap back to domestic
currency. As a result, signiﬁcant external debt burdens were built up. Unlike in Latin America
in the 1980s, this was private not public debt and went largely unnoticed in the more transparent
public accounts. Thus, Asian corporate and bank balance sheets became increasingly exposed
to external, US dollar-priced debt. While Asian currencies could not move, this was not an
issue. Implicitly however, it meant if Asian currencies were ever allowed to depreciate, the
capital base of those same corporate and banking sectors would be severely depleted if not
eliminated. Asian currency devaluation would mean the cost of repaying that external debt
would be multiplied by the extent of that devaluation.
By late 1996, real exchange rate appreciation had resulted in signiﬁcant trade and current
account balance deterioration. Thailand was running a current account deﬁcit of some 8%
of GDP. Assuming the balance of payments must indeed balance, the other side of a current
account deﬁcit must be a capital account surplus. This is indeed what happened in Asia. Massive
capital inﬂows helped cause real currency appreciation, which in turn led to a rising current
account deﬁcit. To fund its widening current account deﬁcit, Thailand had to attract an ever
increasing amount of capital inﬂows. It did not get them. Instead, “fundamental” investors
became increasingly wary and started if anything to reduce their exposure to Thailand in early
1997 due to a combination of increasing political and economic concerns and diminishing
returns on their investments. As that capital ﬂed — selling Thai baht in order to do so — so
Thai domestic interest rates edged higher while the Thai baht itself came under increasing
downward pressure.

6.1.2 Phase II: The Irresistible Force and the Moveable Object
Theory
As the capital account surplus is reduced while the current account deﬁcit remains high, the
pressure through the balance of payments is expressed through rising local interest rates and
increasing downward pressure on the local currency. In order to maintain the peg, the central
bank again intervenes, this time buying local currency (when capital was ﬂowing in, it was

122

Currency Strategy

forced to sell its own currency) and selling the base currency. In order to do so, it has to sell
its foreign exchange reserves, which are denominated in that base currency. As local currency
is bought from the market so supply is reduced and the interest rates attached to that local
currency forced higher. The central bank has the unpalatable choice of sterilizing this effect by
injecting liquidity back into the money market and thus effectively nullifying the effect of its
foreign exchange intervention or allowing interest rates to rise and hurting the economy and
asset markets in turn. As interest rates rise, so asset markets fall, forcing those investors who
have stayed to cut their losses — and their positions — thus putting yet more pressure and so
on and so forth. A vicious cycle develops, the length of which is decided only by the ability or
the willingness of the central bank to expend its foreign exchange reserves. Eventually, one of
two things happen, either the central bank runs out of reserves or the economic and ﬁnancial
cost of maintaining the currency peg becomes too great and the central bank scraps the peg
and allows the currency to “ﬂoat” (i.e. free-fall).
Practice
As Thailand’s capital account came under increasing pressure so did the Thai baht as increasing
numbers of foreign asset managers tried to get out while they could. Financial market volatility
began to rise alarmingly. From the local perspective, Thai corporations and banks had up until
then largely dismissed the idea of currency risk on the view the currency peg eliminated the
need to hedge. Some not only borrowed in US dollars via the Bangkok International Banking
Facility (BIBF) to reduce the corporation’s interest rate bill but also to make what seemed
a risk-free proﬁt, borrowing those dollars, swapping back into Thai baht and then lending
those baht onshore, making a very nice interest rate spread. The market volatility seen in the
ﬁrst quarter of 1997 made some of these Thai corporations re-think the issue of currency
and interest rate risk (though clearly too few went through this re-thinking process given what
transpired!). Perhaps currency risk should be a consideration after all. Thai corporations started
to hedge, albeit selectively and cautiously, and certainly in small amounts compared to the size
of their external debt exposure. Finally, some speculators arrived on the scene, attracted by
the market volatility as a shark is attracted by the thrashing motion of a ﬁsh, and started to
build up positions against several Asian currencies, including the Thai baht. Readers familiar
with my work on the Asian crisis, Asia Falling — Making Sense of the Asian Currency Crisis,
will be familiar with my view that if speculators can be accused of anything it is tardiness.
Frankly, they were late on the scene. The situation had already deteriorated to the point of no
return before they showed up. They were certainly not responsible for the subsequent currency
devaluations. They may have added to the selling pressure, but they certainly did not cause it.
Whatever the case, the Bank of Thailand tried to respond vigorously to the rising selling
pressure on the baht, intervening in the currency market and hiking ofﬁcial interest rates. Still
the selling pressure increased, if anything it accelerated. In May 1997, the Bank of Thailand
tried to ambush the market, stopping Thai banks from lending baht to the offshore market,
hiking interest rates dramatically and intervening aggressively. The dollar collapsed against the
baht and the Thai overnight borrowing rate skyrocketed to 3000%. It was a brave but ultimately
unsuccessful attempt to defend the currency. Undoubtedly, many speculators were burned in
the process, but so too were local market participants. Furthermore, it did nothing to stop the
capital ﬂight. The selling pressure on the Thai baht continued to intensify and the Bank of
Thailand’s foreign exchange reserves continued to fall. Eventually, it proved too much. If the
Bank of Thailand did not scrap the peg and allow the currency to ﬂoat freely it would simply
