
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, by Edwin
Lefèvre
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, by Edwin Lefèvre (Wiley), is as relevant today as when it
was first published in 1923. Although the book deals with stock markets, Lefèvre’s observations
on price behavior and market psychology make it universally applicable to all financial-markets
trading. Lefèvre, who made and lost several fortunes in his trading career, relates his good and
bad experiences and those of his peers from the individual trader’s point of view, making it
resonate with other aspiring traders. This is another book you can pick up and reread often, and
still find something new each time.

Market Wizards: Interviews with Top
Traders, by Jack D. Schwager
In Market Wizards: Interviews with Top Traders, Jack D. Schwager, a veteran trader himself,
interviews the legends of the trading world for their insights and philosophies of trading. Wizards
is not confined strictly to the forex market; it offers a wider-ranging discussion of stocks, futures,
and currency trading. In it, you learn how the likes of Richard Dennis, Bruce Kovener, and Paul
Tudor Jones, to name just a few, approach trading. These traders are living legends today, but they
all started out relatively modestly and succeeded through discipline, strategy, and diligence while
managing intense psychological pressures. If you’re in search of a trading style, these guys have
plenty to offer.

The Secrets of Economic Indicators, by
Bernard Baumohl
The Secrets of Economic Indicators: Hidden Clues to Future Economic Trends and Investment
Opportunities, 2nd Edition by Bernard Baumohl is an excellent guide for any trader pursuing a
fundamental trading approach. This book actually makes economic statistics into an exciting story.
Baumohl covers all the key U.S. economic reports, how to read and interpret the data, and what
they imply for the U.S. outlook. He also looks at some of the most prominent international data
reports, like the German IFO survey and Japanese industrial production. Baumohl also provides
the best websites to find United States and international economic data, so you can follow the data
trail to the source. Read in advance about each U.S. economic release; over the course of a month,
you’ll have learned about every major monthly indicator.

Come into My Trading Room, by Alexander
Elder, MD
Come into My Trading Room: A Complete Guide to Trading, by Alexander Elder, MD (Wiley),
was written by a practicing psychiatrist and trader. Elder’s observations on the personal
psychology and emotions of trading are especially insightful if you’re new to the markets. His
book is a well-rounded overview of all aspects of individual trading, from understanding
emotions to managing money and risk to following the habits of an organized trader.

To access the cheat sheet specifically for this book, go to
www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/currencytrading.

Find out "HOW" at Dummies.com

