
Will executions use limit or market orders? Will physical or mental stops decide trade exits? These
important decisions may depend on the choice between a discount and a direct-access broker. Many
direct systems don’t allow placement of market orders or physical stops. They assume that

participants will sit in front of their terminals at all times and guard positions. If lifestyle conflicts
with this workflow, consider a less demanding system interface that allows automatic position
management.
Modify personal style frequently as skills grow. Experience awakens fresh tactics that require new
risk considerations. Since trading rules only represent guidelines to focus strategies, they should not
strangle fresh ideas. Update them to incorporate your trading evolution and mark progress on the
road to experience. One note of caution: review and adjust all prior tactics as necessary, but don’t
trade new styles first and document them later.
Decide where to place focus at the beginning of each market day. Time restraints force the
elimination of many excellent opportunities in favor of those that appear more imminent through
analysis. Choose wisely and setups will explode as predicted. Use personal trading style to define
what will survive and capture the attention. Intuition plays a great part in this process. New setups
that invoke excitement are more likely to ignite than those that draw fatigue.
Choose information sources wisely. How much chart analysis will be done each night? Will news as
well as numbers trigger trade execution? Will positions remain active through major economic
releases or will they close out in anticipation of shock events? Decide if a real-time news ticker will
improve results and whether the TV set will stay on or off during market hours. Define clear
relationships to stock boards and chat rooms. When will external opinions be shut out completely to
prepare for the next entry?
Trading journals work well in conjunction with written rules. Compare the two frequently to
determine how well decisions follow personal style and whether trading plans remain on target.
Identify poor results and adjust tactics immediately. The game’s complexity requires constant
attention to stay focused on the goal. But avoid using a written journal to excuse failure. Confession
only goes so far in healing emotions. Profits do a much better job.

DAY TRADING
Fast-execution systems popularize very short-term strategies that attack wide Nasdaq spreads.
Direct-access broker-dealers teach their clients these tactics because many of them once worked the
market floors and scalped for a living. Many financial professionals can’t teach anything else—it’s
the only type of trade execution that they understand. As a result, many participants believe that day
traders just scalp and do nothing else.
Scalping the spread should not be taught to neophytes. The quick-trigger environment requires a
seasoned instinct and understanding of how markets move through buy-sell behavior. Scalping
techniques teach players to capitalize on short swings in price and momentum. But most
participants need years of practice to develop finely tuned reflexes that can jump quickly in and out
of fast-moving stocks.
Veteran day traders have quietly flipped stocks for many years. Nightly Pattern Cycle review
uncovered many opportunities with very short time triggers. Automatic speed dialers then rang
brokers for quick fills as soon as ETs were struck during the next day’s session. Although execution
required a phone call rather than Net access, lower market volatility reduced slippage and permitted
effective intraday strategies.
Successful swing trading does not rely on ECNs, SOES, BDs, MMs, and so on. It depends on
accurate prediction of the market’s next move. Participants book profits when they buy low and sell
high. They lose money when they don’t buy low and sell high. Common sense dictates that this

elementary strategy becomes more difficult as the holding period shortens. Most successful day
traders start with investing or position trading. They slowly move to the intraday arena after they
master easier tactics and develop profound skills in the prediction of short-term market movement.
Position trading teaches all of the skills required for successful day trading but at a pace that the
brain can easily assimilate. Day traders must apply instant market analysis and control risk in highly
adverse conditions. This requires many years of experience for most participants. Jump into the day
trading game with a lack of seasoned market-based skills and expect to be thrown into a meat
blender.
Neophytes should seek classic technical training and avoid the video game suicide trap. Learn how,
what, and when to buy and sell. Then use software systems and other tools to optimize strategies
and improve results. Realize that the natural flow of opportunity often requires trade execution
contrary to the crowd order flow that mindlessly chases small shifts in momentum.

RISK MANAGEMENT
Market participants have an amazing capacity to ignore risk management. Caught in the excitement
of the game, no one wants to miss the next big thing. Each day we discover that everyone else
makes money in the markets. Stock boards crow about huge gains but rarely admit big losses.
Newsletters advise how to make a fortune but never how to avoid losing one. And our neighbors all
bought hot stocks at the right time and are well on their way to retirement.
Swing traders fail when they don’t manage positions. Long-term market survivors learn to control
losses effectively before attempting to increase gains. Unfortunately, most neophytes don’t have the
required discipline to exercise this sound risk management. They chase positions with no safe exit
as the lure of the big gain disables unbiased evaluation.
Greed attracts players to the strategies that have the highest failure rates. Danger increases
significantly when trading in these high-volatility environments. Wide swings ensure that price
moves a great distance in a very short time frame. These hot stocks offer few safe entry levels and
many insider shakeouts. Borderline participants always see the upside but ignore the downside
when they enter positions into crowd excitement. Whatever happens next is out of their control
because they exercise no planning, reward targeting, or risk management.
Hot stocks build a sense of invulnerability as they move in the crowd’s direction. Profit feeds the
ego and strokes it as markets race higher. Large gains build and silence rational thought. Traders
caught in this mindset quickly become investors and lose that predatory edge that finds consistent
winners. If the stock turns, the ego says it will always come back. Entire gains vanish as these new
investors insist on value instead of technical patterns. Or it can even ride higher and reinforce bad
habits for the new conquering king.
Positions can move quickly against careless participants and generate strong fear. The charting
landscape may offer few escape routes, and the trader freezes like a deer in the headlights as price
takes off in the wrong direction. Survival instincts often kick in at this point, and flawed logic
decides not to take the loss but ride it back to the entry level or a fresh profit. Anything can happen
after that decision because all control has been abdicated to fate and ego. A trading account empties,
or a miracle saves the day. In either case the speculator takes the next step toward washout and a
safer hobby.
Neophytes should choose less volatile markets for their strategies. Look for stocks that move in
slower motion and offer more opportunity to take appropriate safety measures. But even this calmer

path will set participants on the road to failure if they build inadequate responses to dangerous
conditions. Smaller gains in this environment also encourage more frequent trading. Transaction
costs build quickly and bleed gains, while nonperforming positions waste capital and restrict other
opportunities.
The most important rule of risk management requires little interpretation: never enter a trade
without knowing the exit. Each ET choice generates a risk profile based on the distance between the
entry and major S/R violation level. This level (failure target) determines the point where price
action proves that the trade was wrong and should be abandoned. This distance must be acceptable
before each trade entry.
This exit must not produce a loss in excess of the swing trader’s predetermined risk tolerance.
Target a permissible average loss as part of trading style and rule preparation. Smaller accounts
must manage smaller losses than large accounts. Risk tolerance also aligns closely with reward
measurement. The distance from the entry to the nearest S/R barrier in the direction of the trade
(profit target) measures reward potential. Seek positions with reward targets that measure at least
three times the calculated risk. Then estimate the actual dollar loss should the position fail and
violate the risk level with the expected number of shares.
Many good positions should be avoided or exited quickly. Markets work well when setups yield
profits, but trouble starts when they don’t. Each promising trade has high odds for failure that must
be considered before entry. Many participants fall into a gambling mentality when things go wrong.
They rely on luck to get them past the risk and into a profit. Never follow this dangerous path. Do
not execute a position unless the effect of being wrong matches the individual risk tolerance.
Slippage increases transaction costs. Actual trade fills may fall far from expected execution prices.
Swing traders can exercise more slippage control on entries than exits by using limit orders. Exits
must often be taken quickly and through any door available. This leads to losses that consistently
exceed risk measurements. Slippage and increased transaction costs must factor into reward:risk
calculations. One easy method just pulls a half-point off the ratio. For example, the final number
won’t exceed 2.5:1 if the original setup measures 3:1 reward:risk before real-world impact.
Seek low-risk entry whenever possible. Find setups with ET levels very close to S/R or look for
deep pullbacks in well-established trends. Narrow-range bars offer safer entry than expansion
moves. Spreads narrow and permit swift execution at specific prices in a quieter environment. Filter
time as well as price. The first and last trading hours carry sharp volatility and higher risk. Avoid
execution through discount brokers during this time or face high slippage and late fill reports that
defeat loss management. And always consider the quiet lunch hour to enter positions for afternoon
rallies.

WINNING AND LOSING
Swing trading success depends on the chosen path to profit. Some push hard for the big gain but
risk big losses when the action suddenly turns against them. Others slowly build each profit and
watch defensively for a quick exit when wrong. Choose the focus that matches your trading
personality but prepare to deal with the consequences of the decision. You have to be very, very
good before you allow yourself to be bad.
Measure ongoing performance using win–loss calculations. The simple %WIN ratio compares
winners to losers and tracks the success of new strategies. Average winners (AvgWIN) and losers
(AvgLOSS) measure results against risk tolerance. These calculations look at trades in the
following manner:

%WIN = winners/total trades
AvgWIN = total profits/winning trades
AvgLOSS = total losses/losing trades
Example: The swing trader books profits of $300, $350, and $400 and one loss of $175 is recorded.
Profits come from three out of four trades:
%WIN = 3 winners/4 trades
%WIN = 75%
AvgWIN = ($300 + $350 + $400)/3 winners
AvgWIN = $350
AvgLOSS = $175/1 loser
AvgLOSS = $175
Different strategies emit different risk profiles. Scalpers tend to exhibit high %WIN and low
AvgWIN, while position traders reflect low %WIN and high AvgWIN. Strong momentum markets
incur high AvgLOSS. Momentum players must compensate for this increased risk through higher
%WIN if possible, but that often fails. Swing markets increase %WIN but limit both AvgWIN and
AvgLOSS. Swing traders can impact results through time frame and strategy choices more than
any other market player. They may wind up at either extreme, depending on their risk approach.
Trade risk shifts dramatically through small changes in %WIN, AvgWIN, and AvgLOSS. High%WIN traders can absorb much higher dollar losses than low-%WIN traders and still profit. Many
markets limit AvgWIN by the nature of their inefficiencies, but swing traders can often narrow
AvgLOSS through careful risk management practices. Consider how AvgLOSS impacts
performance from the 25% to 75% %WIN levels. And here’s the kicker: most professional traders
have a %WIN under 50%. Guess how they got to be professionals?
The markets offer only three ways to improve profitability, regardless of trading style: raise the
%WIN, raise the AvgWIN, or lower the AvgLOSS. Intraday traders have fewer profitability options
than position traders. Price tends to move away from entry as a function of time. So intraday profits
(AvgWIN) tend to be smaller than longer-term gains. Very short-term time frames also frustrate
attempts to raise %WIN because short-term traders must demonstrate perfect timing while position
traders can wade through many whipsaws to get to their profit.
Intraday traders can control losses more efficiently than position traders. Price-time tendency now
works to their advantage. In other words, incurred losses will be smaller on average because
positions are held for a shorter time period. This allows loss distribution closer to zero than position
trading. But frequent intraday executions often wash out this advantage through higher transaction
costs.
Loss-side management increases profits more quickly than chasing gains. Take what the market
gives and move on to the next trade. Successful participants know when they’re wrong and execute
a well-rehearsed exit plan. Learn this skill quickly because most traders lose more often than they
win during a typical career. Enter every position with an exit door close to the entry to cut losses

when wrong. Keep another just behind advancing price to protect gains when right. Expect some
frustration along the way. Many stocks will whipsaw through S/R and shake out good positions just
before taking off sharply in the right direction. Experience will reduce these unpleasant events but
will never eliminate them completely.
TABLE 4.2
Three Ways to Make a $10,000 Profit
%WIN
Trades
AvgWIN
75%
100
$800
50%
100
$800
25%
100
$800

AvgLOSS
$2000
$ 600
$ 133

Profit
$10,000
$10,000
$10,000

Seek liquidity at all times. Swing traders need fast execution with low slippage, and that won’t
happen unless there’s an active crowd flipping the stock. Less liquid issues also carry higher
transaction costs and erratic movement that will undermine sound risk management. Avoid stocks
with volume less than 500K to 1M shares/day for 1–3-day positions. Intraday traders should focus
on issues that trade 2M shares or more each session. Special conditions will change these
guidelines. High-level shock events turn thin stocks into excellent swing trading vehicles for short
periods of time. Shocked stocks that trade 3–5M shares or more produce excellent profits with low
transaction costs.

STOP LOSSES
Avoid physical stops as long as positions can be managed in real-time. This reduces stop gunning
exposure and allows a progression of natural exit points. As price evolves, so does exit planning.
Swing tactics implement discretionary (voluntary) rather than system (automatic) trade execution.
This flexibility extends through the exit from each active position. Terminate the trade when
movement in the intended direction reaches a natural barrier that may impede further price change.
Also get out when movement against the intended direction violates a natural barrier that may
accelerate price change.
Focus on trailing S/R to locate appropriate stop loss for the intraday trade. Build a grid around
advancing price with MA ribbons and Bollinger Bands. Apply the 5-8-13 settings and watch the
averages closely. Exit on a break of the 8-bar that follows a very strong trend. Watch the 13-bar in
moderate conditions and depart on a break of that level. Failure through this center point raises odds
that price will expand sharply toward the other band extreme. The interplay among price, MA, and
BB frequently points to a low-risk exit several bars before a serious reversal occurs. Consider an
exit before the MA violates if price starts to roll sideways along the edge of the average.
TABLE 4.3
Market Liquidity in the Year 2000
Volume
Nasdaq
Top 10%
417
Top 20%
895
Top 30%
1400

NYSE/ASE
361
663
1159

All
778
1558
2559

External stop losses manage large cycle reversals. Individual stocks will turn and follow volatile
intermarket conditions such as program selling or index breakouts. Mental stop preparation must
identify external conditions that will terminate active equity positions. When unexplained reversals
trigger sharp expansion on futures or index charts, close positions first and ask questions later.

Don’t wait for a response on the individual stock chart. Use that short interval to escape before
others take notice of the event.
FIGURE 4.11
A series of low-risk channel trades appear during three hours of Immunex price action. Each promising setup
generates a natural band (shaded area) that violates the chosen strategy. This marks a price level that signals the
setup has failed and should be exited. Try to place stop loss orders within these bands to maintain sound risk
management. Avoid the trade completely if a band cannot be drawn close to the intended entry level.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Swing traders consistently recognize impending failure as Pattern Cycles knowledge grows.
Don’t wait for the crowd to depart a failing position. Lead them out the exit door and move on to
the next opportunity. A pullback will often follow the first violation of well-marked S/R in strong
markets. One advanced strategy holds the position through the swing break and bids into the
bouncing market to exit. While good discipline always grabs the first exit door, use this second
chance when caught off guard.
Place an arbitrary stop to keep the trade within risk tolerance if momentum offers no obvious exit.
Enter with the market in motion and place the exit order at any price that yields an acceptable loss.
Better yet, bid into the market several times and place stops very close to the purchase prices. Then
take a series of small losses in the effort to catch a major price thrust. Keep in mind that if a
momentum market turns sharply, no stop loss will offer real protection.

Physical stops provide a convenient tool for parttimers that can’t actively manage their open
positions. Enter the sell stop as soon as the trade produces a new fill report. Place the limit order on
the other side of known S/R within the risk parameters for the position. Add reasonable wriggle
room to avoid whipsaw exits. If the position survives the session, reexamine the stop that night and
adjust as necessary. Continue to review nightly and push the exit door closer to current price as
soon as it moves into a profit. Adjust it even closer as the price target approaches or time reaches
the intended holding period. And consider a quick windfall exit after any sharp bar expansion in the
right direction.

CAPITALIZATION
Small accounts must maintain strict risk parameters to swing trade. The lower transaction costs and
tight spreads of modern markets allow $2,000 to $5,000 of capital to earn a profit. But any
impatience will lead to a quick account decline. Keep position size and trade frequency to a
minimum. Execute longer-term strategies and allow gains to build over time. Choose lower beta
issues that exhibit all of the Pattern Cycle phases but move in slow motion. The markets will still be
around next week and next year.
Active swing traders should start with minimum capital of $10,000 to $25,000. This size permits
good position management without the use of margin. Trade the highest-priced stocks that fit
comfortably into the account and avoid buying low-priced issues. Buy or sell the right number of
shares for each setup and keep free money aside for unexpected opportunities. Transaction costs
still take a bite out of profits at this level. Increase risk through more volatile issues and position
size rather than trade frequency.
Trading for a living requires at least $50,000 to $100,000 and a pool of savings that ensures the
account will not be tapped for daily expenses. This size allows multiple positions in volatile stocks
at all price levels and manages results through real-time systems that respond immediately to
changing conditions. The professional treats swing trading as a business and commits sufficient
time to match the high financial stakes. This commitment level should not be attempted until a
consistent track record demonstrates significant talent and a stable personality for the occupation.
Professional day traders need larger accounts than swing traders as higher transaction costs and
lower AvgWIN impact profitability. Smaller intraday movement requires larger position size to tap
profits and losing trades must be exited quickly when they jump the wrong way. Account
drawdowns will tend to be higher than swing trading, but shock events will do less damage.
Consider the good reasons to reduce trade frequency and apply swing tactics instead of scalping or
very short-term day trading.
Many players find it difficult to manage several open positions at one time regardless of account
size. Avoid the urge to increase position size to compensate for a thin portfolio. Each trade has a
risk level that matches the number of shares put to work. As experience grows, consider the
addition of multiple time frames into a single account. Longer-term positions tap available cash but
require less active babysitting. This strategy works well after the swing trader learns the risks of
trend relativity errors and manages them efficiently.
Establish a solid performance record before incorporating margin into a personal trading plan.
Increased buying power exaggerates both gain and loss. Margin can generate an unhealthy sense of
power that introduces a gambling mentality into trade tactics. It can quickly wipe out a promising
career through overtrading or excessive position size. Consider margin a powerful tool in the right
hands and a dangerous weapon in the wrong hands.
