Charles T. Munger. New York: Donning Company Publishers, 2005.
Chapter 60
1. Interview with Kathleen Cole.
2. Interviews with Jamie Dimon, Jeffrey Immelt.
3. Berkshire Hathaway 2004 chairman’s letter, annual report.
4. Berkshire Hathaway letter to shareholders, 2006. Buffett had stated these criteria in private earlier.
5. Betsy Morris, “The Real Story,” Fortune, May 31, 2004.
6. Investors felt that Coke should move aggressively into noncarbonated drinks, but the company insisted that
international growth in carbonated beverages—the highest-margin product—was the only way to go. At $50,
the stock was also still expensive at 24x earnings and 8.6x book value.
7. Coca-Cola Enterprises took a $103 million charge for the European recall during Ivester’s reign. In 1999,
Daft had to report the first loss in a decade and take a total of $1.6 billion of charges. Then, in 1Q2000, Daft
reported Coke’s second quarterly loss in a row—charges for massive restructuring/layoffs and a write-down
of excess bottling capacity in India. In 2000, Coke took more charges and cut its projection for annual
worldwide unit case volume growth to 5% to 6%, from 7% to 8%. Coke revised its targets again after 9/11.
8. Suppose Berkshire demanded a special deal. On $120 million of purchases, this might be worth, say, a
dime a share, estimating liberally. Berkshire earned $5,309 per A equivalent share in 2003. (The company
doesn’t present cents per share in its financial statements.) To a B shareholder, it would be 3/10 of a penny
per share. It’s very hard to make a case that an amount so small would incent Buffett to do something so
contrary to Coca-Cola’s interests as to force it to turn down a big contract with Burger King in order to keep
selling Coca-Cola at Dairy Queen. That would be so even if Berkshire owned zero Coca-Cola stock. The

problem with the ISS approach was its absolutist checklist approach that applies no reasoning and
proportionality.
9. CalPERS also opposed the election of Herbert Allen, former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn, and Don Keough
because of their business relationships with the company.
10. Herbert Allen, “Conflict-Cola,” Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2004.
11. Excerpts from a survey of corporate board members conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers, as reported
in Corporate Board Member, November/December 2004. PWC identified no comments or sentiment against
Buffett.
12. Deborah Brewster, Simon London, “CalPERS Chief Relaxes in the Eye of the Storm,” Financial Times,
June 2, 2004.
13. Interview with Don Graham.
14. “Coke Shareholders Urged to Withhold Votes for Buffett,” Atlanta Business Chronicle, April 9, 2004.
15. In “The Rise of Independent Directors in the U.S., 1950–2005: Of Shareholder Value and Stock Market
Prices” (Stanford Law Review, April 2007), Jeffrey N. Gordon concludes, “One of the apparent puzzles in
the empirical corporate governance literature is the lack of correlation between the presence of independent
directors and the firm’s economic performance. Various studies have searched in vain for an economically
significant effect on the overall performance of the firm.”
16. This issue was resolved through a consent decree on April 18, 2005, in which the company did not pay a
fine or admit wrongdoing but promised to clean up its internal audit, compliance, and disclosure systems.
17. The GMP International Union, which also spoke at the meeting.
18. Transcript, Coca-Cola shareholder meeting 2004, courtesy of the Coca-Cola Company; Adam Levy and
Steve Matthews, “Coke’s World of Woes,” Bloomberg Markets, July 2004; interviews with several directors
and company employees.
19. Transcript, Coca-Cola shareholder meeting 2004, courtesy of the Coca-Cola Company.
20. Adam Levy and Steve Matthews, “Coke’s World of Woes.” The New York Times blasted Coke over
severance payments to Heyer and other executives in “Another Coke Classic,” June 16, 2004. The criticism
was not universal; the Economist said Isdell was “welcomed by investors and analysts as a safe pair of
hands” (“From Old Bottles,” May 8, 2004).
21. For example, Constance L. Hays, in The Real Thing: Truth and Power at the Coca-Cola Company (New
York: Random House, 2004), makes this inference.
Chapter 61
1. Interview with Tom Newman.
2. Interview with Kathleen Cole.
3. Ibid.
4. The author, too, has for some years sat in the managers’ section, although she is not a shareholder.
5. This dinner, which was hosted by Morgan Stanley at the time, subsequently became a private event hosted
by the author.

6. Courtesy Paul Wachter, producer, Oak Productions.
7. Tom Strobhar, “Report on B-H Shareholder Meeting,” Human Life International, May 2004; “Special
Report, HLI Embarrasses Warren Buffett in Front of 14,000 Stockholders,” July 2004. Mr. Strobhar has a
curious history. After serving as a leader in the boycott against Berkshire that resulted in canceling the
shareholder-contributions program, he wrote an editorial in the Wall Street Journal, “Giving Until It Hurts”
(August 1, 2003), criticizing the shareholder-contributions program for being a clandestine way of “paying”
Buffett (Notwithstanding that Berkshire made no corporate charitable contributions nor paid a dividend).
Strobhar identified himself only as the president of an investment firm in Dayton, Ohio, omitting his role in
the boycott and the fact that he was chairman of Life Decisions International. Strobhar went on in 2005 to
found Citizen Action Now, an organization designed to fight “the homosexual agenda” and for “an America
free from the manipulation of homosexual groups.” On the website of his investment firm, he borrows
Buffett’s reputation by advertising himself (as of November 2007) as “trained in the tradition of Ben
Graham, the ‘father of security analysis,’ whose students include Warren Buffet [sic], ‘the world’s greatest
investor.’…Like Graham and Buffett, Thomas Strobhar’s focus is on ‘value investing.’”
8. Excerpts from 2004 Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting are from notes of the author.
9. The Omaha Housing Authority bought the house for $89,900.
10. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid.
14. Howard Buffett Jr. (Howie B.), speaking at Susie’s funeral.
15. Interview with T. D. Kelsey.
16. Ibid.
17. Interviews with Al Oehrle, Barbara Oehrle.
18. Interview with T. D. Kelsey.
19. Interviews with Herbert Allen, Barbara Oehrle, T. D. Kelsey.
20. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
21. Interviews with Herbert Allen, T. D. Kelsey. According to the Oehrles, Herbert Allen, and Barry Diller,
the rest of the guests remained in Cody for the weekend and turned the weekend, as best they could, into a
sort of tribute to Susie.
22. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
23. Interview with Howie Buffett.
24. Interviews with T. D. Kelsey, Herbert Allen.
25. Interviews with Susie Buffett Jr., Peter Buffett.
26. Interviews with Susie Buffett Jr. and Peter Buffett, who both said they found it comforting to have their

mother with them in the plane.
27. Interview with Howie Buffett.
28. Interview with Sharon Osberg.
29. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
30. Interview with Devon Spurgeon, whom Susie Jr. called on her honeymoon in Italy. The author was also
supposed to make this trip; Buffett’s wish for emotional support from women was probably at an all-time
high during this period.
Chapter 62
1. She left significant amounts of money to Kathleen Cole and Ron Parks, her longtime trusted caretakers and
friends. She left her grandchildren and other people modest amounts, from $10,000 to $100,000.
2. Interview with Tom Newman.
3. Interview with Howie Buffett.
4. Interview with Peter Buffett.
5. A. D. Amorosi, “In ‘Spirit,’ Tradition Is Besieged by Modern Life,” Philadelphia Inquirer, May 23, 2005.
6. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
7. Interview with Peter Buffett.
8. Interview with Sharon Osberg.
9. Interview with Charlie Munger.
10. Berkshire Hathaway annual letter to shareholders, 2005.
11. Charles R. Morris, The Trillion Dollar Meltdown. New York: Public Affairs, 2008.
12. Carol Loomis, “Warren Buffett Gives It Away,” Fortune, July 10, 2006.
13. Ibid.
14. Buffett could not resist: The note that accompanied Bertie’s letter containing this comment said, “She’s
still smarting about that a little bit.”
15. Interview with Doris Buffett.
16. In installments beginning in 2006, as long as either Bill or Melinda Gates is active in the foundation.
17. The first installment of 602,500 shares declined 5% a year in terms of shares thereafter. Buffett expected,
as was reasonable, that the price of Berkshire’s stock would increase by at least 5% a year (through modest
growth and inflation). Thus, the dollar value of the gifts was likely to remain level or even increase from year
to year. During the year between the first gift and the second, Berkshire’s stock price went up 17%. The first
602,500-B-share distribution was worth $1.8 billion, compared to the second 572,375-B-share distribution
worth $2 billion. In June 2006, BRK was trading at $91,500 (B shares at $3,043).
18. As quoted in “The Life Well Spent: An Evening with Warren Buffett,” November 2007.

19. Bill Gates used the term “convenors.” This approach differs, for example, from annually funding a
vaccine program, which requires a continuing investment without a permanent cure.
20. “The New Powers of Giving,” Economist, July 6, 2006; Karen DeYoung, “Gates, Rockefeller Charities
Join to Fight African Hunger,” Washington Post, September 13, 2006; Han Wilhelm, “Big Changes at the
Rockefeller Foundation,” Chronicle of Philanthropy, September 8, 2006; Andrew Jack, “Manna from
Omaha: A Year of ‘Giving While Living’ Transforms Philanthropy,” Financial Times, December 27, 2006.
21. Interview with Doris Buffett. See Sally Beaty, “The Wealth Report: The Other Buffett,” Wall Street
Journal, August 3, 2007.
22. Former President Jimmy Carter letter to Warren Buffett, October 18, 2006.
23. The guinea worm enters the body through the drinking of tainted water, then grows up to three feet long
and the width of a paper clip. The worm burns its way out through the skin by emitting an excruciatingly
painful acid, emerging a few inches a day as sufferers wind it around a twig. They often seek relief by
plunging into water, where the erupting worm releases a cloud of larvae to begin the cycle anew. The Carter
Center and other nongovernmental organizations are tantalizingly close to wiping out the guinea worm.
24. Interview with Astrid Buffett.
25. After Susie’s death, both of her apartments in San Francisco’s Pacific Heights were sold, as was the
Buffetts’ second house, “the dormitory,” in Emerald Bay. Buffett kept the original house in Emerald Bay,
which continues to be used by his children and grandchildren. He never goes there.
26. On December 12, 2007, major central banks began to provide funding at terms longer than overnight, and
began to auction funding against a broader range of collateral and with a broader set of counterparties. The
Federal Reserve activated swap lines to help the other central banks provide liquidity in dollars to their
markets.
27. Using the return on capital figure he achieved for shareholders through 2007 as a proxy, the author
estimates that Buffett (not including Susie’s shares) would have been worth between $71 and $111 billion by
the end of 2007 had he continued to charge his “partners” fees. Susie’s stake would have been worth another
$3.7–$5 billion. The difference between the high and low range is the fee structure (Buffett’s former 25%
plus 6% interest on capital to all partners—the high number—vs. the 2%/20% structure of most hedge funds
today—the low number). The calculation assumes that Buffett took out the equivalent of his 6% a year for
living expenses, as he typically did while running the partnership. That amounts to $1 million per year by
2007. His and Susie’s (really Susie’s) living expenses exceeded this by a wide margin; however, Buffett’s
personal investments—not part of Berkshire—also compounded at an astonishing rate and could (and did)
fund Susie’s lifestyle without further withdrawals from Berkshire.
28. Interview with Charlie Munger.
Afterword
1. Michael Santoli, “They’ve Got Class,” Barron’s, September 10, 2007.
2. E. S. Browning, “Stocks Tarnished by ‘Lost Decade,’” Wall Street Journal, March 26, 2008.
3. Warren Buffett letter to Nicole Buffett, August 10, 2006.
4. Richard Johnson with Paula Froelich, Chris Wilson, and Bill Hoffmann, “Buffett to Kin: You’re Fired!,”
New York Post, September 7, 2006.
5. This excludes approximately $180 million of imputed investment income on the $5.5 billion of General

Re’s cash that Buffett had transferred to National Indemnity and Columbia Insurance through intercompany
reinsurance agreements. General Re estimated the effect on its return on equity at 150 basis points in each of
2005, 2006, and 2007.
6. The combination of underwriting profits and higher float produced a 20% return on average equity in 2006
compared to losses in earlier years. Gen Re grew its book value at an average of 12.8% since 2001, bringing
its capital to more than $11 billion, compared to $8.6 billion when it was acquired. General Re made a $526
million profit from underwriting on premiums of about $6 billion—compared to earlier losses of between $1
and $3 billion (depending on the year) on premiums of just under $9 billion. Float had risen from about $15
billion to $23 billion on a 32% decline in premiums.
7. Joseph P. Brandon letter to Warren Buffett, January 25, 2008.
8. Berkshire Hathway 2007 letter to shareholders.
9. HIH Royal Commission, The Failure of HIH Insurance. Australia: National Capital Printing, Canberra
Publishing and Printing, April 2003.
10. Doug Simpson, “Search for Deep Pockets Widens in Reciprocal of America Case,” Unintended
Consequences blog (dougsimpson.com/blog), March 3, 2005; Timothy L. O’Brien, “Investigation of
Insurance Puts Buffett in Spotlight,” New York Times, March 28, 2005; Timothy L. O’Brien and Joseph B.
Treaster, “The Insurance Scandal Shakes Main Street,” New York Times, April 17, 2005; Marisa Taylor,
“U.S. Dropped Enron-Like Fraud Probe,” McClatchy Newspapers, July 23, 2007; Scott Horton, “Corporate
Corruption and the Bush Justice Department,” Harper’s Magazine, July 24, 2007.

A Personal Note About Research

To write The Snowball, I spent more than five years interviewing Warren Buffett, both in person and on the
phone. For weeks on end I sat in his office or traveled with him observing him work. Some of my most
valuable insights came from my own experiences with him. I also interviewed his family, friends, former
classmates, business associates, and others—250 people in all. Some of these interviews continued for days
and I interviewed many people several times.
Warren gave me virtually unlimited time, and let me roam with surprising freedom among the files and
correspondence in his exhaustive collection; it was especially fortunate that he and many of his friends and
family members were letter-writers. Berkshire Hathaway’s files contained material that helped establish a
timeline and flesh out details. I also relied on my own growing understanding of Warren, and at times on my
direct knowledge of events. Certain disagreements among sources are aired in the endnotes.
Quotes appear throughout the book to illuminate the narrative. Most quotes are from recorded interviews,
and have been edited only for clarity and length. Sources were cited unless the interviewee asked not to be
named.
During their interviews, many people recalled remarks from past conversations. Sometimes the events they
were describing had taken place decades earlier. It would be naive to assume that all of these quotes are
verbatim recollections of every word spoken. Nevertheless, I found them very helpful in conveying the
substance of an incident or conversation. Their sources can be found in the endnotes.
In the end, my own extensive experience with Warren and the thousands of jigsaw puzzle pieces given me by
so many sources came together in this portrait of a fascinating and deeply complex man.

Photo Credits and Permissions:
Alpha Sigma Phi Fraternity National Archives:Image 22
Bryson Photo: Image 65 © 2007, Bryson Photo
Buffalo News: Part 3 and Part 4, Image 36, Image 75
Doris Buffett: Image 5, Image 7, Image 84
Howard Buffett: Image 80
Susie Buffett Jr.: Image 1, Image 6, Image 3, Image 9, Image 13 Image 15, Image 17, Image 23, Image 28,
Image 29, Image 33, Image 34, Image 38, Image 39, and Image 41, Image 64, Image 88
Warren Buffett: Image 8, Image 2, and Image 4, Image 10, Image 11, Image 14, Image 16, Image 19, Image
25, and Image 26, Image 30, Image 40, Image 43, Image 45, Image 46, Image 49, Image 55, Image 58, Image
63, Image 90
Capp Enterprises, Inc.: Image 18: © Capp Enterprises, Inc. Used by permission
C. Taylor Crothers: Image 91
Lauren Esposito: Image 92
Katharine Graham Collection: Image 42
Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce: Image 72: Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce and A Better
Exposure; the Chamber Annual Meeting on Feb. 20, 2004
Lynette Huffman Johnson: Image 67
Arthur K. Langlie: Image 52
Magic Photography, Sun Valley: Part 5, Image 59, Image 62
Jack L. Mayfield: Image 77: Photo by Jack L. Mayfield
Munger family: Image 35, Image 76: courtesy of the Munger family
Charles Munger Jr.: Image 50
Museum of American Finance/Graham-Newman Collection: Image 31
The Nebraska Society of Washington, D.C.: Image 27
Omaha World-Herald: Part 1, Image 44, Image 47, Image 60: Reprinted with permission from The Omaha
World-Herald
Sharon Osberg: Part 6, Image 51, Image 53, Image 81, Image 82, Image 83, Image 87
REUTERS/Peter MacDiarmid: Image 85

Ruane, Lili: Image 56
Stark Center for Physical Culture and Sports: Image 24: The image of Pudgy Stockton on the cover of
Strength and Health magazine was provided by the Stark Center for Physical Culture and Sports at the
University of Texas in Austin— where the Pudgy and Les Stockton collection is housed.
M. Christine Torrington: Image 78,
www.asamathat.com: Image 86

Acknowledgments

Without the help of many people this book would never have come into being. If I’ve succeeded, it’s mainly
thanks to the generosity of others. First among them, of course, is Warren Buffett. The generosity he showed
by giving me so much access to his time, his family, his friends, and his files, and the courage he showed by
refraining from meddling with the book for more than five years—right up until the day it went to the
printer—are remarkable. His conviction that a smart person can do anything and his gentle but persistent
Carnegizing lifted my aspirations as a writer and as a person, and changed my life. His influence on me
cannot be described in a paragraph or a couple of pages—but for everything, Warren, I am grateful.
My literary agent, the peerless David Black, gave impeccable guidance. I trust him implicitly—above all to
tell me important things that I don’t want to hear—the most valuable quality you can have in a friend. He
also stunned Warren into a moment of silence at his negotiating skill, not a small achievement.
My great good fortune was that the book was sold to the perceptive Irwyn Applebaum, the president and
publisher of Bantam Dell, whose support and wisdom have inspired me throughout. Helping me was Ann
Harris, my editor, who elevated The Snowball through her encouragement to write the story of a man’s life
seen in whole, and her editing with a meticulous eye for tone, context, and nuance. Later in the process, Beth
Rashbaum unsheathed her red pencil, relentlessly pruning material this first-time author couldn’t bear to cut
herself, to the immeasurable improvement of the book. The Snowball owes much to them and I am grateful to
have worked with two such talented editors. Any flaws, of course, are mine alone.
At Bantam I also thank Loren Noveck, who as the book’s title administrator oversaw the multiple processes
involved in producing a complex book; Virginia Norey, its designer; Ann’s assistant Angela Polidoro; and the
several others who collaborated in making The Snowball happen: deputy publisher Nita Taublib; publishing
director Gina Wachtel; attorney Matthew Martin; production experts Tom Leddy, Maggie Hart, and
Margaret Benton; creative marketing director Betsy Hulsebosch and her team; sales marketing director
Cynthia Lasky; and publicity director Barb Burg.
I wrote this book while associated with Morgan Stanley as an advisory director, and appreciate my friends’
and colleagues’ and the firm’s support. Throughout, Lisa Edwards, my friend and assistant, organized the
material, scheduled interviews, planned my annual Berkshire Hathaway dinner, handled innumerable other
matters, and generally kept my life together. Lauren Esposito, my researcher, who also came from Morgan
Stanley, brought with her a set of financial skills that added immensely to the book, and became adept at
locating critical research material. To watch an artist like Marion Ettlinger at work inspired me near the end
of the writing, and I thank her for the result.
Doris Buffett, Roberta Buffett Bialek, and Warren Buffett’s children Susan, Howard, and Peter, Charlie
Munger, Bill Gates, and Don Graham were especially generous with their time and insight, and I am grateful
to them for their important contributions.
People trusted by both me and Warren—Sharon Osberg, Vinay Saqi, and Devon Spurgeon—provided various

types of assistance throughout, from financial commentary to calming frayed nerves. The love and support of
my sister, Elizabeth Davey, and my father, Ken Davey, helped bring the book into being. David Moyer came
into my life just in time to learn what it means to live with a writer who is finishing a book on deadline, and
kiddingly referred to himself as my “fiancé in exile” while providing a shoulder to lean on, advice, laughter,
love, and romance. He, along with Sharon Osberg and Justin Bennett, served as early readers, and The
Snowball would be far poorer without their comments and advice.
I am indebted to many other people and organizations who helped with research and granted permission to
use photographs and copyrighted material, as well as those who gave special help with the project directly or
indirectly in various ways. My thanks go to Carol Allen, Herbert Allen, Ed Anderson and Joan Parsons, Jan
and Brian Babiak, the Blumkin family, Hal Borthwick, Debbie Bosanek, Betsy Bowen, Joe Brandon, Phil
Brooks, Kelly Broz, Jan and John Cleary, Carlon Colker, Robert Conte, Gerald Corrigan, Michael Daly,
Leigh Ann Elisio, Stuart Erickson, Paul Fishman, Cynthia George, George Gillespie, Rick Guerin, Marc
Hamburg, Carol Hayes, Liz Hylton, Mark Jankowski, Mr. and Mrs. Howard Jessen, Gladys Kaiser, Don
Keough, Tom and Virginia Knapp, Margaret Landon, Arthur K. Langlie, David Larabell, Stanford Lipsey,
Jack Mayfield, John Macfarlane, Michael McGivney, Verne McKenzie, Charles T. Munger Jr., Molly
Munger, Wendy Munger, Tony Nicely, Dorothe Obert, Ron Olson, Chuck Peterson, Susan Raihofer, Rod
Rathbun, Deb Ray, Eric Rosenfeld, Neil Rosini, Fred Reinhardt, Mick Rood, Gary Rosenberg, Edith
Rubinstein, Michael Ruddell, Richard Santulli, Walter Schloss, Lou Simpson, Carol Sklenicka, Judge Stanley
Sporkin, Mary Stanton Plowden-Wardlaw, Chris Stavrou, Bob Sullivan, Jeffrey Vitale, Marshall Weinberg,
Sheila Weitzel, Bruce Whitman, Jackie Wilson, Al Zanner, and those who asked not to be named.
I would also like to express appreciation to the following organizations: the Douglas County Historical
Society, GEICO, General Re, Greenwich Emergency Medical Service, Greif Inc., Harvard Business School,
Harvard Law School, the Merrick Library, the Martin Luther King Jr. Public Library Washingtoniana
Collection, Morgan Stanley, the National Archives, National Indemnity Corporation, the Nebraska Furniture
Mart, the New Bedford Free Public Library, the New Bedford Whaling Museum, the New York Public
Library, NetJets Inc., the Omaha Press Club, the Omaha World-Herald, Outstanding Investor Digest, the
Rolls-Royce Foundation, Rosehill School, Ruane Cunniff & Goldfarb Co., The Securities and Exchange
Commission, and The Westchester apartments.
