
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

that body to protect the American breakfaster. They
asserted that a professional speculator, one Lawrence
Livingston, had cornered, or was about to corner, coffee. If
his speculative plans were not brought to naught he would
take advantage of the conditions created by the war and
the American people would be forced to pay exorbitant
prices for their daily coffee. It was unthinkable to the
patriots who had sold me cargoes of coffee they couldn't
find ships for, that one hundred millions of Americans,
more or less, should pay tribute to conscienceless
speculators. They represented the coffee trade, not the
coffee gamblers, and they were willing to help the
Government curb profiteering actual or prospective.
Now I have a horror of whiners and I do not mean to
intimate that the Price Fixing Committee was not doing its
honest best to curb profiteering and wastefulness. But that
need not stop me from expressing the opinion that the
committee could not have gone very deeply into the
particular problem of the coffee market. They fixed on a
maximum price for raw coffee and also fixed a time limit
for closing out all existing contracts. This decision meant,
of course, that the Coffee Exchange would have to go out of
business. There was only one thing for me to do and I did
it, and that was to sell out all my contracts. Those profits of
millions that I had deemed as certain to come my way as
any I ever made failed completely to materialise. I was and
am as keen as anybody against the profiteer in the
necessaries of life, but at the time the Price Fixing
Committee made their ruling on coffee, all other
commodities were selling at from 250 to 400 per cent
above pre-war prices while raw coffee was actually below
the average prevailing for some years before the war. I
can't see that it made any real difference who held the
coffee. The price was bound to advance; and the reason for
that was not the operations of conscienceless speculators,
but the dwindling surplus for which the diminishing
importations were responsible, and they in turn were
216

XV

affected exclusively by the appalling destruction of the
world's ships by the German submarines. The committee
did not wait for coffee to start; they clamped on the brakes.
As a matter of policy and of expediency it was a mistake
to force the Coffee Exchange to close just then. If the
committee had let coffee alone the price undoubtedly
would have risen for the reasons I have already stated,
which had nothing to do with any alleged corner. But the
high price which need not have been exorbitant would
have been an incentive to attract supplies to this market. I
have heard Mr. Bernard M. Baruch say that the War
Industries Board took into consideration this factor—the
insuring of a supply in fixing prices, and for that reason
some of the complaints about the high limit on certain
commodities were unjust.
When the Coffee Exchange resumed business, later on,
coffee sold at twenty-three cents. The American people
paid that price because of the small supply, and the supply
was small because the price had been fixed too low, at the
suggestion of philanthropic shorts, to make it possible to
pay the high ocean freights and thus insure continued
importations.
I have always thought that my coffee deal was the most
legitimate of all my trades in commodities. I considered it
more of an investment than a speculation. I was in it over
a year. If there was any gambling it was done by the
patriotic roasters with German names and ancestry. They
had coffee in Brazil and they sold it to me in New York.
The Price Fixing Committee fixed the price of the only
commodity that had not advanced. They protected the
public against profiteering before it started, but not
against the inevitable higher Prices that followed. Not only
that, but even when green coffee hung around nine cents a
pound, roasted coffee went up with everything else. It was
only the roasters who benefited. If the price of green coffee

217

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

had gone up two or three cents a pound it would have
meant several millions for me. And it wouldn't have cost
the public as much as the later advance did.
Post-mortems in speculation are a waste of time. They
get you nowhere. But this particular deal has a certain
educational value. It was as pretty as any I ever went into.
The rise was so sure, so logical, that I figured that I simply
couldn't help making several millions of dollars. But I
didn't.
On two other occasions I have suffered from the action
of exchange committees making rulings that changed
trading rules without warning. But in those cases my own
position, while technically right, was not quite so sound
commercially as in my coffee trade. You cannot be dead
sure of anything in a speculative operation. It was the
experience I have just told you that made me add the
unexpectable to the unexpected in my list of hazards.
After the coffee episode I was so successful in other
commodities and on the short side of the stock market,
that I began to suffer from silly gossip. The professionals
in Wall Street and the newspaper writers got the habit of
blaming me and my alleged raids for the inevitable breaks
in prices. At times my selling was called unpatriotic—
whether I was really selling or not. The reason for
exaggerating the magnitude and the effect of my
operations, I suppose, was the need to satisfy the public's
insatiable demand for reasons for each and every price
movement.
As I have said a thousand times, no manipulation can
put stocks down and keep them down. There is nothing
mysterious about this. The reason is plain to everybody
who will take the trouble to think about it half a minute.
Suppose an operator raided a stock—that is, put the price
down to a level below its real value—what would inevitably
happen? Why, the raider would at once be up against the
best kind of inside buying. The people who know what a
stock is worth will always buy it when it is selling at
218

XV

bargain prices. If the insiders are not able to buy, it will be
because general conditions are against their free command
of their own resources, and such conditions are not bull
conditions.
When people speak about raids the inference is that the
raids are unjustified; almost criminal. But selling a stock
down to a price much below what it is worth is mighty
dangerous business. It is well to bear in mind that a raided
stock that fails to rally is not getting much inside buying
and where there is a raid that is, unjustified short selling—
there is usually apt to be inside buying; and when there is
that, the price does not stay down. I should say that in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, so-called raids are
really legitimate declines, accelerated at times but not
primarily caused by the operations of a professional
trader, however big a line he may be able to swing.
The theory that most of the sudden declines or
particular sharp breaks are the results of some plunger's
operations probably was invented as an easy way of
supplying reasons to those speculators who, being nothing
but blind gamblers, will believe anything that is told them
rather than do a little thinking. The raid excuse for losses
that unfortunate speculators so often receive from brokers
and financial gossipers is really an inverted tip. The
difference lies in this: A bear tip is distinct, positive advice
to sell short. But the inverted tip—that is, the explanation
that does not explain—serves merely to keep you from
wisely selling short. The natural tendency when a stock
breaks badly is to sell it. There is a reason—an unknown
reason but a good reason; therefore get out. But it is not
wise to get out when the break is the result of a raid by an
operator, because the moment he stops the price must
rebound. Inverted tips!

219

XVI
Tips! How people want tips! They crave not only to get
them but to give them. There is greed involved, and vanity.
It is very amusing, at times, to watch really intelligent
people fish for them. And the tip-giver need not hesitate
about the quality, for the tip-seeker is not really after good
tips, but after any tip. If it makes good, fine! If it doesn't,
better luck with the next. I am thinking of the average
customer of the average commission house. There is a type
of promoter or manipulator that believes in tips first, last
and all the time. A good flow of tips is considered by him
as a sort of sublimated publicity work, the best
merchandising dope in the world, for, since tip-seekers
and tip-takers are invariably tip-passers, tip-broadcasting
becomes a sort of endless-chain advertising. The tipsterpromoter labours under the delusion that no human being
breathes who can resist a tip if properly delivered. He
studies the art of handing them out artistically.
221

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I get tips by the hundreds every clay from all sorts of
people. I'll tell you a story about Borneo Tin. You
remember when the stock was brought out? It was at the
height of the boom. The promoter's pool had taken the
advice of a very clever banker and decided to float the new
company in the open market at once instead of letting an
underwriting syndicate take its time about it. It was good
advice. The only mistake the members of the pool made
came from inexperience. They did not know what the stock
market was capable of doing during a crazy boom and at
the same time they were not intelligently liberal. They
were agreed on the need of marking up the price in order
to market the stock, but they started the trading at a figure
at which the traders and the speculative pioneers could not
buy it without misgivings.
By rights the promoters ought to have got stuck with it,
but in the wild bull market their hoggishness turned out to
be rank conservatism. The public was buying anything that
was adequately tipped. Investments were not wanted. The
demand was for easy money; for the sure gambling profit.
Gold was pouring into this country through the huge
purchases of war material. They tell me that the
promoters, while making their plans for bringing out
Borneo stock, marked up the opening price three different
times before their first transaction was officially recorded
for the benefit of the public.
I had been approached to join the pool and I had looked
into it but I didn't accept the offer because if there is any
market manoeuvring to do, I like to do it myself. I trade on
my own information and follow my own methods. When
Borneo Tin was brought out, knowing what the pool's
resources were and what they had planned to do, and also
knowing what the public was capable of, I bought ten
thousand shares during the first hour of the first day. Its
market debut was successful at least to that extent. As a
matter of fact the promoters found the demand so active
that they decided it would be a mistake to lose so much
222

XVI

stock so soon. They found out that I had acquired my ten
thousand shares about at the same time that they found
out that they would probably be able to sell every share
they owned if they merely marked up the price twenty-five
or thirty points. They therefore concluded that the profit
on my ten thousand shares would take too big a chunk out
of the millions they felt were already as good as banked. So
they actually ceased their bull operations and tried to
shake me out. But I simply sat tight. They gave me up as a
bad job because they didn't want the market to get away
from them, and then they began to put up the price,
without losing any more stock than they could help.
They saw the crazy height that other stocks rose to and
they began to think in billions. Well, when Borneo Tin got
up to $120, I let them have my ten thousand shares. It
checked the rise and the pool managers let up on their
jacking-up process. On the next general rally they again
tried to make an active market for it and disposed of quite
a little, but the merchandising proved to be rather
expensive. Finally they marked it up to $150. But the
bloom was off the bull market for keeps, so the pool was
compelled to market what stock it could on the way down
to those people who love to buy after a good reaction, on
the fallacy that a stock that has once sold at $150 must be
cheap at $130 and a great bargain at $120. Also, they
passed the tip first to the floor traders, who often are able
to make a temporary market, and later to the commission
houses. Every little helped and the pool was using every
device known. The trouble was that the time for bulling
stocks had passed. The suckers had swallowed other
hooks. The Borneo bunch didn't or wouldn't see it.
I was down in Palm Beach with my wife. One day I
made a little money at Gridley's and when I got home I
gave Mrs. Livingston a five-hundred-dollar bill out of it. It
was a curious coincidence, but that same night she met at
a dinner the president of the Borneo Tin Company, a Mr.
Wisenstein, who had become the manager of the stock
223

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

pool. We didn't learn until some time afterward that this
Wisenstein deliberately manoeuvred so that he sat next to
Mrs. Livingston at dinner.
He laid himself out to be particularly nice to her and
talked most entertainingly. In the end he told her, very
confidentially, "Mrs. Livingston, I'm going to do
something I've never done before. I am very glad to do it
because you know exactly what it means." He stopped and
looked at Mrs. Livingston anxiously, to make sure she was
not only wise but discreet. She could read it on his face,
plain as print. But all she said was, "Yes."
"Yes, Mrs. Livingston. It has been a very great pleasure
to meet you and your husband, and I want to prove that I
am sincere in saying this because I hope to see a great deal
of both of you. I am sure I don't have to tell you that what I
am going to say is strictly confidential!" Then he
whispered, "If you will buy some Borneo Tin you will make
a great deal of money."
"Do you think so?" she asked.
"Just before I left the hotel," he said, "I received some
cables with news that won't be known to the public for
several days at least. I am going to gather in as much of the
stock as I can. If you get some at the opening to-morrow
you will be buying it at the same time and at the same
price as I. I give you my word that Borneo Tin will surely
advance. You are the only person that I have told this to.
Absolutely the only one!"
She thanked him and then she told him that she didn't
know anything about speculating in stocks. But he assured
her it wasn't necessary for her to know any more than he
had told her. To make sure she heard it correctly he
repeated his advice to her:
"All you have to do is to buy as much Borneo Tin as you
wish. I can give you my word that if you do you will not
lose a cent. I've never before told a woman or a man, for
that matter to buy anything in my life. But I am so sure the
stock won't stop this side of $200 that I'd like you to make
224

XVI

some money. I can't buy all the stock myself, you know,
and if somebody besides myself is going to benefit by the
rise I'd rather it was you than some stranger. Much rather!
I've told you in confidence because I know you won't talk
about it. Take my word for it, Mrs. Livingston, and buy
Borneo Tin!"
He was very earnest about it and succeeded in so
impressing her that she began to think she had found an
excellent use for the five hundred dollars I had given her
that afternoon. That money hadn't cost me anything and
was outside of her allowance. In other words, it was easy
money to lose if the luck went against her. But he had said
she would surely win. It would be nice to make money on
her own hook and tell me all about it afterwards.
Well, sir, the very next morning before the market
opened she went into Harding's office and said to the
manager:
"Mr. Haley, I want to buy some stock, but I don't want it
to go in my regular account because I don't wish my
husband to know anything about it until I've made some
money. Can you fix it for me?"
Haley, the manager, said, "Oh, yes. We can make it a
special account. What's the stock and how much of it do
you want to buy?"
She gave him the five hundred dollars and told him,
"Listen, please. I do not wish to lose more than this
money. If that goes I don't want to owe you anything; and
remember, I don't want Mr. Livingston to know anything
about this. Buy me as much Borneo Tin as you can for the
money, at the opening."
Haley took the money and told her he'd never say a
word to a soul, and bought her a hundred shares at the
opening. I think she got it at $108. The stock was very
active that day and closed at an advance of three points.
Mrs. Livingston was so delighted with her exploit that it
was all she could do to keep from telling me all about it.
225

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

It so happened that I had been getting more and more
bearish on the general market. The unusual activity in
Borneo Tin drew my attention to it. I didn't think the time
was right for any stock to advance, much less one like that.
I had decided to begin my bear operations that very day,
and I started by selling about ten thousand shares of
Borneo. If I had not I rather think the stock would have
gone up five or six points instead of three.
On the very next day I sold two thousand shares at the
opening and two thousand shares just before the close,
and the stock broke to $102.
Haley, the manager of Harding Brothers' Palm Beach
Branch, was waiting for Mrs. Livingston to call there on
the third morning. She usually strolled in about eleven to
see how things were, if I was doing anything.
Haley took her aside and said, "Mrs. Livingston, if you
want me to carry that hundred shares of Borneo Tin for
you, you will have to give me more margin."
"But I haven't any more," she told him.
"I can transfer it to your regular account," he said.
"No," she objected, "because that way L. L. would learn
about it."
"But the account already shows a loss of—" he began.
"But I told you distinctly I didn't want to lose more than
the five hundred dollars. I didn't even want to lose that,"
she said.
"I know, Mrs. Livingston, but I didn't want to sell it
without consulting you, and now unless you authorise me
to hold it I'll have to let it go."
"But it did so nicely the day I bought it," she said, "that I
didn't believe it would act this way so soon. Did you?"
"No," answered Haley, "I didn't." They have to be
diplomatic in brokers' offices. "What's gone wrong with it,
Mr. Haley?"

226

XVI

Haley knew, but he could not tell her without giving me
away, and a customer's business is sacred. So he said, "I
don't hear anything special about it, one way or another.
There she goes! That's low for the move!" and he pointed
to the quotation board.
Mrs. Livingston gazed at the sinking stock and cried:
"Oh, Mr. Haley! I didn't want to lose my five hundred
dollars! What shall I do?"
"I don't know, Mrs. Livingston, but if I were you I'd ask
Mr. Livingston."
"Oh, no! He doesn't want me to speculate on my own
hook. He's told me so. He'll buy or sell stock for me, if I ask
him, but I've never before done trading that he did not
know all about. I wouldn't dare tell him."
"That's all right," said Haley soothingly. "He is a
wonderful trader and he'll know just what to do." Seeing
her shake her head violently he added devilishly: "Or else
you put up a thousand or two to take care of your Borneo."
The alternative decided her then and there. She hung
about the office, but as the market got weaker and weaker
she came over to where I sat watching the board and told
me she wanted to speak to me. We went into the private
office and she told me the whole story. So I just said to her:
"You foolish little girl, you keep your hands off this deal."
She promised that she would, and so I gave her back her
five hundred dollars and she went away happy. The stock
was par by that time.
I saw what had happened. Wisenstein was an astute
person. He figured that Mrs. Livingston would tell me
what he had told her and I'd study the stock. He knew that
activity always attracted me and I was known to swing a
pretty fair line. I suppose he thought I'd buy ten or twenty
thousand shares.
It was one of the most cleverly planned and artistically
propelled tips I've ever heard of. But it went wrong. It had
to. In the first place, the lady had that very day received an
unearned five hundred dollars and was therefore in a
227

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

much more venturesome mood than usual. She wished to
make some money all by herself, and womanlike
dramatised the temptation so attractively that it was
irresistible. She knew how I felt about stock speculation as
practised by outsiders, and she didn't dare mention the
matter to me. Wisenstein didn't size up her psychology
right.
He also was utterly wrong in his guess about the kind of
trader I was. I never take tips and I was bearish on the
entire market. The tactics that he thought would prove
effective in inducing me to buy Borneo—that is, the activity
and the three-point rise were precisely what made me pick
Borneo as a starter when I decided to sell the entire
market.
After I heard Mrs. Livingston's story I was keener than
ever to sell Borneo. Every morning at the opening and
every afternoon just before closing I let him have some
stock regularly, until I saw a chance to take in my shorts at
a handsome profit.
It has always seemed to me the height of damn
foolishness to trade on tips. I suppose I am not built the
way a tip-taker is. I sometimes think that tip-takers are
like drunkards. There are some who can't resist the craving
and always look forward to those jags which they consider
indispensable to their happiness. It is so easy to open your
ears and let the tip in. To be told precisely what to do to be
happy in such a manner that you can easily obey is the
next nicest thing to being happy which is a mighty long
first step toward the fulfilment of your heart's desire. It is
not so much greed made blind by eagerness as it is hope
bandaged by the unwillingness to do any thinking.
And it is not only among the outside public that you
find inveterate tip-takers. The professional trader on the
floor of the New York Stock Exchange is quite as bad. I am
definitely aware that no end of them cherish mistaken
notions of me because I never give anybody tips. If I told
the average man, "Sell yourself five thousand Steel!" he
228

XVI

would do it on the spot. But if I tell him I am quite bearish
on the entire market and give him my reasons in detail, he
finds trouble in listening and after I'm done talking he will
glare at me for wasting his time expressing my views on
general conditions instead of giving him a direct and
specific tip, like a real philanthropist of the type that is so
abundant in Wall Street the sort who loves to put millions
into the pockets of friends, acquaintances and utter
strangers alike.
The belief in miracles that all men cherish is born of
immoderate indulgence in hope. There are people who go
on hope sprees periodically and we all know the chronic
hope drunkard that is held up before us as an exemplary
optimist. Tip-takers are all they really are.
I have an acquaintance, a member of the New York
Stock Exchange, who was one of those who thought I was a
selfish, cold-blooded pig because I never gave tips or put
friends into things. One day this was some years ago he
was talking to a newspaper man who casually mentioned
that he had had it from a good source that G. O. H. was
going up. My broker friend promptly bought a thousand
shares and saw the price decline so quickly that he was out
thirty-five hundred dollars before he could stop his loss.
He met the newspaper man a day or two later, while he
still was sore.
"That was a hell of a tip you gave me," he complained.
"What tip was that?" asked the reporter, who did not
remember.
"About G. O. H. You said you had it from a good
source."
"So I did. A director of the company who is a member of
the finance committee told me."
"Which of them was it?" asked the broker vindictively.
"If you must know," answered the newspaper man, "it
was your own father-in-law, Mr.
Westlake."
229
