
large number of Salomon bond salesmen (only Big Swinging Dick salesmen
were allowed on 41). The sound of 40, as perpetual as crickets in the
woods at night, was the atonal strain of stocks and bonds being sold: the
pleading tone in a hundred voices and the rustling of facts being
repackaged to look better than when they arrived. Through a
loudspeaker, known as the hoot and holler, a man on 41 hooted and
hollered at the salesmen on 40 to sell more bonds. I once walked through
when the firm was attempting to sell the bonds of the drugstore chain
Revco (which later went bankrupt and defaulted on those very bonds).
The voice boomed out of the box: "C'mon, people, we're not selling
truth!" Life on the fortieth floor was grim.
The fortieth floor was more remote from the all-powerful forty-first
than mere geography can suggest. A separate bank of elevators serviced
40. People conversed all day between 40 and 41 yet never laid eyes on
each other. Communications systems were sufficiently advanced, and
human relations sufficiently primitive, that a salesman in Dallas felt just
as close to the forty-first floor as did a salesman on the fortieth floor.
The salesman in Dallas was in some ways closer to Power Central. At least
when he paid homage on 41, because he had come from a distance, the
managing directors said hello to him.
The equity department was an object lesson in life's reversals. The stock
market had once been Wall Street's greatest source of revenues.
Commissions were fat, fixed, and nonnegotiable. Each time a share
changed hands, some broker somewhere took out a handsome fee for
himself, without necessarily doing much work. A broker was paid twice as
much for executing a two-hundred-share order as for a one-hundredshare order, even though the amount of work in either case was the
same. The end of fixed stock brokerage commi ssions had come on May 1,
1975—called Mayday by stockbrokers—after which, predictably,
commissions collapsed. Investors switched to whichever stockbroker
charged them the least. As a result, in 1976, revenues across Wall
Street fell by some six hundred million dollars. The dependable money
machine broke down.
Then, to add insult to penury, the bond market exploded. With the
rise of the bond markets, the equity salesmen and traders had been
reduced by comparison to small-time toll takers. They made a bit of
money and had a few laughs, but not nearly so many as the bond men. No

equity trader, for example, would dream of playing Liar's Poker for a
million bucks. Where would he get the money?
We trainees weren't into being poor. This presented the equity desk
people with the problem of how to persuade us to join them. When they
came through the training program, far from presenting their posteriors
for our immediate attention, as did many of the bond men, the equity
department speakers delivered one long uninterrupted sales pitch. Their
speeches had a pitiful, pleading quality about them, exacerbating the
problem. We trainees might have been slow in many ways. But we had a
nose for fashion. And we knew that in general the quality of treatment
we received in the training class varied inversely with the desirability of
the job held by the speaker. In this there was a lesson: To get the best
job, you had to weather the most abuse.
For that matter, being a trainee wasn't so different from being a
customer. Just as the equity people had to flatter and indulge us, they
had to flatter and indulge their customers to win business, because the
equity market was brutally competitive. An investor could buy shares in
IBM from Salomon, but he could equally well buy them from forty other
stockbrokers. Bond people, on the other hand, could kick us and beat us
trainees with impunity, as they could also, if they wanted, kick and beat
their customers, because Salomon was nearly a monopolist in certain
bond markets. From the way we were treated we were able to infer both
the standards of behavior in every market and the degree of dominance
Salomon enjoyed. Though perhaps not articulated by every trainee, the
ultimate message was lost on no one: Join equities and kiss ass like Willy
Loman; join bonds and kick ass like Rambo.
Still, the people in the equity department seemed happy, though not until
I spent some time with them did I began to fathom why. They felt less
pressure than bond traders and bond salesmen. They had accepted their
lot and, like the peasants in a Breughel pastoral scene, were content to
celebrate the simple pleasures of life. A house on the Jersey shore
rather than in the Hamptons. Skiing in Vermont rather than Zermatt.
And, hard as it was for me to appreciate, the people in the equity
department were having careers. They had seen bull markets, bear
markets, and dull markets. As long as they had their beloved stock
t, iney seemed not to mind their relative penury. They desperately
wanted to convey to us the soulfulness of their jobs. To this end, they

distributed a book of poems, essays, and quotations at the outset of
their training program module. It opened unfortunately, with the
following passage written by an equity man, entitled "Memoirs of a
Trader":
The market, he had learned, was like the sea, to be respected and
feared. You sail on its smooth surface on a placid mid-summer day; you
were borne along by a favoring breeze; took a pleasant swim in its
waters, and basked in the rays of the sun. Or you lolled in the quiet
currents and dozed. A cold gust of wind brought you to, sharply—clouds
gathered, the sun had gone—there were flashes of lightning and peals of
thunder; the ocean was whipped into seething waves; your fragile craft
was tossed about by heavy seas that broke over its sides. Half the crew
was swept overboard . . . you were washed upon the shore . . . naked and
exhausted you sank upon the beach, thankful for life itself. . . .
The equity department weathered not only rough seas but rejection as
well. It hurt to watch. Each day the MC of the equity module, Laszlo
Birinyi, made a valiant and often brilliant pitch to sway us. Yet each day
he failed. The gist of Laszlo's pitch for the equity department was this
question: When you turn on your television at six-thirty and Dan Rather
tells you that today the market went up twenty-four points, what market
do you think he means? "What!" Laszlo would say. "You think he's talking
about Grade A industrial bonds? Ha! He's talking about the stock
market." In other words, if you joined the equity department, your
mother would know what you did for a living.
Laszlo also stressed the stock market's long history and culture.
Everyone from Will Rogers to John Kenneth Galbraith had held forth on
the stock market. In joining equities, we could be a part of something far
larger than ourselves. I'm not sure we could conceive of anything much
larger than ourselves. And even if we had, it would not have been the
stock market. As a result, this particular appeal by Laszlo never worked.
We were unmoved by history and culture, and anyway the wise men
invariably made the stock market seem an unappealing place to work.
Their scribblings were as smarmy as "Memoirs of a Trader," as in the
case of this quotation from someone named Walter Gutman: "There is
nothing like the ticker tape except a woman—nothing that promises, hour
after hour, day after day, such sudden developments; nothing that
disappoints so often or that occasionally fulfills with such unbelievable,

passionate magnificence." To which male trainees, who
recalled only their sexual conquests, rolled their eyes into the backs of
their heads and blushed. Who knows what the female trainees thought?
Deep down, however, the stock market people didn't care much for book
learning or school or anything except raw experience. Quotes from stock
market legend Benjamin Graham were wheeled in to defend their
position: "In the stock market the more elaborate and abstruse the
mathematics the more uncertain and speculative the conclusion we draw
therefrom. . . . Whenever calculus is brought in, or higher algebra, you
could take it as a warning signal that the operator was trying to
substitute theory for experience."
This sounded ridiculous to the eighty M.B.A. 's and fifteen Ph.D. 's in the
training class. What was the point of owning a bazooka if the law made
you hunt with a bow and arrow? The equity department seemed
desperately backward. It was aware its pitch was badly off key. So it
stopped singing one day and arranged for one of its Bright Young Men to
speak to us. He was its shiny new toy. It was his job to dazzle us with his
brilliance, blind us with his science. He worked in the newest and hottest
area in the department—program trading (which has since been blamed
for the October 1987 stock market crash). He lectured on his specialty.
Then he opened the floor to questions. An M.B.A. from Chicago named
Franky Simon moved in for the kill.
"When you trade equity options," asked my friend Franky, "do you hedge
your gamma and theta or just your delta? And if you don' t hedge your
gamma and theta, why not?"
The equity options specialist nodded for about ten seconds. I'm not sure
he even understood the words. We trainees were equally oblivious (it was
an obnoxious question), but we felt that any self-respecting options
trader should avoid being stumped by a trainee. The options trader
lamely tried to laugh himself out of his hole. "You know," he said, "I don't
know the answer. That's probably why I don't have trouble trading. I'll
find out and come back tomorrow. I 'm not really up on options theory."
"That," said Franky, "is why you are in equities."
That faced him completely. The young would-be stud from equities had
no response. He just curled up in a little ball and writhed in pain. How
humiliating! Faced by a trainee.
Eventually it became uncool to be seen in the equity department. Imagine

our horror, then, when the equity department began a trainee
outreach program. Biryini insisted on dining with each of us, and all of a
sudden we all were candidates for Equities in Dallas. People panicked.
Many tried to make themselves deeply undesirable. A few were experts
in the field. Still, they could run, but they could no longer hide. No one
was safe. Rumors spread of a short list being created by the equity
department, of trainees in whom it was "interested." Then we received a
crushing piece of news. The equity department was planning a boat trip
to become further acquainted with the trainees on its short list.
Could it be true? It was. Six trainees had been targeted by Biryini,
though which six my source did not know. That became clear when the
invitations arrived. Four of the six went to back-row people. So there
was rough justice in the world. One went to Myron Samuels, who could
afford to laugh about it because the municipal bond department had
already promised to save him. The sixth came to me.
I was as helpless as the female victim of an arranged marriage who, upon
first seeing the horrible visage of her chosen naate, shrieks in vain. I
had only so much say in my future at Salomon Brothers. My influence
could be only weak and indirect, using managing directors as my
mouthpiece. The way out of this developing snare was to play frigid with
the equity department and, at the same time, encourage a managing
director from another department to pursue me. The risk was that I
would offend the equity department, which would then try to have me
fired. True, it didn't have a great deal of power. But firing me did not
require a great deal of power.
The boat floated off the southern tip of Manhattan. The men from
equities tried to corner us and rhapsodize about their market. The
trainees danced and weaved like boxers. Three minutes in the front of
the boat, then to the back of the boat, then to the engine room, around
and around we went, and the boat seemed to get smaller and smaller. An
hour into the cruise and the boat seemed like a dinghy. Soon someone
would begin to recite "Memoirs of a Trader" as the sea washed against
the side of the Circle Line cruiser.
Their mating ritual was brutally straightforward. Once they had
cornered you on the boat, they poured a few whiskeys into you, waited
until the moon rose over the canyons of Wall Street, and positioned the
Circle Line in view of the Stock Exchange. Then a managing director put

his arm around you and told you that you were an especially talented
trainee, and wouldn't you like to put that talent to work in a sure-to-besuccessful career in equities. Think of the History! Think of the Culture!
I thought instead of a good rule for survival on Wall Street: Never agree
to anything proposed on someone else's boat, or you'll regret it in the
morning. I was extraordinarily agile and found a way to avoid trouble. "
Myron Samuels described the morning following the boat ride as a
"coyote morning." After an ill-considered one-night stand you wake up
and see for the first time the face of the woman you've slept with; your
arm is pinned to the bed by her head, and rather than wake her, like an
entrapped coyote, you chew off your arm and scram. By the cruel light of
morning, the equity department indeed appeared once again to be pimply
and gross.
Still, the hunters pursued. We were invited to play in a softball game
between the Salomon equity department and one of its largest clients.
The managing director who the night before had whispered soothing
words into my ear now didn't even remember my name. He was too busy
falling all over himself to please his customers to worry about anything
else. It was apparent that we, the team from Salomon, were not
supposed to win. Also, we were to laugh whenever the other team made a
joke, however awful. I muffed a few grounders at shortstop for the
cause and chuckled like a fool—such humorous fellows were our
customers!—but knew I had done the right thing the night before by
locking myself in the bathroom.
As the training program neared its conclusion, the back room game of
Liar's Poker grew. Bond trading had captured the imaginations of more
than half the men in the class. Instead of saying "buy" and "sell" like
normal human beings, they said "bid" and "offer." All aspiring traders
were making markets in anything that could be quantified, from the
number of points the Giants would score to the number of minutes
before the first of the Japanese fell asleep to the number of words on
the back page of the New York Post. At the front of the classroom each
morning a young hopeful shouted, "I'll bid a quarter for your bagel."
Bonds, bonds, and more bonds. Anyone who did not want to trade them
for a living wanted to sell them. This group now included several women
who had initially hoped to trade. At Salomon Brothers men traded.
Women sold. No one ever questioned the Salomon ordering of the sexes.

But the immediate consequence of the prohibition of women in trading
was clear to all: It kept women farther from power.
A trader placed bets in the markets on tbehalf of Salomon Brothers. A
salesman was the trader's mouthpiece t(» most of the outside world. The
salesmen spoke with institutional investors such as pension funds,
insurance companies, and savings and loams. The minimum skills required
for the two jobs were quite differemt. Traders required market savvy.
Salesmen required interpersonal skillls. But the very best traders were
also superb salesmen, for they had to persuade a salesman to persuade
his customers to buy bond X or selll bond Y. And the very best salesmen
were superb traders and found custtomers virtually giving their
portfolios over to them to manage.
The difference between a trader and a salesman was more than a matter
of mere function. The traders ruled tthe shop, and it wasn't hard to see
why. A salesman's year-end bonus was determined by traders. A trader's
bonus was determined by the profits on his trading books. A salesman
had no purchase on a trader, wlhile a trader had complete control over a
salesman. Not surprisingly, yciung salesmen dashed around the place
looking cowed and frightened, while young traders smoked cigars. That
the tyranny of the trader was. institutionalized shouldn't surprise
anyone. Traders were the people closest to the money. The firm's top
executives were traders. Gutfreuntd himself had been atrader. There
were even occasional rumors, probaably started by the traders, that all
the salespeople were going to be firedl, and the firm would simply trade
in a blissful vacuum. Who needed the ffucking customers anyway?
Good bond traders had fast brains andl enormous stamina. They watched
the markets twelve and sometimess sixteen hours a day—and not just
the market in bonds. They watcheed dozens of financial and commodity
markets: stocks, oil, natural gass, currencies, and anything else that
might in some way influence the bcond market. They sat down in their
chairs at 7:00 A.M. and stayed put umtil dark. Few of them cared to talk
about their jobs; they were as reticent :as veterans of an unpopular war.
They valued profits. And money. Especially money, and all the things that
money could buy, and all the Ikudos that attached to the person with the
most of it.
As I had arrived at the firm with no conccrete plans for my future, I
was willing to consider almost anything. Nevertheless, I quickly came to

the conclusion that I could never be a bowd trader from having met a
great number of them and not finding one wtno bore the slightest
resemblance to me. We had, as far as I could tell, nothing in common, and
I
thought as seriously of being a trader as I thought of being Chinese.
That made me, by default, a salesman. I found imagining myself as a bond
salesman only marginally more plausible than imagining myself as a bond
trader. I was experiencing the same clumsiness making the transition
from school to work inside Salomon as I had outside Salomon. And much
to my distress the whole idea of working on the trading floor, rather
than growing familiar, became more daunting as the training program
progressed. The bond salesmen from the forty-first floor who spoke to
us were by definition leaders in the firm, and they might have provided
me with a role model, but their smooth metal surfaces offered nothing
to cling to. They expressed no interests outside selling bonds, and they
rarely referred to any life outside Salomon Brothers. Their lives seemed
to begin and end on the forty-first floor; and I began to wonder if I
wasn't about to enter the Twilight Zone.
More different types of people succeeded on the trading floor than I
initially supposed. Some of the men who spoke to us were truly awful
human beings. They sacked others to promote themselves. They harassed
women. They humiliated trainees. They didn't have customers. They had
victims. Others were naturally extremely admirable characters. They
inspired those around them. They treated their customers almost fairly.
They were kind to trainees. The point is not that a Big Swinging Dick was
intrinsically evil. The point is that it didn't matter one bit whether he
was good or evil as long as he continued to swing that big bat of his. Bad
guys did not suffer their comeuppance in Act V on the forty-first floor.
They flourished (though whether they succeeded because they were bad
people, whether there was something about the business that naturally
favored them over the virtuous are separate questions). Goodness was
not taken into account on the trading floor. It was neither rewarded nor
punished. It just was. Or it wasn't.
Because the forty-first floor was the chosen home of the firm's most
ambitious people, and because there were no rules governing the pursuit
of profit and glory, the men who worked there, including the more
bloodthirsty, had a hunted look about them. The place was governed by

the simple understanding that the unbridled pursuit of perceived selfinterest was healthy. Eat or be eaten. The men of 41 worked with one
eye cast over their shoulders to see whether someone was trying to do
them in, for there was no telling what manner of man had levered himself
to the rung below you and was now hungry for your job. The
range of acceptable conduct within Salomon Brothers was wide indeed. It
said something about the ability of the free marketplace to mold
people's behavior into a socially acceptable pattern. For this was
capitalism at its most raw, and it was self-destructive.
As a Salomon Brothers trainee, of course, you didn't worry too much
about ethics. You were just trying to stay alive. You felt flattered to be
on the same team with the people who kicked everyone's ass all the time.
Like a kid mysteriously befriended by the schoolyard bully, you tended to
overlook the flaws of bond people in exchange for their protection. I sat
wide-eyed when these people came to speak to us and observed a
behavioral smorgasbord the likes of which I had never before
encountered, except in fiction. As a student you had to start from the
premise that each of these characters was immensely successful, then
try to figure out why. And so it was, in this frame of mind, that I first
watched the Human Piranha in action.
The Human Piranha came to tell us about government bonds, though he
was so knowledgeable about the handling of money that he could have
spoken about whatever he wished. He was the only bond salesman who
made traders nervous, because he generally knew their job better than
they did, and if they screwed up by giving him a wrong price, he usually
made a point of humiliating them on the hoot and holler. It gave other
salespeople great satisfaction to watch him do this.
The Human Piranha was short and square, like the hooker on a rugby
team. The most unusual thing about him was the frozen expression on his
face. His dark eyes, black holes really, rarely moved. And when they did,
they moved very slowly, like a periscope. His mouth never seemed to
alter in shape; rather it expanded and contracted proportionally when he
spoke. And out of that mouth came a steady stream of bottom-line
analysis and profanity.
The Piranha, that day, began by devouring the government of France. The
French government had issued a bond known as the Giscard (yes, the one
described by Tom Wolfe in Bonfire of the Vanities. Wolfe learned of the

Giscard from a Salomon trader; in fact, to research his fictional bond
salesman, Wolfe had come to 41 and sat spitting distance from the
Human Piranha). The Piranha was troubled by the Giscard, so dubbed
because it had been the brainchild of the government of Valery Giscard
d'Estaing. The French had raised about a billion dollars in 1978 with the
bond. That wasn't the problem. The problem was that the bond
was, under certain conditions, exchangeable into gold at thirty-two
dollars an ounce—i.e., the holder of, say, thirty-two million dollars of the
bonds, rather than accept cash, could demand one million ounces of gold.
"The fuckin' frogs are getting their faces ripped off," said the Piranha,
meaning that the French were losing a lot of money on the bond issue now
that the bond had indeed become convertible and the price of gold was
five hundred dollars an ounce. The stupidity of the fuckin' frogs
disgusted the Piranha. He associated it with their habit of quitting work
at 5:00 P.M. The European work ethic was his bete noire, though he put
it differently. He had once derided a simpering group of Salomon's
Englishmen and Continental Europeans who had complained of being
overworked by calling them "Eurofaggots."
Once he'd finished with France, he whipped out charts to show the way a
government bond arbitrage trade worked. As he spoke, the people in the
front row grew nervous, and the people in the back row began to giggle,
and the people in the front row grew more nervous still, fearing that the
people in the back row would cause the Piranha to feed on us all. The
Piranha didn't talk like a person. He said things like "If you fuckin' buy
this bond in a fuckin' trade, you're fuckin' fucked." And "If you don't
pay fuckin' attention to the fuckin' two-year, you get your fuckin' face
ripped off." Noun, verb, adjective: fucker, fuck, fucking. No part of
speech was spared. His world was filled with copulating inanimate objects
and people getting their faces ripped off. We had never before heard of
people getting their faces ripped off. And he said it so often, like a
nervous tic, that each time he said it again, the back row giggled. The
Human Piranha, a Harvard graduate, thought nothing of it. He was always
like this.
Dozens of salesmen and traders from each of the three bond groups
(governments, corporates, and mortgages) passed through our program. I
recall only a few. The Human Piranha came from governments and was
typical not so much of the department as of the entire Fuckspeak
