Liquidity
To be considered liquid, a trader must have the ability to change holdings
quickly into cash. Although you can see that a day trader must trade a large
number of shares to make a profit, he or she must also have significant cash
and securities in his or her account to be able to continue trading activities.

281

282 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Slippage
Slippage can cost day traders significantly if they’re not careful how they execute their trades. Slippage relates to the difference between what you expect
your exit or entry stock prices to be and what you actually end up paying for
and getting out of that stock when your order is finally executed. Depending
on the volatility of the market, a stock price sometimes can vary by as much
as one or two points from the time you see the stock quotation until the time
your order is actually executed. Traders can control slippage with the right
type of order. The three basic ways to enter a position are at market, with a
stop order, or with a limit order. Day traders rarely use market orders, which
means buying or selling a stock at the market price. Instead they use stop or
limit orders to better control when their orders are filled and how much they
pay for the stock. We discuss types of orders in Chapter 2.
Most traders recommend that you never enter a position without immediately
placing a stop-loss order at an exit price that you decide is the most you’re
willing to lose on a particular position. Although a stop order means that once
a stock hits the exit price, the order changes to a market order and may result
in your selling the stock at less than that price, it nevertheless is safer than
placing a limit order, which can mean that you miss the exit point altogether
and possibly lose even more. Stop-loss orders can cause some slippage, but
you usually lose less with these types of orders than with limit orders. A limit
order can be completely missed when your stock breaks into a downward
trend, because the fall in price was too abrupt or rapid for it to be executed.
When buying stock, traders use limit orders, because they place limits on the
entry prices traders are willing to pay. Traders certainly don’t want to end
up paying higher prices than they intend, which, in turn, raises the bar for
making a profit higher than is reasonably possible to attain.

Trading costs
Trading costs vary significantly depending on the amount of trading you do
or don’t do each month. The minitable below provides a breakdown of the
commissions charged by one of the top day-trading firms.
Number of Trades per Month

Commissions

1 to 399
400 to 999
1,000 to 1,499
1,500 plus

$9.95 per trade
$7.95 per trade
$5.95 per trade
$2.95 per trade

Chapter 17: The Basics of Day Trading
The cost of trading is the same whether you have Level I or Level II access
(see Chapters 3 and 14 for information on Level I and Level II quoting alternatives). The number of trades you do will impact whether or not you have to
pay for Level II access. To get Level II access for free, you must make at least
20 trades per month; otherwise, the monthly fee for Level II access is $150.
Options-trading fees are $9.95 per trade, plus $1.25 per contract. In addition
to these fees, per-share charges can range from $0.002 per share to $0.01
per share, depending on the exchange on which you choose to trade. If your
computer crashes or your Internet access goes down, phone orders (for the
company cited in the minitable) can cost you $15 per trade.
So if you trade 30 times a day for 20 days a month, the number of your
trades totals 600. At $7.95 per trade, your commission costs are $4,770 per
month, and if you trade 1,000 shares with each trade, that adds up to a total
of 600,000 shares per month. Even at the lowest per-share exchange cost
of $0.002, that means an additional $1,200 in per-share charges. Thus, your
monthly cost for this volume of trading would be $5,970.
In addition to these costs, many traders also pay for newsletters or join
trading chat rooms that give them alerts for the best opportunities each
day. These services can add another $200 to $250 to your monthly costs. So
before you see even one penny of profit, your monthly outlay can be $6,170
(that’s $74,040 annually). You can easily understand why so many day traders never see a profit for at least six months and why such a high percentage
of day traders actually give up before their businesses turn profitable.

Taxes (of course)
On top of all these costs, you must consider taxes that you’ll have to pay on
any short-term profits at your current individual tax rate and not the preferred tax rates given to long-term investments that are held more than a year.
However, full-time day traders have tax advantages that other traders and
investors don’t have, but to qualify for these special breaks, day traders must:
✓ Buy and sell a high volume of stocks every day. If you’re day trading full
time, proving that you’re meeting the requirements to qualify for the
special day-trading tax breaks is easier. If you work full time and trade
part time, qualifying for the tax break may be more difficult.
✓ Establish (in their accounts) that they regularly and continually make
numerous trades just about every day the market is open. A broker
designating you as a pattern day trader and requiring you to maintain a
margin account minimum of $25,000 may help prove you’re a day trader
in the eyes of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
✓ Make a profit buying and selling stocks with short-term horizons rather
than profit by holding stocks for long-term gains or dividend income.

283

284 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
If you successfully prove to the IRS that you’re a day trader, you can consider
your day-trading activities as a business and thereby write off all your trading costs as a sole proprietor on Schedule C of your tax return. The reason
doing so gives you such a great tax advantage is that other investors are
able to write off only the costs that exceed 2 percent of their adjusted gross
incomes. Any losses reported on your Schedule C business return can be
written off against your adjusted gross income and thus reduce your tax bill,
which, in turn, can help you qualify for other tax breaks.
In addition to the costs of making your trades, you can write off many more
items against your business on Schedule C. You also can write off any interest you pay on your margin account and possibly depreciate up to 100 percent of any equipment that you bought to start and continue to run your
trading business as a Section 179 business deduction (this deduction could
be as much as $125,000). If you use a space in your home exclusively for your
trading activities, you also can take a home-office deduction.
Any gains that you make on your trading activities are considered capital
gains, and as such, are exempt from any self-employment taxes that other
sole proprietors must pay on their business profits. You still have to report
your gains and losses on Schedule D, and to avoid additional scrutiny, you
may want to attach a note to your Schedule C explaining why you have losses
and no income. The IRS red flags returns from people who report losses on
Schedule C for several years in a row, a factor that also can trigger an audit.

Avoiding the Most Common Mistakes
If the risks and costs don’t scare you away from day trading, you need to
become familiar with some common mistakes that lead to failure for many
day traders. Some traders talk about their more common mistakes, especially
the ones that cost a lot of money while they were building their businesses.
Here are some of the more serious mistakes new day traders make:
✓ Breaking stop-loss rules: When a stock starts dropping, newer, not yet
disciplined, traders tend to panic as their picks begin losing money, so
they decide to hold the stock rather than exit when their initial stop-loss
is reached. However, traders go broke using that strategy, because they
don’t stop their losses as planned. You must set your exit prices based
on your technical analysis for both losses and profits when you first buy
the stock. Follow those rules mechanically when the target price is hit,
and don’t let your emotions get in the way.
✓ Chasing trends: New traders who aren’t yet confident in the way they
read patterns often wait to see confirmation that they’re right before
they enter a position. That hesitation causes them to miss planned
entry points and, if they’re right, can end up forcing them into buying
at a stock price that’s higher than they intended when an upward

Chapter 17: The Basics of Day Trading
trend is expected or selling at a lower price than they intended when
a downward trend is expected. By missing intended entry prices, traders end up chasing the trends and finding that their original entry and
exit points no longer are valid because many others already acted on
the trend and the stock is no longer available at the planned prices.
Experienced traders just walk away from that particular trade instead of
getting caught up in trading points that don’t match technical analysis
and thereby chasing a trend.
✓ Not waiting for the right trade: A new day trader must exhibit the
patience required in waiting for the right trade to match what the technical analysis indicates. Experienced traders know to wait for the right
timing instead of forcing a trade, entering at the wrong price, and overtrading their account.
✓ Not establishing set rules before the trading day begins: To avoid getting caught up in the emotions of a big win or loss, you need to decide
your entry and exit points before the trading day begins and never deviate from them after the day begins. Experienced day traders know that
you either focus on your trades or think about your rules. You don’t
have time to do both, and trying to do so can be a recipe for disaster.
Staying objective and following your rules is crucial to maintaining the
control a day trader needs.
✓ Forgetting that fundamentals don’t matter: New day traders get caught
up in the idea that the company whose stock they’ve purchased is a
good company and that when its stock loses ground, it’s therefore
bound to head back up. Experienced traders know that how good the
fundamentals look doesn’t matter and that when the market is selling down, even the price of a good stock goes down. Day traders must
follow market signs and not worry about how good or bad the fundamentals of the company they’re trading may appear.
✓ Averaging down: Although investors may average down, meaning they
buy a stock and if the price goes down they buy even more shares
believing that it’s a good stock that will recover, this technique doesn’t
work at all for day traders, and most experienced traders of every
variety will tell you that using it is a fatal mistake. Day traders instead
believe that you need to set a stop price and get out (called stopping
out) of a losing stock and possibly reenter again at a lower price. Doing
so gives you time to look objectively at what is happening with the stock
and determine whether getting back in is worthwhile. Stopping out also
is likely to cost you less than averaging down, and you won’t risk getting caught with a margin problem. Averaging down can tie up too much
money that otherwise can be used for a more profitable trade with a different stock. The worst feeling, even for an experienced trader, occurs
when a stock plunges far below the stop position, because deciding
whether to take the large loss is difficult. In most cases, if you’re uncertain of your next move, experienced traders recommend that you get
out of the position before the situation grows worse or out of control.

285

286 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
✓ Not knowing when to take profits: New traders sometimes make the
mistake of either taking profits too early or not taking profits at all. Both
can result in unnecessary losses. Most of the time, indecision strikes
when traders are afraid they’ll lose a profit if they hold it too long or
miss a profit if they exit too soon. Just as with losses, exit points need to
be determined before entering a position, and rules need to be followed.
Remember that as a day trader you must focus either on your trade or
on your rules. Day traders who move into and out of positions within
seconds or minutes don’t have time to do both.
✓ Walking away from the computer with open positions: Experienced
day traders never walk away from their computers when they still have
an open position. Although we touch briefly on holding open positions
overnight in the introduction to this chapter, this rule is even stricter.
Because experienced day traders respond to price changes that occur in
mere seconds or minutes, they definitely don’t want to be away from the
screen while a position is still open.
Day trading is a high-risk career choice that you should consider only after
doing a considerable amount of initial research, hunting down good resources
for educating yourself about the risks and rewards, and finding all the techniques you need to use to day trade successfully. Even before you get started,
be sure to check out the firms you’re planning to use as resources by calling
up their disciplinary records and complaint histories through the SEC or state
regulators. You’re putting a good deal of money at risk, so take the time to find
out all you can before spending even that first dime.
You also may want to consider taking your Series 7 exam, the exam all stockbrokers are required to pass. Although you must be sponsored to take the
exam, many training centers near your home or online can help you find a
sponsoring broker. Even though you may never want to work as a broker, the
information you’re required to know for the exam gives you a much stronger
awareness of the securities markets and the laws by which they’re governed.
Studying for the test, you’ll also discover more about the various investment
products on the market and the risks you take when buying and selling each
type. We discuss the Series 7 exam in Chapter 20. For a closer look at day
trading, read Day Trading For Dummies by Ann C. Logue (Wiley).

Chapter 18

Doing It by Derivatives
In This Chapter
▶ Defining derivatives
▶ Opting for options
▶ Figuring on futures
▶ Considering commodities
▶ Exploring the risks

T

raders can raise the bar on the leverage they’re allowed by opening the
door to the derivatives markets. Derivatives are any financial instruments
that get or derive their value from another financial security, which is called
an underlier. This underlier is usually stocks, bonds, foreign currency, or
commodities. The derivative buyer or seller doesn’t have to own the underlying security to trade these instruments.
You may unwittingly encounter derivatives if you trade those exchangetraded funds (ETFs) that offer to return two or even three times the value
of an underlying stock index. Those ETFs use derivatives to amplify the
reward — and the risk. And you may recall that derivative trading, especially
those derivatives tied to the value of underlying mortgage assets, exacerbated the mortgage mess that started the financial collapse of 2008.
Derivatives traders use futures and options, which are the two most common
types of derivatives, to make money in a highly risky venture. In this chapter,
we introduce you to a variety of derivatives, how they’re traded, and the risks
involved in trading futures and options. However, you need to seek additional
training before jumping into this kind of trading.

Types of Derivatives:
Futures and Options
Derivatives are marketable instruments, which over time acquire and relinquish value based on an underlying asset (see the later section on “Options

288 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
lingo”), including such commodities as coffee or soybeans, bonds, and even
stocks. They are commonly used by commercial and institutional organizations to hedge against the risks of financial losses suffered by the underlying
assets that they hold. Buying or selling a derivative, for example, can minimize your financial loss, whenever a major change occurs in the price of an
asset that you own. Hedging is a popular tactic used by growers, producers,
portfolio managers, and users of the commodities.
The two basic and most common types of derivatives are contracts for
options and for futures. Traders buy and sell them as a way to speculate on
the direction that the volatile prices of underlying assets will take farther
down the road. If their hunches are right and the prices move in the directions they expect, traders can make a significant profit. If, on the other
hand, they’re wrong, they can lose the amount they paid for the derivative —
possibly even quite a bit more. Before we explain all the risks, we need to
more accurately define futures and options.

Futures
Futures are legally binding contracts between two parties, one of whom agrees
to buy and the other who agrees to sell an asset for a specific price at a specified time in the future. The specific price is known as the strike price. The specified date in the future is known as the settlement date. Futures first were used
in the 18th century in Japan as a means of trading rice and silk, but they didn’t
appear in U.S. markets until the 1850s, when futures markets were developed
for buying and selling commodities, such as wheat, cotton, and corn.
Futures contracts are one of the most volatile trading instruments. Prices can
change rapidly, causing traders to face sudden and sometimes huge losses
or gains. Futures contracts are traded based on the prices of underlying commodities, indexes, bonds, and stocks. Most people who enter futures markets
do so not to actually buy and sell the actual goods or underlying financial
asset, but rather either to speculate on or to hedge the risks of the changing
prices of the assets that they do hold.

What’s your position?
When people talk about futures, they’re bound to say something about their
positions. Here’s what they mean:
✓ Short positions: The party in the contract who agrees to deliver the commodity, stock, or bond holds a short position. Traders who take short positions are expecting the price of the underlying commodities to go down.
✓ Long positions: The party in the contract who agrees to buy the commodity, stock, or bond in a futures contract holds a long position on the
security. Traders who buy long positions are expecting the price of the
underlying commodities to go up.

Chapter 18: Doing It by Derivatives
Making money using futures
Traders can make money from trading futures on the basis of the daily
movements of the markets for the various types of underlying commodities,
stocks, bonds, or currencies involved in the contracts they buy and/or sell.
For example, typical futures contracts for wheat are signed between wheat
farmers and bread producers. On one side of this contract, farmers agree to
sell a specific amount of the wheat they grow at a specific price and a specified time, and on the other side, producers agree to pay that price for the
contracted amount of wheat to be delivered to them by the specified time.
Farmers benefit by ensuring that they can get a specific price or income from
their wheat, and bread producers benefit by knowing how much they have to
pay for the wheat they need to make the bread that they, in turn, sell to earn
a living.
The value of that futures contract is adjusted daily. Assuming the farmer
agreed in February to sell 10,000 bushels of wheat to the bread maker at $4
per bushel in July, and assuming that before the July settlement date the
price of wheat raises to $5 per bushel, the farmer holding the futures contract has lost $1 per bushel of wheat or $10,000. These types of price adjustments actually are calculated daily throughout the time that the futures
contract is in force, and that means the farmer’s or bread maker’s account is
credited or debited as wheat prices fluctuate.
The farmer and bread maker will probably never actually exchange their
goods. Instead, the obligations of the futures contract eventually are settled
with cash. In this scenario, the bread maker will probably buy his wheat at
the current price of $5 per bushel when he needs it, but because he speculated correctly on the price, it’s only really costing him $40,000 (instead of
$50,000 at the current market price) to buy the wheat. Although the bread
maker pays $50,000 for 10,000 bushels of wheat, he has saved $10,000 because
of the money he made on the wheat futures contract. The farmer, on the
other hand, sells his wheat at $5 per bushel and gets $50,000 cash, but actually keeps only $40,000, because he has to cover his loss from the futures
contract.
You can see from this example that futures contracts are actually financial
positions. This financial position, or the buying and selling of futures contracts, is what traders are speculating about. If futures traders believe the
price of wheat is rising, they buy futures contracts so they can benefit from
the gain made by the price. But when the situation is reversed and the price
of wheat drops to $3 per bushel, then the trader who buys can be on the
losing side of that futures contract and be liable for a $10,000 loss. The cost
of buying into a futures contract is called the premium paid for that contract,
which is only a small percentage of the price of the actual commodity, stock,
bond, or currency underlying the contract.

289

290 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Commodities futures
People who buy commodities futures basically are agreeing to buy a certain
amount of a commodity at a set price at some point in the future. Conversely,
people who sell those same futures are agreeing to provide a certain amount
of a commodity at the agreed upon price by the agreed upon time. Buyers or
sellers can enter into futures contracts on many commodities, including farm
products (pork bellies, wheat, corn, and soybeans), precious metals (gold,
copper, and silver), and many others.
Traders usually don’t get directly involved as buyers and sellers of the actual
commodities, because they usually get out of their futures contracts before
the underlying commodities upon which their trades are based ever change
hands. Instead, they’re speculators, buying and/or selling futures contracts
based on which way they think the commodity price is going to move.
Speculation, as you know, is wrought with risk, and the reason the risk is so
great is that a commodity contract controls a large amount of the commodity
(or commodity value) compared with the relatively small price that it takes
to buy or sell the contract. The result is extensive leverage, which means
controlling a large position with only a small cash deposit. If the price moves
in a direction that’s the opposite of what the trader anticipates, he or she
may have to take a huge loss to get out of the contract.
