
Dissecting the main sections
of the annual report
Most 10-Ks follow a pretty standard list of things to be covered. While 10-Ks
are usually slightly different, and some may contain different items, usually
you’ll find most include the basic items listed below.

Business
Here, the company describes in excruciating detail exactly what it sells, where
it sells, and how it makes money. Even if you think you know what a company
does, taking a spin through the business section of the 10-K can be eye-opening.
For instance, did you know that Coke sells Kildevaeld mineral water in Denmark?
Now you do.
The business section also gives you, the fundamental analyst, a high-level
view of the company’s business model. Coke, for instance, primarily sells
beverage concentrate to bottling companies. It’s up to the bottling companies
to deal with actually turning the concentrate into drinkable beverages, and
get the bottles and cans to the stores.

18 506455-ch12.indd 196

9/24/09 10:36:06 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

197

Understanding the specifics of a company’s business model is critical to fundamental analysis. For instance, since Coke doesn’t actually bottle many of its
beverages, a fundamental analyst might be careful before comparing the company with another beverage company that does its own bottling. The bottling
businesses requires large investments in machines and trucks, which tend to
be less profitable than selling concentrate. And speaking of competitors, in the
10-K’s business section, companies will usually spell out all the companies
they deem to be their rivals. This list of rivals is very helpful for fundamental
analysts, since it’s a list of comparables, or other companies to benchmark
against each other.
Companies will also state, in the business section, who their key suppliers
are. Fundamental analysts pay attention to suppliers, checking to make sure
they’re sound and able to keep providing materials the company needs. Also,
sometimes it can be a better idea to invest in a company’s suppliers than in
the company itself. Since the suppliers aren’t as well-known, they might have
a lower valuation than the company itself.

Risk factors
Cigarettes contain health warnings as do roller coasters and even some food.
The same goes for stocks. Companies must clearly spell out everything that
possibly could go wrong. Many of the risks are boilerplate, meaning cut-andpasted legalese, but sometimes the warnings can be useful in fundamental
analysis.
Ignoring the risk factors in companies’ 10-Ks can be a big mistake. The risk factors section in the 10-K filed by Lehman Bros. in January 2008 was stunningly
clear. The first risk stated that Lehman stood to suffer if real-estate values
were to continue to fall. Lehman also pointed out that being unable to borrow
would “impair our liquidity.” The risks were prescient as the housing market
fell further and a credit crunch occurred, and Lehman was unable to borrow,
causing it to collapse just a few months later in September.

Unresolved staff comments
If the SEC has a problem with any way the company handles its accounting,
you’ll see the details described here.
Make sure this part of the 10-K is blank. If the SEC disagrees with a company’s
books, you should probably find another stock to invest in.

Properties
Here you’ll get a rundown of all the major property the company owns and
where it’s located. Coke, for instance, gives the square footage of its 35-acre
office complex in Atlanta, as well as discussing facilities it leases in Georgia.

18 506455-ch12.indd 197

9/24/09 10:36:06 PM

198 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Legal proceedings
You can’t go into business without getting sued, a fact that’s painfully clear
from this section of the 10-K. Here, you can see all the lawsuits that are pending against the company and the company’s own estimate of the odds of winning or losing.
If you’re interested in a company’s environmental record, this is a great place
to look. You can see whether or not a company has been sued for violating
environmental rules.

Executive officers
Curious who’s running the company? You’ll get a rundown here, with bios of
all the major executives of the company.

Market for registrant’s common equity
Investors have gotten so used to getting stock information from financial Web
sites, they often forget the company itself provides some basic, but sometimes useful stock price information. In this section of the 10-K, companies
generally provide a chart showing how high and low their stock price got in
each quarter of the year, and the value of dividends paid. The company also
provides an estimate of how many investors own the stock.
Some companies even tell you how many shares of their own stock they
issued, or bought back. Information on stock buybacks is extremely valuable,
since you can find out whether a company is using its cash on the bet that
its stock will rise. The importance of stock buybacks to fundamental analysis
will be covered in more detail in Chapter 12.
Sometimes, investors need to find out a stock’s price after it no longer trades.
For instance, a stock you own may have been acquired, or bought, by a rival.
After a company is bought, you can no longer look up its stock price on most
investing Web sites because it no longer actively trades. The Market for
Registrant’s Common Equity section of the 10-K can help you get a ballpark
estimate of a stock’s value in the past.

Selected financial data
Here, you’ll find a handy reference to the company’s most important financial
data over the past five years. There may also be some comparative data for
the industry. This section of the 10-K is very important for trend analysis,
which is covered in more detail in Chapter 17.

Management’s discussion and analysis
Imagine the CEO of a company was put on the witness stand to discuss, with
little embellishment, what the company does and what its future looks like.
That’s the tone of this critical section of the 10-K, often called the MD&A. The

18 506455-ch12.indd 198

9/24/09 10:36:06 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

199

company spells out in very plain language what the current standing of the
business is.
Pay careful attention to the wording used in the 10-K. When a business development is called “challenging” in the MD&A, that’s a clue to fundamental
analysts to dig deeper.

Quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
There are many risks a company faces that go beyond the business risks
listed above. Companies face the risks of rising and falling currencies, and
commodity prices, for instance. Some companies sell a great deal of product
in foreign countries. That means these companies may be exposed to the risk
of falling overseas currencies, which could hurt the bottom line when the
profits are brought back home and converted into dollars.

Financial statements and supplementary data
Here you’ll find the real meat of the 10-K. The company presents all the
required financial statements, including the income statement (Chapter 5),
balance sheet (Chapter 6) and the statement of cash flows (Chapter 7). At the
bottom of the financial statements, you’ll find a further description of each
of the line items in what are called the financial footnotes. Some companies
may also disclose in these footnotes if they used a slightly unorthodox way of
calculating any of the items on the financial statements.
Some of the most important portions of the 10-K are stuffed into the footnotes.
These various odds and ends are vitally important to fundamental analysis.
Here, the company will disclose all the financial information that is either too
specific or unusual to fit neatly into the rows and columns of the financial
statements. In either case, you’ll want to pay very close attention to the footnotes, as I’ll show you later in the chapter.

Changes in and disagreements with accountants
Just as getting into a tiff with your boss or teacher is generally not a great
idea, the same goes when it comes to a company and its auditor. If a company
and its accounting firm has a, shall I say, difference in opinion over the financials, you’ll find it here. As a fundamental analyst, you want to see this part of
the 10-K blank, and it usually is.

Controls and procedures
After the accounting debacles of Enron and Worldcom, regulators leaned on
all companies to improve the quality of their financials. One of the key areas
of new financial regulation had to do with a company’s financial controls and
procedures. It wasn’t good enough for a company to have faith that its financial reports were accurate. But companies had to take the extra step to say
whether someone could easily cook the books if they wanted to. Companies
are required to have safeguards in place to stop fraud from even occurring.

18 506455-ch12.indd 199

9/24/09 10:36:06 PM

200 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
What was that again? Restatements
One of the dirty little secrets of accounting
is the fact that companies make mistakes in
their financial statements. Mistakes are pretty
common, actually. It’s not unheard of for a company, many months or years after reporting
revenue and earnings, to tell shareholders the
numbers are wrong and need to be changed.
When this happens, it’s called a restatement.
Restatements are one of fundamental analysts’
worst enemies. When you analyze a company’s
fundamentals, you’re forced to somewhat take
the company’s word on the truth of the financial statements. When financials are restated,

that throws into question all the work you did
analyzing the company. Just see how common
restatements are by checking out how many
companies issued restatements in the following years (source: AuditAnalytics.com):
✓ 2008: 778
✓ 2007: 1,111
✓ 2006: 1,565
✓ 2005: 1,403
✓ 2004: 875

Corporate governance
This part of the annual report is really just a placeholder for things you can
find the in the proxy statement. This section pretty much refers you to the
proxy statement, covered in Chapter 9, which is where a company lays out
how well the company’s board of directors is watching over the company, and
how well everyone’s getting paid.

Exhibits and financial statement schedules
Anything that doesn’t quite fit into any of the categories above is stuffed
into this part of the 10-K. Interesting items to look for here include the juicy
employment contracts given to top executives.

Executive sign-off
All the top executives sign off on the 10-K. And in a somewhat new development, in the wake of Enron, a rule called Sarbanes-Oxley requires the CEO
and CFO to certify that the books and records are accurate, as far as they
know.

Auditor opinion
The company’s accounting firm is required to give the company the Good
Housekeeping Seal of Approval, or not. The auditor’s opinion of the company’s books will be covered in more detail later in this chapter.

18 506455-ch12.indd 200

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

201

How to Tackle a Massive Annual Report
When slogging through a company’s annual report, you might start thinking War and Peace wasn’t so long after all. Not only are annual reports usually around 200 pages long, they’re stuffed with technical language, tables,
and detailed footnotes that will make you wish you were reading about the
Bezukhovs and the Bolkonskys instead of revenue and earnings.
But as a fundamental analyst, reading the 10-K is one of those things you’ll
quickly master. Don’t worry. You don’t need to be an accountant to get what
you need from the annual report. In this section, I’ll step you through things
you should be looking for in the annual report.

Starting from the bottom up: The footnotes
Reading an annual report is very different than reading a book. With a novel,
you probably wouldn’t read the back of the book first, in case you ruin the
surprise ending. But fundamental analysts hate surprises. Perhaps that’s why
many start reading the annual report near the bottom with the footnotes.
By reading the footnotes before reading anything else, you can quickly find
out about all the unusual items going on at the company. It’s usually the
unusual items that might have the most sway over your final opinion on a
company’s future or health.
Some fundamental analysts intentionally do not read any of the commentary
from the management until they’ve reviewed the footnotes of the annual
report. Management’s discussion, in both the MD&A and in the preface of the
annual report to shareholders, will be full of positive spin. You don’t want your
unbiased opinion toward the company to be tainted until you have a chance
to figure out what questions you have.
When reading the footnotes, you’ll want to pay special attention to areas
described in the sections that follow.

Assets and liabilities that aren’t on the balance sheet
One of the strangest things about accounting rules is companies are allowed,
for various reasons, to keep certain assets or liabilities off the balance sheet.
As you can imagine, this is a huge issue for fundamental analysts. The balance sheet is one of the key financial statements fundamental analysts use to
assess a company’s debt load and access to cash.

18 506455-ch12.indd 201

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

202 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Sometimes, what isn’t on the balance sheet is more important than what is
on it. Consider American International Group, or AIG. This massive insurance
company all but collapsed until the government plowed tens of billions of
dollars into the company. How could an insurance company be brought to its
knees?
The answer was contained in a footnote buried in the company’s 2008 annual
report: credit default swaps, or CDS. CDS are extremely complicated financial
instruments that are essentially insurance policies to protect investors from
bum investments. Just as an insurance policy protects a homeowner from
a loss from fire, a CDS would protect an investor, say, if a borrower couldn’t
pay back a loan. AIG made quite a bit of money selling CDS contracts to other
investors and collecting premiums from them. But fundamental analysts who
paid close attention to the footnotes saw that AIG was exposed to huge liabilities that weren’t on the balance sheet.
Fundamental analysts who paid attention to AIG’s footnotes saved themselves
a bundle. When the 10-K was filed on Feb. 28, 2008, AIG’s stock price was still
trading for more than $50 a share. By the end of 2008, once other investors
understood the risks of the CDS contracts, the stock cratered to $1.57 a share.

Understanding pension liabilities
One of the biggest landmines faced by many companies is the huge pension
benefits they owe to their retirees. During the 1950s, many companies attracted
talented workers by promising to pay them big portions of their salaries well into
their golden years. Those promises have come back to haunt many companies.
The size of the pension obligations are disclosed in companies’ footnotes.
Pension costs can take a big bite out of profit remaining for shareholders.
When a company’s pension is underfunded, for instance, it is required to
divert some of its profit to fund its pension plan. Not only can big pension
shortfalls eat into a company’s profits, they can also cut into how much a
company can afford to invest in new products, which may dent future growth.
It gets even trickier. Companies invest much of their pension funds. That
means if the stock market takes a big nosedive, as it did in 2008, companies
not only may see their business falter but also be forced to pony up money
to put into the pension fund to cover the investment losses. For instance, in
2008, pension plans at the largest U.S. companies were nearly 18% short of
the funding they need to cover future expenses, says S&P.
This shortfall of $459 billion is a direct hit on companies’ profitability. During
2009, for instance, large U.S. companies may need to contribute an estimated
$70 billion to the pension plans in 2009, up from just $10 billion in 2008, says
consulting firm Mercer. Table 12-1 shows how companies’ pension liabilities
change over time. Notice how the shortfall in 2008 got so large, the pension
deficit was larger than companies’ total profit.

18 506455-ch12.indd 202

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

Table 12-1

203

The Rise and Fall of Companies’ Pension Plans

Year

Pension (shortfall) or
surplus $ millions

Percentage
(shortfall) or
surplus

Net income of
companies

2008

–$256,736

–17.9%

$222,007

2007

$63,380

4.4%

$587,232

2006

–$40,184

–2.7%

$708,486

2005

–$140,430

–9.6%

$599,571

2004

–$164,328

–11.5%

$545,143

Source: Standard & Poor’s, based on S&P 500

Pension expenses can severely curtail companies’ profitability. If companies
do contribute $70 billion into pension plans in 2009, that would reduce the
profitability of the largest U.S. companies by 8%, Mercer estimates.

Changes to accounting and inventory
Companies have a certain amount of leeway in deciding how to keep their
books and records. That flexibility is part of the U.S. accounting system. But
as a fundamental analyst, you want to keep a close eye on when companies
make a change to their accounting rules. You should always ask yourself why
a company might decide to change its accounting treatment. It’s also a good
idea to compare a company’s accounting treatment with other companies in
the same industry. Watch out when a company uses accounting methods that
make its earnings look better.
Be extremely suspicious if you see that a company changes the way that it
accounts for inventory. First in, first out, or FIFO, allows the company to consider the oldest goods in its warehouses to be the ones it sold first. In a period
of rising prices, the oldest goods will have been the cheapest, so the company’s cost of goods sold under FIFO will be lower, and profits higher.
Under LIFO, or last in, first out, companies consider that the newest inventory
is sold. When prices are rising, LIFO tends to decrease profits. Be suspicious
when a company voluntarily switches from LIFO to FIFO, since that’s a quick
and easy way to artificially boost the bottom line.

Debt repayment timeline
During the credit crunch of 2008, it became clear that some homebuyers and
companies simply borrowed too much money.

18 506455-ch12.indd 203

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

204 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
A key part of fundamental analysis is understanding whether a company has
borrowed too much. And an important part of assessing this is knowing when
a company’s debt matures, or is due. When a company’s debt matures, suddenly it must either pay off the debt with cash, or refinance, by replacing the
debt with a new loan at the higher current interest rates.
Chapter 6 shows you how to use the balance sheet to find out how much of
a company’s debt load is due in more than a year, or long-term debt. But the
footnotes provide even more detail on when a company must repay its debts.
If you notice in the footnotes that a big chunk of a company’s long-term debt
is due in 13 months, and interest rates have risen, that’s a tipoff that the company’s profits going forward might be lower. If a company doesn’t pay off the
debt, it may have to replace the older debt with newer debt carrying higher
interest rates.

Effects of tax rates
You might assume U.S. companies pay the standard 35% tax rate. But in reality,
very few companies pay that much. Here, companies must state what their
actual effective tax rate was and why it differed from the standard 35% tax rate.
Typically, the effective tax rate might be decreased if a company does a large
portion of its business in countries with lower tax rates.
It’s critical when sizing up a company’s earnings to compare the tax rate the
company told investors it would use to the one it actually used to measure
its profit. It’s possible for companies to artificially boost their earnings by
using a lower tax rate than investors are expecting. Fundamental analysts,
too, should pay attention if the result a company’s tax rate is lower is due to
a temporary reason, such as a short-term tax incentive to open a plant in a
certain country. If the tax rate rises in the future, the company’s profitability
might take a hit.

See what management has to say for itself
The MD&A is one of the most clearly written portions of the 10-K. It’s where
management spells out, in English, all the important factors facing the company and summarizes all the key elements investors should be aware of.
For beginning fundamental analysts, the MD&A is a good place to start reading the 10-K. Management will step through many of the portions of its business that are of most interest to fundamental analysts. A few of the things
you should be looking for in the MD&A include the:

18 506455-ch12.indd 204

9/24/09 10:36:07 PM

Chapter 12: Using the Annual Report (10-K) to See What a Company Is Worth

205

Forward-looking information
If there’s one knock against financial statements, it’s that they are historical
documents. The income statement and balance sheet, for instance, tell you
what the company did, not what it’s going to do. And as an investor, you’re
more concerned about a company’s future than its past. Stock prices tend to
rise when a company does better in the future than people expect. Look for
any indication from the company about how it expects to perform in the
following year.
Don’t expect to see the words, “This is what our business will do next year” in
big, bold letters. Management signals this kind of thing more subtly.

An examination of the real risks
There’s an entire discussion of the risks a company faces inside its MD&A.
Many investors assume this is just a duplication of the dedicated risk section
in the 10-K. But that’s not always the case.
In the dedicated risks section, the company spells out every single possible
thing it could imagine going wrong. Some might even say the CEO could get hit
by lightning. (I’m kidding about that, but some companies go almost that far).
Many of the risks are pretty generic and probably cut-and-pasted from other
places.
But in the risks section of the MD&A, management highlights a few of the
risks and provides more detail on why they’re so scary. These risks, I’ve
found, tend to be more of the high-level things that might keep a forwardthinking CEO up at night.
Don’t get tripped up over whether you agree the risks highlighted in the
MD&A are really the biggest concerns. What’s important is that management
thinks these risks are significant. Knowing what keeps the CEO up at night
gives you a look into the decision-making of a company. For instance, the risks
of obesity and changing tastes go a long way in explaining why Coke paid
about $4.1 billion to buy rival Glaceau in 2007. The company was a leading
competitor in less sugary drinks, such as Vitaminwater, perceived by some
consumers to be healthier than soft drinks.
