
Pit trading still continues today, and if you do get the chance to view it in action, I would urge you to go. Once
you have seen it for real, you will understand why volume is so powerful in supporting price, and why I believe
the exponents of PAT are simply promulgating something different for the sake of it.
Whilst it is undoubtedly true to say that price action encapsulates all the news, views and decisions from traders
and investors around the world, and that with detailed analysis we can arrive at a conclusion of future market
direction, without volume we have no way of validating that price analysis. Volume gives us our bearings, it
allows us to triangulate the price action and to check the validity of our analysis. This is what the pit traders of
old were doing – they would see a price move, validate it by considering the order flow in the pit, and act
accordingly. For us, it is the same. We simply use an electronic version of order flow which is the volume on our
screens.
But, let me give you another example.
Returning to our auction again, only this time there is no physical sale room. Instead we are joining an online
auction, and perhaps now you can begin to imagine the problems that the ex pit traders encountered. We have
moved from the physical sale room, where we can see all the buyers, the number of people in the room, the
phone bids and the speed of the bidding. In a physical sale room we also get a sense of where the price starts
to pause. We see bidders become fearful as the price approaches their limit and they hesitate with the next bid,
just fractionally, but enough to tell you they are near their limit. This is what the pit traders missed.
In an online auction we are logged in and waiting for the auction to start. An item we want to buy appears and
we start bidding. We have no idea how many other bidders are there, we have no idea if we are playing on a
level playing field. All we see is the price being quoted. The auctioneer, for all we know, could be taking bids
'off the wall' (fake bids in other words) which happens more often than many people think. The reason is that all
good auctioneers like to encourage auction fever – it’s good for business, so they use every trick in the book.
Meanwhile back to our online auction. We continue bidding and eventually win the item.
But, have we got our item at a good price? And, in this scenario we are only referring to price and not value,
which is a very different concept. Besides, I hope by now, you are beginning to get the picture. In the online
auction all we see is price.
Therefore, in a real online ‘auction’ of trading, do we really want to base our trading decisions solely on price?
Furthermore, the great iconic traders of the past would have given us their answer, and it would have been a
very emphatic NO.
Once again I accept it is an imperfect example, but one which I hope makes the point.
To me, a price chart with no volume is only part of the story. Price does encapsulate market sentiment at a given
and precise moment in time, but with so much market manipulation prevalent in so many markets, why ignore
such a valuable tool which is generally provided free.
Whilst price is a leading indicator, in itself, it only reveals what has gone before, from which we then interpret
what is likely to happen next. Whilst we may be correct in our analysis, it is volume which can complete the
picture.
In a manipulated market, volume reveals the truth behind the price action. In a pure market, volume reveals the
truth behind market sentiment and order flow.
So, let's take a closer look at price, and in particular the effect that changes in technology have had on the four
principle elements of a price bar, the open, the high, the low and the close. And the most significant change in
the last few years has been the move to electronic trading, which has had the most profound effect on two
elements of the four, namely the opening and closing prices.
Scroll back to the days of Ney and earlier, and the markets in those days only traded during a physical session.
The market would open when the exchange opened, and close when the exchange closed at a prescribed time.
Trading was executed on the floor of the exchange, and everyone knew when the market was about to open or
close. This gave the opening and closing prices great significance, particularly on the open and close of the
day. The opening price would be eagerly awaited by traders and investors and, as the closing bell approached,

frenetic trading activity would be taking place as traders closed out their end of day positions. This is now
generally referred to as regular trading hours (RTH), and is the time the exchange is physically open. Whilst this
principle still applies to stock markets around the world, with the NYSE trading from 9.30am to 4.00pm, and the
LSE open from 8.00 am until 4.30 pm, what has revolutionised the trading world is the advent of electronic
trading.
The platform that really changed the game was Globex, introduced by the CME in 1992, since when virtually
every futures contract can now be traded 24 hours a day. Whilst the cash markets, such as stocks, are restricted
to the physical time set by the exchange, what has changed, certainly with regard to this market, has been the
introduction of electronic index futures, which now trade around the clock. What this means, in effect, is that the
opening and closing prices of the cash market are now far less important than they once were.
The reason is simply the introduction of Globex, as electronic trading has become the standard for index
futures, which are derivatives of the cash market indices. The ES E-mini (S&P 500) was the first to be
introduced in 1997, followed shortly afterwards by the NQ E-mini (Nasdaq 100) in 1999, and the YM E-mini
(Dow Jones 30) in 2002. With these index futures now trading overnight through the Far East and Asian
session, the open of the cash index is no longer a surprise with the futures signalling overnight market
sentiment well in advance. By contrast, in the days before the advent of electronic trading, a gapped open, up or
down, would have given traders a very strong signal of market intent. Whereas today, the open for the major
indices is no longer a great surprise as it is forecast by the overnight futures markets.
Whilst it is certainly true to say that individual stocks may well react for a variety of reasons to sentiment in the
broad index, generally all boats tend to rise on a rising tide, and therefore likely to follow suit. The open and the
close for individual stocks is still significant, but the point is that the index which reflects market sentiment will
be broadly known in advance, making the open less relevant than it once was.
The same could be said of the closing price. When the physical exchange closes, stocks are closed for the day
in the cash markets, but electronic trading continues on the index future and moves on into the Far East session
and beyond.
This facet of electronic trading also applies to all commodities, which are now traded virtually 24 hours a day on
the Globex platform, and both currency futures, and currency spot markets also trade 24 hours a day.
The electronic nature of trading is reflected in the price chart. Twenty years ago, gap up or gap down price
action would have been the norm, with the open of a subsequent bar closing well above or below the close of
the previous bar. These were often excellent signals of a break out in the instrument, particularly where this was
confirmed with volume. Such price action is now rare, and generally restricted to the equity markets, which then
catch up when the physical exchange opens the next day. Virtually every other market is now electronic such
as the spot forex market, and as we have just seen, indices catch up with the overnight futures as do
commodities and other futures contracts.
The open of one bar will generally be at exactly the same price as the close of the previous bar, which reveals
little. This is one of the many effects that electronic trading is now having on price action on the charts, and is
likely to continue to have in the future. Electronic trading is here to stay, and the significance of these elements
of price action in various markets will change as a result.
If the market is running 24 hours a day, then the open of one bar will simply follow the close of the previous bar,
until the market closes for the weekend. From a price action trading perspective, this gives us little in the way of
any valid 'sentiment' signals, which makes volume even more relevant in today's electronic world – in my
humble opinion at any rate!
However, let's take a look at an individual bar in more detail, and the four elements which create it, namely the
open, the high, the low and the close, and the importance of these from a Volume Price Analysis perspective. At
this point I would like to say that the only price bars I use in the remainder of this book, and in my own trading
are candlesticks. This is what Albert taught all those years ago, and it is how I learnt.
I have tried bar charts and thought I could dispense with candles. However, I have returned to candles and do
not plan to use any other system, for the foreseeable future. I do understand that some traders prefer to use
bars, line charts, Heikin Ashi, and many other. However, my apprenticeship in Volume Price Analysis was with

candlesticks and I believe its true power is revealed when using this approach. I hope, by the end of this book
you too will agree.
Therefore, I want to start by dissecting a typical candle and explain how much we can learn from it. In any
candle, there are seven key elements. The open, high, low and close, the upper and lower wicks and the
spread as shown in Fig 3.10. Whilst each of these plays a part in defining the price action within the time frame
under consideration, it is the wicks and the spread which are the most revealing in terms of market sentiment,
when validated with volume.

Fig 3.10 A Typical Candle
Perhaps the simplest way to visualise the price action contained within a candle, and is applicable regardless
of timeframe (from a tick chart to a monthly chart), is to display the price action, as a sine wave, with the market
oscillating back and forth, as buyers and sellers battle for supremacy.
The image in Fig 3.11 is a visual representation of this price action and in this case it is the buyers who are
triumphant. However, the price action could have taken a different journey in creating this candle. It is the
completed candle which is important.

Fig 3.11 Price Action As A Sine Wave
Let's start with the spread which reveals the sentiment for that session.
A wide spread between the open and the close indicates strong market sentiment, either bullish or bearish,
depending on whether the closing price finished above the opening price or below it.
A narrow spread between the open and the close indicates sentiment which is weak. There is no strong view
one way or the other. The wicks to the top and bottom are indicative of change. A change in sentiment during
the session. After all, if the sentiment had remained firm throughout, then we would have no wicks at all. This is
the equivalent of our online auction, or physical auction, where the price opens at one level, and closes at a
higher level once sold. The price action would simply create a solid candle with no wick to the top or the bottom,
and in the context of trading, suggesting strong and continued sentiment in the direction of the candle.
This is the power of the wicks and why, when used in combination with the spread, reveal so much about true
market sentiment. It forms the basis of price action trading, which is perfectly valid in it's own right.
However, why stop at this point and refuse to validate that price action with volume? This is something I simply
cannot understand and perhaps any PAT traders reading this book can convince me otherwise. Just drop me
an email as I am always happy to learn.
So, as you can see, the length and context of the wick, whether to the upside or the downside is paramount in
Volume Price Analysis, and the easiest way to explain this is to consider some further visualisation examples,
which will help to make the point.
Let’s take two examples and the first is in Fig 13.12. Here we have a wick where the price has opened, the
market has moved lower, and then recovered to close back at the open price. In the second example in Fig
13.13 we have a wick where the price has opened, the market has moved higher and then moved lower to
close back at the open.

Let's analyse what's happening here with the price action and market sentiment. In both cases we can be
certain that this is the profile of the price action, since the closing price has returned to the original opening
price. So there is no guesswork. It is true that within the price action, there may have been ups and downs, pull
backs and reversals, but at some point in the session, the price action hit a low, or a high and then returned to
the original starting point.

Lower Wick Example

Fig 3.12 Lower Wick Example
Taking the lower wick example first, the price bar opened and almost immediately sellers were in the market
forcing the price lower, and overwhelming the buyers. Perhaps within the move lower, there were pauses and
brief attempts to rally, which would have been seen perhaps in faster time frames, and a key part of trading.
However, in this session, as far as we are concerned, the sellers remained in control throughout the first part of
the candle’s creation.
At some point during the course of the session, the buyers started to come back into the market, wrestling
control from the sellers as the market price had now become an attractive buying proposition. Gradually near
the bottom of the price bar, the sellers finally give up, having been overwhelmed by the buyers who gradually
take control. Now it's the turn of the sellers to be under pressure, as more and more buyers flood into the market,
overwhelming the sellers and taking the price back higher once again, to finally close at the opening price.
But, what does this price action reveal? And the answer is two very important things.
First, that in this session, whatever the time frame may have been, there has been a complete reversal in market
sentiment. Why? Because the selling pressure that was in evidence during the first part of the candle’s creation,
has been completely overwhelmed and absorbed in the second half.
Second, that the sentiment on the close of the bar is bullish – it has to be, since we know that the price action
closed at the open, so at the instant of closure, the price must have been rising, supported by all the buying
pressure underneath.

Does this mean that this is signalling a reversal in any trend? The short answer is no, and you will discover why
once we start looking at volume, which will then give us the complete picture. At the moment we are simply
considering price action which is only half the picture, but the point I want to make, is that the wick on a candle
is EXTREMELY important, and a vital part of Volume Price Analysis, as is the spread. In this case the spread
was zero, which is JUST as significant as any large spread of the candle.
I hope that the above example has helped to explain what is happening 'inside' the candle with the associated
price action. This is a very simple example, with the price action split symmetrically into a 50/50 window.
Nevertheless, the principle holds good. The price action may have been split into a 25/75 or even a 15/85, but
the point is this – the sellers were overwhelmed by the buyers during the course of the session that the candle
is representing.
This now brings me on to another area of volume analysis which we are also going to consider later in the
book. I've already mentioned Volume Price Analysis or VPA several times so far, which is the relationship
between volume and price over the entire life of the candle, but what happens within the life of the candle for
example. Where is the buying and selling actually taking place, and this is called Volume At Price, or VAP for
short.
Whilst VPA focuses on the 'linear relationship' between volume and price once the candle has closed, VAP
focuses on the volume profile during the creation of the price bar. In other words, 'where' has the volume been
concentrated within the associated price action.
We could say that VPA is our big picture of the volume price relationship on the outside of the candle, whilst
VAP gives us the detail of the volume profile, 'inside' the candle. This helps to give us an additional perspective
on our 'outside' view – two views of the same thing, but from different perspectives, with one validating the
other. A further triangulation of the volume and price relationship.
Now let's look at our other example, which was the upper wick example.

Upper Wick Example

Fig 3.13 Upper Wick Example
In this example the market opened with the buyers immediately taking control, forcing the price higher, and
overcoming the sellers, who are compelled to admit defeat under the buying pressure. However, as the session
develops the price action reaches a point at which the buyers are beginning to struggle, the market is becoming
resistant to higher prices and gradually the sellers begin to regain control.
Finally, at the high of the session, the buyers run out of steam and as the sellers come into the market, the
buyers close out their profits. This selling pressure then forces prices lower, as waves of sellers hit the price
action.
The candle closes back at the open price and the session closes. Once again, there are two key points with this
price behaviour which are fundamental.
First, we have a complete reversal in market sentiment, this time from bullish to bearish. Second, the sentiment
at the close is bearish, as the open and closing price are the same.
Again, this is a stylised view of the price behaviour. Nevertheless, this is what has happened over the session
of the candle, and it makes no difference as to what time frame we are considering.
This could be a candle on a tick chart, a 5 minute chart, a daily chart or a weekly chart, and this is where the
concept of time comes into play. This type of price action, accompanied with the correct volume profiles, is
going to have a significantly greater effect when seen on a daily or weekly chart, then when seen on a 1 minute
or 5 minute chart.
This is something we will cover in more detail in the next few chapters.
But, what does this price action look like on a price chart in candle form?

Lower Wick Example

Fig 3.14 Candle From Lower Wick Example
Although the resulting candle doesn’t look very exciting it actually represents one of the most powerful price
actions that you will find on any chart, particularly when volume analysis is added to it. Price action and volume
then tell us where the market is likely to go next.
And here is another, equally powerful candle.

Upper Wick Example
Once again, this is an extremely important price pattern, which we will return to time and time again throughout
the book.

Fig 3.15 Candle Resulting From Upper Wick Example
Now this is where, for price action trading, the book might stop. After all, we can now visualise the buying and
the selling simply from the price action of the wick on the candle. But what of course this does NOT reveal, is
the strength of this price action, and perhaps even more importantly, whether this price action is valid. Is the
price action genuine, or is it false, and if it is genuine, what is the strength of any consequent move likely to be.
This is why I feel price action trading only tells half the story. It is volume which completes the picture. And in
the next chapter we start to consider volume from first principles.

Chapter Four
Volume Price Analysis – First Principles
[On the continual learning in share investing] Wherever learning curves begin in this mercurial business, they
never seem to end.
John Neff (1931-)
In this chapter I want to start with some basic tenets for Volume Price Analysis VPA, but first of all, let me set out
what I believe are the guiding principles in order to be consistently successful as a trader using this approach. I
must stress, these are the principles I use every day, and have been developed over 16 years, since I first
started using this technique based on Albert's teaching. Despite the cost and surreal experience, I am eternally
grateful to Albert for setting me (and my husband David) on the right trading road. And I hope this book will do
the same for you.
Now, these are not rules, but simply guiding principles to help to put the rest of what you are about to learn into
context. And just as an aside, for the remainder of the book I will be referring to Volume Price Analysis as VPA
– it's quicker and easier for you, and for me!

Principle No 1: Art Not Science
The first principle to understand is that learning to read charts using VPA is an art, it is not a NOT a science.
Moreover, it is not a technique that lends itself easily to automation or software. Although it does take a little
while to become proficient, you will be rewarded for your effort and time. It can then be applied to any instrument
in any market in any time frame. The reason software does not work with VPA, is simply that most of the
analysis is subjective. You are comparing and analysing price behaviour against the associated volume,
looking for confirmations or anomalies, whilst at the same time, comparing volume to judge its strength or
weakness in the context of volume history.
A software program, does not have any subjectivity in its decision making. Hence it can never work.
The other advantage is that once you have learnt this technique, it is effectively free to use for life! The only cost
is any data feed you may need for the live volume, and your investment in this book!

Principle No 2 : Patience
This principle took me some time to learn, so I hope that I can save you a huge amount of wasted effort here.
The financial market is like a super tanker. It does not just stop and turn on a dime or sixpence. The market
always has momentum and will almost always continue beyond the candle or candle pattern which is signalling
a potential reversal or an anomaly. When I first started, I always became very excited whenever I saw a trading
signal, and would enter a position immediately, only to see the market continue on for a while before the signal
was validated with the market duly changing course.
The reason for this is very simple to understand once you begin to think about what is happening in each price
bar, and in terms of the reality of the market. So, let me use an analogy here to help illustrate this point.
The analogy is of a summer shower of rain. The sun is shining, then there is a change, the clouds blow in, and
in a few minutes the rain begins to fall, lightly at first, then heavier, before slowing again, and finally stopping.
After a few minutes the sun comes out again, and starts drying up the rain.
This analogy gives us a visual picture of what actually happens when a price reversal occurs. Let's take an
example of a down trend where the market has been selling off over a period of several down candles. At this
point we begin to see signs of potential buying coming into the market. The sellers are being overwhelmed by
the buyers. However, they are NOT all overwhelmed immediately within the price action of the candle. Some
sellers continue to hang on, believing that the market is going to move lower. The market does move a little
lower, but then starts to tick higher and some more sellers are frightened out of the market. The market then
drops back lower once again, before recovering, and in doing so shakes out the more obstinate sellers. Finally,
the market is ready to move higher having 'mopped up' the last dregs of selling.
