
talons under the children's bed. "On the 5th of November," says the Rev. Joseph Glanvil,
"it made a mighty noise; and a servant, observing two boards in the children's room
seeming to move, he bid it give him one of them. Upon which the board came (nothing
moving it, that he saw), within a yard of him. The man added, 'Nay, let me have it in my
hand ;' upon which the spirit, devil, or drummer pushed it towards him so close, that he
might touch it. "This," continues Glanvil, "was in the day-time, and was seen by a whole
room full of people. That morning it left a sulphureous smell behind it, which was very
offensive. At night the minister, one Mr. Cragg, and several of the neighhours, came to
the house, on a visit. Mr. Cragg went to prayers with them, kneeling at the children's
bedside, where it then became very troublesome and loud. During prayer time, the spirit
withdrew into the cock-loft, but returned as soon as prayers were done; and then, in sight
of the company, the chairs walked about the room of themselves, the children's shoes
were hurled over their heads, and every loose thing moved about the chamber. At the
same time, a bed-staff was thrown at the minister, which hit him on the leg, but so
favourably, that a lock of wool could not have fallen more softly." On another occasion,
the blacksmith of the village, a fellow who cared neither for ghost nor devil, slept with
John, the footman, that he also might hear the disturbances, and be cured of his
incredulity, when there "came a noise in the room, as if one had been shoeing a horse,
and somewhat came, as it were, with a pair of pincers," snipping and snapping at the poor
blacksmith's nose the greater part of the night. Next day it came, panting like a dog out of
breath; upon which some woman present took a bed-staff to knock at it, "which was
caught suddenly out of her hand, and thrown away; and company coming up, the room
was presently filled with a bloomy noisome smell, and was very hot, though without fire,
in a very sharp and severe winter. It continued in the bed, panting and scratching for an
hour and a half, and then went into the next room, where it knocked a little, and seemed
to rattle a chain."
The rumour of these wonderful occurrences soon spread all over the country, and people
from far and near flocked to the haunted house of Tedworth, to believe or doubt, as their
natures led them, but all filled with intense curiosity. It appears, too, that the fame of
these events reached the royal ear, and that some gentlemen were sent by the King to
investigate the circumstances, and draw up a report of what they saw or heard. Whether
the royal commissioners were more sensible men than the neighbours of Mr.
Mompesson, and required more clear and positive evidence than they, or whether the
powers with which they were armed to punish anybody who might be found carrying on
this deception, frightened the evil-doers, is not certain; but Glanvil himself reluctantly
confesses, that all the time they were in the house, the noises ceased, and nothing was
heard or seen. "However," says he, "as to the quiet of the house when the courtiers were
there, the intermission may have been accidental, or perhaps the demon was not willing
to give so public a testimony of those transactions which might possibly convince those
who, he had rather, should continue in unbelief of his existence."
As soon as the royal commissioners took their departure, the infernal drummer recommenced his antics, and hundreds of persons were daily present to hear and wonder.
Mr. Mompesson's servant was so fortunate as not only to hear, but to see this pertinacious
demon; for it came and stood at the foot of his bed. "The exact shape and proportion of it

he could not discover; but he saw a great body, with two red and glaring eyes, which, for
some time, were fixed steadily on him, and at length disappeared." Innumerable were the
antics it played. Once it purred like a cat; beat the children's legs black and blue; put a
long spike into Mr. Mompesson's bed, and a knife into his mother's; filled the porrengers
with ashes; hid a Bible under the grate; and turned the money black in people's pockets.
"One night," said Mr. Mompesson, in a letter to Mr. Glanvil, "there were seven or eight
of these devils in the shape of men, who, as soon as a gun was fired, would shuffle away
into an arbour;" a circumstance which might have convinced Mr. Mompesson of the
mortal nature of his persecutors, if he had not been of the number of those worse than
blind, who shut their eyes and refuse to see.
In the mean time the drummer, the supposed cause of all the mischief, passed his time in
Gloucester gaol, whither he had been committed as a rogue and a vagabond. Being
visited one day by some person from the neighbourhood of Tedworth, he asked what was
the news in Wiltshire, and whether people did not talk a great deal about a drumming in a
gentleman's house there? The visiter replied, that he heard of nothing else; upon which
the drummer observed, "I have done it; I have thus plagued him; and he shall never be
quiet until he hath made me satisfaction for taking away my drum." No doubt the fellow,
who seems to have been a gipsy, spoke the truth, and that the gang of which he was a
member knew more about the noises at Mr. Mompesson's house than anybody else. Upon
these words, however, he was brought to trial at Salisbury, for witchcraft; and, being
found guilty, was sentenced to transportation; a sentence which, for its leniency, excited
no little wonder in that age, when such an accusation, whether proved or not, generally
insured the stake or the gibbet. Glanvil says, that the noises ceased immediately the
drummer was sent beyond the seas; but that, some how or other, he managed to return
from transportation; "by raising storms and affrighting the seamen, it was said;" when the
disturbances were forthwith renewed, and continued at intervals for several years.
Certainly, if the confederates of this roving gipsy were so pertinacious in tormenting poor
weak Mr. Mompesson, their pertinacity is a most extraordinary instance of what revenge
is capable of. It was believed by many, at the time, that Mr. Mompesson himself was
privy to the whole matter, and permitted and encouraged these tricks in his house for the
sake of notoriety; but it seems more probable that the gipsies were the real delinquents,
and that Mr. Mompesson was as much alarmed and bewildered as his credulous
neighhours, whose excited imaginations conjured up no small portion of these stories,
"Which rolled, and as they rolled, grew larger every hour."
Many instances, of a similar kind, during the seventeenth century, might be gleaned from
Glanvil and other writers of that period; but they do not differ sufficiently from these to
justify a detail of them. The most famous of all haunted houses acquired its notoriety
much nearer our own time; and the circumstances connected with it are so curious, and
afford so fair a specimen of the easy credulity even of well-informed and sensible people,
as to merit a little notice in this chapter. The Cock Lane Ghost, as it was called, kept
London in commotion for a considerable time, and was the theme of conversation among
the learned and the illiterate, and in every circle, from that of the prince to that of the
peasant.

At the commencement of the year 1760, there resided in Cock Lane, near West
Smithfield, in the house of one Parsons, the parish clerk of St. Sepulchre's, a stockbroker,
named Kent. The wife of this gentleman had died in child-bed during the previous year,
and his sister-in-law, Miss Fanny, had arrived from Norfolk to keep his house for him.
They soon conceived a mutual affection, and each of them made a will in the other's
favour. They lived some months in the house of Parsons, who, being a needy man,
borrowed money of his lodger. Some difference arose betwixt them, and Mr. Kent left the
house, and instituted legal proceedings against the parish clerk for the recovery of his
money.
While this matter was yet pending, Miss Fanny was suddenly taken ill of the small-pox;
and, notwithstanding every care and attention, she died in a few days, and was buried in a
vault under Clerkenwell church. Parsons now began to hint that the poor lady had come
unfairly by her death, and that Mr. Kent was accessory to it, from his too great eagerness
to enter into possession of the property she had bequeathed him. Nothing further was said
for nearly two years; but it would appear that Parsons was of so revengeful a character,
that he had never forgotten or forgiven his differences with Mr. Kent, and the indignity of
having been sued for the borrowed money. The strong passions of pride and avarice were
silently at work during all that interval, hatching schemes of revenge, but dismissing
them one after the other as impracticable, until, at last, a notable one suggested itself.
About the beginning of the year 1762, the alarm was spread over all the neighbourhood
of Cock Lane, that the house of Parsons was haunted by the ghost of poor Fanny, and that
the daughter of Parsons, a girl about twelve years of age, had several times seen and
conversed with the spirit, who had, moreover, informed her, that she had not died of the
smallpox, as was currently reported, but of poison, administered by Mr. Kent. Parsons,
who originated, took good care to countenance these reports; and, in answer to numerous
inquiries, said his house was every night, and had been for two years, in fact, ever since
the death of Fanny, troubled by a loud knocking at the doors and in the walls. Having
thus prepared the ignorant and credulous neighhours to believe or exaggerate for
themselves what he had told them, he sent for a gentleman of a higher class in life, to
come and witness these extraordinary occurrences. The gentleman came accordingly, and
found the daughter of Parsons, to whom the spirit alone appeared, and whom alone it
answered, in bed, trembling violently, having just seen the ghost, and been again
informed that she had died from poison. A loud knocking was also heard from every part
of the chamber, which so mystified the not very clear understanding of the visiter, that he
departed, afraid to doubt and ashamed to believe, but with a promise to bring the
clergyman of the parish and several other gentlemen on the following day, to report upon
the mystery.
On the following night he returned, bringing with him three clergymen, and about twenty
other persons, including two negroes, when, upon a consultation with Parsons, they
resolved to sit up the whole night, and await the ghost's arrival. It was then explained by
Parsons, that although the ghost would never render itself visible to anybody but his
daughter, it had no objection to answer the questions that might be put to it, by any
person present, and that it expressed an affirmation by one knock, a negative by two, and

its displeasure by a kind of scratching. The child was then put into bed along with her
sister, and the clergymen examined the bed and bed-clothes to satisfy themselves that no
trick was played, by knocking upon any substance concealed among the clothes. As on
the previous night, the bed was observed to shake violently.
After some hours, during which they all waited with exemplary patience, the mysterious
knocking was heard in the wall, and the child declared that she saw the ghost of poor
Fanny. The following questions were then gravely put by the clergyman, through the
medium of one Mary Frazer, the servant of Parsons, and to whom it was said the
deceased lady had been much attached. The answers were in the usual fashion, by a
knock or knocks:-"Do you make this disturbance on account of the ill usage you received from Mr. Kent ?"
-- "Yes."
"Were you brought to an untimely end by poison ?" -- "Yes."
"How was the poison administered, in beer or in purl ?" -- "In purl."
"How long was that before your death?" -- "About three hours."
"Can your former servant, Carrots, give any information about the poison?" -- "Yes."
"Are you Kent's wife's sister ?" -- "Yes."
"Were you married to Kent after your sister's death?" -- "No."
"Was anybody else, besides Kent, concerned in your murder?" -- "No."
"Can you, if you like, appear visibly to anyone?" -- "Yes."
"Will you do so?" -- "Yes."
"Can you go out of this house?" -- "Yes."
"Is it your intention to follow this child about everywhere?" -- "Yes."
"Are you pleased in being asked these questions?" -- "Yes."
"Does it case your troubled soul?" -- "Yes."
[Here there was heard a mysterious noise, which some wiseacre present compared to the
fluttering of wings.]
"How long before your death did you tell your servant, Carrots, that you were poisoned? - An hour?" -- "Yes."

[Carrots, who was present, was appealed to; but she stated positively that such was not
the fact, as the deceased was quite speechless an hour before her death. This shook the
faith of some of the spectators, but the examination was allowed to continue.]
"How long did Carrots live with you?" -- "Three or four days."
[Carrots was again appealed to, and said that this was true.]
"If Mr. Kent is arrested for this murder, will he confess?" -- "Yes."
"Would your soul be at rest if he were hanged for it?" -- "Yes."
"Will he be hanged for it?" -- "Yes."
"How long a time first?" -- "Three years."
"How many clergymen are there in this room?" -- "Three."
"How many negroes?" -- "Two."
"Is this watch (held up by one of the clergymen) white?" -- "No."
"Is it yellow?" -- "No."
"Is it blue?" -- "No."
"Is it black?" -- "Yes."
[The watch was in a black shagreen case.]
"At what time this morning will you take your departure?"
The answer to this question was four knocks, very distinctly heard by every person
present; and accordingly, at four o'clock precisely, the ghost took its departure to the
Wheatsheaf public-house, close by, where it frightened mine host and his lady almost out
of their wits by knocking in the ceiling right above their bed.
The rumour of these occurrences very soon spread over London, and every day Cock
Lane was rendered impassable by the crowds of people who assembled around the house
of the parish clerk, in expectation of either seeing the ghost or of hearing the mysterious
knocks. It was at last found necessary, so clamorous were they for admission within the
haunted precincts, to admit those only who would pay a certain fee, an arrangement
which was very convenient to the needy and money-loving Mr. Parsons. Indeed, things
had taken a turn greatly to his satisfaction; he not only had his revenge, but he made a

profit out of it. The ghost, in consequence, played its antics every night, to the great
amusement of many hundreds of people and the great perplexity of a still greater number.
Unhappily, however, for the parish clerk, the ghost was induced to make some promises
which were the means of utterly destroying its reputation. It promised, in answer to the
questions of the Reverend Mr. Aldritch of Clerkenwell, that it would not only follow the
little Miss Parsons wherever she went, but would also attend him, or any other
gentleman, into the vault under St. John's Church, where the body of the murdered
woman was deposited, and would there give notice of its presence by a distinct knock
upon the coffin. As a preliminary, the girl was conveyed to the house of Mr. Aldritch
near the church, where a large party of ladies and gentlemen, eminent for their
acquirements, their rank, or their wealth, had assembled. About ten o'clock on the night
of the 1st of February, the girl having been brought from Cock Lane in a coach, was put
to bed by several ladies in the house of Mr. Aldritch; a strict examination having been
previously made that nothing was hidden in the bedclothes. While the gentlemen,. in an
adjoining chamber, were deliberating whether they should proceed in a body to the vault,
they were summoned into the bedroom by the ladies, who affirmed, in great alarm, that
the ghost was come, and that they heard the knocks and scratches. The gentlemen entered
accordingly, with a determination to suffer no deception. The little girl, on being asked
whether she saw the ghost, replied, "No; but she felt it on her back like a mouse." She
was then required to put her hands out of bed, and they being held by some of the ladies,
the spirit was summoned in the usual manner to answer, if it were in the room. The
question was several times put with great solemnity; but the customary knock was not
heard in reply in the walls, neither was there any scratching. The ghost was then asked to
render itself visible, but it did not choose to grant the request. It was next solicited to give
some token of its presence by a sound of any sort, or by touching the hand or cheek of
any lady or gentleman in the room; but even with this request the ghost would not
comply.
There was now a considerable pause, and one of the clergymen went downstairs to
interrogate the father of the girl, who was waiting the result of the experiment. He
positively denied that there was any deception, and even went so far as to say that he
himself, upon one occasion, had seen and conversed with the awful ghost. This having
been communicated to the company, it was unanimously resolved to give the ghost
another trial; and the clergyman called out in a loud voice to the supposed spirit that the
gentleman to whom it had promised to appear in the vault, was about to repair to that
place, where he claimed the fulfilment of its promise. At one hour after midnight they all
proceeded to the church, and the gentleman in question, with another, entered the vault
alone, and took up their position alongside of the coffin of poor Fanny. The ghost was
then summoned to appear, but it appeared not; it was summoned to knock, but it knocked
not; it was summoned to scratch, but it scratched not; and the two retired from the vault,
with the firm belief that the whole business was a deception practised by Parsons and his
daughter. There were others, however, who did not wish to jump so hastily to a
conclusion, and who suggested that they were, perhaps, trifling with this awful and
supernatural being, which, being offended with them for their presumption, would not
condescend to answer them. Again, after a serious consultation, it was agreed on all

hands that, if the ghost answered anybody at all, it would answer Mr. Kent, the supposed
murderer; and he was accordingly requested to go down into the vault. He went with
several others, and summoned the ghost to answer whether he had indeed poisoned her.
There being no answer, the question was put by Mr. Aldritch, who conjured it, if it were
indeed a spirit, to end their doubts-make a sign of its presence, and point out the guilty
person. There being still no answer for the space of half an hour, during which time all
these boobies waited with the most praiseworthy perseverance, they returned to the house
of Mr. Aldritch, and ordered the girl to get up and dress herself. She was strictly
examined, but persisted in her statement that she used no deception, and that the ghost
had really appeared to her.
So many persons had, by their openly expressed belief of the reality of the visitation,
identified themselves with it, that Parsons and his family were far from being the only
persons interested in the continuance of the delusion. The result of the experiment
convinced most people; but these were not to be convinced by any evidence, however
positive, and they, therefore, spread abroad the rumour, that the ghost had not appeared in
the vault because Mr. Kent had taken care beforehand to have the coffin removed. That
gentleman, whose position was a very painful one, immediately procured competent
witnesses, in whose presence the vault was entered and the coffin of poor Fanny opened.
Their deposition was then published; and Mr. Kent indicted Parsons and his wife, his
daughter, Mary Frazer the servant, the Reverend Mr. Moor, and a tradesman, two of the
most prominent patrons of the deception, for a conspiracy. The trial came on in the Court
of King's Bench, on the 10th of July, before Lord Chief-Justice Mansfield, when, after an
investigation which lasted twelve hours, the whole of the conspirators were found guilty.
The Reverend Mr. Moor and his friend were severely reprimanded in open court, and
recommended to make some pecuniary compensation to the prosecutor for the aspersions
they had been instrumental in throwing upon his character. Parsons was sentenced to
stand three times in the pillory, and to be imprisoned for two years: his wife to one year's,
and his servant to six months' imprisonment in the Bridewell. A printer, who had been
employed by them to publish an account of the proceedings for their profit, was also
fined fifty pounds, and discharged.
The precise manner in which the deception was carried on has never been explained. The
knocking in the wall appears to have been the work of Parsons' wife, while the scratching
part of the business was left to the little girl. That any contrivance so clumsy could have
deceived anybody, cannot fail to excite our wonder. But thus it always is. If two or three
persons can only be found to take the lead in any absurdity, however great, there is sure
to be plenty of imitators. Like sheep in a field, if one clears the stile, the rest will follow.
About ten years afterwards, London was again alarmed by the story of a haunted house.
Stockwell, near Vauxhall, the scene of the antics of this new ghost, became almost as
celebrated in the annals of superstition as Cock Lane. Mrs. Golding, an elderly lady, who
resided alone with her servant, Anne Robinson, was sorely surprised on the evening of
Twelfth-Day, 1772, to observe a most extraordinary commotion among her crockery.
Cups and saucers rattled down the chimney -- pots and pans were whirled down stairs, or
through the windows; and hams, cheeses, and loaves of bread disported themselves upon

the floor as if the devil were in them. This, at least, was the conclusion that Mrs. Golding
came to; and being greatly alarmed, she invited some of her neighbours to stay with her,
and protect her from the evil one. Their presence, however, did not put a stop to the
insurrection of china, and every room in the house was in a short time strewed with the
fragments. The chairs and tables joined, at last, in the tumults, and things looked
altogether so serious and inexplicable, that the neighbours, dreading that the house itself
would next be seized with a fit of motion, and tumble about their ears, left poor Mrs.
Golding to bear the brunt of it by herself. The ghost in this case was solemnly
remonstrated with, and urged to take its departure; but the demolition continuing as great
as before, Mrs. Golding finally made up her mind to quit the house altogether. She took
refuge with Anne Robinson in the house of a neighbour; but his glass and crockery being
immediately subjected to the same persecution, he was reluctantly compelled to give her
notice to quit. The old lady thus forced back to her own house, endured the disturbance
for some days longer, when suspecting that Anne Robinson was the cause of all the
mischief, she dismissed her from her service. The extraordinary appearances immediately
ceased, and were never afterwards renewed; a fact which is of itself sufficient to point out
the real disturber. A long time afterwards, Anne Robinson confessed the whole matter to
the Reverend Mr. Bray field. This gentleman confided the story to Mr. Hone, who has
published an explanation of the mystery. Anne, it appears, was anxious to have a clear
house, to carry on an intrigue with her lover, and resorted to this trick to effect her
purpose. She placed the china on the shelves in such a manner that it fell on the slightest
motion, and attached horse-hairs to other articles, so that she could jerk them down from
an adjoining room without being perceived by any one. She was exceedingly dexterous at
this sort of work, and would have proved a formidable rival to many a juggler by
profession. A full explanation of the whole affair may be found in the "Every-day Book."
The latest instance of the popular panic occasioned by a house supposed to be haunted,
occurred in Scotland, in the winter of the year 1838. On the 5th of December, the inmates
of the farm-house of Baldarroch, in the district of Banchory, Aberdeenshire, were
alarmed by observing a great number of sticks, pebble-stones, and clods of earth flying
about their yard and premises. They endeavoured, but in vain, to discover who was the
delinquent; and the shower of stones continuing for five days in succession, they came at
last to the conclusion that the devil and his imps were alone the cause of it. The rumour
soon spread over all that part of the country, and hundreds of persons came from far and
near to witness the antics of the devils of Baldarroch. After the fifth day, the shower of
clods and stones ceased on the outside of the premises, and the scene shifted to the
interior. Spoons, knives, plates, mustard-pots, rolling-pins, and flat-irons appeared
suddenly endued with the power of self-motion, and were whirled from room to room,
and rattled down the chimneys in a manner which nobody could account for. The lid of a
mustard-pot was put into a cupboard by the servant-girl in the presence of scores of
people, and in a few minutes afterwards came bouncing down the chimney to the
consternation of everybody. There was also a tremendous knocking at the doors and on
the roof, and pieces of stick and pebble-stones rattled against the windows and broke
them. The whole neighbourhood was a scene of alarm; and not only the vulgar, but
persons of education, respectable farmers, within a circle of twenty miles, expressed their
belief in the supernatural character of these events, and offered up devout prayers to be
