
FIGURE 9.3
Applied Micro Circuits registers seven NR7 bars over a 3-½ month period. Six of these coiled springs lead to
profit with a simple range strategy to guide trade execution. Enter a position in whatever direction price moves
out of the narrow bar’s range and place a stop at the other side of the bar. Then use trailing stops to lock in
profit. Only the second entry would have triggered a loss through all of the AMCC action with these classic
tactics.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Exit the coiled spring as price expands into S/R. This strategy follows the advice to ‘‘enter in mild
times but exit in wild times.” Keep in mind that expansion out of NR7 congestion may not signal a
breakout. If a large barrier blocks the profit door, get out quickly and move on to the next
opportunity. The expansion bar may represent a short covering rally or a stop gun exercise that will
quickly reverse.
Book consistent profits through direct price thrusts unless multiple cross-verification opens greater
rewards. When coiled springs align in several time frames, hold the position through a series of
expansion bars and place trailing stops to lock in profits. But remember that markets trend only 15–
20% of the time and odds favor the trade that grabs a few quick bars. Use skill and reasoned
judgment to recognize when conditions strongly support longer positions.

APPLICATIONS
The coiled spring trade arises through a wide variety of circumstances. It can signal many other
types of setups through perfect location and time. The most common patterns appear near the apex
of triangles and the tops of declining bull flags. Look for the NR7 bar wherever S/R suggests an
impending breakout. These tension zones may materialize at 3rd watch tops, simple trendlines, or
even Bollinger Band extremes. Always use the coiled spring for low-risk entry while the crowd
waits for perfect hindsight.

TRIANGLE COIL
Triangle breakouts exhibit classic coiled spring behavior. Volatility peaks at the start of the pattern
and ebbs just before a major breakout occurs. The upper and lower pattern boundaries define time
as well as price. Extend them to see where they meet and what other important S/R they will cross
to get there. Keep in mind that the NR7-2 signal in this trade offers one of the best in all of technical
analysis.
Description
•
•
•
•
•
•

High and low boundaries for the congestion pattern should form very early in the range.
Look for price swings to shorten and volume to drop as the pattern evolves toward the
breakout.
The pattern should not extend beyond a 50% retracement of the prior trend.
Look for three hits of the top and bottom trendlines before final breakout.
Breakout should occur about two-thirds of the way from the start of the pattern to the
projected apex.
The NR7 will likely print either at the middle of the triangle or right against one of the
trendlines.

Triangles can complete with or without NR7 bars. Well-placed narrow bars allow low-risk entry
within the formation just before price ejection. Watch out when the signal appears too early within
the developing pattern. Chances are that nothing of interest will occur until later, when most traders
turn away to find other opportunities.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 9.4)
•
•
•

Long-legged hammer reaches through test of prior low and 50% retracement (1). Price then
closes above the 50-day SMA (2).
Trendlines form from upper and lower boundaries (3) at similar but opposing angles.
Trendlines create a midline (4) at equal distance between the top and bottom. Price action
pivots across this horizontal axis.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 9.5)

Midline (1) shows natural price swing.
NR7 prints at midline exactly between 20-day SMA and 50-day SMA. Then a second NR7 in a
row (NR7-2) appears right next to it.
Buy immediately or as soon as price rises above the 5-day congestion range (6). Place a stop
loss below the first NR7 range near 36.

Stock breaks on the next bar and closes near the high. An exit at 43 before closing captures a
nice profit. But triangle breakouts favor price to exceed the pattern high (5). Consider
taking some money off the table and riding the rest.
Next bar carries price outside Bollinger Band top (7). Consider exit before closing if possible.
Profit on the following bar adds 10 points, but the entire bar prints outside the band. A
trailing stop strategy for runaway trends would capture part of this movement.

FIGURE 9.4

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
Risk remains low, as with other coiled spring strategies. A 2-point loss compares with a potential
20-point gain. Clearly marked resistance at 44 and 48 offer easy targets and planning. Failure at the
descending trendline within the pattern might still yield a 2-point profit for an early position. Risk
rises after the breakout because runaway gaps hide simple entry points. Once again, trading ahead
of the crowd shows many advantages.

FIGURE 9.5

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FAILURE COIL I
The coiled spring often signals pattern failure just before it occurs. These entries tend to produce
dramatic results because the breakout fools the crowd that waits for the alternate outcome. Watch
market action closely as price approaches a failure point. It may print the NR7 one to two bars
ahead of the actual breakout event.
Description

•
•
•
•
•

The setup often appears while the opposite strategy draws the trader’s attention.
Locate the trendline or price level on the alternate setup that signals a pattern failure on
violation.
Any pattern failure that prints a NR7 before it breaks constitutes a failure coil.
Any coiled spring that moves in the unexpected direction also constitutes a failure coil.
The most common failures appear in simple triangles, flags, and trendline breaks.

The failure coil setup works powerfully because it occurs when the crowd least expects it.
Remember that failure trades go vertical because they trap so many speculators who have little
choice but to incur large losses to escape their pain.
Setup Tactics (FIGURE 9.6)
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Gemstar draws an apparent head and shoulders pattern that begins with a first failure (1)
retracement.
The decline ends at a horizontal neckline (2) and prints a small double bottom (4).
The neckline captures the crowd’s attention. The herd follows the next rally and looks for
the formation of a right shoulder. The right shoulder (3) appears on schedule and price starts
to drop.
Price returns twice to test the 50-day SMA successfully (4), (5). Note within (5) how the 20day SMA drops to the 50-day SMA and bounces off in support.
A rising trendline (8) forms from the moving average tests.
Another reversal at (6) reinforces a descending trendline. The pattern now looks like a
symmetrical triangle as well as head and shoulders.
The Stochastics oscillator (9) starts to flatline and move toward 50.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 9.7)

Rising trendline (1) supports price through nine bars as a small rally pushes toward the triangle
apex.
A NR7 coiled spring (2) signals at the triangle’s dead center.
Price bar (5) strikes the falling trendline (3) on the next bar while the top Bollinger Band (4)
rises to support price.
Enter on (5) with a stop loss below the rising trendline. This also marks a violation of the
bottom of the NR7 range.
Price ejects strongly in a pattern failure that makes further entry difficult. First resistance at (6)
marks a good profit for those in a position from the mid 70s. But both pattern failure and
triangle breakouts favor price to exceed the pattern high (7). Consider taking some money
off the table and riding the rest.
The rally shoots out the top Bollinger Band (8) and demands a quick exit. Those who stick
around with a trailing stop strike gold because price rises another 15 points before it finally
reverses.

FIGURE 9.6

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
This setup displays an excellent reward:risk profile if the trade executes on the bar after the coiled
spring signal. The minimum target would yield an approximate 2:1 reward:risk, while a managed 3day holding period would book an amazing 9:1. Realistically, few swing traders would maintain
their positions through the series of expansion bars and price resistance. And entry after the
breakout faces increased risk because the pattern exhibits few pullbacks.

FIGURE 9.7

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

FAILURE COIL II
This setup reminds swing traders that long-term success relies on probability and risk management,
not pattern reading. The most perfect coiled spring setup can go sour at any time or any place.
When all else fails, follow the written trading plan or face the fires of hell. Fortunately, even the
hottest inferno can turn a nice profit from time to time.
Description

•

See Failure Coil I.

Failure coils arise from complex patterns or standard coiled spring setups. When they suddenly
appear in an unexpected location, swing traders reverse gears quickly to capitalize on the trapped
crowd. But effective strategy recalls that classic NR7 signals have an equal chance of going in
either direction. This requires that trading plans include a bilateral response to most standard coiled
spring signals.

Setup Tactics (FIGURE 9.8)
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

Sandisk prints a standard dip trip or coiled spring setup. A sharp rally reverses and pulls
back in a classic ABC correction (2). A Fib grid (1) drawn over the price action reveals a
very bullish scenario.
The C wave ends in a sharp double-bottom pattern (3) right at the 62% retracement.
The two bottoms trigger wide swing pivots (7) across the whole number 100.
The retracement turns into a large bull flag (4) with the double bottom right at the far
extreme of the pattern.
Price action draws a rising trendline (6) out of the bottom and pushes toward the upper flag
channel.
A tiny NR7 appears (5) right at the interface between the declining channel and rising
trendline.
Price sits below both the 20-day SMA and 50-day SMA.
FIGURE 9.8

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Execution and Position Management (FIGURE 9.9)

Place a sell short stop under the low of the narrow bar and a buy stop above it (2). This captures
bar expansion, regardless of which way it goes.
Manage the sell stop with a limit order that avoids entry if few upticks appear near the
breakdown.
Once filled, lift the other order and replace it with a stop loss at the same price.
The next bar opens within the range of the NR7 but below the trendline. This offers a little
whipsaw room in case of a false breakdown.
Price quickly violates the NR7 to the downside and triggers the sell stop as long as it can fill
near the broken range.
The next price bar approaches the double bottom and 62% retracement (3). It then pushes
through the bottom Bollinger Band.

•

•
•

Both support levels tell the swing trader to exit with a 10–15-point profit, but there is a
problem. The scenario sets up an inverse 3rd watch. As with uptrends, downtrends favor that
price break through the second test of a significant S/R level. This presents a tough choice
after building a nice profit. The best strategy takes some money off the table and leaves the
rest.
The next bar gaps through the low (4), expands out of the Bollinger Band, and leads to a
pullback short sale opportunity.
The small doji (5) signals another entry as price drops below 60.
FIGURE 9.9

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Reward:Risk
A long position carries the greatest risk for the setup. The classic retracement and flag pattern
suggest an upside breakout and rally back to the old high. But the moving averages and failure of
price to mount 100 both telegraph the ensuing selloff better than the pattern. The NR7 bar right at
the interface between the two trendlines offers an excellent low-risk opportunity. Price movement
out of that small range in either direction triggers a breakout.

10 CHAPTER
FINGER FINDER

CHARACTERISTICS
Swing traders throughout the world apply Japanese candlestick charting techniques. This venerable
practice presents a method to look at individual price action and a means to uncover short-term
market signals. Most equity software now offers the option of displaying charts with this powerful
application. In fact, many seasoned participants have abandoned Western bars entirely and trade
only with candles.
Their change in tactics comes at an opportune time. Modern market noise cripples the ability of
classic bars to locate reliable signals as violations rip through important charting landscape features.
Candles reduce this whipsaw with their unique shadow and real body structure. Where the bar
enthusiast sees broken support and moves on to the next setup, the candle trader may find that same
level still intact. This additional layer of information protects pocketbooks and opens opportunities
that others will miss.
The finger finder studies single-bar candlestick patterns to identify markets that print important
directional signals. This outstanding tool flags hidden price action that takes place in the time frame
beneath the bar that triggers the setup. Look for fingers to reach across well-marked S/R, clear out
the stops, and then jump back across violation points. These underlying mechanics set the stage for
price swings in the opposite direction.
Candles generate complex visual data from short-term price movement. They define natural
extremes and open a window to the next-lower time frame without the need for a separate chart.
Shadow zones may mark hidden pullbacks and reversals within this shorter view. They can also
signal broad changes in direction when they print at major price intersections.

Trade Mechanics
Single-bar hammers and dojis provide the most powerful immediate feedback of all candlestick
patterns. Western technical analysis rarely offers such dependable short-term signals. These
formations print when a significant battle between bulls and bears ends in a draw. Two specific
requirements generate their predictive power. First, the high-low range must be greater than
average. Second, the closing tick must equal or stand close to the opening tick.
The candlestick’s real body must print near one extreme of that bar’s range to complete the hammer
or doji pattern. The longer the high-low range compared to the recent average, the more powerful
the signal. Reversal candidates should also oppose the direction of the last few price bars. For
example, the real body on a hammer after a downtrend that lasts several sessions should print at the
top end of the range. This suggests that opposition has mounted against that trend in the lower time
frame.
FIGURE 10.1
Hammer and doji candlesticks repeatedly signal short-term reversals on the Crown Castle charting landscape. The
finger finder opens a window to hidden price action within a single bar. Consider both the length of the candle
and its location when predicting how this setup will impact the next price swing.

RealTick® © 1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

These powerful candles also predict strong continuation movement when they appear in the right
place. Ongoing trends often gap forward and print a finger with the real body pointed in the primary
direction. This fish hammer swims strongly and predicts the ramping move will continue. Also
watch for a new trend to generate an apparent reversal finger early in price development. This
actually signals increased momentum in the shadow’s direction and should get taken out
immediately.
The spinning top has little predictive power and confuses trade planning. This conflicting pattern
occurs when the real body prints a standoff between participants near the middle of a high-low
range. But the spinning top can signal the much more useful harami under certain circumstances.
The entire real body must fit within the open-close range of the prior bar to generate this useful
pattern. And the prior candle must exceed the high or low range of the bar that precedes it.
Finger finder sets open-to-close height at one-third or less of the total high–low range. This captures
both doji and hammer events. It also outputs both spinning tops and haramis. Subsequent filters
attempt to remove spinning tops from consideration and highlight the other three formations. But
finger finder candidates rely on visual analysis more than any other bell. The skilled eye does a
better job picking out promising candle opportunities than any mathematics.

Dojis represent perfect opening-closing balance because price finishes exactly where it started.
Hammers demand less perfection. They must close so that the central body of the candlestick is less
than one-third the length of the bar’s total range. Swing traders will often find a dramatic V-bottom
or top when reviewing the chart beneath the action of the candle. This embedded price action
provides the basis for many of the trading strategies associated with the two patterns.
The harami draws the candle equivalent of the Western inside day. Different rules extend the reach
of this powerful pattern beyond its classic applications. The candle’s high-low range can violate the
prior bar’s range as long as the real body remains within it. The Harami signals a likely reversal
when it prints within a tall expansion bar after a strong rally or selloff. Close examination will
reveal that the opening tick actually prints a gap in the next-lower time frame. This often signals a
hole-in-the-wall in the opposite direction that should hold through a first test (see Figure 5.19).
FIGURE 10.2
Long candle shadows can yield big price gains. Rallies often print a false reversal candle early in a new trend.
Price quickly exceeds the shadow high and thrusts forward in a sharp expansion move. Short covering fuels this
dependable phenomenon as amateur candlestick technicians misinterpret their pattern signals.

These gaps should present a significant boundary to short-term price gains. Watch the action after
the signal to pick the appropriate strategy to execute. For example, aggressive traders can sell short
when price violates the real body low. Defensive traders can wait until a violation of the shadow
low of the pattern bar. Consider a long-side execution if price rises above the signal bar shadow and
continues the prior trend. This represents a pattern failure because the bearish candle should start a

reversal. Use range breakouts of the tall bar that precedes the harami for long entry as well. Set
harami stop loss according to the chosen entry point, regardless of direction. In other words, exit the
position when price reenters the real body’s range if the setup uses a real body breakout to trigger
execution.

