
TRADING

125

task of designing or buying a complete trading system, which is just as
impossible as a complete system for pulling your car out of the garage.
I have two friends who earn a good living testing systems for traders.
Both are expert programmers. One of them laughed as he told me how
he gets at least one phone call a week from yet another amateur who
thinks he has discovered the Holy Grail. He wants his automatic set of
rules backtested to find the best parameters, and his only concern is that
the programmer should not steal his secret! I asked my friend how many
profitable automatic systems he found during several years of backtesting.
Not one.
Not one? Doesn’t he get discouraged doing this kind of work?
Well, what keeps him going is that he has a handful of steady clients
who are successful professional traders. They bring him snippets of
trading methods for testing. They may test their parameters for placing
stops, the length of MACD, and so on. Then they use their own judgment to bind those snippets into a decision-making tree.
An intelligent trading system includes components that have been
backtested, but the trader retains control over his actions. He has several inviolate rules, mostly having to do with risk control and money
management, but allows himself latitude in combining those components to reach trading decisions.
An intelligent trading system is an action plan for entering and exiting markets that spells out several specific functions, such as finding
trades or protecting capital. Most actions, such as entries, exits, and
adjusting stops, can be partly but not fully automated. Thinking is a
hard job; a mechanical trading system tempts you by promising you
won’t have to think any more, but that’s a false promise. To be a successful trader you need to use your judgment. A trading system is a
style of trading, not an automatic turnkey operation.

SYSTEM TESTING
You must test each indicator, rule, and method before including them
in your trading system. Many traders do this by dumping historical data
into testing software and obtaining a printout of their system’s parameters. The profit-loss ratio, the biggest and the smallest profit or loss,
the average profit and loss, the longest winning and losing streaks, the
average profit, and the average or the maximum drawdowns give the
appearance of objectivity and solidity.

126

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Those printouts provide a false sense of security.
You may have a very nice printout, but what if the system delivers
five losses in a row, while you trade real money? Nothing in your testing has prepared you for that, but it happens all the time. You grit your
teeth and put on another trade. Another loss. Your drawdown is getting deeper. Will you put on the next trade? Suddenly, an impressive
printout looks like a very thin reed on which to hang your future, while
your account is being whittled away.
The attraction of electronic testing is such that there is now a small
cottage industry of programmers who test systems for a fee. Some
traders spend months, if not years, learning to use testing software. A
loser who cannot admit he’s afraid to trade has a wonderful excuse that
he is learning new software. He’s like a swimmer who is afraid of water
and keeps himself busy ironing his swimsuit.
Only one kind of system testing makes sense. It is slow, it is timeconsuming, and it does not lend itself to testing a hundred markets at
once, but it’s the only method that prepares you for trading. It consists
of going through historical data one day at a time, scrupulously writing down your trading signals for the day ahead, then clicking your
chart forward and recording the trades and signals for the next day.
Begin by downloading your stock or futures data for a minimum of
two years. Swing to the left side of the file, without looking at what
happened next. Open your technical analysis program and a spreadsheet. The two most important keys for traders on a computer are Alt
and Tab because they let you switch between two programs. Open two
windows in your analytic program—one for your long-term chart with
its indicators, the other for the short-term chart. Open a spreadsheet,
write down your system’s rules at the top of the page and create
columns for the date, entry date and price, and the exit date and price.
Turn to the weekly chart and note its signal, if any. If it gives you a
buy or sell signal, go to the daily chart ending on the same date to see
whether it gives you a buy or a sell signal as well. If it does, record the
order you have to place in your spreadsheet. Now return to the daily
chart and click one day forward. See whether your buy or sell order was
triggered. If so, return to the spreadsheet and record the result. Track your
trade day by day, calculating stops and deciding where to take profits.
Follow this process throughout your entire data file, advancing a
week at a time on the weekly chart, a day at a time on the daily chart.
At every click write down your system’s signals and your actions.

TRADING

127

As you click forward, one day at a time, the market history will
slowly unfold and challenge you. You click and a buy signal comes
into view. Will you take it? Record your decision in a spreadsheet. Will
you take profits at a set target, on a sell signal, or on the basis of price
action? You are doing much more than testing a set of rigid rules.
Moving ahead day by day, you develop your decision-making skills.
This one-bar-at-a-time forward testing is vastly superior to what you get
from backtesting software.
How will you deal with gap openings when prices open above your
buy level or below your stop? What about limit moves in futures?
Should the system be adjusted, changed, or scrapped? Clicking forward
one day at a time gets you as close to the real experience of trading as
you can ever get without putting on a trade. It puts you in touch with
the raw edge of the market, which you can never experience through
an orderly printout from a professional system tester.
Manual testing will improve your ability to think, recognize events,
and act in the foggy environment of the market. Your trading plans
must include certain absolute rules, most of them concerning money
management. As long as you stay within those rules, you have much
freedom in trading the markets. Your growing levels of knowledge,
maturity, judgment, and skill are much more important assets than any
computerized testing.

Paper Trading
Paper trading means recording your decision to trade and tracking it as
if it were a real trade, only without money. Most of those who paper
trade have lost their nerve after getting beat up by the markets. Some
people alternate between real trades and paper trades and cannot
understand why they seem to make money on paper but lose whenever they put on a real trade.
This happens for two reasons. First, people tend to be less emotional
with paper. Good decisions are easier to make when your money is not
on the line. Second, good trades often look murky at entry time. The
easy-looking ones are more likely to lead to problems. A nervous beginner jumps into obvious-looking trades but paper trades the more promising ones. It goes without saying that hopping between real trading
and paper trading is sheer nonsense. You either do one or the other.
There is only one good reason to paper trade—to test your discipline.

128

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

If you can download your data at the end of each day, do your
homework, write down your orders for the day ahead, watch the opening and record your entries, and then track your market each day,
adjusting your profit targets and stops—if you can do all of this for several months in a row, recording your actions, without skipping a day—
then you probably have the discipline to trade that market. Someone
who is in it for entertainment will not be able to paper trade this way
because it requires work.
To paper trade your system, download your data at the end of each
day. Apply your tools and techniques, reach trading decisions, calculate
stops and profit targets, and write them down for tomorrow. Do not place
your orders with a broker, but check whether they would have been triggered and write down those fills. Enter paper trades in your spreadsheet
and your trading diary (see Chapter 8, “The Organized Trader”). If you
have the willpower to repeat this process daily for several months, then
you have the discipline for successful trading with real money.
Still, there is no substitute for trading with real money, because it
engages emotions more than any paper trade. It is better to learn by
putting on very small real trades than paper trades.

TRIPLE SCREEN UPDATE
One of the most pleasant encounters that occur several times each year
is when a trader comes up to me at some conference and tells me how
he started trading for a living after studying my book or participating
in a Camp. At that point, he may be living and trading on a mountaintop, and as often as not he owns the mountaintop. I noticed long
ago that half-way through our conversation these people become
slightly apologetic. They tell me they use Triple Screen, but not exactly
the way I taught it. They may have modified an indicator, added
another screen, substituted a tool, and so forth. Whenever I hear that,
I know I am talking to a winner.
First of all, I tell them they owe their success primarily to themselves.
I did not teach them any differently than the dozens of others in the
same class. Winners have the discipline to take what is offered and use
it to succeed. Second, I see their apology for having changed some
aspects of my system as an indication of their winning attitude. To benefit from a system, you must test its parameters and fine-tune them until
that system becomes your own, even though originally it was developed
by someone else. Winning takes discipline, discipline comes from confi-

TRADING

129

dence, and the only system in which you can have confidence is the
one you have tested on your own data and adapted to your own style.
I developed the Triple Screen trading system in the mid-1980s and
first presented it to the public in 1986 in an article in Futures magazine.
I updated it in Trading for a Living and several videos. Here I will
review it, focusing on recent enhancements.
What is a trading system? What’s the difference between a method,
a system, and a technique?
A method is a general philosophy of trading. For example; trade with the
trend, buy when the trend is up, and sell after it tops out. Or—buy
undervalued markets, go long near historical support levels, and sell
after resistance zones have been reached.
A system is a set of rules for implementing a method. For example, if our
method is to follow trends, then the system may buy when a multi-week
moving average turns up and sell when a daily moving average turns
down (get in slow, get out fast). Or—buy when the weekly MACDHistogram ticks up and sell after it ticks down.
A technique is a specific rule for entering or exiting trades. For example,
when a system gives a buy signal, the technique could be to buy when
prices exceed the high of the previous day or if prices make a new low
during the day but close near the high.

The method of Triple Screen is to analyze markets in several timeframes and use both the trend-following indicators and oscillators. We
make a strategic decision to trade long or short using trend-following
indicators on long-term charts. We make tactical decisions to enter or
exit using oscillators on shorter-term charts. The original method has
not changed, but the system—the exact choice of indicators—has
evolved over the years, as have the techniques.
Triple Screen examines each potential trade using three screens or
tests. Each screen uses a different timeframe and indicators. These
screens filter out many trades that seem attractive at first. Triple Screen
promotes a careful and cautious approach to trading.

Conflicting Indicators
Technical indicators help identify trends or turns more objectively than
chart patterns. Just keep in mind that when you change indicator
parameters, you influence their signals. Be careful not to fiddle with
indicators until they tell you what you want to hear.

130

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

We can divide all indicators into three major groups:
Trend-following indicators help identify trends. Moving averages,
MACD lines, Directional system, and others rise when the markets are
rising, decline when markets fall, and go flat when markets enter trading ranges.
Oscillators help catch turning points by identifying overbought and
oversold conditions. Envelopes or channels, Force Index, Stochastic,
Elder-ray, and others show when rallies or declines outrun themselves
and are ready to reverse.
Miscellaneous indicators help gauge the mood of the market crowd.
Bullish Consensus, Commitments of Traders, New High–New Low Index,
and others reflect the general levels of bullishness or bearishness in
the market.
Different groups of indicators often give conflicting signals. Trendfollowing indicators may turn up, telling us to buy, while oscillators
become overbought, telling us to sell. Trend-following indicators may
turn down, giving sell signals, while oscillators become oversold, giving buy signals. It is easy to fall into the trap of wishful thinking and
start following those indicators whose message you like. A trader must
set up a system that takes all groups of indicators into account and
handles their contradictions.

Conflicting Timeframes
An indicator can call an uptrend and a downtrend in the same stock on
the same day. How can this be? A moving average may rise on a weekly
chart, giving a buy signal, but fall on a daily chart, giving a sell signal.
It may rally on an hourly chart, telling us to go long, but sink on a 10minute chart, telling us to short. Which of those signals should we take?
Amateurs reach for the obvious. They grab a single timeframe, most
often daily, apply their indicators and ignore other timeframes. This
works only until a major move swells up from the weeklies or a sharp
spike erupts from the hourly charts and flips their trade upside down.
Whoever said that ignorance was bliss was not a trader.
People who have lost money with daily charts often imagine they
could do better by speeding things up and using live data. If you cannot make money with dailies, a live screen will only help you lose
faster. Screens hypnotize losers, but a determined one can get even closer
to the market by renting a seat and going to trade on the floor. Pretty
soon a margin clerk for the clearing house notices that the new trader’s

TRADING

131

equity has dropped below limit. He sends a runner into the pit who
taps that person on the shoulder. The loser steps out and is never seen
again—he has “tapped out.”
The problem with losers is not that their data is too slow, but their
decision-making process is a mess. To resolve the problem of conflicting timeframes, you should not get your face closer to the market, but
push yourself further away, take a broad look at what’s happening,
make a strategic decision to be a bull or a bear, and only then return
closer to the market and look for entry and exit points. That’s what
Triple Screen is all about.
What is long term and what is short term? Triple Screen avoids rigid
definitions by focusing instead on the relationships between timeframes. It requires you to begin by choosing your favorite timeframe,
which it calls intermediate. If you like to work with daily charts, your
intermediate timeframe is daily. If you are a day-trader and like fiveminute charts, then your intermediate timeframe is the five-minute
chart, and so on.
Triple Screen defines the long term by multiplying the intermediate
timeframe by five (see “Time—The Factor of Five,” page 87). If your
intermediate timeframe is daily, then your long-term timeframe is weekly.
If your intermediate timeframe is five minutes, then your long-term is
half-hourly, and so forth. Choose your favorite timeframe, call it intermediate, and immediately move up one order of magnitude to a
long-term chart. Make your strategic decision there, and return to the
intermediate chart to look for entries and exits.
The key principle of Triple Screen is to begin your analysis by stepping back from the markets and looking at the big picture for strategic
decisions. Use a long-term chart to decide whether you are bullish or
bearish, and then return closer to the market to make tactical choices
about entries and exits.

The Principles of Triple Screen
Triple Screen resolves contradictions between indicators and timeframes. It reaches strategic decisions on long-term charts, using trendfollowing indicators—this is the first screen. It proceeds to make
tactical decisions about entries and exits on the intermediate charts,
using oscillators—this is the second screen. It offers several methods
for placing buy and sell orders—this is the third screen, which we may
implement using either intermediate- or short-term charts.

132

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Begin by choosing your favorite timeframe, the one with whose
charts you like to work, and call it intermediate. Multiply its length by
five to find your long-term timeframe. Apply trend-following indicators
to long-term charts to reach a strategic decision to go long, short, or
stand aside. Standing aside is a legitimate position. If the long-term
chart is bullish or bearish, return to the intermediate charts and use
oscillators to look for entry and exit points in the direction of the longterm trend. Set stops and profit targets before switching to short-term
charts, if available, to fine-tune entries and exits.
SCREEN ONE
Choose your favorite timeframe and call it intermediate. Multiply it by
five to find the long-term timeframe. Let’s say you prefer to work with
daily charts. In that case, move immediately one level higher, to the
weekly chart. Do not permit yourself to peek at the dailies because this
may color your analysis of weekly charts. If you are a day-trader, you
might choose a 10-minute chart as your favorite, call it intermediate,
and then immediately move up to the hourly chart, approximately five
times longer. Rounding off is not a problem; technical analysis is a craft,
not an exact science. If you are a long-term investor, you might choose
a weekly chart as your favorite and then go up to the monthly.
Apply trend-following indicators to the long-term chart and make a
strategic decision to trade long, short, or stand aside. The original version of Triple Screen used the slope of weekly MACD-Histogram as its
weekly trend-following indicator. It was very sensitive and gave many
buy and sell signals. I now prefer to use the slope of a weekly exponential moving average as my main trend-following indicator on longterm charts. When the weekly EMA rises, it confirms a bull move and
tells us to go long or stand aside. When it falls, it identifies a bear
move and tells us to go short or stand aside. I use a 26-week EMA,
which represents half a year of trading. You can test several different
lengths to see which tracks your market best, as you would with any
indicator.
I continue to plot weekly MACD-Histogram. When both EMA and
MACD-Histogram are in gear, they confirm a dynamic trend and encourage you to trade larger positions. Divergences between weekly
MACD-Histogram and prices are the strongest signals in technical
analysis, which override the message of the EMA.

TRADING

133

A

B

Figure 6.1 Triple Screen—Weekly Chart
Gaming stocks tend to do well in a weak economy—gambling appeals to
people down on their luck. In 2000 and 2001, as the broad stock market was
declining, gaming stocks put in a stellar performance. Alliance Gaming, for
instance, rallied from below 2 to over 40, with very few pullbacks. How
could Triple Screen help us benefit from this performance?
The pattern between points A and B is called a saucer bottom, a slow
drawn-out minimal decline and just as minimal a rise on hardly any volume. Still, during that time ALLY had managed to put in a bullish divergence of MACD-Histogram, a hugely powerful signal that is rarely seen
on weekly charts. It traced a low in area A, but could not even push
below zero at the bottom of the saucer. The first vertical arrow marks the
point where MACD-Histogram starts trending higher. A few weeks later
the weekly EMA also turns up, and at that point, with both weekly indicators trending up, ALLY becomes a screaming buy. It is time to switch to
the daily charts and look for buying opportunities. The second vertical
arrow marks another period when both the EMA and MACD-Histogram
are in gear to the upside, and then the stock doubles in a few weeks. The
clean, steady uptrend of the weekly EMA keeps telling us to trade ALLY
only from the long side.
At the right edge of the chart, the weekly EMA keeps trending higher,
but wildly volatile price action shows that the easy portion of the uptrend
is over. MACD-Histogram is moving opposite the EMA, warning of high
volatility ahead. The relatively easy money is off the table.

134

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

SCREEN TWO

Return to the intermediate chart and use oscillators to look for trading
opportunities in the direction of the long-term trend. When the weekly
trend is up, wait for daily oscillators to fall, giving buy signals. Buying
dips is safer than buying the crests of waves. If an oscillator gives a sell
signal while the weekly trend is up, you may use it to take profits on
long positions but not to sell short.

Figure 6.2 Triple Screen—Daily Chart
The uptrend on the weekly chart keeps telling us to trade ALLY from the
long side or stand aside. With the daily EMA also rising, we have several
options. We may buy when prices pull back to their rising daily EMA, or
when short-term Force Index dips below zero. The upper channel line provides a logical profit-taking target. An experienced trader can pyramid
his position, adding to it whenever a new buy signal appears and only
tightening stops instead of exiting at the upper channel. That channel keeps
getting wider as prices rise—from 10 points wide in April to 16 in July.
At the right edge of the chart, the alternating spikes of Force Index
warn traders that the days of relatively easy money are over. The market
has become hysterical, and the likelihood of trend continuation is low.
Better bank your winnings and go look for another stock in another group
that is rising or falling quietly, not yet discovered by the market crowd.
