
154

XI

started it did not recognise it when it came back to him in
less than twenty-four hours, swollen with new and
picturesque details.
The news of Percy Thomas' latest misadventure turned
my mind from the fishing to the cotton market. I got files
of the trade papers and read them to get a line on
conditions. When I got back to New York I gave myself up
to studying the market. Everybody was bearish and
everybody was selling July cotton. You know how people
are. I suppose it is the contagion of example that makes a
man do something because everybody around him is doing
the same thing. Perhaps it is some phase or variety of the
herd instinct. In any case it was, in the opinion of
hundreds of traders, the wise and proper thing to sell July
cotton and so safe too! You couldn't call that general
selling reckless; the word is too conservative. The traders
simply saw one side to the market and a great big profit.
They certainly expected a collapse in prices.
I saw all this, of course, and it struck me that the chaps
who were short didn't have a terrible lot of time to cover
in. The more I studied the situation the clearer I saw this,
until I finally decided to buy July cotton. I went to work
and quickly bought one hundred thousand bales. I
experienced no trouble in getting it because it came from
so many sellers. It seemed to me that I could have offered
a reward of one million dollars for the capture, dead or
alive, of a single trader who was not selling July cotton and
nobody would have claimed it.
I should say this was in the latter part of May. I kept
buying more and they kept on selling it to me until I had
picked up all the floating contracts and I had one hundred
and twenty thousand bales. A couple of days after I had
bought the last of it it began to go up. Once it started the
market was kind enough to keep on doing very well indeed
—that is, it went up from forty to fifty points a day.

155

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

One Saturday this was about ten days after I began
operations—the price began to creep up. I did not know
whether there was any more July cotton for sale. It was up
to me to find out, so I waited until the last ten minutes. At
that time, I knew, it was usual for those fellows to be short
and if the market closed up for the day they would be
safely hooked. So I sent in four different orders to buy five
thousand bales each, at the market, at the same time. That
ran the price up thirty points and the shorts were doing
their best to wriggle away. The market closed at the top.
All I did, remember, was to buy that last twenty thousand
bales.
The next day was Sunday. But on Monday, Liverpool
was due to open up twenty points to be on a parity with the
advance in New York. Instead, it came fifty points higher.
That meant that Liverpool had exceeded our advance by
100 per cent. I had nothing to do with the rise in that
market. This showed me that my deductions had been
sound and that I was trading along the line of least
resistance. At the same time I was not losing sight of the
fact that I had a whopping big line to dispose of. A market
may advance sharply or rise gradually and yet not possess
the power to absorb more than a certain amount of selling.
Of course the Liverpool cables made our own market
wild. But I noticed the higher it went the scarcer July
cotton seemed to be. I wasn't letting go any of mine.
Altogether that Monday was an exciting and not very
cheerful day for the bears; but for all that, I could detect no
signs of an impending bear panic; no beginnings of a blind
stampede to cover. And I had one hundred and forty
thousand bales for which I must find a market.
On Tuesday morning as I was walking to my office I met
a friend at the entrance of the building.
"That was quite a story in the World this morning," he
said with a smile. "What story?" I asked.
"What? Do you mean to tell me you haven't seen it?" "I
never see the World," I said. "What is the story?"
156

XI

"Why, it's all about you. It says you've got July cotton
cornered."
"I haven't seen it," I told him and left him. I don't know
whether he believed me or not. He probably thought it was
highly inconsiderate of me not to tell him whether it was
true or not.
When I got to the office I sent out for a copy of the
paper. Sure enough, there it was, on the front page, in big
headlines:
JULY COTTON CORNERED BY LARRY LIVINGSTON

Of course I knew at once that the article would play the
dickens with the market. If I had deliberately studied ways
and means of disposing of my one hundred and forty
thousand bales to the best advantage I couldn't have hit
upon a better plan. It would not have been possible to find
one. That article at that very moment was being read all
over the country either in the World or in other papers
quoting it. It had been cabled to Europe. That was plain
from the Liverpool prices. That market was simply wild.
No wonder, with such news.
Of course I knew what New York would do, and what I
ought to do. The market here opened at ten o'clock. At ten
minutes after ten I did not own any cotton. I let them have
every one of my one hundred and forty thousand bales.
For most of my line I received what proved to be the top
prices of the day. The traders made the market for me. All
I really did was to see a heaven-sent opportunity to get rid
of my cotton. I grasped it because I couldn't help it. What
else could I do?
The problem that I knew would take a great deal of hard
thinking to solve was thus solved for me by an accident. If
the World had not published that article I never would
have been able to dispose of my line without sacrificing the
greater portion of my paper profits. Selling one hundred

157

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

and forty thousand bales of July cotton without sending
the price down was a trick beyond my powers. But the
World story turned it for me very nicely.
Why the World published it I cannot tell you. I never
knew. I suppose the writer was tipped off by some friend
in the cotton market and he thought he was printing a
scoop. I didn't see him or anybody from the World. I didn't
know it was printed that morning until after nine o'clock;
and if it had not been for my friend calling my attention to
it I would not have known it then.
Without it I wouldn't have had a market big enough to
unload in. That is one trouble about trading on a large
scale. You cannot sneak out as you can when you pike
along. You cannot always sell out when you wish or when
you think it wise. You have to get out when you can; when
you have a market that will absorb your entire line. Failure
to grasp the opportunity to get out may cost you millions.
You cannot hesitate. If you do you are lost. Neither can you
try stunts like running up the price on the bears by means
of competitive buying, for you may thereby reduce the
absorbing capacity. And I want to tell you that perceiving
your opportunity is not as easy as it sounds. A man must
be on the lookout so alertly that when his chance sticks in
its head at his door he must grab it.
Of course not everybody knew about my fortunate
accident. In Wall Street, and, for that matter, everywhere
else, any accident that makes big money for a man is
regarded with suspicion. When the accident is
unprofitable it is never considered an accident but the
logical outcome of your hoggishness or of the swelled
head. But when there is a profit they call it loot and talk
about how well unscrupulousness fares, and how ill
conservatism and decency.
It was not only the evil-minded shorts smarting under
punishment brought about by their own recklessness who
accused me of having deliberately planned the coup. Other
people thought the same thing.
158

XI

One of the biggest men in cotton in the entire world met
me a day or two later and said, "That was certainly the
slickest deal you ever put over, Livingston. I was
wondering how much you were going to lose when you
came to market that line of yours. You knew this market
was not big enough to take more than fifty or sixty
thousand bales without selling off, and how you were
going to work off the rest and not lose all your paper
profits was beginning to interest me. I didn't think of your
scheme. It certainly was slick."
"I had nothing to do with it," I assured him as earnestly
as I could.
But all he did was to repeat: "Mighty slick, my boy.
Mighty slick! Don't be so modest!"
It was after that deal that some of the papers referred to
me as the Cotton King. But, as I said, I really was not
entitled to that crown. It is not necessary to tell you that
there is not enough money in the United States to buy the
columns of the New York World or enough personal pull to
secure the publication of a story like that. It gave me an
utterly unearned reputation that time.
But I have not told this story to moralize on the crowns
that are sometimes pressed down upon the brows of
undeserving traders or to emphasize the need of seizing
the opportunity, no matter when or how it comes. My
object merely was to account for the vast amount of
newspaper notoriety that came to me as the result of my
deal in July cotton. If it hadn't been for the newspapers I
never would have met that remarkable man, Percy
Thomas.

159

XII
Not long after I closed my July cotton deal more
successfully than I had expected I received by mail a
request for an interview. The letter was signed by Percy
Thomas. Of course I immediately answered that I'd be glad
to see him at my office at any time he cared to call. The
next day he came.
I had long admired him. His name was a household
word wherever men took an interest in growing or buying
or selling cotton. In Europe as well as all over this country
people quoted Percy Thomas' opinions to me. I remember
once at a Swiss resort talking to a Cairo banker who was
interested in cotton growing in Egypt in association with
the late Sir Ernest Cassel. When he heard I was from New
York he immediately asked me about Percy Thomas,
whose market reports he received and read with unfailing
regularity.
161

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Thomas, I always thought, went about his business
scientifically. He was a true speculator, a thinker with the
vision of a dreamer and the courage of a fighting man—an
unusually well-informed man, who knew both the theory
and the practice of trading in cotton. He loved to hear and
to express ideas and theories and abstractions, and at the
same time there was mighty little about the practical side
of the cotton market or the psychology of cotton traders
that he did not know, for he had been trading for years and
had made and lost vast sums.
After the failure of his old Stock Exchange firm of
Sheldon & Thomas he went it alone. Inside of two years he
came back, almost spectacularly. I remember reading in
the Sun that the first thing he did when he got on his feet
financially was to pay off his old creditors in full, and the
next was to hire an expert to study and determine for him
how he had best invest a million dollars. This expert
examined the properties and analysed the reports of
several companies and then recommended the purchase of
Delaware & Hudson stock.
Well, after having failed for millions and having come
back with more millions, Thomas was cleaned out as the
result of his deal in March cotton. There wasn't much time
wasted after he came to see me. He proposed that we form
a working alliance. Whatever information he got he would
immediately turn over to me before passing it on to the
public. My part would be to do the actual trading, for
which he said I had a special genius and he hadn't.
That did not appeal to me for a number of reasons. I
told him frankly that I did not think I could run in double
harness and wasn't keen about trying to learn. But he
insisted that it would be an ideal combination until I said
flatly that I did not want to have anything to do with
influencing other people to trade.
"If I fool myself," I told him, "I alone suffer and I pay
the bill at once. There are no drawn-out payments or
unexpected annoyances. I play a lone hand by choice and
162

XII

also because it is the wisest and cheapest way to trade. I
get my pleasure out of matching my brains against the
brains of other traders men whom I have never seen and
never talked to and never advised to buy or sell and never
expect to meet or know. When I make money I make it
backing my own opinions. I don't sell them or capitalise
them. If I made money in any other way I would imagine I
had not earned it. Your proposition does not interest me
because I am interested in the game only as I play it for
myself and in my own way."
He said he was sorry I felt the way I did, and tried to
convince me that I was wrong in rejecting his plan. But I
stuck to my views. The rest was a pleasant talk. I told him I
knew he would "come back" and that I would consider it a
privilege if he would allow me to be of financial assistance
to him. But he said he could not accept any loans from me.
Then he asked me about my July deal and I told him all
about it; how I had gone into it and how much cotton I
bought and the price and other details. We chatted a little
more and then he went away.
When I said to you some time ago that a speculator has
a host of enemies, many of whom successfully bore from
within, I had in mind my many mistakes. I have learned
that a man may possess an original mind and a lifelong
habit of independent thinking and withal be vulnerable to
attacks by a persuasive personality. I am fairly immune
from the commoner speculative ailments, such as greed
and fear and hope. But being an ordinary man I find I can
err with great ease.
I ought to have been on my guard at this particular time
because not long before that I had had an experience that
proved how easily a man may be talked into doing
something against his judgment and even against his
wishes. It happened in Harding's office. I had a sort of
private office—a room that they let me occupy by myself
and nobody was supposed to get to me during market
163

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

hours without my consent. I didn't wish to be bothered
and, as I was trading on a very large scale and my account
was fairly profitable, I was pretty well guarded.
One day just after the market closed I heard somebody
say, "Good afternoon, Mr. Livingston."
I turned and saw an utter stranger—a chap of about
thirty or thirty-five. I could not understand how he'd got
in, but there he was. I concluded his business with me had
passed him. But I didn't say anything. I just looked at him
and pretty soon he said, "I came to see you about that
Walter Scott," and he was off.
He was a book agent. Now, he was not particularly
pleasing of manner or skillful of speech. Neither was he
especially attractive to look at. But he certainly had
personality. He talked and I thought I listened. But I do
not know what he said. I don't think I ever knew, not even
at the time. When he finished his monologue he handed
me first his fountain pen and then a blank form, which I
signed. It was a contract to take a set of Scott's works for
five hundred dollars.
The moment I signed I came to. But he had the contract
safe in his pocket. I did not want the books. I had no place
for them. They weren't of any use whatever to me. I had
nobody to give them to. Yet I had agreed to buy them for
five hundred dollars.
I am so accustomed to losing money that I never think
first of that phase of my mistakes. It is always the play
itself, the reason why. In the first place I wish to know my
own limitations and habits of thought. Another reason is
that I do not wish to make the same mistake a second
time. A man can excuse his mistakes only by capitalising
them to his subsequent profit.
Well, having made a five-hundred dollar mistake but
not yet having localised the trouble, I just looked at the
fellow to size him up as a first step. I'll be hanged if he
didn't actually smile at me—an understanding little smile!
He seemed to read my thoughts. I somehow knew that I
164

XII

did not have to explain anything to him; he knew it
without my telling him. So I skipped the explanations and
the preliminaries and asked him, "How much commission
will you get on that five hundred dollar order?"
He promptly shook his head and said, "I can't do it!
Sorry!"
"How much do you get?" I persisted.
"A third. But I can't do it!" he said.
"A third of five hundred dollars is one hundred and
sixty-six dollars and sixty-six cents. I'll give you two
hundred dollars cash if you give me back that signed
contract" And to prove it I took the money out of my
pocket.
"I told you I couldn't do it," he said.
"Do all your customers make the same offer to you?" I
asked. "No," he answered.
"Then why were you so sure that I was going to make
it?"
"It is what your type of sport would do. You are a firstclass loser and that makes you a first-class business man. I
am much obliged to you, but I can't do it."
"Now tell me why you do not wish to make more than
your commission?"
"It isn't that, exactly," he said. "I am not working just for
the commission."
"What are you working for then?"
"For the commission and the record," he answered.
"What record?"
"Mine."
"What are you driving at?"
"Do you work for money alone?" he asked me.
"Yes," I said.
"No." And he shook his head. "No, you don't. You
wouldn't get enough fun out of it. You certainly do not
work merely to add a few more dollars to your bank

165

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

account and you are not in Wall Street because you like
easy money. You get your fun some other way. Well, same
here."
I did not argue but asked him, "And how do you get
your fun?" "Well," he confessed, "we've all got a weak
spot." "And what's yours?" "Vanity," he said.
"Well," I told him, "you succeeded in getting me to sign
on. Now I want to sign off, and I am paying you two
hundred dollars for ten minutes' work. Isn't that enough
for your pride?"
"No," he answered. "You see, all the rest of the bunch
have been working Wall Street for months and failed to
make expenses. They said it was the fault of the goods and
the territory. So the office sent for me to prove that the
fault was with their salesmanship and not with the books
or the place. They were working on a 25 per cent
commission. I was in Cleveland, where I sold eighty-two
sets in two weeks. I am here to sell a certain number of
sets not only to people who did not buy from the other
agents but to people they couldn't even get to see. That's
why they give me 33,3 percent."
"I can't quite figure out how you sold me that set."
"Why," he said consolingly," I sold J. P. Morgan a set."
"No, you didn't," I said. He wasn't angry. He simply
said, "Honest, I did!"
"A set of Walter Scott to J. P. Morgan, who not only has
some fine editions but probably the original manuscripts
of some of the novels as well?"
"Well, here's his John Hancock." And he promptly
flashed on me a contract signed by J. P. Morgan himself. It
might not have been Mr. Morgan's signature, but it did not
occur to me to doubt it at the time.
Didn't he have mine in his pocket? All I felt was
curiosity. So I asked him, "How did you get past the
librarian?"
"I didn't see any librarian. I saw the Old Man himself. In
his office."
166

XII

"That's too much!" I said. Everybody knew that it was
much harder to get into Mr. Morgan's private office empty
handed than into the White House with a parcel that
ticked like an alarm clock.
But he declared, "I did."
"But how did you get into his office?"
"How did I get into yours?" he retorted.
"I don't know. You tell me," I said.
"Well, the way I got into Morgan's office and the way I
got into yours are the same. I just talked to the fellow at
the door whose business it was not to let me in. And the
way I got Morgan to sign was the same way I got you to
sign. You weren't signing a contract for a set of books. You
just took the fountain pen I gave you and did what I asked
you to do with it. No difference. Same as you."
"And is that really Morgan's signature?" I asked him,
about three minutes late with my skepticism.
"Sure! He learned how to write his name when he was a
boy." "And that's all there's to it?"
"That's all," he answered. "I know exactly what I am
doing. That's all the secret there is. I am much obliged to
you. Good day, Mr. Livingston." And he started to go out.
"Hold on," I said. "I'm bound to have you make an even
two hundred dollars out of me." And I handed him thirtyfive dollars.
He shook his head. Then: "No," he said. "I can't do that.
But I can do this!" And he took the contract from his
pocket, tore it in two and gave me the pieces.
I counted two hundred dollars and held the money
before him, but he again shook his head.
"Isn't that what you meant?" I said.
"No."
"Then, why did you tear up the contract?"
"Because you did not whine, but took it as I would have
taken it myself had I been in your place."
"But I offered you the two hundred dollars of my own
accord," I said. "I know; but money isn't everything."
167

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Something in his voice made me say, "You're right; it
isn't And now what do you really want me to do for you?"
"You're quick, aren't you?" he said. "Do you really want
to do something for me?"
"Yes," I told him, "I do. But whether I will or not
depends what it is you have in mind."
"Take me with you into Mr. Ed Harding's office and tell
him to let me talk to him three minutes by the clock. Then
leave me alone with him."
I shook my head and said, "He is a good friend of mine."
"He's fifty years old and a stock broker," said the book
agent That was perfectly true, so I took him into Ed's
office. I did not hear anything more from or about that
book agent. But one evening some weeks later when I was
going uptown I ran across him in a Sixth Avenue L-train.
He raised his hat very politely and I nodded back. He came
over and asked me, "How do you do, Mr. Livingston? And
how is Mr. Harding?"
"He's well. Why do you ask?" I felt he was holding back
a story.
"I sold him two thousand dollars' worth of books that
day you took me in to see him." "He never said a word to
me about it," I said, "No; that kind doesn't talk about it."
"What kind doesn't talk?"
"The kind that never makes mistakes on account of its
being bad business to make them. That kind always knows
what he wants and nobody can tell him different. That is
the kind that's educating my children and keeps my wife in
good humor. You did me a good turn, Mr. Livingston. I
expected it when I gave up the two hundred dollars you
were so anxious to present to me."
"And if Mr. Harding hadn't given you an order?"
"Oh, but I knew he would. I had found out what kind of
man he was. He was a cinch." "Yes. But if he hadn't bought
any books?" I persisted.

168

XII

"I'd have come back to you and sold you something.
Good day, Mr. Livingston. I am going to see the mayor."
And he got up as we pulled up at Park Place.
"I hope you sell him ten sets," I said. His Honor was a
Tammany man.
"I'm a Republican, too," he said, and went out, not
hastily, but leisurely, confident that the train would wait.
And it did.
I have told you this story in such detail because it
concerned a remarkable man who made me buy what I did
not wish to buy. He was the first man who did that to me.
There never should have been a second, but there was. You
can never bank on there being but one remarkable
salesman in the world or on complete immunization from
the influence of personality.
When Percy Thomas left my office, after I had
pleasantly but definitely declined to enter into a working
alliance with him, I would have sworn that our business
paths would never cross. I was not sure I'd ever even see
him again. But on the very next day he wrote me a letter
thanking me for my offers of help and inviting me to come
and see him. I answered that I would. He wrote again. I
called.
I got to see a great deal of him. It was always a pleasure
for me to listen to him, he knew so much and he expressed
his knowledge so interestingly. I think he is the most
magnetic man I ever met.
We talked of many things, for he is a widely read man
with an amazing grasp of many subjects and a remarkable
gift for interesting generalization. The wisdom of his
speech is impressive; and as for plausibility, he hasn't an
equal. I have heard many people accuse Percy Thomas of
many things, including insincerity, but I sometimes
wonder if his remarkable plausibility does not come from
the fact that he first convinces himself so thoroughly as to
acquire thereby a greatly increased power to convince
others.
169
