
An important consideration in deciding whether to enter into a trade is often the
ease with which the trader can reverse the trade. Liquid option markets, where there
are many buyers and sellers, are much less risky than illiquid markets, where there are
few buyers and sellers. In the same way, a spread which consists of very liquid options
is much less risky than a spread which consists of one or more illiquid options. If a trader
is considering entering into a spread where the options are illiquid, he ought to ask
himself whether he is willing to live with that position until expiration. If the market is
very illiquid, that may be the only time he will be able to get out of the position at
anything resembling a fair price. If the spread consists of long-term options, say nine
months, the trader may find himself married to the position for better or worse, in
sickness and in health, for the next nine months. If he is unwilling to commit his capital
for that period, perhaps he should avoid the position. Since there is greater risk
associated with a long-term investment than with a short-term investment, a trader who
does decide to take a position in long-term options ought to expect greater potential
profit in the form of larger theoretical edge.

New traders are often advised to begin trading in liquid markets. If a new trader
does make an error resulting in a losing trade, in a liquid market he will be able to keep
his loss to a minimum because he will be able to exit the trade with relative ease. On


Risk Considerations 197

the other hand, an experienced trader, especially a market maker, will often prefer to
deal in less liquid markets. There may be less trading activity in such markets, but the
bid/ask spread is much wider, resulting in greater theoretical edge each time a trade is
made. Of course, any mistake can be a problem with which the trader will have to live
for a long time. However, an experienced trader is expected to keep his mistakes to a
minimum.

The most liquid options in any market are those which are short-term and which
are either at- or slightly out-of-the-money. Such options always have the narrowest
bid/ask spread, and there are usually traders willing to buy or sell large numbers of these
contracts. As a trader moves to longer term options, or to options which are more deeply
in-the-money, he finds that the bid/ask spread begins to widen, and there are fewer and
fewer traders interested in these contracts. While at-the-money short-term options are
constantly traded, deeply in-the-money long-term options may not trade for weeks at a
time.

In addition to the liquidity of an option market, a trader should also give some
thought to the liquidity of the underlying market. If a trader has an option position and
wants to make an adjustment, he may find it difficult to do if the option market is
illiquid. If the underlying market is liquid, he will at least he be able to make his
adjustment in that market with relative ease. The most dangerous market in which to
trade is one where both the options and the underlying contract are inactively traded.
Only the most experienced and knowledgeable traders should enter such markets.

End-of-day volume figures and bid/ask spreads in S&P 500 index options traded at
the Chicago Board Options Exchange on July 9, 1993 are shown in Figure 9-15. Note
the lower volume and wider bid/ask spread for back month and deeply in-the-money
options, versus front month and at- and out-of-the-money options.


o Buysi| ou 0 Yee ANS i) %lZ — *0% ) wz Mie
5 Suyjsi ou 0 wet ZL ft) web Lt 0 YL %b
= Burs!| ou 0 Berl tbh 9 Spel %El rd ZL ehh
Bupsi| ou 0 Meth LL vel %6 %E OL %49 %9
08 Yerl vAPL Z 6 x8 ogh ZL 8&9 zee't ME ye
Buys|| ou 8 Sel xg 019 eh *Ay sep) 94) I
Buysy ou 921 %%G tS see Ee “AE gerz % %&
0 %6 %E SLL'h 4 YE 00s %e Sz oct % %
Buys] ou I he € eer’) %l Sl ze | oy
2 %9 %9 02s %e %e 0s el 1 re % sy,
oor i) %G 008 Set ALL ) + Mg, ze 94
Buys ou fore Slat 1 Ol oy cla 0 914
Buqs|| ou 0 "zZ z o6tk =& He, 6op 4
Bugs! ou ses aE thE zsh vl %I 40 % 94
Busi] ou 1 %S S SSL He 4s oog 99 9%
os eas wrt lz YL Sb 992 %S 84S ero'r Sh Ab
Buys!) ou 9} ae 8604 os 48 eb eg tb %p
Bugs} ou I +1 MEL sor'z HAE SAL zes'z 8 &e
tv) Wve %Ae% fe) YL Belt ) 9 Gt sce yl MEL
Buysi| ou oog Ye Ale 0 %A0e ZA61 0 "48h gt
0 &oe &6e OL “92 “Se fa) Sz “Are 0 yee = ee
) %A9e %4ge 0 ie og 0 6% */8S 0 ez lz
aunloA SV pla aunjoA =6Sy sé aunjoA =4Sy—OpIG aunjoA SV pPId
suondo 49quisseq suondo saquiaydes suondo ysnbny suondo Ajar

198

ind oZ¢
ind S94
ind ogy
ind gy
ind oSr
ind Spy
yd Opp
ind sey
nd Oey
ynd Szp
ind oz

Ire9 Ob
[reo Sop
[reo 09%
{reo SSP
Ne3 OSp
ITeo Spb
(e9 OPP
[180 Sey
ITE2 OF
Ieo Sep
IfEo Oc

Li Sbp ye xepu] 00S dks
(300) suonde xepuj Gos ges C66! ‘6 Aine

S1-6 ounBi4



“ 10 %
Bull and Bear Spreads

While delta neutral strategies are perhaps the most popular among active option traders,
many traders prefer to trade with a bullish or bearish perspective in the underlying
instrument. The trader who wishes to take a directional position in the underlying
instrument has the choice of doing so in either the instrument itself, buying or selling a
futures contract or stock, or in the option market. If he chooses the option market, the
trader has the opportunity to integrate option pricing theory into a bull or bear strategy
in order to take advantage of theoretically mispriced options.

NAKED POSITIONS

Since the purchase of calls or the sale of puts will create a positive delta position, and
the sale of calls or purchase of puts will create a negative delta position, we can always
take a directional position in a market by taking an appropriate naked position in either
calls or puts. If all options are overpriced (high implied volatility), we might sell puts to
create a bullish position, or sell calls to create a bearish position. If all options are
underpriced (low implied volatility], we might buy calls to create a bullish position, or
buy puts to create a bearish position.

The problem with this approach is that, as with all non-hedged positions, there is
very little margin for error. If we purchase options, we will lose money not only if the
market moves in the wrong direction, but also if the market fails to move enough in our
favor to offset the time premium in the option. If we sell options, we face the prospect
of unlimited risk if the market moves violently against us. An experienced trader will
always look for a way to improve the risk/reward characteristics of his position by
looking for positions with the greatest possible margin for error. This philosophy applies
no less to directional strategies than to volatility strategies. In directional strategies, as
in volatility strategies, this can often be done by finding an appropriate spread.

BULL AND BEAR RATIO SPREADS

If a trader believes that implied volatility is too high, one sensible strategy is a ratio
vertical spread. For example, with the underlying market at 100 suppose a June 100
call has a delta of 50 and a June 110 call has a delta of 25. A delta neutral spreader can:

buy 1 June 100 call (50)
sell 2 June 110 calls (25)

199


200 Chapter 10

Since the spread is delta neutral, it has no particular preference for upward or downward
movement in the underlying market.

Now suppose the same trader believes that this ratio vertical spread is a sensible
strategy, but at the same time he is also bullish on the market. There is no law that
requires him to do this spread in a delta neutral ratio. If he wants this spread to reflect
his bullish sentiment, he might change the ratio slightly:

buy 2 June 100 calls (50)
sell 3 June 110 calls (25)

The trader has essentially the same ratio vertical spread, but with a bullish bias. This is
reflected in the total delta for the position of +25.

There is, however, an important limitation using this type of ratio strategy to create
a bullish or bearish position. In our example the trader is initially bullish, but the position
is still a ratio vertical spread. As such, it has a negative gamma. If the trader has
underestimated volatility, and the underlying market moves up too quickly, the spread
can invert from a positive to a negative delta. If the market rises far enough, to 130 or
140, eventually all options will go deeply into-the-money and the deltas of both the June
100 and June 110 calls will approach 100. Eventually, the trader will be left with a delta
position of -100. Even though the trader was correct in his bullish sentiment, the
position was primarily a volatility spread, so that the volatility characteristics of the
position eventually outweighed any considerations of market direction.

The delta can also invert with a backspread. Unlike a negative gamma position,
where the inversion is caused by swift price movement in the underlying contract, a
backspread can invert when the market is less volatile than expected. For example,
suppose that with the underlying market at 100 a trader believes that implied volatility
is too low. He might decide on a delta neutral backspread:

buy 2 June 110 calls (25)
sell 1 June 100 call (50)

If, however, he is bullish on the market, he can, as in the last example, change the
ratio to reflect this sentiment:

buy 3 June 110 calls (25)
sell 1 June 100 call (50)

His delta position of +25 reflects this bullish bias.

We know that as time passes, or as volatility declines, all deltas move away from
50. If time begins to pass with no movement in the underlying contract, the delta of the
June 100 call will remain at 50, but the delta of the June 110 call will start to decline.
If, after a period of time, the delta of the June 100 call declines to 10, the delta of the
position will no longer be +25, but will instead be -20, Since this spread is a volatility
spread, the primary consideration, as before, is the volatility of the market. Only
secondarily are we concerned with the direction of movement. If the trader overesti-
mates volatility, and the market moves more slowly than expected, the spread which
was initially delta positive can instead become delta negative.


Bull and Bear Spreads 201

BULL AND BEAR BUTTERFLIES AND TIME SPREADS

Butterflies and one-to-one (non-ratioed) time spreads can also be chosen in such a way
as to reflect a trader’s bullish or bearish bias. Like ratio spreads, however, their delta
characteristics can also invert as market conditions change.

With the underlying market at 100, a delta neutral trader might buy the June
95/100/105 call butterfly (buy a 95 call, sell two 100 calls, buy a 105 call). The trader
hopes that the market will sit still at 100 so that at expiration the butterfly will widen
to its maximum value of five points. If, however, a trader wants to buy a butterfly, but
is also bullish on the market, he can choose a butterfly where the inside exercise price
is above the current price of the underlying contract. If the underlying market is
currently at 100, he might choose to buy the June 105/110/115 call butterfly. Since
this position wants the underlying market at 110 at expiration, and itis currently at 100,
the position is a bull butterfly. This will be reflected in the position having a positive
delta.

Unfortunately, if the underlying market moves too swiftly, say to 120, the butterfly
can invert from a positive to a negative delta position. Since at expiration the butterfly
always has its maximum value with the underlying contract right at the inside exercise
price, the trader will now want the market to fall back from 120 to 110. Whenever the
underlying market is below 110, the position will be bullish; whenever the underlying
market is above 110, the position will be bearish.

Conversely, if the trader is bearish, he can always choose to buy a butterfly where
the inside exercise price is below the current price of the underlying market. But again,
if the market moves down too quickly and goes through the inside exercise price, the
position will invert from a negative to a positive delta.

In a similar manner, a trader can choose time spreads that are either bullish or
bearish. A long time spread always wants the near-term contract to expire exactly
at-the-money. A long time spread will be initially bullish if the exercise price of the time
spread is above the current price of the underlying market.! With the underlying market
at 100, the June/March 110 call time spread (buy the June 110 call/sell the March 110
call} will be bullish since the trader will want the underlying market to rise to 110 by
March expiration. The June/March 90 call time spread (buy the June 90 call/sell the
March 90 call) will be bearish, since the trader will want the underlying market to fall
to 90 by March expiration. However, like a long butterfly, a long time spread has a
negative gamma, so that if the market moves through the exercise price, the delta can
invert. If the market moves from 100 to 120, the June/March 110 call time spread,
which was initially bullish, will become bearish. If the market moves from 100 to 80,
the June/March 90 call time spread, which was initially bearish, will become bullish.

1. In the futures market the situation may be complicated by the fact that different futures months may
be trading at different prices. Instead of choosing a traditional time spread where both options have the
same exercise price, the trader may have to choose a diagonal spread to ensure that the position {s either
bullish (delta positive) or bearish (delta negative).


202 Chapter 10

VERTICAL SPREADS

It is common for traders to take bull or bear market positions by choosing appropriate
ratio spreads, butterflies, or time spreads, but in each of these positions volatility is still
the primary concern. A trader can be right about market direction, but if he is wrong
about volatility, the spread may not retain the directional characteristics that the trader
intended.

If a trader focuses initially on the direction of the underlying market, he might look
for a spread where the directional characteristics of the spread are the primary concern,
and volatility is of secondary importance. He would like to be certain that if the spread
is initially bullish (delta positive) it will remain bullish under all possible market
conditions. If it is initially bearish (delta negative) it will remain bearish under all
possible market conditions.

The class of spreads which meet the above requirements are known as vertical
spreads. A vertical spread always consists of one long (purchased) option and one short
(sold) option, where both options are of the same type (either hoth calls or both puts)
and expire at the same time. The options are distinguished only by their different
exercise prices. Typical vertical spreads might be:

buy 1 June 100 call
sell 1 June 105 call

or

buy 1 March 105 put
sell 1 March 95 put

Vertical spreads are not only initially bullish or bearish, but they remain bullish or
bearish no matter how market conditions change. Two options which have different
exercise prices but which are identical in every other respect cannot have identical
deltas. In the first example, where the trader is long a June 100 call and short a June
105 call, the June 100 call will always have a delta greater than the June 105 call. If
both options go deeply into-the-money or very far out-of-the-money, the deltas may he
almost identical. Even then, the June 100 call will have a delta fractionally greater than
the June 105 call. In the second example, no matter how market conditions change,
the March 105 put will always have a delta greater than the March 95 put.

At expiration, a vertical spread will have a minimum value of zero, if both options
are out-of-the-money, and a maximum value of the amount between exercise prices, if
both options are in-the-money. If the underlying market is below 100 at expiration, the
June 100/105 call spread will be worthless because both options will be worthless. If
the market is above 105, the same spread will be worth five points because the June
100 call will be worth exactly five points more than the June 105 call. Similarly, the
March 95/105 put spread will be worthless if the underlying market is above 105 at
expiration, and it will be worth 10 points if the market is below 95. The expiration
values of typical bull and bear vertical spreads are shown in Figures 10-1 and 10-2.


Bull and Bear Spreads

203

Figure 10-1

sell a call (put)
at a higher
exercise price
€
=
oo
)
n
o
—
~«
buy a cali (put)
at a lower
exercise price
Figure 10-2
sell a call (put)
at a lower
exercise price
~+
#
=
2
Qa
g
pa
buy a calf (put)
at a higher
exercise price



204 Chapter 10

Since a vertical spread at expiration will always have a value hetween zero and the
amount between exercise prices, a trader can expect the price of such a spread to be
somewhere within this range. A 100/105 call vertical spread will trade for some
amount between zero and five points; a 95/105 put vertical spread will trade for some
amount between zero and 10 points. The exact value will depend on the likelihood of
the underlying market finishing below the lower exercise price, above the higher
exercise price, or somewhere in between. If the market is currently at 80 and gives little
indication of rising, the price of the 100/105 call vertical will be close to zero, while
the price of the 95/105 puts vertical will be close to 10. If the market is currently at
120 with little likelihood that it will fall, the price of the 100/105 call vertical will be
close to five points, while the price of the 95/105 put vertical will be close to zero.

If a trader wants to do a vertical spread, he has essentially four choices. If he is
bullish he can choose a bull vertical call spread or a bull vertical put spread; if he is
bearish he can choose a bear vertical call spread or a bear vertical put spread. For
example:

bull call spread: buy a June 100 call
sell a June 105 call
bull put spread: buy a June 100 put
sell a June 105 put
bear call spread: sell a June 100 call
buy a June 105 call
bear put spread: sell a June 100 put

buy a June 105 put

Note that a trader who is bullish can buy a 100 call and sell a 105 call, or buy a
100 put and sell a 105 put. And a trader who is bearish can buy a 105 call and sell a
100 call, or buy a 105 put and sell 100 put. This may seem counter-intuitive, since one
expects spreads which consist of puts to have characteristics which are the opposite of
those which consist of calls. Regardless of whether a vertical spread consists of calls or
puts, whenever a trader buys the lower exercise price and sells the higher exercise
price, the position is bullish; whenever a trader buys the higher exercise price and sells
the lower exercise price, the position is bearish. Call and put vertical spreads which
expire at the same time and which consist of the same exercise prices have approxi-
mately the same delta, so they have approximately the same bullish or bearish charac-
teristics.

Given the many different exercise prices and expiration months available, how can
a trader choose the vertical spread which best reflects his directional expectations and
which gives him the best chance to profit from those expectations?

Since options have a limited life with a fixed expiration date, a trader who wants
to use options to take advantage of an expected market move must first determine his
time horizon. Is the movement likely to occur in the next month, in the next three
months, in the next nine months? If it is currently May and the trader foresees upward

2. Weare assuming for the moment that all options are European, with no possibility of early exercise.


Bull and Bear Spreads 205

movement, but helieves the movement is unlikely to occur within the next two months,
it does not make much sense to take a position in June options. If his expectations are
long-term, he may have to take his position in September, or even December, options.
Of course, as he moves further and further out in time, market liquidity may become
more of a problem. This is a factor that will have to taken into consideration.

Next, a trader will have to decide just how bullish or bearish he is. Is he very
confident, and therefore willing to take a very large directional position? Or is he less
certain and willing to take only a limited position? Two factors determine the total
directional characteristics of a vertical spread:

1, The delta of the specific vertical spread
2. The size in which the spread is executed

For example, a trader who wants to take a position which is 500 deltas long
(equivalent to purchasing five underlying contracts) can either choose a vertical spread
which is 50 deltas Jong and execute it 10 times, or choose a vertical spread which is 25
deltas long and execute it 20 times. Both positions will leave him long 500 deltas.

The delta value of a vertical spread is determined by various factors: time to
expiration, volatility, and distance between exercise prices. Since a trader will be
required to choose an expiration date which covers the period of expected directional
movement, and since a trader will always make his best estimate of volatility over a
given period, in practice the delta will be a function of the exercise prices which he
chooses. The greater the distance between exercise prices, the greater the delta value
associated with the spread. A 95/110 bull spread will be more bullish than a 100/110
bull spread, which will, in turn, be more bullish than a 100/105 bull spread. This is
shown in Figure 10-3.

Once a trader decides on an expiration month in which to take his directional
position, he must decide which specific spread is best. That is, he must decide which
exercise prices to use. A common approach is to focus on the at-the-money options. If
a trader does this, he will have the following choices:

Bull call spread: buyanin-the-money call or buy an atthe-money call

sell an at-the-money cal! sell an out-of-the-money
Bear cali spread: buy anat-the-money call or buy an out-of-the-money call

sell an in-the-money call sell an at-the-money call
Bull put spread: buyanat-the-moneyput or buy an out-of-the-money put

sell an in-the-money put sell an at-the-money put
Bear put spread: buy anin-the-money put or buy an at-the-money put

sell an at-the-money put sell an out-of-the-money put

With four different bull spreads and four different bear spreads available, how can
the trader choose the spread which represents the hest value? One way to do this is to
use a theoretical pricing model to evaluate several different vertical spreads. This has
been done in Figure 10-4 for six different options on an underlying futures contract: an
in-the-money, at-the-money, and out-of-the-money call, and an in-the-money, at-the-

