
Alarms should not print a breakout through S/R. Price must remain trapped when the dust settles on
that bar’s activity. Verify prior emotional trading at the same price level through TM investigation.
Also make certain the high volume doesn’t reflect a prescheduled transaction such as a secondary
offering.

READING THE CROWD
Volume breathes differently than price. Narrow action may yield sharp emotional behavior or an
unexpected lack of participation. Each outcome carries different consequences for swing traders.
This crowd-measurement tool works well on daily charts but consistently undermines intraday
signals. It offers both early warnings and dead ends, often at the same time. Volume reflects a
crowd psychosis that often makes little sense in the short term but turns highly predictable at key
intersections of trend and time.
Successful swing trading requires skillful interpretation of the herd mentality that drives price
change. Develop a seasoned understanding of volume’s impact on the stock chart. Learn when to
use it and how to ignore it when required. Always pay close attention to the evolution of crowd
participation as well as the peaks and valleys. This often provides the clearest signals for major
reversals and impending breakouts.
Opportunity arises from recognition of key volume events and correct interpretation of the odd
crowd tension that builds around breakout and breakdown levels. Invoke both left- and right-brain
functions to measure this complex struggle. Human nature channels greed and fear between stable
boundaries most of the time. But the speculator’s pocketbook depends upon those rare moments
when crowd forces get thrown out of balance.
Many elements of the charting landscape read the emotional crowd and try to predict its next move.
Volume addresses this difficult task better than any other tool. But keep in mind that profits depend
on price change alone. Realize that price itself offers the best leading indicator for price change
throughout the Pattern Cycle. As it rises, it predicts that further gains will follow. As it falls, odds
increase that it will fall even further.

BEAR MARKETS
Modern participants have rarely faced severe bear market conditions. Most players wrongly believe
that profits will continue even in a major decline as long as they just flip their long strategies upside
down. But worldwide bear markets present difficult conditions for most short-side participants.
Trend-following tactics often fail as sudden squeezes offer no escape and induce heavy losses.
A special personality marks each secular bear market. Inflation or oil prices may drive some while
overheated economics or asset overvaluation awakens others. But bear markets all display one
common characteristic: they make it much harder to turn short-term profits than typical bull
markets. Swing traders should prepare for the next downturn now so that they can survive and profit
while waiting for better conditions.
Pattern Cycles suggest effective short sale tactics during individual stock bear markets. But volume
drops sharply through most phases of a broad worldwide bear depression. This induces illiquidity
and dangerous trading conditions. Spreads widen and slippage increases for both entries and exits.
Opportunities vanish as good short sale inventories dry up at many broker-dealers. Reliable
information disappears and good sources close up shop due to a lack of interest.

FIGURE 3.17
Dish Networks prints a silent alarm before jumping 15 points. The high-volume event ends with a small price
range and the session never pushes DISH through resistance at 40. But the next morning the stock breaks out in a
vertical rally that carries another three sessions.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Bear markets appear through many time frames. They can represent grand bear markets, cyclical
bear markets, intermediate-term corrections, or minor down-swings. Minor downtrends can last a
few minutes or days. Longer ones may persist for several months. Grand bear markets can span
decades and embed multiple cyclical bull-bear swings. These cyclical swings pose the greatest
threat for modern swing traders. Historically this particular bull-bear cycle lasts about four years,
with 25% (or one year) of that time spent in active bear conditions.
Bears shake out the market infrastructure and realign prevailing psychology. The actual price
decline often takes up only a small percentage of the time that downtrend conditions persist. As
with stocks, indices fall faster than they rise and the selling spasms tend to end quickly. The rest of
the time the market meanders back and forth on low volume while it tries to heal. This offers
another clue why trading during these times can be very difficult. The typical bear market doesn’t
end in the high-volume capitulation that marked volatile corrections in the 1990s. It slowly heals as
value investors start to move back into positions. Many other participants will have little interest in
the markets by that time.
The financial media condition traders and investors to believe that a simple 20% retracement off the
index highs constitutes an active bear market. This comforts many participants, the small drop in
their portfolios giving them battle credentials. But technical and psychological damage mark bear

conditions with far greater accuracy than flat percentages. This type of pain has rarely been
experienced over the past two decades.
A bear market corrects the excesses of a specific market uptrend. It retraces according to classic
Fibonacci mathematics. When the prior rally displays a moderate advance, the bear market may not
need a great pullback to correct the imbalance. But when market rallies extend to historical levels,
conditions favor a very deep pullback that may take several years of basing before a new and
sustainable rally can begin.
Swing traders should act defensively through cyclical bear market conditions unless the intraday
charts signal opportunity. Rallies and selloffs that print at that level provide excellent short-term
setups. Tighten the holding period and step into as many positions as the temporary market
environment allows. Try to anticipate where short covering rallies will likely erupt. Get in along
with the insiders and use the short seller’s panic to turn a profit. Then find natural reversal levels
and flip over to the short side after the squeeze completes. Follow the daily chart for key turning
points but avoid being tossed around by the frequent tests of investor hope and fear.
TABLE 3.3
Bear Market Severity
Bear Market
1973–1974
1983–1984
1987–1988
1989–1990
1998

Percent Decline
59%
31%
35%
33%
29%

Months to Recover
48
18
20
7
2

Cyclical bear markets print according to the same mechanics as individual stocks and futures. Look
for a double bottom or the Big W to signal the end of a major selloff. These emotional periods offer
excellent longer-term profit for those with precise market timing. But as with other falling knives,
entry requires execution against popular sentiment. Watch the technicals closely and act when
cross-verification opens up the next bull phase.

4 CHAPTER
BUILDING A SWING TRADING STRATEGY

SYSTEMS AND METHODS
Swing traders must make the right choices to build an effective strategy. Seek original techniques
that work in diverse market conditions and stand apart from the crowd’s madness. Adopt a
customized holding period that fits the personal lifestyle and permits careful position management.
Spend more time controlling losses than seeking gains, and prepare to adjust everything as profits
grow.
Opportunity depends on inefficiency. Price patterns expose inefficient markets that discharge their
instability through rapid price change. Swing traders evolve fresh strategies to capture these events
and build quick profits. But as high-odds tactics gain recognition, the crowd seizes them and
inefficiency starts to close. Professionals then fade the setup and generate whipsaws that shake out
many speculators. This intense competition for profit forces many swing traders to cut and run.
They jump quickly to the next method that works, with the crowd always one step behind.
An effective market edge generates consistent trading profits. But most modern strategies must
adapt continuously to the curse of common knowledge. Specialize on a single pattern for as long as
it produces good results. But notice when unexpected outcomes start to undermine profitability.
Stay focused and recognize immediately when the crowd discovers that pattern’s virtues. Then have
the confidence to move on quickly to the next original idea.
Emotional instability ensures that stock positions turn into surrogate spouses, bosses, and wayward
offspring. Control your personal life first before taking a trade, or the market will do it for you.
Keep in mind one disturbing fact: more swing traders will fail due to lack of discipline than lack of
knowledge. Successful execution depends much more on the executioner than the strategy.
Profits require both effective risk management and emotional self-discipline. The greed-fear axis
clouds the mind and opens the trading game to great danger. Use cold, objective rules to manage
emotions and avoid the fatal traps that quickly end a career. Engage frequently in tactical roleplaying and visualize appropriate responses to different market conditions. Hope for the best but
always prepare for the worst with each new position. Both extremes will happen regularly over
time.

MOMENTUM TRADING
Pattern Cycles generate powerful strategies to capitalize on changing conditions and major turning
points. But most participants fall into the momentum game and never learn other tactics. While the
greedy eye sees many rising trends with few pullbacks, most still lose money chasing a hot market.
They realize too late that momentum demands precise timing and strict emotional control.
Greed-fear exerts tremendous force during dynamic price movement and clouds careful preparation.
Ironically, initial gains can be dramatic for new momentum traders. Beginner’s luck and
fearlessness combine to make those first weeks or months very rewarding. But results often change
quickly. Momentum traders at all levels lack sound risk management.
Focus on the big gain dulls awareness of the big loss. Market insiders adjust quickly to the
momentum crowd and generate sharp whipsaws to shake out the weak hands. Confused participants

start buying tops and selling bottoms with regularity. Or they abandon their rules and try to survive
by holding old winners through violent selloffs and waiting for a decent bounce.
Sharp trends print wide range bars and many gapping moves. This volatility increases risk and
inhibits safe entry-exit planning. Swing traders rely on S/R to define execution and reward
targeting. Most momentum markets display few common landscape features. This requires entry
without a clear violation level that proves that the setup was wrong. Only 3D charting or arbitrary
stop loss keeps the speculator out of intense danger in this blind environment.
Momentum trading can be mastered. Three disciplines will break destructive habits and reprogram
trading for success:
•
•
•

Abandon the adrenaline rush: Forget the excitement. Profit depends upon detached and
disciplined execution.
Learn the numbers: The nature of price movement must be ingrained deeply enough to
allow spontaneous decision-making during the trading day.
Cross-verify: Objective measurements must filter unconscious bias.

FIGURE 4.1
The markets offer the momentum crowd many opportunities to fail. The neophyte sees continuous price change during
this winter rally, but the active trends last only a short time. During one segment of this volatile move, Rambus prints
15 trend bars compared to 53 sideways range bars.

Reduce momentum risk through 3D charting. Identify reward for the time frame of interest.
Confirm that the stock shows no important divergences that may signal the end of the move or an
impending reversal. Then guide execution and position management through the chart in the nextlower dimension. When a strong trend explodes on the daily chart, use the 60-minute bar to pick out
lower-risk entry and define natural exit points. For intraday positions, control the 5-minute bar
breakout by using a 1-minute chart to locate swing levels.
Successful momentum strategy requires solid tape reading skills. Demand on the time and sales
ticker reveals the inner workings of rapid price movement. Both retail (small-lot) and professional
(large-lot) traders need to participate in a sharp trend or it will fail. Watch the crowd’s response to
support numbers very closely. If the swing trader can’t feel their urgency to get on board, perhaps it
isn’t there. Use round numbers to gauge demand when the action pushes into uncharted territory.
Multiples of 10 often present strong resistance in place of classic S/R levels. Understand the
motives of the big players that drive fast markets and ride their coattails to gain a needed edge. And
if big lots start to move against a rally, be prepared to join them.
Time-of-day tendencies cultivate profit and danger zones. As the market opens, overnight
imbalance and fresh retail cash trigger volatility that resolves through price change. Insiders guide
stop gunning exercises and fade trends through the lunch hour’s negative feedback. The final hour
arrives, just in time to resolve many complex themes with sharp breakouts or breakdowns. And
through it all, intraday buying and selling oscillates in an orderly 90-minute cycle.
Technical analysis uncovers momentum secrets as it exposes insider deception and herd behavior.
Verify all fast markets through both patterns and indicators. Proper application will reduce failed
entries because it invokes natural risk management. Always trade by the numbers and not the news.
Use cold logic to painlessly exit marginal positions and move on quickly to the next opportunity.
Physics teaches that an object in motion tends to remain in motion. Momentum profits depend on
this well-understood mechanism. Moving averages set to multiple time frames reveal trend velocity
through their relationships with each other. Measure this acceleration-deceleration with a classic
MACD indicator or apply MA ribbons and watch them spread or contract over different time
periods. For obvious reasons, always seek acceleration cross-verification before momentum trade
execution.
Swing traders apply original tactics to each phase of the Pattern Cycle. At new highs, they execute
momentum setups that rely on sound risk management. When market conditions change, they move
swiftly on to fresh ideas that reflect the new inefficiencies. Always opportunistic, they seek the next
profit as a predator looks for a vulnerable meal.
Momentum strategies fail through most market conditions. Stocks trend only fifteen to twenty
percent of the time. Constricted ranges bind price during the rest of its existence. Trading longevity
requires diverse skills through both trending and congested markets. Be flexible enough to shift
from one strategy to the other as feedback loops alternate between positive and negative. In other
words, adapt tactics quickly to changing market conditions rather than wait for those limited times
when the environment favors the hot stock.

COUNTERTREND TRADING
Constricted ranges dictate countertrend plays. This classic swing strategy uses clearly marked
boundaries to buy weakness and sell strength. When S/R draws strong congestion, sell short as price
tests resistance and go long when it falls into support. Use the charting landscape to guide low-risk
execution levels. Keep in mind that the first thrust into S/R usually offers the best fade position and

that odds will deteriorate on repeated tests. And remember that swing entry is always very pricesensitive.
FIGURE 4.2
Short-term volatility shakes out intraday traders during these six hours of choppy Nextel action. Meaningless price
swings of 2 to 2 1/2 points masks the underlying downtrend, squeezes shorts and relieves weak hands of their stock
positions. Many intraday trends respond to conflicting intermarket cycles that ensure a bumpy rise for the momentum
crowd. Look for convergence between indices, futures, and equities when trading short-term momentum.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Focus the intended execution near a single price level and stick to it. Never chase entry and always
maintain a tight stop loss. Countertrend trades must execute with minimum slippage right at or
close to known S/R. The swing trader should stand aside if conditions don’t allow for this narrow
entry. These setups manage risk through small losses taken when positions violate specific S/R
zones. A series of larger losses due to poor execution will eliminate a very good profit.
Target reward through examination of the local features. If possible, carry the position until price
approaches the other extreme of the range. Broad congestion likely mirrors intermediate S/R that
inhibits a quick price thrust across the pattern. Many swing traders find that single direct price
moves without retracement provide the best conditions for a profitable exit. Consider getting out as
price jumps into that first boundary. If this is the chosen style, the original reward:risk evaluation
should confirm that this price target carries enough profit to make the trade worthwhile.

Buying bottoms and selling tops carefully applies countertrend strategies. Major highs and lows
attract interest more than any other charting landscape feature. This ensures a large supply of
participants but also invites more whipsaws and unexpected outcomes. Apply this primary rule at
tests of prior highs and lows: fade the first test after a significant pullback but trade in the direction
of the extreme on subsequent tests. Price tends to break out of ranges on the third try (second test of
a high or low).
Use small reversal patterns in the chart below the holding period to fade entry near S/R extremes.
Adam and Eve patterns and double tops/bottoms present simple formations that apply this 3D
technique. Short sales depend on price violating the bottom of the smaller top pattern, while long
positions signal when price surges through the top of the smaller bottom pattern. This original
method allows low-risk execution close to the larger high or low in anticipation of a favorable price
move.
Victor Sperandeo’s 2B trade in Methods of a Wall Street Master and Raschke and Connor’s Turtle
Soup in Street Smarts both trap the crowd as it leans the wrong way right after price violates a high
or low but reverses immediately. As smart traders adopt these contrary tactics, many price extremes
face increased danger of a swift reversal after the initial breakout or breakdown. The safest 2B fade
strategy lags the crowd before position entry. Let the price action break through key levels but don’t
execute in the opposite direction until it pops back across support or resistance.
Trade 2B setups defensively. The market may still want to break through the barrier. Ride the
subsequent pullback to the first natural swing level and then exit. After a good reaction the trend
can reassert itself quickly and take out the old extreme. This follows the wisdom to fade the first
test of an old high or low but follow the trend on the second test. Apparent triple bottoms and tops
often yield to significant breakouts or breakdowns.
Watch out when a new high or low retraces and forms congestion close to the price extreme. Simple
continuation patterns can quickly ignite into new trend thrusts. Stay away from small pennants and
short pullbacks when planning 2B entry. The best reversals for this pattern come when a sharp
retracement occurs after the first high or low. The subsequent test should then print more price bars
than the decline that precedes it. Also pay close attention to lower-pane indicators as the event
approaches. The trade cross-verifies when oscillators diverge from price direction just as the old
high or low breaks.
Pullback entry into a strongly trending market represents a major category of swing tactics. This
classic setup buys the first sharp decline into support or sells the first bear rally into resistance. Exit
depends on many factors, including personal trading style, holding period, and available capital.
Subsequent swings also offer safe entry, but risk increases as trends evolve and reach overboughtoversold conditions. In other words, each pullback after the first one has higher odds of being a
reversal rather than a continuation pattern. Chapter 8 examines this bread-and-butter swing trade in
greater detail.
Central tendency presents high reward: high risk opportunities at the extremes of price action.
These tactics work best in congested markets or in the extreme volatility near climax events. The
strategy fades price when a long bar thrusts out of a Bollinger Band extreme more than 50% of its
entire length. In rangebound markets, odds for success improve substantially when the top or
bottom band aligns horizontally just before the violation and price thrusts into known resistance
(other than the band itself).
FIGURE 4.3
The 2B reversal (1) traps participants that sell short into a violation of the last intermediate low. This classic
scenario also appears at double tops right after new highs. Enter the reversal as soon as price jumps back within

the prior S/R. This Broadvision example also illustrates a clear stop gunning exercise just before the market
moves substantially higher. Note how both (2) and (3) offer logical long side entry for the subsequent rally.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Consider this trade at the end of parabolic rallies and selloffs. The bands will turn close to vertical
as these events progress. Look for an intense burst of energy that forces the bar to break halfway or
more through the band. This signals the possible climax and invites countertrend entry. But
successful execution requires both a skilled hand and excellent timing. Some blowoffs can issue a
series of these bars before a violent reversal. Use cross-verification and tight stop loss to manage
risk. And master other setups before attempting this dangerous trade.

TRADING TACTICS
Narrow range tactics enter positions in low volatility near the edge of S/R in anticipation of a
breakout. Both range-based coiled springs and simple, well-placed congestion generate excellent
reward:risk profiles. These unique opportunities may signal through the pattern alone, but look for
volatility and price rate of change indicators to verify narrow conditions. Both plots should move
toward flatline before a breakout occurs. This indicates that the pattern has a supportive
environment but does not flag an impending move. Review coiled spring tactics in Chapter 9 to
manage positions with this important contraction event.
