
Average
Vanguard Index 500

10-Year
Fund
6.7%
8.8
9.8
7.3
6.5
7.8%
9.1%

2000 –2005
Total
−5.2%
−2.5
−3.3
−4.6
−3.7
−3.9%
0.5%

Annual Return

−0.5%
7.1%

−7.6%
3.4
1.4
−1.1
1.7

10-Year
Shareholder

−8.3%
−2.0%

−14.3%
−5.5
−8.5
−8.4
−4.8

10-Year
Shareholder Lag

Growth Fund Returns versus Investor Returns: Aggressive Growth Funds, 1995 –2005

Fund Group
Overall Manager

EXHIBIT 5.3

[57]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

percent per year, nearly equal to the return of 9.1 percent
for the index fund. But woe to the shareholder who chose
them. For while the fund returns were acceptable, the returns of their shareholders were, well, terrible.
Their average return came to minus 0.4 percent per
year, in negative territory and a lag of fully 8.3 percentage
points behind the funds’ reported per share figure. For
the record, the annual return of the index fund shareholder, at 7.1 percent, also lagged the return of the fund,
but by only 2.0 percentage points, far less than this
group’s gap of 8.3 percentage points, or even the industry
gap of 2.7 percentage points.
When the annual returns of these aggressive funds
are compounded over the full period, the deterioration is
stunning: a cumulative fund return averaging more than
112 percent; a cumulative shareholder return averaging
negative 4.5 percent. That’s a lag of more than 117 percentage points! This astonishing penalty, then, makes
clear the perils of fund selection and timing. It also illustrates the value of indexing and the necessity of setting a
sound course and then sticking to it, come what may.

When ever-counterproductive investor emotions
are played on by ever-counterproductive fund
industry promotions, little good is apt to result.

[58]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

The shocking performance of fund investors during
the stock market “new economy” bubble is unusual in its
dimension, but not in its existence. Fund investors have
been chasing past performance since time eternal, allowing their emotions—perhaps even their greed—to overwhelm their reason. But the fund industry itself has played
on these emotions, bringing out new funds to meet the
fads and fashions of the day, often supercharged and speculative, and then aggressively advertising and marketing
them. It is fair to say that when ever-counterproductive investor emotions are played on by ever-counterproductive
fund industry promotions, little good is apt to result.
The fund industry will not soon give up its promotions. But the intelligent investor will be well advised to
heed not only the message in Chapter 4 about minimizing
expenses, but the message in this chapter about getting
emotions out of the equation. The beauty of the index
fund, then, lies not only in its low expenses, but in its
elimination of all those tempting fund choices that promise so much and deliver so little. Unlike the hot funds of
the day, the index fund can be held through thick and thin
for an investment lifetime, and emotions need never enter
the equation. The winning formula for success in investing is owning the entire stock market through an index
fund, and then doing nothing. Just stay the course.

THE GRAND ILLUSION

Don’t Take My Word for It
The wise Warren Buffett shares my view, in what I
call his “four E’s.” “The greatest Enemies of the Equity
investor are Expenses and Emotions.” Even Andrew
Lo, MIT professor and author of A Non-Random
Walk Down Wall Street (suggesting strategies to outperform the market), personally “invests by buying
and holding index funds.” Perhaps even more surprisingly, the founder and chief executive of the largest
mutual supermarket—while vigorously promoting actively managed funds—favors the classic index fund
for himself. When asked why people invest in managed funds, Charles Schwab answered: “It’s fun to
play around. . . it’s human nature to try to select the
right horse . . . (But) for the average person, I’m more
of an indexer. . . The predictability is so high . . . For
10, 15, 20 years you’ll be in the 85th percentile of performance. Why would you screw it up?”
Mark Hulbert, highly regarded editor of the
Hulbert Financial Digest concurs. “Assuming that
the future is like the past, you can outperform 80
percent of your fellow investors over the next several
decades by investing in an index fund—and doing
nothing else. [But] acquire the discipline to do something even better: become a long-term index fund investor.” His New York Times article was headlined:
“Buy and Hold? Sure, but Don’t Forget the Hold.”

[59]

Ch

apt er Six

Taxes Are Costs, Too


Don’t Pay Uncle Sam Any More
Than You Should.

WE STILL AREN’T THROUGH with these relentless rules
of humble arithmetic—the logical, inevitable, and unyielding long-term penalties assessed against stock market participants by investment expenses and the powerful impact
of inflation—that have slashed the capital accumulated by
mutual fund investors. As described in Chapter 4, the
index fund has provided excellent protection from the
penalty of these costs. While its real returns also were
hurt by inflation, the cumulative impact was far less than
on the actively managed equity funds.
But there is yet another cost—too often ignored—that
slashes even further the net returns that investors actually

TA X E S A R E C O S TS , T O O

[61]

receive. I’m referring to taxes—federal, state, and local income taxes.* And here again, the index fund garners a
substantial edge. The fact is that most managed mutual
funds are astonishingly tax-inefficient, a result of the shortterm focus of their portfolio managers, usually frenetic
traders of the stocks in the portfolios they supervise.

Managed mutual funds are
astonishingly tax-inefficient.

The turnover of the average equity fund now comes
to about 100 percent per year. (In fairness, based on total
assets rather than number of funds, the turnover rate of
actively managed funds is 61 percent.) Industrywide, the
average stock is held by the average fund for an average
of just 12 months. (Based on equity fund total assets, only
20 months.) Hard as it is to imagine, from 1945 to 1965,
the turnover rate averaged just 16 percent per year, an average holding period of six years for the average stock in
a fund portfolio. This huge increase in turnover and its
attendant transaction costs have ill-served fund investors.
* About one-half of all equity mutual fund shares are held by individual
investors in fully taxable investment accounts. The other half are held in taxdeferred accounts such as individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and corporate
savings, thrift, and profit-sharing plans. If your fund holdings are solely in the
latter category, you need not be concerned with the discussion in this chapter.

[62]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

This pattern of tax-inefficiency for active managers
seems destined to continue as long as (1) stocks rise, and
(2) fund managers continue their hyperactive patterns of
short-term trading. Let’s be clear: Most fund managers,
once focused on long-term investment, are now focused
on short-term speculation. But the index fund follows precisely the opposite policy—buying and holding forever,
and incurring transaction costs that are somewhere between infinitesimal and zero.
So let’s pick up where we left off two chapters ago,
with the net annual return of 10.0 percent for the average
equity fund over the past 25 years can be compared with
the 12.3 percent return for the S&P 500 Index fund.
With the high portfolio turnover of actively managed
funds, their taxable investors were subject to an estimated
effective annual federal tax of 1.8 percentage points per
year (state and local taxes would further balloon the figure), reducing the after-tax annual return to 8.2 percent
(Exhibit 6.1).
Despite the higher returns that they earned, investors in the index fund were actually subjected to
lower taxes—in fact, at 0.6 percentage points, only
about one-third of that tax burden—bringing their
after-tax return to 11.7 percent. Compounded, the initial $10,000 investment grew by just $61,700 after
taxes for the active funds, nearly 60 percent less than

TA X E S A R E C O S TS , T O O

[63]

EXHIBIT 6.1 Index Fund versus Managed Fund:
Profit on Initial Investment of $10,000, 1980 –2005
200
$179,200

$179,200
Gross Return

$170,800

Pre-tax Return

Thousands ($)

150

$149,000

After-tax Return
Real Return

100

$98,200

$65,100

$61,700

50

$23,100

0

Index Fund

Average Fund

Note: Assumes reinvestment of all dividends and capital gains.

the $149,000 of accumulated growth in the index fund,
a loss of some $87,300.*
What’s more, just as fund expenses are paid in current dollars, so is your annual tax bill. When we calculate
the accumulated wealth in terms of real dollars with 1980
buying power, investor wealth again contracts dramatically. The annual real return of the average equity fund
now drops to 4.9 percent, less than 60 percent of the 8.4
*The index fund investor would be subject to taxes on any gains realized
when liquidating shares. But for an investor who bequeaths shares to heirs,
the cost would be “stepped up” to their market value on date of death and
no capital gain would be recognized or taxed.

[64]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

percent actual return of the index fund. Compounded, the
real after-tax accumulation on that initial $10,000 came to
$65,100 for the index fund, nearly three times the
$23,100 for the active equity index fund.
Even with the more subdued returns earned in the
postbubble era, actively managed funds persist in foisting
this extraordinarily costly tax inefficiency on their shareholders. While the net annual return of the average equity
fund was 8.5 percent over the past decade (1996 to 2005),
the tax bill consumed fully 1.7 percentage points of the return, reducing the net fund return to just 6.8 percent.
I hesitate to assign the responsibility for being “the
straw that broke the camel’s back” of equity fund returns
to any single one of these negative factors. But surely the
final straws include (1) high costs, (2) the adverse investor
selections and counterproductive market timing described
in Chapter 5, and (3) taxes. Whatever way one looks at it,
the camel’s back is surely broken. But the very last straw,
it turns out, is inflation.

Fund returns are devastated by
costs, taxes, and inflation.

When we pay our fund costs in current dollars, year
after year—and that’s exactly how we pay our fund expenses
and our taxes on fund capital gains (often realized on a

TA X E S A R E C O S TS , T O O

[65]

short-term basis, to boot)—and yet accumulate our assets
only in real dollars, eroded by the relentless rise in the cost
of living that seems imbedded in our economy, the results
are devastating. It is truly remarkable—and hardly praiseworthy—that this devastation is virtually ignored in the information that fund managers provide to fund investors.
A paradox: While the index fund is remarkably taxe fficient in managing capital gains, it turns out to be relatively tax-inefficient in distributing dividend income.
Why? Because its rock-bottom costs mean that nearly all
the dividends paid on the stocks held by the low-cost
index fund actually flow directly into the hands of the
index fund’s shareholders. With the high expense ratios
incurred by managed funds, however, only a tiny portion
of the dividends that the funds receive actually find their
way into the hands of the fund’s shareholders.
Here is the unsurprising and ever relentless arithmetic: the annual gross dividend yield earned by the typical active equity fund before deducting fund expenses is
about the same as the dividend yield of the low-cost index
fund—1.8 percent in late-2006. But after deducting the
1.5 percent of expenses borne by the typical active fund,
its net dividend yield drops to just 0.3 percent (!) for its
owners. Fund operating costs and fees confiscate fully 80
percent of its dividend income, a sad reaffirmation of the
eternal position of fund investors at the bottom of the mutual fund food chain.

[66]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

The expense ratio of a low-cost index fund is about
0.15 percent, consuming only 8 percent of its 1.8 percent
dividend yield. The result: a net yield of 1.65 percent to
distribute to the passively managed index fund owners, a
dividend merely 5.5 times as high as the dividend yield of
0.3 percent on the actively managed fund.
For taxable shareholders, that larger dividend is subject
to the current 15 percent federal tax on dividend income,
consuming about 0.27 percentage points of the yield. Paradoxically, the active fund, with an effective tax rate of just
0.045 percent (15 percent of the 0.3 percent net yield), appears more tax efficient from a dividend standpoint. But the
reality is that the tax imposed by the active managers in the
form of the fees it deducts before paying those dividends has
already consumed 80 percent of the yield. The wise investor
will seek the dividend “tax-inefficiency” of the index fund dividend rather than the “tax-efficiency” of most actively managed funds engendered by their confiscatory operating costs.

Don’t Take My Word for It
Consider these words from a paper by John B.
Shoven, of Stanford University and the National Bureau of Economic Research, and Joel M. Dickson,
(continued)

TA X E S A R E C O S TS , T O O

[67]

then of the Federal Reserve System: “Mutual funds have failed
to manage their realized capital gains in such a way as to permit
a substantial deferral of taxes (raising) investors’ tax bills considerably. . . . If the Vanguard 500 Index Fund could have deferred all of its realized capital gains, it would have ended up in
the 91.8 percentile for the high tax investor” (i.e., it outpaced
92 percent of all managed equity funds).
Or listen to investment adviser William Bernstein, author of The Four Pillars of Investing: “While it is probably a
poor idea to own actively managed mutual funds in general, it is
truly a terrible idea to own them in taxable accounts . . . (taxes
are) a drag on performance of up to 4 percentage points each
year . . . many index funds allow your capital gains to grow
largely undisturbed until you sell. . . . For the taxable investor, indexing means never having to say you’re sorry.”
And Dr. Malkiel again casts his lot with the index fund:
“Index funds are . . . tax friendly, allowing investors to defer
the realization of capital gains or avoid them completely if the
shares are later bequeathed. To the extent that the long-run
uptrend in stock prices continues, switching from security to
security involves realizing capital gains that are subject to tax.
Taxes are a crucially important financial consideration because the earlier realization of capital gains will substantially
reduce net returns. Index funds do not trade from security to
security and, thus, they tend to avoid capital gains taxes.”

C

te r Se v

e

n

hap

When the Good Times
No Longer Roll


What Happens If
Future Returns Are Lo wer?

REMEMBER THE UNFAILING principle described in
Chapter 2: in the long run it is the reality of business—the
dividend yields and earnings growth of corporations—that
drives the returns generated by the stock market. However, I must warn you that during the past 25 years—the
period examined in the three preceding chapters—the
12.5 percent nominal annual return provided by the U.S.
stock market included a speculative return of nearly 3
percent per year, far above the business reality.

W H E N T H E G O O D T I M E S N O LO N G E R RO L L

[69]

Recall that the century-plus nominal investment return earned by stocks was 9.5 percent, consisting of an
average dividend yield of 4.5 percent and average annual
earnings growth of 5.0 percent. A mere 0.1 percent per
year—what I described as speculative return—was added
by the rise in the price/earnings ratio from 15 times at the
beginning of the period to 18 times at its end, bringing
the total annual return to 9.6 percent.*
Paradoxically, the investment return earned by stocks
over the past 25 years was hardly extraordinary. A dividend
yield averaging 3.4 percent plus annual earnings growth of
6.4 percent brought it to 9.8 percent, almost precisely
equal to the historical norm of 9.5 percent. But, illustrating the difficulty of forecasting changes in the amount that
investors are willing to pay for each dollar of corporate
earnings, the speculative return was anything but normal.

Common sense tells us that we’re facing an era of
subdued returns in the stock market.

As investor confidence rose, so did the price/earnings
(P/E) ratio rise—from 9 times to 18 times, an amazing 100
* A more-than-technical caveat: due to the issuance of additional shares of
stock by corporations over the years, the rate of growth of corporate earnings per share is estimated to lag the growth of aggregate corporate earnings by as much as 2 percentage points per year.

[70]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

percent increase, adding fully 2.7 percentage points per
year—almost 30 percent—to the solid 9.8 percent fundamental return. (Early in 2000, the P/E ratio had actually
risen to an astonishing 32 times, only to plummet to 18
times as the new economy bubble burst.) Result: speculative return was responsible for more than 20 percent of the
market’s 12.5 percent annual return during this period.
Since it is unrealistic to expect the P/E ratio to double in
the coming decade, a similar 12.5 percent return is unlikely to recur. Common sense tells us that we’re facing an
era of subdued returns in the stock market (Exhibit 7.1).

EXHIBIT 7.1

Total Returns on Stocks, Past and Future

Earnings Growth

Dividend Yield

Investment Return
14
12
10

P/E Change
Speculative Return

12.5

9.6

2.7

0.1

Percent

7.0
8

5.0

6.4

6

2

9.8

9.5

4
4.5

3.4

0
−2

Last 100 Years

Last 25 Years

6.0
8.0
2.0
−1.0
Next 10 Years

W H E N T H E G O O D T I M E S N O LO N G E R RO L L

[71]

Why? First, because today’s dividend yield on stocks
is not 4.5 percent (the historical rate), but slightly below
2 percent. Thus we can expect a dead-weight loss of 2.5
percentage points per year in the contribution of dividend
income to investment return. Let’s assume that corporate
earnings will continue (as, over time, they usually have) to
grow at about the pace of our economy’s expected nominal growth rate of 5 or 6 percent per year over the coming decade. If that’s correct, then the most likely
investment return on stocks would be in the range of 7 to
8 percent. I’ll be optimistic and project an annual investment return (a bit nervously!) averaging 8 percent.
Second, the present price/earnings multiple on
stocks looks to be about 18 times based on the trailing
12-month reported earnings of the S&P 500 (16 times
if we use projected operating earnings, which exclude
write-offs for discontinued business activities). If it remains at that level a decade hence, speculative return
would neither add to nor detract from that possible 8
percent investment return. My guess (it is little more
than that) is that the P/E might ease down to, say, 16
times, reducing the market’s return by about 1 percentage point a year, to an annual rate of 7 percent. You
don’t have to agree with me. If you think it will leap to
25 times, add 3 percentage points, bringing the total return on stocks to 11 percent. If you think it will drop to

[72]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

12 times, subtract 4 percentage points; reducing the
total return on stocks to 4 percent.

If rational expectations suggest future annual
returns of about 7 percent on stocks, what does
this imply for returns on equity funds?

Now assume that 7 percent is a rational expectation for
future stock market returns. To calculate the return for the
average actively managed equity mutual fund in such an environment, simply remember the humble arithmetic of fund
investing: nominal market return, minus investment costs,
minus taxes (reduced to reflect lower capital gains realization), minus an assumed inflation rate of 2.3 percent (the
rate the financial markets are now expecting over the coming decade) equals just 1.4 percent per year (Exhibit 7.2). I
simply didn’t have the courage to make another deduction
to reflect the impact of the counterproductive timing and
adverse fund selection that will likely continue to bedevil the
typical fund shareholder. It may seem absurd to project
such a low return for the typical equity fund investor. But
the numbers are there. Again, feel free to disagree and to
project the future using your own rational expectations.
In summary, the future outlook for stock returns is
far below the long-term real return on U.S. stocks of

W H E N T H E G O O D T I M E S N O LO N G E R RO L L

[73]

EXHIBIT 7.2 Index Fund versus Managed Fund: Projected Profit
on Initial Investment of $10,000, 2006 –2016
10

$9,700

$9,700
$9,300
$8,800

Gross Return
Pre-tax Return

8

After-tax Return

Thousands ($)

Real Return

6
$5,500
$5,100
$4,400

4

2
$1,500

0

Index Fund

Average Fund

Note: Assumes reinvestment of all dividends and capital gains.

about 6.5 percent annually. My projection of a future
real return of 4.7 percent (before costs and taxes) is conservative largely because today’s dividend yield of 2 percent is below the long-term norm of 4.5 percent,
partially offset by my optimistic projection of real earnings growth of 2.5 percent per year versus the 1.5 percent long-term norm. The real long-term rate of per
share earnings growth of U.S. corporations has been no
more than that humble figure. As suggested earlier,
some experts put the figure at only 1 percent on an earnings per share basis.

[74]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

In any event, in a likely future environment of lower
returns on equities, the low-cost, tax-efficient index fund
would provide even higher real returns relative to actively
managed equity funds than the enormous advantage it has
achieved over the past quarter century. Yes, a real 10-year
gain of $5,100 on a $10,000 investment in the index fund
is nothing to write home about. But what’s to be said
about the mere $1,500 profit that could well be what the
typical managed equity fund delivers?

Unless the fund industry begins to change, the
typical actively managed fund appears to be a
singularly unfortunate investment choice.
