
After a directional price move, a candlestick with no real body forms, representing equilibrium between the bulls and bears. The doji represents indecision,
which is not likely to sustain a move. Its appearance should be considered a
warning that a change in the trend’s direction may occur.
Chart Example

Figure 3.21 shows a daily chart of Marchex Inc. (MCHX). On June 7, 2007, a
bullish southern doji formed after a downward move. Price consolidated for
several days using the doji’s low as support (dotted line) before rising back up to
test the May high. On June 26, a bearish northern doji formed after the upward
move. Price consolidated for three more days, using the doji’s high as resistance
(dotted line), before turning back down and filling the gap.
Helpful Hint

A doji resembles a cross.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 43 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.21

43

Northern and southern doji

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Doji Is a Component of Other Patterns

A doji can stand on its own merit, but it also is a component of other candlestick patterns. If a doji appears as part of another formation, it strengthens the
signal. Some examples include the following:
• If the middle bar of a three-candlestick evening star is a doji, the pattern is more ominous. In that case, it would be referred to as an evening
doji star.
• If a doji appears as the second candle in a harami, it will increase
that pattern’s implications and would be referred to as a harami
cross.

Distinctive Doji
A doji may be referred to by a nickname, depending on the length of the shadows and where the opening and closing prices appear along the vertical line that
forms the candlestick’s range.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

44

Page 44 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.22

Long-legged doji (rickshaw man)

Long-Legged Doji

A doji that has very long upper and lower shadows is called a long-legged doji
(Figure 3.22). It may also be referred to as a rickshaw man.
Pattern Psychology The long upper shadow indicates that the stock rallied at
some point during the session when the high was established. The long lower
shadow indicates that the stock also sold off sharply at some point during the
same session when the low was established. By the close of market, neither the
bulls nor the bears could claim victory. According to Steve Nison, in his book
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (New York Institute of Finance, 2001,
p. 162): “These long shadows hint, as the Japanese say, ‘the market has lost its
sense of direction.’”
The long-legged pattern illustrates a volatile struggle between the bulls and
bears during the session. If you view an intraday chart of the day’s price action,
it may look somewhat like a roller coaster ride. Refer back to Figure 2.16 in
Chapter 2 to see an example of how a long-legged candle might look intraday.
Chart Example Figure 3.23 shows a daily chart of Infosys Technologies
(INFY). A high-wave candle formed on March 30, 2007. The low of the highwave candle provided support for the next day’s session and a reversal followed.
The high-wave formation is a long-legged spinning top. Another long-legged
pattern formed on April 13. It had no real body; therefore, it was a long-legged
doji. The high of the long-legged doji provided resistance during the next two
trading sessions and a decline followed.
Gravestone Doji

When the horizontal line representing the opening and closing prices
forms at, or very near, the bottom of the vertical line (the low of the session),

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 45 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.23

45

Long-legged doji compared to a high-wave candle

Source: TeleChart 2007®

with a long upper shadow, it is a distinctive variation called a gravestone doji
(Figure 3.24).
When it forms after a price advance, the gravestone doji resembles a
shooting star. If it forms after a price decline, it resembles an inverted hammer.
The difference is that the shooting star and inverted hammer patterns both
have small real bodies at, or near, the lows of their sessions. The gravestone doji
has no real body because the opening and closing prices are the same, or very
close to the same. The presence of a doji produces a stronger signal. As is usually
the case with a doji, the gravestone pattern is typically stronger at market tops
than at market bottoms.
Pattern Psychology The long upper shadow indicates that during the session
the market rallied strongly. At the time price was at the high of the session,

FIGURE 3.24

Gravestone doji

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

46

Page 46 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

there was no upper shadow. The long white candle had a shaven top (and a
shaven bottom if there is no lower shadow). By the end of the session the bears
were successful in beating the bulls back to the same point where the session
had started. The longer the upper shadow, the stronger the signal. The Japanese
say that the gravestone doji represents the gravestones of those who died
defending their territory.
Chart Example Figure 3.25 shows a daily chart of Vulcan Materials Co.
(VMC). On April 30, 2007, the stock gapped up open after a price advance and
rallied strongly during the session. By the session’s close, price had fallen all
the way back to the low, leaving a very long upper shadow. Such a long upper
shadow after a price advance must be interpreted as a bearish signal. You may
also have noticed that price gapped down the following session, leaving a void
on the chart on both sides of the gravestone doji. When price gaps up and then
down again in this fashion, it forms a bearish Western reversal pattern called an
island top. Gaps are covered in more detail in Part II.
Helpful Hint An easy way to remember this doji’s nickname is by noting that
the long upper shadow looks like the upright part of a gravestone and the
horizontal line looks like the gravestone’s base.

FIGURE 3.25

Gravestone doji formed after a price advance

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 47 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.26

47

Dragonﬂy doji

Dragonﬂy Doji

When the horizontal line representing the opening and closing prices forms at, or
very near, the top of the vertical line (the high of the session), with a long lower
shadow, it is a distinctive variation referred to as a dragonfly doji (Figure 3.26).
The long lower shadow of the dragonfly doji points the opposite direction
of the gravestone doji’s shadow. When it forms at the end of a price advance,
the dragonfly doji resembles a hanging man. If it forms after a price decline, it
resembles a hammer. The difference is that the hanging man and hammer patterns both have small real bodies at, or near, the highs of their sessions. The
dragonfly doji has no real body because the opening and closing prices are the
same, or very close to the same.
Pattern Psychology The long lower shadow indicates that during the session
the market sold off sharply. At the time price was at the low of the session, the
long black candle had a shaven bottom (and shaven top if there was no upper
shadow). By the end of the session, the bulls were successful in pushing price
back up to the same point where the session had started.
Chart Example Figure 3.27 shows a daily chart of Wheeling-Pittsburgh
Corp. (WPSC). On July 27, 2007, a dragonfly doji formed after a sharp
decline back to support at the June low (dotted line). Although doji are
typically better at calling tops than bottoms, in a situation like this where the
doji formed at prior support, it increased the likelihood that price would
change direction after the doji. The very long lower shadow shows the covering
of short positions by bears and the willingness of the bulls to step into long
positions at that support level. Note also in this example that a hammer formed
two days prior to the dragonfly doji; however, it failed to confirm with a higher
close the next session.
Helpful Hint An easy way to remember this doji’s nickname is by noting that
the long lower shadow resembles a dragonfly’s long body. The horizontal line
looks like its outstretched wings, which are closer to the top of its body.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

48

Page 48 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.27

Dragonﬂy doji formed at support

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Dark Cloud Cover and
Piercing Pattern
Both the dark cloud cover and the piercing pattern are reversal patterns that are
formed from two candlesticks of the opposite color. They may be referred to
generically as piercing lines because they both pierce the prior candle’s real body.
Dark Cloud Cover

The dark cloud cover (Figure 3.28) is a strong reversal pattern that forms after a
price advance.
Pattern Description and Criteria The dark cloud cover pattern includes the
following criteria:
• The first candle has a strong bullish real body (at least average length,
and often it is a long white candle).
• The second candle has a bearish real body. Price gaps up open above
the prior session’s high and closes deeply (ideally half-way or more) into
the prior session’s white real body. Because of this price action, the second candle’s black real body will be at least average length, or longer.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 49 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

49

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.28

Dark cloud cover

The deeper the second candle’s black real body
penetrates the prior candle’s white real body, the stronger
the signal. If it engulfs the prior candle’s entire real body,
it is not a dark cloud cover pattern; it would be a bearish
engulfing pattern.
If the second candle’s bearish real body does not
close at least halfway into the prior candle’s bullish real
body, it may be best to wait for additional downside confirmation before entering a short position based strictly
on the dark cloud cover’s signal. Confirmation comes
when price trades below the dark cloud cover day during
the following session, and even better if it closes below it.
It is not unusual to see heavy volume accompany
this reversal pattern. If so, and if this pattern forms at a
major market top, it is a climax move called a blow-off top.

blow-off
top
A sharp
upward thrust
in an uptrend
is followed by
aggressive
selling. The
move is
accompanied
by heavy
volume and
often results in
a change in the
direction of the
trend.

Pattern Psychology The trend is up and the formation
of a strong white candle shows the dominance of the
bulls. The market gaps up open during the following
session with the bulls still in control. Then price turns
down and a sharp sell-off occurs. In spite of the higher open, by the end of the
session the bears have completely taken control away from the bulls and closed
the session well below the prior session’s close.
The pattern clearly demonstrates an abrupt reversal in market sentiment.
It is a striking reversal pattern and will be noticed by many traders.
Chart Example Figure 3.29 shows a daily chart of Knightsbridge Tankers
(VLCCF). After trending up for several weeks, price gapped up open to a new

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

50

Page 50 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.29 Bearish dark cloud cover pattern was accompanied
by heavy volume
Source: TeleChart 2007®

high on May 22, 2007 (circled). A sell-off began, and by the close of the session
nearly all of the gains from the prior session’s strong bullish candle had been
wiped out. Volume was heavy leading up to the reversal signal, as well as on
both days of the dark cloud formation suggesting a climax top. Price continued
its decline in the following days.
Acceptable Variation Although it sends a stronger signal if the second candle
gaps up open above the prior candle’s high, it is acceptable if price only gaps up
open above the prior candle’s close (Figure 3.30). Because both candlestick lines
of this pattern should have fairly long real bodies, the acceptable variation
would include the following criteria:
• The first candle has a strong bullish real body and also has an upper
shadow.
• The second candle gaps up open, not above the high of the prior session’s upper shadow, but above the prior session’s close. In other words,
it opens within the prior candle’s upper shadow.
• The second candle’s black real body closes well into the prior candle’s
white real body.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 51 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.30

51

Dark cloud cover (variation)

Chart Example (Variation) Figure 3.31 shows a daily chart of Imperial Oil
Ltd. (IMO). On May 22, 2007, a strong bullish candle formed with a long
upper shadow (circled). The next session gapped up open above the prior
candle’s close but within its upper shadow. Price reversed direction and closed
far into the prior candle’s bullish real body. Heavy volume accompanied the
bearish reversal formation. Price consolidated after the climax move.

FIGURE 3.31 A variation of the bearish dark cloud cover pattern.
Price opened above the prior bar’s close rather than above its high
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

52

Page 52 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Helpful Hint Think of this pattern as an ominous black storm cloud rolling
in over a white cloud.
Piercing Pattern

The piercing pattern (Figure 3.32) is a strong reversal pattern that forms after a
price decline. It is the bullish counterpart of the dark cloud cover pattern.
Pattern Description and Criteria The piercing pattern includes the following
criteria:
• The first candle has a strong bearish real body (at least average length,
and often it is a long black candle).
• The second candle has a bullish real body. Price gaps down open below
the prior session’s low and closes deeply (more than half-way) into the
prior candle’s black real body. Because of this price action, the second
candle’s white real body will be at least average length, or longer.
The deeper the second candle’s white real body penetrates the prior candle’s black real body, the more likely a reversal will occur. If it engulfs the prior
candle’s entire real body it is not a piercing pattern; it would be a bullish engulfing pattern.
If the second candle’s bullish real body does not close at least halfway into
the prior candle’s bearish real body, it may be best to wait for additional confirmation before entering a long position based strictly on the piercing pattern’s
signal. Confirmation comes when price trades above the piercing candle during
the following session, and even better if it closes above it.

FIGURE 3.32

Piercing pattern

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 53 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

53

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

It is not unusual to see heavy volume accompany
this reversal pattern. If so, it may point to a selling
climax.
Pattern Psychology The trend is down and the
formation of a strong bearish candle further supports
the dominance of the bears. The market gaps down
open during the following session with the bears still
in control. Then price turns up, and a strong rally
ensues. By the end of the session, the bulls have been
successful at closing price deeply into the prior black
candle’s real body.
One look at this pattern and it is obvious that there
was an abrupt reversal in market sentiment. A weak
(bearish) open is reversed, and price closes well above the
prior day’s close. The striking contrast is very noticeable
on the chart and will be seen by many traders.

selling
climax
A sharp sell-off
in a downtrend
is followed by
aggressive
buying. The
move is
accompanied
by heavy
volume and
often results in
a change in the
direction of the
trend.

Chart Example Figure 3.33 shows a daily chart of Talisman Energy Inc.
(TLM). After a fast decline, price gapped down open on June 27, 2007, below
the prior session’s low (circled). Price reversed direction intraday and by the end

FIGURE 3.33

Bullish piercing pattern formed at support

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

54

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 54 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

of the session closed well into the prior candle’s long black real body. This
pattern had a higher chance of changing the trend direction because it formed
at support at the May low (dotted line).
Acceptable Variation Although it provides a stronger signal if price gaps
down open below the prior session’s low, it is acceptable if price only gaps down
open below the prior session’s close (Figure 3.34). Because both candlestick
lines of this pattern should have fairly long real bodies, the acceptable variation
would include the following criteria:
• The first candle has a strong bearish real body and also has a lower shadow.
• The second candle gaps down open, not below the low of the prior session’s lower shadow, but below the prior session’s close. In other words,
it opens within the prior candle’s lower shadow.
• The second candle’s white real body closes at least halfway into the
prior candle’s black real body.
Chart Example (Variation) Figure 3.35 shows a daily chart of Intercontinental
Exchange Inc. (ICE). After a fast decline from July 17–25, 2007, price gapped
down open on July 26 (circled), to support (dotted line). Price did not gap open
below the prior candle’s low, but below its close and within its lower shadow. Price
reversed direction intraday and closed well into the prior candle’s bearish real
body. This example had even more support below than that shown in Figure
3.33. Many traders will observe such strong support, which increases the
likelihood that this pattern will follow through. This example shows how an
Eastern signal (reversal pattern) can converge with a Western technical event
(support) to increase the probability that a change in price direction will occur.
Support and resistance will be discussed in more detail in Part II.

FIGURE 3.34

Piercing pattern (variation)

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 55 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

55

FIGURE 3.35 Variation of the piercing pattern formed at prior
support. Price opened below the prior bar’s close rather than below its low
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Engulﬁng Patterns
An engulfing pattern is a strong reversal signal that includes two candlestick
lines of opposite color. The pattern forms after a directional price move, either
up (bearish pattern) or down (bullish pattern). The trend that precedes the pattern may be short or longer term.
Pattern Description and Criteria

Engulfing patterns include the following criteria:
• The color of the first candle’s real body should correspond to the direction of the current trend: white in an uptrend or black in a downtrend.
• The second candle has a longer real body and is the opposite color of
the prior candle.
• The real body of the second candle must completely engulf (surround)
the real body of the first candle. It is not necessary that the second candle
envelop the prior candle’s upper and lower shadows, just the real body.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

56

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 56 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Engulfing patterns are even stronger if one or more of the following factors are present:
• The engulfing candle forms after a long or steep trend.
• The real body of the first candle is very small, for example, a spinning
top or even a doji, and is engulfed by a long real body.
• The engulfing candle has a long real body with little or no upper and
lower shadows (shaven, or nearly so).
• The engulfing session is accompanied by heavy volume.
The engulfing pattern exemplifies an abrupt turnaround in investor psychology. By the time the pattern is confirmed by the close of the engulfing session, price may have made a fairly significant move in the new direction.
Bearish Engulﬁng Pattern

A bearish engulfing pattern forms after a price advance. The first candle has a
bullish real body. The second candle has a longer bearish real body that completely surrounds the prior candle’s white real body (Figure 3.36).
You will observe some bearish engulfing patterns where the close of the
first session is the same, or nearly the same, as the open of the second session
(Figure 3.37 left); or the open of the first session is the same, or near, the close
of the second session (Figure 3.37 right). It is acceptable if the prices match at
either end, but not at both ends. The second candle’s real body should be noticeably longer than the first candle’s. If the prices were to match at both ends,
the real bodies would be the same size, which would not meet the engulfing
pattern criteria (though it would still show an abrupt shift in market sentiment). The same scenarios shown in Figure 3.37 apply to the bullish engulfing
pattern discussed later in this chapter except that the bullish pattern occurs after
a downtrend and the colors are reversed (black followed by white).

FIGURE 3.36

Bearish engulﬁng pattern

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 57 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.37

57

Acceptable bearish engulﬁng patterns

Pattern Psychology In a rising market, price opens in the direction of the
trend but then makes an abrupt turnaround. The strong bearish engulfing
session sends a clear message that the bears have overtaken the bulls. The bearish
engulfing pattern is a prominent formation and will be noticed by many traders.
The bearish engulfing pattern is similar to the dark cloud cover pattern
except that, rather than piercing deeply into the prior candle’s white real body,
it completely envelops it. In addition, the first candle’s real body need not be at
least average length or longer, as required by the dark cloud cover pattern. The
bearish engulfing pattern is generally a stronger reversal signal than the dark
cloud cover pattern.
Chart Example Figure 3.38 shows a daily chart of Bolt Technology Corp.
(BTJ). A bearish engulfing pattern formed on July 9, 2007. This engulfing
pattern was made stronger because: it followed a sharp upward move; the
engulfing candle was significantly longer than the prior candle; and it was
accompanied by heavy volume. Price declined during the session following the
engulfing day, and then rallied back up from July 11 to 13 and formed a dark
cloud cover pattern at resistance provided by the top of the bearish engulfing
pattern. That test of resistance also set up a small bearish Western double top
pattern, which was confirmed on July 25 when the stock broke down through
support at the July 10 swing low (dotted line). Price gapped down the next day,
then curled back up for three days and tested the prior support (dotted line) as
resistance before declining further.
