the observation is from the mean. We do this by subtracting the mean of 20 from the value of the
observation of 24, leaving us a value of 4. Next, we divide the standard deviation into our number, which gives us 0.8 (4/5). This tells us that the observation is 0.8 standard deviations from the
mean.
The Chi-Square distribution is based on the sums of standard normal variables. If it is based
on the sum of two standard normal variables, we say that it has two degrees of freedom. If it is
based on the sum of three, it has three degrees of freedom. As the number of degrees of freedom
increases, the distribution begins to approach the shape of a normal distribution. The Chi-squared
distribution primarily is used for goodness-of-fit tests. The term “test statistic” refers to a value
computed from a sample that is used to test a particular hypothesis. A hypothesis could be something like: “Are all the colors of M&M candies in a bag equally likely to occur?” Many test statistics are known to follow a Chi-Square distribution, so this distribution has many applications.

Download at www.wowebook.com

593

Appendix A Basic Statistics

The t distribution or Student’s t (Student was a pen name used by the person who first
worked out its applications) is used often in statistics. The t distribution applies when the true
standard deviation is unknown (which is most of the time) and is especially important for small
samples. The t distribution converges to the normal distribution as the number of degrees of freedom (the sample size minus 1) increases. It closely approximates a normal distribution by 30
degrees of freedom. The t distribution is symmetric, similar in shape to the normal distribution
but with wider tails. It commonly is used to test the statistical significance of regression coefficients (such as the intercept and slope). An application of the t statistic is shown later.
The last major commonly used distribution is the F distribution. The F distribution is based
on the ratio of two variables, each of which follows a Chi-Square distribution. It primarily is used
to test whether samples have the same variance. It is used in regression as an overall measure of
goodness-of-fit because it is the ratio of explained variation to unexplained variation.
Now let us see how some of these things come together in looking at some output from a
linear regression. Let us use PEP’s monthly returns as the Y variable and the S&P 500 monthly
returns as the X variable over the 2000–2004 period. We can use Excel to run the regression.
Table A.1 displays the output, with the values of primary importance shaded in gray.
TABLE A.1

Excel Regression Output for PEP Monthly Returns from 2000 to 2004

Summary Output

Regression Statistics
Multiple R
R-Square
Adjusted R-Square
Standard Error
Observations

0.2733
0.0747
0.0588
0.0550
60

ANOVA

df

SS

MS

F

Significance F

Regression
Residual

1
58

0.0142
0.1753

0.0142
0.0030

4.6828

0.0346

Total

59

0.190

Coefficients
Intercept

Standard
Error
t Stat

P-Value

Lower 95%

Upper 95%

Lower 95.0%

Upper 95.0%

0.0096

0.0071

1.3540

0.1810

–0.0046

0.0238

–0.0046

0.0238

X Variable 1 0.3321

0.1535

2.1640

0.0346

0.0249

0.6394

0.0249

0.6394

Download at www.wowebook.com

594

Part IX Appendices

Let us start with the intercept and slope of the regression. The intercept, which is clearly
labeled, is 0.0096. The slope is labeled X Variable 1 under Coefficients and has a value of
0.3321. The slope is approximately the beta of the stock, which is explained later. Technically,
monthly returns on the risk-free asset (T-bills or T-bonds might be used) should have been subtracted from each variable, but we are trying to keep things simple. As a practical matter, in many
cases it won’t matter much if we don’t subtract risk-free asset returns. The beta, a measure of
risk, for an average stock is 1. We see that PEP’s beta is less than that of an average stock. We
also see the r-squared value, which is labeled R-Square of 0.0747. This means that our regression
explains 7.47% of the variation in PEP’s returns over this period. Below the slope value of
0.3321, we see the t statistic value of 2.1640. As a rule of thumb, t values over 2 are statistically
significant, so this exceeds that hurdle. The item labeled P-Value shows the probability that we
would observe the given value strictly by chance alone. The P-value of the slope t value is
0.0346, which says that the probability that this t value happened purely by chance was only
3.46%. In most academic research, P-values less than 5% (or sometimes 1%) are considered statistically significant. Analyzing this information is called a t test. Finally, let us consider the F
value of 4.6828. This has a significance value of 0.0346, the same as the t value. It essentially
tells you the same information as the t in this case. Unless you are performing a multiple regression, the P-value of the t of the slope and the significance value of the F statistic will be the same.
The other numbers on the output have their uses, which you can learn from a standard statistics
textbook.
What do the results tell us? The results show that our regression equation does seem to
explain part of the variation in PEP’s returns. The results are significant from a statistical point of
view. However, we are only explaining 7.47% of the variation in PEP’s returns. Whether this is
useful from a practical point of view depends on other factors.

MODERN PORTFOLIO THEORY
We all learned portfolio theory as children: Don’t put all your eggs in one basket! However, MPT
began in 1952 with the work of Harry Markowitz. He worked out many mathematical relationships between groups of stocks, or portfolios. Some of the key results are as follows:
• The mean return of a portfolio is a simple weighted average of the mean returns of the
individual stocks.
• The standard deviation (of returns) of a portfolio is a quadratic function.
• The standard deviation of a portfolio is almost always less than a simple weighted
average of the individual stock standard deviations.
• Even with weak positive correlation, there are significant benefits to diversification.
• If an investor is only concerned with the mean return and standard deviation of a portfolio, it is possible logically to eliminate many portfolios from consideration.
• For large portfolios, the variance of each stock contributes little to the overall portfolio
variance. However, the covariance of each stock’s returns with the returns of all the
other stocks is quite important.

Download at www.wowebook.com

595

Appendix A Basic Statistics

We will flesh out these points as we go along.
Consider combinations (or portfolios) of two stocks, X and Y. Assume that we have estimates of the expected return (mean) and standard deviation of returns for each stock. We can calculate the expected return of a portfolio of X and Y by taking a simple weighted average of the
individual expected returns. Thus, denoting the expected return on the portfolio as Rp, we have
the following:
Rp

wx R x

wy Ry

How about the standard deviation of a portfolio of X and Y? That is more complicated. The
formula involves a squared term (therefore, it is a quadratic equation) and looks like this:
p

wx

x

wy

y

wx wy

x

r

y xy

The rxy term in this equation is the correlation between stock X and stock Y. If this value
was equal to 1 (perfect correlation), this equation would simplify to the following:

However, perfect correlation is virtually impossible in the real world. With rxy < 1, the
standard deviation of the portfolio is always less than a simple weighted average of the two individual standard deviations. This means that there are significant benefits to diversification in
terms of risk reduction.
We can see how portfolios look in what is called risk-return space in Figure A.4. This figure is based on annualized monthly returns for PEP and KO over the 2000–2004 period. Note the
curved line, which shows the quadratic nature of the standard deviation relationship. Also, note
that a portfolio consisting of 80% KO and 20% PEP is a better choice than KO by itself. Why do
we say this? We say it because points that are to the northwest are preferable because they offer
more return for less risk. The correlation of returns between the two stocks was 0.489 over this
period. Therefore, we see that there are significant benefits to diversification, even if the two
stocks have weak positive correlation.
How would the curve change if the correlation was greater? The line between the two
ends, representing 100% of one of the stocks, would become straighter. If the correlation was
perfect (+1), it would be a completely straight line. How would the curve change if the correlation was smaller? It would bend more toward the vertical axis. In the extreme case of perfect
negative correlation (–1), there would actually be one portfolio possibility that would touch the
vertical axis with a standard deviation of 0. However, the most common case, as stated earlier, is
correlation between 0.2 and 0.5. Therefore, the curve in Figure A.4 is typical in terms of its general shape.
When we extend our calculations to more than two stocks, the expected return is still a
simple weighted average of the individual returns, while the standard deviation has terms containing the variance of each stock plus cross-terms (similar to 2wxwy␴x␴yrxy). When we graph
possible portfolio combinations for three stocks, we get a picture like the one in Figure A.5.

Download at www.wowebook.com

596

Part IX Appendices

18.000%
100% PEP
16.000%
PEP
14.000%
12.000%

Return

PEP
10.000%
8.000%
100% KO
6.000%
4.000%
2.000%
0.000%

Risk (Standard Deviation)

FIGURE A.4 Two-stock portfolio return versus standard deviation
16%

Q

14%

Stock 3
12%

Return

10%

M
8%
Stock 2
6%

P

Stock 1

4%
Risk-free rate
2%

0%

Standard Deviation

FIGURE A.5 Three stock portfolios return and standard deviation

Some aspects of Figure A.5 we discuss later. For now, let us focus on the points of possible portfolios using stocks 1, 2, and 3. This figure was drawn using 1,000 different possible portfolios. If we extended the number of points, the blank spots gradually would be filled in.
Therefore, instead of a curved line of possible portfolios, we have a curved region.

Download at www.wowebook.com

597

Appendix A Basic Statistics

If we were to extend our set of possible stocks to four, the variance of the portfolio would
be calculated by adding up all the terms in the following matrix and dividing by 3 (see Figure
A.6).
The terms along the diagonal, shown inside the smaller boxes in Figure A.6, are the variances of each of the four stocks. The off-diagonal terms are covariance terms. Because the
covariance of stock 1 with stock 2 is the same as the covariance between stock 2 and stock 1, the
matrix is actually symmetric around the diagonal. Notice that there are four variance terms and
12 covariance terms. The covariances are roughly three times (12 to 4) as important in the portfolio variance calculation. As the number of stocks under consideration grows, the individual
variance terms become less and less important. For example, consider adding a fifth stock. The
matrix would expand to 25 cells. The variance of stock 5 would be one of the 25 cells. However,
there would be eight additional covariance terms added to the matrix, representing stock 5’s
covariances with the other four stocks. For large portfolios, the variance of each stock is relatively unimportant; what is important is how each stock co-varies with the rest of the stocks in
the portfolio. This idea hints at what is called the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), to be
discussed shortly.

σ 12

σ 12

σ 13

σ 14

σ 21

σ 22

σ 23

σ 24

σ 31

σ 32

σ 32

σ 34

σ 41

σ 42

σ 43

σ 42

FIGURE A.6 Variances of four stocks

Let us return to Figure A.5. Which portfolio would we actually want to hold? Before we
answer that question, we need to look at another concept. Consider the diagram in Figure A.7
that shows estimates of the mean and standard deviation for the returns on five stocks. Which
investment(s) is/are the most attractive? To begin, we assume that investors will not bear more
risk without the likelihood of more return. In investments jargon, we are assuming that investors
are risk-averse. With this assumption, it becomes clear that we would prefer points to the northwest on the diagram. Stock A is preferable to Stock B because it has higher return for the same
risk. The same argument can be made concerning C and D. We can also argue that A is preferable
to C because it has less risk for the same return. In portfolio theory-speak, we say that A dominates B, B dominates C, and A dominates C. That leaves us with A and E. There is no clear way
to say which one an investor would prefer. It depends on his/her tolerance for bearing risk. A
more aggressive investor would opt for E, while a less aggressive investor would opt for A. The
fact that A and E dominate the others means that they form what is called the efficient set.

Download at www.wowebook.com

598

Part IX Appendices

We can extend the efficient set concept to what is called the efficient frontier. Let us return
to Figure A.5 once again, focusing on some additional aspects of it. Portfolios along the upper
edge of the curve from P to Q (which is the point at stock three) represent the efficient frontier.
These portfolios have either the highest return for any given value of standard deviation, or the
lowest standard deviation for any given level of return. These are the portfolios that would be of
most interest to rational investors. The particular portfolio along P–Q that an investor would
choose would depend on his/her risk tolerance. We are assuming that investors only care about
two things: expected return and standard deviation. This perspective is called a mean-variance
framework.
30
E
25

Return (%)

20
A

C

B

D

15

10

5

0

Standard Deviation (%)

FIGURE A.7 Efficient set

Portfolio theory was all fine and good, but there were still two important hurdles in applying the equations. First, Markowitz did not specify how to get the inputs. In other words, he
offered no prescribed method for coming up with the estimates of expected return and standard
deviation. Of course, one could use historical data to come up with estimates, but how much data
would be needed? Sixty months of monthly returns? Fifty-two weeks of daily returns? There was
no clear answer. Second, as the portfolio size increased, the number of inputs became exponentially large. For a 100-stock portfolio, an investor would need 100 expected returns, 100 standard
deviations, and 4,950 correlation coefficients. With today’s computing power, it would not be
difficult to calculate these inputs from a given sample of historical data, but in the early 1960s,
this was a formidable computing task.
By 1964, a computationally easier method, with some added theory, had been developed.
William Sharpe has received most of the credit for this. The theory became known as the Capital
Asset Pricing Model, or CAPM. This theory was based on several simplifying assumptions, such as
no transactions costs, no taxes, and other assumptions. However, the most important assumption was
that of homogeneous expectations. This means that all investors view the inputs to portfolio theory

Download at www.wowebook.com

Appendix A Basic Statistics

599

in the same manner, and that they agree on the expected returns and standard deviations of all stocks
and their correlations (or covariances). With this assumption, all investors identify the same efficient
frontier. Next, we add the assumption that a risk-free asset (like U.S. Treasury bills) exists.
Returning (for the last time) to Figure A.5, consider the line that starts at the risk-free rate
and is just tangent to the efficient frontier. The point of tangency is labeled as portfolio M. The
question “which portfolio should I hold?” now becomes “what combination of the risk-free asset
and portfolio M do I want to own?” That is true because combinations of the risk-free asset and
portfolio M lie along the line from the risk-free rate to portfolio M and beyond. Portfolios on this
line dominate (in portfolio theory-speak) all those that lie below. This means that this line has now
become the efficient frontier. Portfolio M has now taken on some special significance. Every
investor wants to hold the risky portfolio. This means that all investors own a chunk of M, which
is a portfolio consisting of all stocks (because every stock must be held by someone, everyone has
to hold some of every stock). Investors willing to bear more risk might put all of their money in M.
Investors who are more cautious might put only 30% of their money in M and 70% in the risk-free
asset (T-bills). Either way, both hold the stocks in M in the same proportions.
From these ideas, it can be shown (we will not go through a tedious derivation) that the
expected return ri on any stock i is given by the following equation, which we will call the
CAPM equation:

This means that β is the product of the correlation coefficient between the stock and the
market as a whole times the standard deviation of the stock relative to that of the market. So, if
the stock’s correlation with the market is 0.4 and its standard deviation is three times that of the
market, then its β is 1.2 (0.4 ⫻ 3).
For many years, investors had thought about expected return like this:

For example, the expected return on a corporate bond would be the yield on a U.S. Treasury
bond, a risk-free asset (risk-free in terms of default risk) of the same maturity, plus a premium for
default risk, plus possibly a premium for liquidity risk. To calculate the expected return on the stock
of that same company, an extra risk premium would be added for the fact that common stockholders have a residual claim and, thus, common stock has higher risk than the company’s bonds.
Therefore, the CAPM equation has the same basic structure that people had been using for
many years. The difference is that the risk premium is quantifiable. Note that all of the risk
comes about through the relationship between the stock and the market. This is risk that cannot
be diversified away, referred to as nondiversifiable risk. It is also called systematic risk. Beta is
a measure of systematic or systemwide risk. All companies have some similar risk because they
operate under the same laws, the same tax structure, the same political leadership, the same monetary policy, and so on. However, these things will affect different stocks differently. Companies
will also have higher systematic risk, or betas, if they have more debt or have a cost structure
with higher fixed costs (as opposed to variable costs).
Does the CAPM work? Yes and no. There have been many debates about how to test the
CAPM. The evidence in support of the CAPM is mixed. Individual stock betas tend to be highly

Download at www.wowebook.com

600

Part IX Appendices

unstable. For example, remember that we calculated the beta for PEP over the 1995–1999 period
using monthly returns. The beta we got was 1.466. When we did the same calculation over the
2000–2004 period, we got 0.332. (Remember that we performed this calculation in the earlier
discussion about regression.) It is possible that if we did some in-depth analysis of PEP over this
period, we could rationalize the difference. However, sometimes company betas seem to change
from one period to another without an obvious reason. However, portfolio betas tend to be more
stable. If a particular mutual fund has a beta of 1.18 and the stock market is generally up over a
certain period, the return on that mutual fund would most likely exceed that of the S&P 500. If
the market were down, the fund’s performance would probably be worse than that of the market.
In spite of the various problems with betas, they are heavily quoted and used. This is partly
because there is no good alternative.
What is the beta for the market as a whole? Because the covariance of an asset with itself
is the same as the asset’s variance, and the correlation of any asset with itself is 1, the expression
for β, rim mi simplifies to 1. In practice, the S&P 500 is often used to represent the market portfolio. A stock with a beta greater than 1 is an above-average risk stock. If the stock’s beta is less
than 1, its risk is below average.

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT
Performance measurement can refer to calculations done at what we will call the microlevel or at
what we call the macrolevel. At the microlevel, in Chapter 22, “System Design and Testing,” we
discussed various measures for assessing the performance of a particular trading strategy.
Now we need to look at the macrolevel. We address things at the macrolevel by posing the
question, “How do we tell whether an investor’s overall investment performance has been good
or bad?” This is of particular interest to people who are hiring someone else to manage their
money, such as a mutual fund portfolio manager. We want to determine whether the performance
is adequate given the risk.
One simple method of assessing performance is to measure reward per unit of risk.
Because we can earn the risk-free return by investing in a risk-free asset, like Treasury bills, it
makes sense to focus on the reward in excess of the risk-free return per unit of risk. Therefore, we
simply subtract the risk-free return from the average return from the investment and divide by the
standard deviation of the returns over the period of measurement. If fund ABC earned an average
return of 12% over the period with a standard deviation of 20%, while the risk-free return was
4%, our performance measure would be 0.4 (calculated as (12 – 4) / 20)). This measure is called
the Sharpe performance measure or Sharpe ratio, because it was first suggested by William
Sharpe.
Putting the same idea in CAPM terms, a logical measure is excess return per unit of beta,
which is known as the Treynor measure of performance. Suppose that in the previous example,
the beta of fund ABC was 1.1. This would lead to a Treynor measure of 7.27. (First subtract 4%
from 12%, yielding 8%; then divide 1.1 into 8%.)
Another measure related to beta is what is called Jensen’s alpha. Let us assume that we are
estimating the market risk premium, which is Rm – Rf, as 6%. Let us use the same numbers for
fund ABC that we used before. With these estimates, we would estimate the fund’s expected
return as 10.6% (4% + 1.1 × 6%). We would next subtract the 10.6% from the actual return of
12% to get 1.4%, which would be the fund’s alpha. Therefore, alpha is a measure of excess
