A
Complete
Guide to
Technical
Trading
Tactics
How to Profit Using Pivot
Points, Candlesticks &
Other Indicators

JOHN L. PERSON

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

A
Complete
Guide to
Technical
Trading
Tactics

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing
print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional
and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived the
market’s ever-changing temperament and have prospered—some by reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice trader,
professional, or somewhere in-between, these books will provide the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

A
Complete
Guide to
Technical
Trading
Tactics
How to Profit Using Pivot
Points, Candlesticks &
Other Indicators

JOHN L. PERSON

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2004 by John L. Person. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax
201-748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used
their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book
and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not
be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support,
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at 800-762-2974,
outside the United States at 317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Person, John L.
A complete guide to technical trading tactics : how to profit using pivot
points, candlesticks & other indicators / John L. Person
p. cm.
“Published simultaneously in Canada.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-471-58455-X (cloth)
1. Stocks—Charts, diagrams, etc. 2. Investment analysis. 3. Futures.
4. Options (Finance) I. Title.
HG4638 .P47 2004
332.63′2042—dc22
2003026687
Printed in the United States of America
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Contents

Preface

ix

Acknowledgments

xv

CHAPTER 1

Introduction to Futures and Options:
Understanding the Mechanics

1

How the markets work, the elevator analogy, product for the times, important
terminology such as margin, contract specifications, and leverage

CHAPTER 2

Fundamentals:
The Market Driver

19

Supply and demand issues, economic growth and productivity effects, major economic reports and their in role in market prices

CHAPTER 3

Technical Analysis:
The Art of Charts

33

Western-style bar charts and key reversals, point-and-figure charts that focus only
on price, market profiling, price and time analysis

CHAPTER 4

Candle Charts:
Lighting the Path

43

Enlightening charting technique and its colorfully named patterns—hammers,
stars, spinning tops, dojis, hanging man, and others—powerful reversal patterns,
reliable continuation patterns, key examples in the dollar and bonds

v

vi
CHAPTER 5

CONTENTS

Chart Analysis:
Volume, Open Interest, Price Patterns

67

Volume and open interest rules for traders, M tops and W bottoms, trend lines,
measuring patterns, the head-and-shoulders, triangles, pennants and flags, diamonds, wedges, funnels, gaps, islands, rounded bottoms, oops signals, opening
range breakouts

CHAPTER 6

Pivot Point Analysis:
A Powerful Weapon

93

The pivot point formula for target trading, calculating support and resistance levels, importance of multiple verification from several sources, the P3T trading technique, weekly and monthly charts and numbers, risk management techniques

CHAPTER 7

Day-Trading, Swing Trading:
Acting on Analysis

113

Trading to bounce off target numbers, calling tops and bottoms, weekly chart
magnets, harami cross and other candle clues to market reversals, pivot points
save the day, lining up the stars, the verify-verify-verify approach

CHAPTER 8

Technical Indicators:
Confirming Evidence

135

Moving averages and trends, simple rules with averages, tweaking and visualizing
MACD, stochastics, false signals, Gann’s key numbers, Fibonacci ratios and projections, time counts for cycles, Elliott wave and its clues

CHAPTER 9

Market Sentiment:
What Traders Are Thinking

161

Getting a market consensus from contrary opinion, Commitments of Traders
reports, margin rate changes, Market Vane Bullish Consensus report, put-to-call
ratios, volatility index (VIX), when the boat is tipping over, media effect

CHAPTER 10 Order Placement:
Executing the Plan

171

Importance of getting an order right, online platform concerns, impact of market
conditions on orders, 14 top order entry selections you need to know, orders in
after-hours trading, spreading concepts

vii

Contents

CHAPTER 11 The Mental Game:
Inside the Trader

189

Conquering fear, learning discipline, improving confidence, suggestions for success, I’ll-think-about-it syndrome, the paper trader, fear and greed factors, becoming a specialist, setting up an investment diary, setting a positive mind frame,
dealing with adrenaline, establishing goals, positive affirmations, stress relief
techniques, rewarding success to build success

CHAPTER 12 The Tactical Trader:
Tips and Techniques That Work

203

Pyramiding approaches, scale trading, stop reversals, breakouts, momentum trading, the Friday 10:30 a.m. rule, stop placement near a magnet, trading multiple
contracts

CHAPTER 13 Options:
A Primer

217

What options are and how to use them with futures, simple puts and calls,
options premiums, the Greeks, comparison shopping, strangles and straddles,
eight top option spreads, delta neutral techniques

CHAPTER 14 Closing Bell:
My Top 10 List

235

What the experts suggest, top 10 trading thoughts, measuring success

Glossary

241

Bibliography

253

Index

255

Preface

he purpose of this book is to share some of the tips, techniques, and
observations that have worked for me and other highly successful
traders. After nearly 23 years as a registered broker in the futures and
options field, I have come to know quite a few successful traders and have
personally made many successful trades. I have also experienced my share
of disasters and have known traders and investors who were doomed for
permanent failure. Therefore, I am writing this book to help the new individual investor understand the mechanics of the markets and to serve as a
refresher for the seasoned veteran trader.
Most of the trade examples demonstrated in this book were direct trade
recommendations from either The Bottom Line Financial and Futures
Weekly Newsletter or those that appeared in the daily Dow report provided
through the Chicago Board of Trade web site and at www.nationalfutures
.com. Rather than demonstrating just one methodology of trading tactics
using pivot point analysis, I wanted to show through various techniques how
you can implement these calculations with other methods and indicators.
Much of what I have learned over the course of 23 years in the industry did
come from hard work and, I must admit, being around the right people at the
right time. I do not want you to abandon your knowledge of traditional technical analysis techniques. I would just like you to be open to integrating the
numbers to help you confirm, validate, and identify entry and exit points
when trading.
I also want to relay the message that mathematically calculated support
and resistance numbers, or pivot points, work on different markets and
should be derived from different time frames—not only from a daily basis,
but also from a weekly and monthly time frame.
In addition, as most of the readers either know or will find out, trading
is also a combination of strong emotional and personal characteristics.
Through my experience and observations, I want to share and explain what

T

ix

x

PREFACE

works and what does not but, more important, to disclose why things go
wrong when they do for those who failed. I believe it is important to take an
inventory, so to speak, when things go right to capitalize on that experience
by examining what you did so the results can be repeated. It is just as important to examine what went wrong so you can learn from the experience. By sharing with you the experiences and techniques that I and other
professional traders have learned, the hope is that you will benefit and become a more profitable trader.
I firmly believe that traders from all different levels of experience will
benefit from the information contained in this book, whether it is actually
gaining a new understanding or a new technique or refreshing, reviewing,
or reviving your memory about tactics, strategies, or trading techniques
that an advanced trader may have forgotten.
My professional history may explain my qualifications for writing this
book. I started in this business as a runner on the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in 1979. To illustrate a reference point in time, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average was near the 900 level. The S&P 500 Index futures
contract did not even exist back then. I became a registered commodity
broker in 1982 and worked up through the ranks in the industry as I was
studying economics at Loyola University. The head of the research department at the firm where I worked was George C. Lane. He, of course, is
credited with developing the oscillator system known as stochastics. He
was the first boss who tutored me in the art of technical analysis. Little did
I know at that time that a true master of technical analysis was going to be
responsible for helping to create the intrigue, financial rewards, and passion for the futures industry that I have had throughout all these years.
Granted, there were other individuals who had an influence on my career. Jack F., an old member of the Chicago Board of Trade, helped me understand the importance of moving averages and the aspect of long-term
charts. Back in 1985 and 1986 in what I call the great bond market boom, he
was instrumental in helping me understand how to ride a strong trending
market. In 1986, I captured what I call a winning tidal wave bull market run
that remains legendary to this day for those who were on board with me, as
well as friends who invested and knew me well.
Another broker at a firm where I worked taught me this strange and
unique method of plotting unconventional trend lines to predict price and
time coordination. Harry A. was his name and this guy would tell you on a
Monday that at 11:40 a.m. Wednesday the high in bonds would be 7812⁄32.
Come Wednesday at 11:45 a.m. or so, the high was 7811⁄32, and I would watch
the price take a disastrous plummet. His method, as I later found out, was
based on Drummond geometry.

Preface

xi

I had the privilege to work with a former chairman of the Chicago
Board of Trade, Bill Mallers Sr., who was always looking for a new system.
His thirst for achievement and passion for the markets amazed me. Another
man in the office who worked for Bill Sr. was a fairly quiet, yet confident,
guy. He always had a cigar stub in his mouth—never did smoke but just
chewed on them. He sat near me and time after time would overhear my
recommendations to clients, in particular my points of support and resistance. Almost on a daily basis he had the same target numbers, usually
within a point or tick of mine. That is when we discovered we were doing
the same thing. The amazing thing was he claimed to be a direct student of
Charles Drummond.
I was also fortunate to have been introduced to another fascinating
man, Dan Gramza, an instructor for several futures exchanges and firms
worldwide. His understanding of the market and the relationship between
time, price, and volume is incredible. His teaching also included a wonderful tutoring in candle charting. When I discovered that, he humbly mentioned that he knew Steve Nison and “helped” write some of Steve’s first
book. When I got home, I immediately searched for the book in the storage
box and, sure enough, there it was in the acknowledgment section on page
IV. Not only was Dan mentioned in one of the best books on the basics of
candle charting, in my opinion, he helped write chapter 8 in Steve’s book.
My experience has ranged from learning stochastics from the creator
of the indicator, moving averages from a famous floor trader and options
from my own experience, Drummond geometry from two different fascinating people at two different times in my career, pivot point analysis, and
then candle charting techniques from what I would call a master.
In March 2003 I started hosting a radio program titled, The Personal Investment Hour. The format was to invite expert traders and analysts to
share with listeners who they were and what they do to trade successfully.
My guests have included John Murphy, Martin Pring, John Bollinger, Victor
Niederhoffer, Gerald Appel, Linda Bradford Raschke, Larry Williams, and a
fabulous roll call of other top experts. Most guests were thrilled to come on
and share their story and methods. Some of the contents of those interviews are mentioned in this book as well. In fact, the interviews were
recorded and archived on my web site, www.nationalfutures.com, where
anyone can go to listen to them.
By writing this book, I can share with you how and what I do to produce
the analysis that goes out every week in The Bottom Line Financial and
Futures Newsletter. I believe my experience in the industry and the techniques that I have developed can be instrumental in helping you to become
a better trader. I believe that you can successfully learn to better integrate

xii

PREFACE

the two elements of market analysis: time and price. The elements that I
have focused on from the technical side are:
• Pivot points, a leading price predictor that is based on price points
using different time frames.
• Cycle analysis, which deals with predicting market turning points based
on time.
• Candle chart patterns, which are based on price relationships between
the open, high, low, and close and past chart points such as old highs
or lows.
• Fibonacci ratio corrections and extension studies, which are based on
past price points.
Other studies such as volume are used to gauge the level of participation
and to help uncover the strength or weakness of a market trend.
The last—and maybe the most—important aspect of trading that this
book covers is evaluating the psychological makeup of traders and providing exercises that can help those who are having a rough period overcome
their problems. Learning who you are and how you react to market conditions is a vital aspect of trading.
I hope that reading this book will help you have a better understanding
of what it takes to trade and to broaden your horizons in investing in the futures and options market. More important, I want you to know how to learn
to do it on your own. Industry experts agree that about 80 percent of the
people who trade lose. With those odds against you, you need all the help
you can get! Individual speculators need to know that it is a rewarding adventure as long as they can make it against the markets and their biggest
competitor, every other trader. As a zero-sum game, for every loser there is
a winner in futures trading. Or another way to think about it, perhaps, is
that 20 traders are taking the money of 80 other traders.
If you are going to trade successfully, you need to understand that it requires hard work and, above all, to think of trading as a business. As you
read this book, I hope you learn that you do not need to have an IQ of 160
or be a mathematician or possess superhuman skills to be successful. What
you do need to have is a fascination for this business, patience, discipline,
a trading plan, identification of what type of trader you are, risk capital, and
the desire to improve your financial life.
Through the development of technology and the Internet, more information is accessible today for the individual speculator than ever before. I
sincerely believe a knowledgeable and educated investor is a better trader.

Preface

xiii

So if you are trading or are getting ready to trade, try to work at continually learning what is available to you. Cutting-edge technology will continue to offer more powerful and helpful trading tools to individual traders.
It is up to you to learn how to use them to your advantage. I hope that you
will benefit from the tips and techniques that are mentioned in these pages
and certainly hope that you can apply them successfully in your trading.
JOHN L. PERSON
Palm Beach, Florida
March 2004

Acknowledgments

riting requires intense devotion and discipline; I now have a new
sense of respect for anyone who has ever written any books or
published material, especially on the subject of technical analysis.
I have many people to thank—those who were indirectly responsible and
influential in my education throughout the years and, of course, my family,
especially my wife, Mary, who also tolerated my perseverance for finishing
this book at the expense of ignoring her and asking too many questions
when I had computer problems.
Mom, I know you wanted a lawyer in the family; instead you got a futures trader. My son, John Paul, who decided not to get in the investment
business; instead, he followed the entrepreneurial spirit and opened his
own chain of cell phone stores. There is still a chance to convert him back
to the investment world: He likes my stock picks!
Special thanks to the Friday night “wanders” group, the best support
group of friends one could ever have. Those I wish to mention directly: Lan
Turner from Gecko Software, Stuart Unger, Barry Isaacson, Cheryl Fitzpatrick, Rory Obractin, and Jonathan W. Dean from FutureSource; Dan
Gramza for inviting me to his class and taking my calls; Barbara Schmidt
Bailey and Ted Doukas from the Chicago Board of Trade; and James
Mooney, president of Infinity Brokerage Services.
The more analysts and authors I met, the more I found how truly fortunate I was in having Pamela van Giessen of John Wiley & Sons as my editorial director. Thank you, Pam! My special thanks go to Darrell Jobman,
who was directly responsible for orchestrating and directing me through
the whole process of this project and directly responsible for helping to get
this material organized and published.

W

J. L. P.

xv

A
Complete
Guide to
Technical
Trading
Tactics

CHAPTER 1

Secrets
of Trading
Understanding the Mechanics

In the 21st Century you don't need to be an
expert to invest like a top performer. Let
your money work for you by copying the
best performing traders.
Thinking is easy, acting is difficult, and to put
one’s thoughts into action is the most difficult
thing in the world.

— Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

G

oethe could have been referring to paper trading versus the act of actually trading when he wrote the phrase above. Trading is exactly that:
putting your thoughts or convictions about a price move into action
by entering an order and placing money at risk.
Investing is a totally different ball game. This book is about trading. The
purpose of trading is to turn over or buy and sell (sell and buy) to build cash
in an account by capitalizing on changes in price. It is not about acquiring
and holding assets or property.
Futures trading is becoming more attractive than ever before as investors transfer their knowledge and trading skills from the stock market
boom of the late 1990s to more active markets where the idea of creating
wealth is still alive. As the equity markets became consumed by the bear
market mentality liquidation phase, investors with knowledge of technical analysis and computer skills flocked to open futures accounts to trade
e-mini S&P 500 and e-mini Nasdaq 100 index futures.
Stock market firms and brokers have developed futures divisions, and
day-trading education experts have crawled out of the woodwork to teach investors the art of day trading those products. Some of the numerous quality
instructors come with a very high tuition cost; others are not so expensive.
1

2

INTRODUCTION TO FUTURES AND OPTIONS: Understanding the Mechanics

Most likely, learning about trading at a reasonable price is why you are
reading this book. However, reading this book alone will not guarantee that
you will succeed in trading. You need to read this book, practice its principles, and continue your trading education, realizing that the biggest obstacle
in trading is what is between your left and right ears. I believe the techniques
in this book are excellent strategies, and I hope you will apply and benefit
from them. Teaching someone to become a successful trader and letting
them experience the power of financial rewards is a satisfying and rewarding pursuit.
As investors look for markets beyond stocks or mutual funds in which to
put their money, they will find a whole new world out there with different
products to trade, among them futures. You may be among those investors
who are afraid of and concerned about trading futures because of what you
heard about them in the past. There are good reasons for being nervous about
treading into any new market. But consider the scandals that have plagued
Wall Street in the post-bubble era and may continue for some time. As history
shows, there have been countless scandals on Wall Street in the past, and
there almost certainly will be more in the future. So-called traditional investing in stocks is not immune to risk and has its own set of problems.
The question is: Will confidence in America’s corporate leadership return
sooner rather than later? Stock ownership is at the highest level per capita
in America’s history. More investors and private traders participate in the
markets than ever before. In addition to stocks and mutual funds, there are
a host of stock-related derivative products—exchange-traded funds such as
QQQs, options such as the OEX, and many, many others including a relatively new and spectacular market development called single stock futures.
The price direction of equities and all of these derivative instruments boils
down to what will happen to the underlying forces of earnings and growth.
Here is a brief story that may shed light on Americans’ changing viewpoint about investing. I was giving a seminar on the futures markets to an
investment club. One older gentleman said his money was safe in the bank,
and he wouldn’t give his money to the stock market again.
I asked, “Why do you feel that way?”
He responded, “They are all crooks!”
“Well, if you think like that, why are you at a futures seminar?” I asked.
“I always thought they were risky, but now I want to learn for myself,”
he replied.
“Futures trading is risky,” I agreed, “but what gave you the impression
not to open a futures account before?”
“My stock broker told me not to trade commodities, that I would lose
my shirt,” he said. “So I kept buying the stocks he recommended, and, instead, I lost my shirt with him.”
