
276

Inside the Currency Market

can be exercised anytime. This point changes the entire equation, because
both accompany different formulas and methodologies and neither can
be employed together. For example, some track the S&P 500 against VIX
Options that settle European exercise. Secondly, American options trade
ﬁve hours longer than European options and that must be held account in
any trading plan (CME Options Rulebook). The methodology is European
options are employed to hedge and American options are widely traded.
The Black Scholes formula originated in 1973 in the Journal of Political
Economy and is employed to measure European options both over the counter and exchange traded. The vast majority of over-the-counter options are
European exercised.
The Barone, Adesi, and Whaley formula originated in 1987 in the Journal
of Finance to factor American exchange-traded options (CME). The question
for both was how to price and value options, but both formulas must be
employed against its respected type. Consider traded options.
Formulas must factor call and put options, time to expiration, price,
strike price, and interest rates. Interest rates must be factored as a risk-free
rate. The T-Bill is widely employed, but that rate is twice removed from an
actual BBA or internal LIBOR.
John Cox, Stephen Ross, and Mark Rubenstein published a binomial
pricing model in the Journal of Financial Economics in 1979 that valued trades
based on arbitrage that factored a currency pair and currency option. In one
way, Cox-Ross, as it’s known in market parlance, can be viewed as the risk
measure to the two main option pricing models currently in existence.
The Canadians at the Montreal options and derivatives exchange widely
employ Cox-Ross. All three models set standards that haven’t been surpassed
since inception.
In 1983, Mark Garmen and Steven Kohlhagen advanced the Black
Scholes formula with introduction of an interest-rate factor measured against
each side of a currency pair. The purpose was to factor the risk-free rate
between a currency pair that accounts for exchange rates. Finally, is the question of implied volatility.
Implied volatility is deﬁned by the market as the expected return. The
CME deﬁnes implied volatility as “implied by a market price of an option
based on option pricing models. Volatility through models yields a theoretical
option value.” Despite a deﬁnition that said nothing, the key word is implied.
Implied volatility is expected, not guaranteed, but expected if the market
reacts as anticipated. Some say a formula doesn’t exist to calculate implied
volatility hence the purpose to follow a delta strategy. Implied correlation is
the preferred method due to its statistical component.

Currency Cycles, Currency Futures, Options, and Volatility

277

Volatility is an estimate based on American or European formulas using
option-market prices as an input. By using past and present prices, implied
volatility is found by running the models backward. These are what-if scenarios that incorporate a futures price, strike, option price, days to expiration,
and interest rates. Formulas are factored as F(S, O, D, R).
Market events in a delta strategy can disrupt an expected forecast and
destroy a risk-reversal strategy especially when the return is expected within a
30-day period. The assumption is volatility within a currency pair will increase
the price of deltas. Yet it’s not a guaranteed strategy simply because currency
markets can trade sideways, and move in inﬁnitesimal ranges with price congestion for long periods. Time will surpass the strategy. Implied volatility may
work well in other markets, but spot prices and its fast rate of change or no
change can impinge the overall measure of volatility unless the strategy was
perfected. Today’s strategy is trade at the money options. A risk measure is
employed by taking the one month interest rate differential and divide by the
implied volatility from the one month at the money call or put option. It’s a
measure of currency options but can be employed to trade equitiy indices.
Volatility and Volatility Indicators

To measure risk is to measure volatility. The question is how far will prices
vary in relation to expected returns? Two instruments can realize different
returns based on variations because we are squaring the difference from the
mean as a measure of variability. So volatility must be measured by squaring
the variance to obtain a standard deviation to obtain an accurate view of
volatility.
Volatility is measured by standard deviation calculated by standard deviation of daily returns over X trading days to annualize the ﬁgure. This measures
the spread of prices around the mean—the average. When prices are close to
the mean, standard deviation is low, and high when prices are far away.
The general strategy should be buy the low and sell the high.
Standard deviation asks the question how far apart is the distribution.
Normal distribution says prices should be 68 percent within one standard
deviation of the average, 95 percent within 2 standard deviations, and about
96 percent within three standard deviations. This outline is known as realized,
actual, or market volatility that’s generally measured in one- to three-month time
frames, one year to measure historic volatility. Looked at another way, suppose
as suggested by prior research that a 252-day simple moving average was plotted, a mean based on past year price closes that considers U.S. foreign exchange

278

Inside the Currency Market

(FX) trading days and holidays. Much dispersion occurs around the mean over
a yearly period. How to capture those short-term variations in volatility terms
has been the subject of intense research over many years, more so in the present
day as option trading increased with new ﬁnancial instruments. Consider that in
Whaley’s historic 1987 paper, 30 American options traded on the CME.
The main point associated with volatility and volatility indicators is it
tends toward mean reversion where prices oscillate around a long-term average. Whether low or high volatility, it mean reverts. A rate of return of volatility as an annualized standard deviation percentage index or indicator can
be converted to shorter time frames. For example, a 20 percent index value
converts to a monthly value by multiplying 20 percent by square root of onetwelfth, for a 5.77 forecast that predicts movement of one standard deviation
over one month of / 5.77 (ASX example). This formula addresses the
question of stressed rates.
Stress rates ask the question what is the probability z scores change based
on whatever standard deviations are measured in relation to the square root
of time? The formula is:
Sezσ√t

where
s = spot in logs,
e = the natural logarithm,
z = a z score, sigma (SD) at the square root of t.
It’s a strategy not only to determine spot prices but other market instruments
such as options. Market professionals view this methodology as a measurement of a time series employed for the short term. The purpose is to capture
only volatility that deviated from normal trend.
Another strategy widely employed by central banks is to measure volatility
between two pair’s exchange rates and correlate.
The formula
2  σ—
2  σ—
2 2 σ σ
σ—
p 1 2
12
1
2
where
volatility 12  cross rate volatility,
volatility 1  volatility of exchange rate 1,
volatility 2  volatility of exchange rate 2, and
p  correlation between currency 1 and 2.
Prior research measured volatility in terms of options, and measured
volatility by Garch models, Arch models, time-series models, long-term

279

Currency Cycles, Currency Futures, Options, and Volatility

volatility, and short-term volatility. Papers measured single-market instruments, combined markets, and instruments. The study of pure volatility
began in the summer of 2000 in the Journal of Alternative Investments by
Robert Krause and intensiﬁed over the years.
Krause proposed then a pure volatility contract, later ﬁnalized and outlined in the 2010 issue of the Swiss Derivatives Review. Many questions were
settled with formulation of the CME’s 2011 introduction of Krause’s volatility
contracts on six currency pairs, euro/U.S. dollar, British pounds/U.S. dollar,
Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar, Australian dollar/U.S. dollar, Swiss francs/U.S.
dollar and Japanese yen/U.S. dollar. Vol (Trademark) contracts are cash settled and settle to either the 1 or 3 month realized volatility.
The formula is:
RV = 100 ×

⎛
p ⎞
252 / n ⎜ L n p t ⎟
t −1 ⎠
⎝

2

n

∑R

2
t

t=1

where
n  number of trading days,
rt  continuous compounded daily returns calculated by
p
rt  L n p t and,
t −1
where

Ln  natural logarithm,
pt  underlying reference price at time t, and
pt1  underlying reference price at time t period preceding time t.

The formula is calculated as an annualized standard deviation of log returns
of daily settlement. Any volatility contract should begin with zero as the
foundation point. To deﬁne a mean, it begins at a zero point and deviations
occur from that point.
At the Volatility Institute at New York University, many time-series charts
for various ﬁnancial instruments are available for daily review at the vlab, as
well as many published papers and lists of courses. Robert Krauss updated
volx.us with an abundance of information, papers, and trade strategies.
Option Premiums

On any screen shot of American currency options is a view of volume, futures
price, option price, and strike price for each option offered. American currency options trade at premiums in half-point strike price increments and

280

Inside the Currency Market

represent 85 percent of total CME volume (CME Options Rulebook).
Premiums are quoted in U.S. dollar points per foreign currency. The notional
values equal the same underlying price convention, $12.50 euro, $62,500
British pounds.
The formula to determine premium is:
Points  Contracts  Tick value
For example, a 1.4430 euro/U.S. dollar call option bid at 75  150 contracts is equal to 0.0075 multiplied by $125,000 equals $937.50. To sell the
option 150 multiplied by $937.50 equals $140,625. A premium quote is
reported as the equivalent of a live price in the OTC market (2010 Option
Rulebook). To know currency options is to know liquidity in the market
related to any currency pair combined with the futures and cash prices.
The overall question is where is the market in terms of liquidity and at what
strike price, a determination of a long or short market.
Barrier Options

The importance of this section is not to understand barrier options, how to
trade those options, and price methodologies. Rather it’s important to know
where barriers are located within spot currency prices to determine if a break
or bounce will occur at a particular price once a barrier is reached.
Importers, exporters, and major companies routinely employ barrier
options to facilitate trade across borders. For example, Canadians employ
barrier options to facilitate oil ﬂows and other trade to U.S. markets, its
largest export partner. Japanese exporters routinely employ barrier options
to facilitate a multitude of trade in various products to various world
destinations.
A multitude of barrier options can routinely be found within yen prices
in various currency-pair arrangements. Since the United States is the secondlargest export market, Japanese yen/U.S. dollar and U.S. dollar/Japanese yen
must be evaluated to determine where barriers are located since barriers may
restrict a price break at certain levels.
Barrier levels at certain prices are either defended successfully, in which a
bounce will occur in the opposite direction, or an unsuccessful defense occurs
and prices will continue a forward path. Barrier options are employed to lock
in a particular price.

Currency Cycles, Currency Futures, Options, and Volatility

281

Other currency pairs may contain barrier options to hedge other ﬁnancial instruments. Other types of barrier options exist such as a Binary or Plain
Vanilla, but they don’t have the market power as a full barrier option simply
because of a higher-priced barrier. The question for deployment of barrier
options is how important is the price and cost to defend it. European-style
options are by far the most popular deployed, yet American- and Bermudastyle are also employed (US FX Committee 2005 Report). Bermuda options
allow expiration relative to time, but speciﬁc dates relative to exercise must
be stated in prior arranged agreements. For traders, it’s the nondiscrete
barrier options to monitor because they are determined by the spot rate
(FX Committee 2005).
Barrier options began trade with formal outlines implemented by the
U.S. FX Committee and other organizations such as the International Swaps
and Derivatives Association in 1998 with an additional update in 2005 and
2006. Highlights from the updated report follow.
A barrier event was further deﬁned. The committee question was how
does one know a barrier was reached? A barrier-determination agent was introduced as a third-party conﬁrmation a barrier event occurred. Determination
dates and rate calculations were further deﬁned. Barrier and other options are
backed by extensive agreements that outline the terms between two parties.
The real purpose to this supplementary report was to further deﬁne barrier
options and single- and double-No-Touch and One-Touch binary options.
It was a forward report, as most of these reports are facilitated by market
professionals.
Two types of barrier options exist for our purposes, Knock in/Knock out
and Double Knock in/Double Knock out. Knock-out options terminate if
spot trades at or beyond a deﬁned barrier before expiration. The closer the
knock out to the spot rate, the less expensive it is because the probability that
the barrier is reached will increase.
A knock-in option is inactive but becomes live if spot trades at or beyond
a barrier before expiration. The closer Knock in trades to spot, the more the
option will increase because the probability exists that the barrier will be hit
(FX Committee). Double Knock-in and Double-Knock out options include
another barrier. News organizations that specialize in currency markets routinely report locations of barrier options.
The problem with movements at times of an export currency such as the
U.S. dollar/Japanese yen is barrier options are routinely located within various price points of U.S. dollar/Japanese yen that at times restrict movements.
It’s not unusual to see a $5 or $10 million barrier located at a certain price.

282

Inside the Currency Market

Volatility and Value-at-Risk Models

Volatility affects market prices as a function primarily from outside forces.
Inﬂation, interest rates, political changes, economic disasters, military escapades, and wars all affect markets in terms of volatility levels and levels can
change dramatically.
Dollars at Risk seeks to determine such factors as yield-curve movements
in relation to currency prices and employed as a measure of risk. Dollars at
Risk ask questions as to how many basis points does a 10-year Treasury bond
move in relation to a target price or stop loss order, and what about two-yearbond basis points? The preferred method is to factor ﬁxed-income returns
against a constructed yield curve using various risk measures that account for
volatility.
Value-at-risk (VAR) models assess risk using “statistical techniques on
worst-case scenarios that can’t exceed a particular conﬁdence level. It measures
risk in relation to leverage. New components include volatility, correlations,
and exponentially weighted moving averages to assess risk” ( Jorion 2007).
Conclusion

After a historic walk through past economists such as Schumpeter and
methodologies of economic business cycles, an introduction of currency
cycles was offered in terms of inversions. The methodology of currency cycles
is in the measurement. Since currency-pairs invert, past inventors of indicators widely employed today such as Gann and Elliot were offered as a
methodology to help in understanding how and why cycles occur, with
a further idea that methodologies can be applied easily to a chart.
Volatility was discussed in all its minute details of historic importance
as well as offered formulas to calculate and measure market instruments and
currency pairs, volatility in relation to options and premiums, and barrier
options. Risk models in terms of VAR and dollars at Risk were addressed.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

CHAPTER 10

Technical Analysis
This chapter highlights in depth and detail many market tools and various
indicators. Volume and open interest is discussed due to its wide use
and effectiveness. Formulas, trade strategies, trading methodologies, and
past history to understand its modern-day context are all highlighted.
Commitment of traders’ reports, where to ﬁnd them at the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME), how to read the reports, and which ones to read, as well as their
points of reference in order to evaluate a trade plan is explained step by
step. The Baltic Exchange, its derivation, products, purpose, functions,
and evaluative tools are addressed in order to track commodity currencies.
Correlations, then regression lines and other trend lines, are shown and
methodologies highlighted to understand how to plot lines on a chart to
measure currency and other market prices. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) may be a future indicator due
to wide use of the SDR ﬁnancial instrument. Pivot points, Bollinger Bands,
and Ichimoku, and their purpose, derivations, calculations, and formulas
along with full explanations of how to measure currency and other market
prices is fully explained.
Currency-pair prices trend, range, or cluster in a zone for periods of time,
while other periods of time account for volatility. How to measure various
phenomena can be gauged by market tools and/or indicators.
It’s imperative to know a range of indicators to account for various market periods, yet it’s also imperative to be able to shift indicators as market
periods meld from one type to another, such as range to trend. Indicators
are never perfect, but they provide reasonable estimates of various market
periods. Reasonable estimates are derived from indicator calculations.

283

284

Inside the Currency Market

For example, Bollinger Bands are widely deployed to account for both
volatility and moving-average components. Moving averages measure mean
time series over time, pivot points measure support and resistance, and
Ichimoku measures moving averages for present and future market conditions. All work equally well to capture proﬁts, but none have the perfection
of a pure mathematical model. Yet markets are never perfect so it’s imperative
to allow conﬁrmation in every market scenario.
The import of any indicator is to know its minute details as well as any
currency pair for its various characteristics, because all have variations. Some
indicators work well in trends, others work better in short-term market moves.
Volume and Open Interest

Volume and open interest studies trace their roots to commodity trading with
passage of the Commodity Exchange Act on September 21, 1922. It was
formerly titled the Grain Futures Act, but was amended in June 1936 to
include other traded commodities such as wheat, rice, corn, oats, and other
agricultural products (Bear, 1948).
The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), established in 1848, was mandated by
the Agricultural Department to maintain volume and other extensive records for
open inspection for at least three years. Commitment of Traders (COT) Reports
today still maintain a three-year history for public view. The main purpose for
the records was to maintain integrity of the markets due to the importance of
agricultural products to the American public in staple and export terms.
Open interest is assumed to be a byproduct of future market developments. Yet the Chicago Daily Tribune reported open interest for wheat contracts as early as 1926.
The New York Stock Exchange traces its roots to the 1792 Buttonwood
Agreement where 24 brokers signed an agreement to trade securities by commission (NYSE). Possibly volume and open-interest studies trace their roots
to these early days and became a natural byproduct with establishment of
organized commodity exchanges.
As two of the oldest indicators, volume and open interest hasn’t been a
focus in the modern day due to more popular, ready-made indicators. Yet
volume and open interest have been a constant staple for market professionals
since inception.
Ken Shaleen of Chartwatch can be credited with writing the deﬁnitive
book in 1992, called Volume and Open Interest. Outside Ken Shaleen’s work,

Technical Analysis

285

volume and open interest has been contained within the conﬁnes of market
professionals because not much has been written since Shaleen. Ironically,
market professionals know nothing about popular indicators, nor do non-market
professionals know anything about professional tools. Market professionals
employ pure mathematical models while nonprofessionals employ indicators,
and neither interest intersects.
Open interest is deﬁned by the CME as total futures contracts long
or short in a delivery month entered into but not offset by delivery. Only
one side of the transaction is calculated. Volume is simply the number of
contracts bought or sold for a given time period. Volume in days past was
an essential ingredient as a hedge, called price insurance (Baer 1948). Open
interest was the trading method. Today, volume and open interest together
are employed to determine trends, market sentiment, and direction by monitoring contract ﬂows.
Under daily settlements on the CME web site is where volume and
open interest information is found. Anyone can view foreign exchange (FX)
futures, FX options, or both for open interest and volume reports. The new
addition is FX Micro contracts and the key is to study open interest and
volume because Micro contracts are arranged as spot transactions, so a full
view of standard and FX Micros can be determined.
Three different reports may be employed: futures only, options and put/
call totals, and Micro contracts. For options, volume and open interest is
now available for each strike price. Long-term traders would be interested in
near- and next-term contracts while short-term traders would be served by
nearest contracts. Floor trading and Globex are the two reports of interest.
An initial report is issued after market closes that includes ﬂoor trading, and
ﬁnal reports are issued before market openings the next day that include ﬂoor
trading and Globex trading from overnight. There are a number of scenarios
to monitor.
A trending market occurs when volume and open interest is up. Prices
rise on increased volume and open interest. Low volume may be a correction,
but it depends if open interest rises (Shaleen). A rise is a correction, a fall
could be a reversal. Average volume is a range trade. When volume and open
interest is up and prices decline, chances are good it’s a downtrend (Shaleen).
Average volume and ﬂat open interest represent congestion, an unsure market,
or a wait-and-see approach to outside events (Shaleen).
The key is to compare Japanese yen/U.S. dollar futures and options
against U.S. dollar/Japanese yen Micros to determine direction. Same
for Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar and Swiss franc/U.S. dollar futures and
