
AU3772_C028.fm Page 444 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

444

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Now, after a Minor Top has occurred, the stock now being in new high
ground, and the Top having been made on very heavy volume, we may look
for the corrective move. Ordinarily, that would be a decline of several days,
a week, sometimes longer. Occasionally, the correction, as we said a few
paragraphs back, will take the form of a horizontal hesitation lasting a week
or more without any particular corrective move in the downward direction.
Where there is a downward correction, it is likely to come down to or near
the Top of the last previous Minor High (support). Also, and often at the
same time, the corrective move will carry down to the Basic Trendline drawn
through two or more previous Minor Bottoms; or to the “parallel”; or to a
trendline drawn through the last two or more previous Minor Tops. If the
corrective move is horizontal, it is likely to run out until it meets one of these
lines.
In any case, the thing to watch for is the decline of volume. If the trading
shrinks, perhaps irregularly, but on the whole, steadily, for some days after
a new Top has been made, during which time the stock either reacts or, at
any rate, makes no progress in the Primary Direction, then you are justified
in considering this as a Minor Correction. If the stock now continues the
Primary Move and gets to a point that is “three days away,” you can consider
the Bottom (that is, the point you draw your trendline through, not necessarily the extreme low point in the case of horizontal moves) as a new Basing
Point.
Where a stock is starting what appears to be a new move, a breakout
from a period of vacillating moves, it is sometimes hard to say precisely
what point should be considered the Bottom. There may be several small
and indecisive moves on low volume preceding the real breakout. In such
a case, we would consider the appearance of high volume as the breakout
signal, and set our Basing Point at the low point immediately preceding this
signal. There will usually be such a point on one of the low-volume days in
the 3 or 4 days just before the breakout.
All that has been said about Basing Points in a Bull Market would also
be true, in reverse, in a Bear Market, except that heavy volume does not
always accompany a downside breakout.
Now there comes the difficult and distressing situation where the stock,
having made a long runaway move (let us assume it is an upward move),
starts out, apparently, to make a Flag, and is bought after a sufficient correction of 40% with a decline of volume, and then continues to go down
steadily, without any rallies and without any clear volume indications. This
is an unusual situation, but it does happen on both the upside and the
downside, from time to time. In the case we have just mentioned, we would
look for Support Levels (Consolidation Patterns, Multiple Tops, etc.) formed
on the way down in the previous trend, and lying below the level at which
we purchased the stock. We would use these supports as Basing Points rather
than hold a stop under the extreme Bottom of the vertical move.
In many cases of this type, you will not be able to find adequate Basing
Points. Therefore, it seems unwise to try to get in on corrections after long

AU3772_C028.fm Page 445 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter twenty-eight:

What Is a Bottom — What Is a Top?

445

runaway moves except: (1) where the stock has risen well above good Support that can serve as a Basing Point, or (2) where the stock is completely
above all prices for several years and is moving “in the clear.” (The reverse,
of course: in Bear Markets, the stock should have fallen below a strong
Resistance Area, or must be in new low ground for the past several months
before you consider a short sale.) And in any case of this sort where you are
thinking of a trade in a stock that appears to be making a Consolidation
after a fast, long, vertical move, you must have pronounced and conspicuous
drying up of volume throughout the formation of the Flag or Pennant Correction.
There is one more word of caution needed here regarding trading in an
Intermediate Trend. A series of moves in a trend will often take place in very
regular form. There may be a good trendline, and the reactions may be about
40% to 50% and may come back to the previous Minor Tops. The volume
on the Corrections may shrink, with increasing volume on the new Tops. It
is easy to start trading on such a “staircase” in the expectation that the moves
will continue to be regular and consistent. But trends do not go on forever.
Any Minor Top may be the last. The importance of finding your Basing
Points is to enable you to get out, at best, on any closing violation of one of
these points, and at worst, on your protective stop order. The volume may
again come to your aid in this question of when to stop trading on a trend.
Although you look for high volume on the Tops, you will be exceedingly
suspicious of volume that is much higher than that on any of the preceding
Minor Tops (or Bottoms in a Bear Market). The final, or the next-to-final,
“blow-off” of a trend will usually show more volume than any of the Minor
blow-offs along the way; and when you see such climactic volume, you
should prepare to retire into your shell and wait for a full Correction of the
entire series of moves making up your Intermediate Trend. Later, weeks later,
or perhaps months later, you may find the stock has corrected 40% or more
of the whole Intermediate Move and is resting quietly with very little activity.
Then is the time to watch it for new opportunities and a new trend in the
Primary Direction.
EN9: In a book composed of nothing but important chapters this Chapter 28 might
not get the emphasis it deserves from the unwary reader. In fact the procedure
outlined here is of absolutely basic importance in analyzing and trading trends. In
Chapter 28.1 I have added to it material which has been of great importance to my
trading and to the trading of my students.

AU3772_C028.fm Page 446 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

chapter 28.1

Basing Points – A Case Analyzed
The longer one thinks about the chart so casually tossed off in Figure 210
the more he realizes that it embodies a profound and natural understanding
of trends and the market. Consider — wave up, wave recedes; wave up,
wave recedes, and so on. As long as the trader or investor is not chased from
his position by the corrective wave he will under normal circumstances ride
the trend to its natural end. But locals and hedge funds and those who profit
from volatility know that the previous low is where investors and traders
set their stops. So in the ordinary flow of trading if they see an opportunity
to take out an important low they will do it. If possible. And it is sometimes
possible. And the low sometimes falls from the natural flow of trading.
Bruce Kovner, on being interviewed by Jack Schwager (Market Wizards),
was asked where he set his stops. “Where they’re hard to get to,” he said.
A stop set on a basing point with a prudently calculated filter is hard to get
to, unless the market has truly reversed direction. In fact, what is a long-term
moving average but a lagging stop with a filter built in?
And what are Basing Points but the marking of highs and lows in full
realization that a pattern of higher highs and higher lows is a bull trend,
and when that pattern changes to one of lower highs and lower lows the
trend is changing, or has changed. This is the principle behind Dow Theory,
and it is the principle behind trading trends of lesser duration than Dow
trends. And, as is quickly realized, a pattern of lower highs and lower lows
means inevitably that the trendline has been broken.
As for Figure 210, Mark Twain had some cogent comments on it. He
said that anyone trying to make sense of it would go crazy, and anyone
trying to justify the prices with the chart would be shot. Figure 210 preserves
unexplainable conundrums and conflicts carefully preserved since the earliest editions. The reader is urged to take it as a concept rather than using
it as a lesson. And see Figure 210.1. Therefore let me codify the rules implicitly presented in the Figure:
1. A high is made, being recognized by no higher prices occurring for
the moment.
2. Prices recede and a low is made. This low is found by watching each
day after the previous high until no lower prices are made. As prices
begin to rise again we note each day on which prices are completely
outside the range of our low day candidate.

AU3772_C028.fm Page 447 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter 28.1:

Basing Points – A Case Analyzed

447

3. When three such days are observed before a new low is made we
mark the candidate day as a Basing Point and raise our stop to 6%
(or x%) under the low of the basing point day. (See Chapter 27).
4. If a new high is 3% greater than the previous high a new Basing Point
is found at the low of the new high day.

The Basing Points Paradigm
By no means will every issue be amenable to this kind of analysis. But the
method is so paradigmatic that it is worth examining at greater length. And
like virtually every other method of classical chart analysis it must be used
with caution and good and thoughtful judgement. Sometimes on some
stocks it will seem to work as smooth as silicon lubricant and on other issues
it will appear to be useless. However, even on recalcitrant issues the principles underlying the method will be of use, if not the actual method itself.
With this in mind Figure 210.1 is presented. The careful reader will see that
the chart in this example uses only bottoms or lows in stop setting and does
not advance stops on the making of new highs as in Figure 210. This is done
for instructional purposes and to keep the example simple for the general
investor. More advanced traders will want to study and perhaps utilize the
techniques in Figure 210.
Figure 210.1 actually serves more than one instructional purpose. It
illustrates a picture perfect case of the use of Basing Points, and it also
illustrates a complete analysis of a bull market from entry to exit with keys
marking events in the life of the market. Thus, the observation of Basing
Points, the setting of the stops, the tracking of potentially false turns are all
noted. The chart is accompanied by the keys. Originally the marked and
keyed chart was used in graduate seminars at Golden Gate University for
instructional purposes. Shortly it became obvious that marking the chart in
this manner was extremely useful in trading. So it is suggested to the reader
as a way of making his charts more communicative and more useful.

448

FIGURE 210.1 Apple Computer, bull market of 1987. A near perfect example of the use of Basing Points for
trading of a reasonably regular and smooth bull market. Only low wave Basing Points are illustrated.

AU3772_C028.fm Page 448 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

AU3772_C028.fm Page 449 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

Chapter 28.1:

Basing Points – A Case Analyzed

449

KEY TO FIGURE 210.1 ANALYSIS
1. A rounding bottom, or perhaps a scallop.
2. Resistance or breakout line.
3. Wake up call on volume.
4. Run Day, big volume. Breakout through line 2. Sure entry signal.
5. First Basing Point (BP) Notice prior volume fall off in consolidation, and surge
on run-day. A stop was entered before this BP using the low of the formation
before the entry.
6. BP
7. A weak BP (because of shallowness of retracement)
8. BP
9. Test of BP at 8.
10. A trendline drawn after point 9.
11. BP
12. BP candidate which fails 3 day rule.
13. BP
14. A potential BP but not a very good one because new high has not been made
from 13.
15. A support/resistance line.
16. BP.
17. BP
18. A resistance/support line.
19. Flag which becomes BP.
20. TL, but too steep to last.
21. Trendline.
22. BP
23. Trendline.
24. BP
25. BP
26. Horizontal trendline.
27. BP at 26.75 (stop 25.41). Stopped out at 25.41.
A Narrative of the events in the Chart
1,2,3. Had we been asleep the event at number 3 should have awakened us. A volume
day like this should catch the attention, and we begin paying attention to the stock
and note the pattern that has been developing—the rounding bottom, or scallop.
4. And at number 4 we see a ‘run day’ on heavy volume. A good signal for entry
with the breaking of the horizontal line at 2. When we enter we set our stop 5%
under the recent low. After entering on strength there is every possibility that some
profit taking will occur as well as probing by locals to chase out arrivistes.
5. We watch with interest for the first reaction. Each day we observe as a candidate
for a possible ‘Basing Point.’ This occurs at 5 and we now begin to count ‘days away’
from the Basing Point, that is, days whose range is entirely outside the range of the
candidate day, and which occur before a lower low is made. When the Basing Point
at 5 is confirmed we raise our stop to 5% under the low of 5.
6. A higher high is made after 5 with a subsequent reaction to 6, which proves to
be another Basing Point. So we raise our stop to 5% under 6.
7. Prices continue to climb and another Basing Point is made at 7. The procedure is
becoming clear: Find a Basing Point and establish a stop a prudent distance under
it. If a new Basing Point is made raise the stop. Watch with interest the reactions
against the trend. Either they allow you to establish a new higher Basing Point, or
they end your trade.

AU3772_C028.fm Page 450 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:25 PM

450

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

8,9. We find a new Basing Point at 9, raise our stop and draw the trendline at 10.
At 9 we have a lower low than 8, but our ‘filter,’ our 5% padding keeps our position
intact. We do not lower our stops using 9 as a new Basing Point. One of the inviolable
rules is that stops are never lowered. The filter is important, since traders try to take
out nearby lows and exacerbate volatility. It is called the running of the sheep.
11. At 11 we find a new, if tenuous Basing Point. An advance with a thin higher high.
12. At 12 we have a candidate for a Basing Point which fails the 3 day rule.
13. At 13 we find the Basing Point that is good and raise our stop.
14. And at 14 we are confronted with a marginal situation. It is potential Basing
Point. But a marginal one because a higher high was not made after 13.
15. At 15 we are able to draw a line defining resistance — a line which will become
a support line.
16. At 16 a new Basing Point which would have tested a point at 14.
17. At 17 we find a new Basing Point and at 18 we can identify a resistance line. The
spurt across this line is both gratifying and a warning. Because it becomes a flagpole
from which the flag at 19 flies. Flags and flagpoles are messages that the market has
heated up and now wants close watching. A flag can serve as a Basing Point, so we
move our stop again, fully aware that the end may be approaching. The trendline at
20 is further confirmation of this environment due to its steepness. But we see two
good anchor points in 16 and 17 and draw trendline 21 — a better line to defend.
22. A good reaction finally occurs at 22 giving a strong Basing Point and good
rationale for raising the stop. Notice the interesting fact that points 22 and 24 have
come back to rest on the trendline we drew at 10.
24. As the tempo has increased and the volatility 24 furnishes us another valid Basing
Point.
25. Even 25 is a valid point and we can now see the clear support line at 26.
27. When this line is pierced at 27 upon extraordinary volume, and in the process
takes out our Basing Point stop from 25, it is clearly time to exit the train.
The Basing Point concept is even more thoroughly explored in the paper titled “Stair
Stops” on the John Magee Technical Analysis website: www.edwards-magee.com

AU3772_book.fm Page 451 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty-nine

Trendlines in Action
From what has already been said in Part One of this book, you will be familiar
with the characteristic single-line trends of stocks, and the numerous exceptions and deviations that come into the picture from time to time. We know
that stocks often move in parallel trends, sometimes for months, occasionally
even for years. We also know that they may, and do, break out of trend or
change the direction of their trends without notice.
Most of the pattern formations we have studied can be considered as
manifestations of trend action, that is, as Continuations or Reversals of a
trend.
Thus, a Symmetrical Triangle is simply the meeting of two trends. During
the formation of the Triangle, the stock is following both trends in a narrowing pattern, until finally, the dominant trend asserts itself. An Ascending
Triangle is following an upward trend, but has encountered a Resistance
Level at the Top. A Head-and-Shoulders shows the end of an upward trend
and the beginning of a downward trend. A Rectangle is a Parallel Trend
Channel running in a horizontal direction. And so on.
We can project a Parallel Trend, and, in the case of stocks which happen
to continue moving in that trend, we can buy and sell at almost the precise
points of contact with the trendline. Unfortunately, long and perfect straightline trends of this sort are the exception rather than the rule. For actual
trading purposes we will project our trends more or less continuously on
the basis of the most recently established data.
From the standpoint of tactics, let’s consider the trends as they are
indicated by the successive Minor Tops and Minor Bottoms. For illustration
of this, and as a guide to what we are leading up to, we will consider
simplified, ideal situations (see diagram examples on the next page).
To avoid confusion, mark the top trendline in blue and the bottom
trendline in red. This can be done on daily charts easily by using colored
pencils. We will refer to the upper trendline as the Blue Trend, and the lower
trendline as the Red Trend. From time to time, we will also want to draw a
line parallel to a Blue Trend across the Bottom of the trend so as to include
a segment of the Trend Channel between two Tops within parallel lines. This
we will call the Blue Parallel, and we will mark it with a dotted or broken
blue line. Conversely, we may wish to draw a parallel to the Red Trend so
as to include the segment of the Trend Channel between two Bottoms; and
this dotted red line we will call the Red Parallel.
451

AU3772_book.fm Page 452 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

452

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

DIAGRAM 3 (Left, above). Here is a rising trend showing the Basic Trendline
across two Bottoms, which we call the Red Trendline, and its parallel (indicated by
a broken line) through the Top of the intervening peak. The parallel suggests the
approximate objective of the next move if the stock continues in trend.
DIAGRAM 4 (Right, above). The same rising trend with the Return Line, which
we call the Blue Trendline, drawn through two Tops. Broken line represents its
parallel through the intervening Bottom. This Blue Parallel is useful in determining
a buying point, especially in trends of rapidly changing form when the stock may
not react to its Basic Trendline.

DIAGRAM 5 (Left, above). This is a declining trend showing the Basic Trendline
across two Tops, which we call the Blue Trendline, and its parallel (indicated by a
broken line) through the Bottom of the intervening decline. The parallel suggests the
approximate objective of the next move if the stock continues in trend.
DIAGRAM 6 (Right, above). The same declining trend with the Return Line, which
we call the Red Trendline, drawn through two Bottoms. Broken line represents its
parallel through the intervening Top. This Red Parallel is useful in determining a
point at which to make short sales, especially in trends of rapidly changing form
when the stock may not rally to its Basic Trendline.

AU3772_book.fm Page 453 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-nine:

Trendlines in Action

453

W

Y

J

G

A

K
C

B

E

F

H

I

D

DIAGRAM 7. Simplified diagram of a stock chart showing trend action. Basic
Trendlines are marked with heavy lines; Return Lines are marked lightly.
At the start, the stock declines in a Parallel Trend Channel. Blue Trendline is basic
here. A short sale on a rally to the Red Parallel at point A will find its objective on
the Blue Parallel at B. Another short sale on the Red Parallel at C would be followed
by failure to reach the objective. Chances are good, however, that increased volume
would develop at the Double Bottom and give warning to get out of short commitments. The upside penetration of the basic Blue Trendline at E, alone, is not sufficient
reason to reverse position and go long. Trendlines set up during formation of the
Rectangle would be marked in the regular way, but are indicated here by broken
lines to emphasize the pattern. Another short sale, if tried on the sixth point of contact
with the Rectangle at F, would be stopped out on the breakout.
The trend is now rising, although we cannot yet draw a Basic (Red) Trendline. The
first buy would be made on a 40–50% correction of the breakout move from the
Rectangle, or on a return to the Top (Support) level at H.
A trendline would be drawn to the first Bottom established in the Triangle. This
is not shown, as it would ultimately be replaced by the line shown through the
outermost point in the Triangle. We have indicated by broken lines the trendlines set
up during the formation of the pattern.
The objective of the breakout move from the Triangle would be the Red Parallel
to our now rising Basic Trendline. This objective is reached at J. A Return Line (Blue)
would be drawn from the first Reversal Top of the Triangle at G through the Top of
the breakout move at J, and the parallel to this through point I would indicate about
where to make the next purchase. As a matter of fact, the stock does not actually get
back to that point; in practice, the purchase would probably be made at K on the
basis of a 40–50% correction, or on a reaction to the Support Level G.
The subsequent upward move would not carry through to the Red Parallel marked
W. However, the alarm would probably be sounded clearly by a day of heavy volume,
a One-Day Reversal, or a gap. Since the trend is now obviously convergent, no further
purchases would be considered. The next move fails to make such headway and falls
far short of the objective set by the Red Parallel marked Y. Soon after, the Wedge
breaks out downside.
