
As another layer of risk management, limit your total dollar risk per contract. What
I experienced was that as my account size grew, 1 percent of $200,000 is a $2,000
risk per contract. However, when my account grew over the years, 1 percent risk on
a $500,000 account became a $5,000 risk. As we know that most trades do not work,
in my opinion that was too much risk to take. Therefore, I limit my dollar risk per
contract. If the risk exceeds my levels, I do not take the trade.

Step 5 says not to take a commodity trade if the dollar risk exceeds $2,500 a contract, regardless of account size.
Step 6: Maximum Risk per Sector

Over the last 18 years I have made repeated mistakes. One of the most glaring mistakes
has been allocating too much to a particular sector. Regardless, if I am only taking a
small risk per trade when they are concentrated I open myself up to increased risks.
What happened was that I would get a signal in the interest rates. They all seemed low
risk with risk per trade of approximately 1 percent. However, due to their concentration, I ended up with big drawdowns. I limit my exposure per sector to a maximum
risk of 5 percent of my portfolio.
I will not take a trade if I surpass this risk per sector. Sectors are prevalent in the
stock market as well as the commodity markets. To further clarify, I will not take another trade in tech stocks, for instance, if my total risk in tech stocks was 5 percent, or
if I had an exposure to the grains—wheat, corn, soymeal, soybeans, and so on—that
was 5 percent, I would pass on the trade that would put me over this threshold.
Do not take the trade if you have already allocated 5 percent of your account in
that sector.
Step 7: Maximum Risk on Total Portfolio

1. Identify the strongest markets and the weakest markets. These should be the
only markets in which you look for a trade.
2. When you get a breakout signal, confirm that the breakout risk is not more
than 1 percent of your core account size; if so, go to the next step.
3. Trade only in the direction of the MACD. If long, confirm you are above the
zero line. If short, confirm you are below the zero line.

101
YOUR COMPLETE ROBUST TRADING PLAN

Before I take a new position I verify that I will not surpass a total open trade risk versus
my core equity. The reason for this is that the more open positions, the more risk I am
taking on.
I have learned over the years that my biggest drawdowns are during periods in which
I have the greatest amount of open trade profits. When I get to a point when I have
20 percent open trade profits compared to my core equity, I will take a new trade. This
is an attempt to mitigate big drawdowns.
This is very easy to calculate. I simply divide my open profits by my core equity. My
core equity is my original equity and closed profits. For example, if I have a current account
size of $100,000, I would not let my open trade equity or open equity increase more than
$20,000. One could tighten the stops by adjusting the ATR volatility stop or take profits.
There is no wrong or right answer.The answer is dependent on your risk tolerance.
Do not take the trade if you have already have 20 percent of your total core equity
in open profits.
Quick review of the seven steps to take before entering any trade:

4. Do not exceed more than 10 longs and 10 shorts.
5. Do not take a commodity trade if the dollar risk exceeds $2,500 a contract
regardless of account size.
6. Do not take the trade if you have already allocated 5 percent of your account
in that sector.
7. Do not take the trade if you have already have 20 percent of your total core
equity in open profits.
If you have passed all of these criteria, then you can take the trade and see what
happens. Do not expect the trade to work.
Any trade is 50/50.
Now that you are in the trade you need to protect yourself and follow the trade if
it works.

Stops

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

102

You need to protect yourself since most trades do not work. I do this by the usage of
two stops. My first stop is my hard stop or initial stop.
If I am long my predefined risk is the Y period low, and if I am short my predefined
risk is the X period high.
As an example, if I use parameters such as a 20‐day high and a 10‐day low, my
initial hard stop is the 10‐day low. I count back 10 bars and that is my maximum risk
level. I do not vacillate! Most trading programs include this feature (lowest low for Y
periods or highest high for X periods). The Y day low stop is immediately entered into
the market once I have been filled. I do not change it if the price gets close to it. This
stop is set in stone. If the stop is hit, then I exit with a small loss and move on to the
next trade, no big deal!
On another tangent one can offset these stops slightly by a small parameter, but this
is a personal preference and not totally necessary.
An important point from an earlier section is that the last trade has no bearing
on the upcoming trade. Every trade is 50/50 and statistically independent. You
must take every trade—you cannot pick and choose because you do not know
the future!

■ If the Trade Starts Working
If the trade starts working, meaning it starts moving away from my initial hard stop,
then the next following or trailing stop kicks in: the ATR trailing stop. There is no
perfect indicator; however, I prefer the trailing ATR stop as a trailing stop method.

The ATR stop is based on average true range. Average true range was developed by
J. Welles Wilder as an indicator that measures volatility. Welles Wilder developed his
concept called true range (TR), which is defined as the greatest of the following:
■

Method 1: Current high less the current low.

■

Method 2: Current high less the previous close (absolute value).

■

Method 3: Current low less the previous close (absolute value).

For those of you who would like to understand the background of the ATR trailing stop, the basic premise is in measuring the distance between two points, not the
direction. If the current period’s high is above the prior period’s high and the low is
below the prior period’s low, then the current period’s high‐low range will be used
as the true range. This is an outside day that would use Method 1 to calculate the true
range. This is pretty straightforward. Methods 2 and 3 are used when there is a gap or
an inside day. A gap occurs when the previous close is greater than the current high
(signaling a potential gap down or limit move) or the previous close is lower than the
current low (signaling a potential gap up or limit move).
Figure 6.5 shows examples when methods 2 and 3 are appropriate.

103

True Range (TR)
B

C

Current
High
T
R

T
R

Previous
Close
Previous
Close

Current
High

Previous
Close

T
R
Current Low

FIGURE 6.5 True Range

Example A: A small high/low range formed after a gap up. The TR equals the
absolute value of the difference between the current high and the previous
close.
Example B: A small high/low range formed after a gap down. The TR equals
the absolute value of the difference between the current low and the previous close.

YOUR COMPLETE ROBUST TRADING PLAN

A

Example C: Even though the current close is within the previous high/low
range, the current high/low range is quite small. In fact, it is smaller than
the absolute value of the difference between the current high and the previous close, which is used to value the true range.

■ The Calculation of Average True Range

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

104

Basically, the average true range (ATR) is based on X periods, which can be calculated
on any period such as intraday (for day traders), a daily, weekly, or monthly basis. For
this example, the ATR will be based on daily data. Because there must be a beginning,
the first true range value is simply the high minus the low, and the first 14‐day ATR
is the average of the daily TR values for the last 14 days. After that, Wilder sought to
smooth the data by incorporating the previous period’s ATR value. The ATR value
as well as breakout highs and lows are subjective. I personally like to look at a much
longer period. I use a 39 period. I give the trade more room with this parameter, but
again there is no magic number.
Most charting packages have average true range and average true range stops built
in so there is no need to manually calculate either the average true range or ATR stop.
The trailing ATR stop continually makes adjustments to make sure that the stop is
moved in your favor. The ATR stop trails the progress when there is a trend yet gives
the trade enough room to work. The ATR trailing stop is one way to limit losses and
protect profits. A stop‐loss order is set a multiple of the average true range (ATR) away
from the current price. If the price moves in the trade’s favor, the stop follows along.
As with all trailing stops, the ATR trailing stop never exits at the high or a low of a
trade.You will always give back some of the profits.
Only liars get out at the highs or lows of a trade.
Giving back part of your profits is reality and nothing to fear.
The real hard part of using an average true range stop is where the need for a
proper mindset is paramount. One needs both the patience and discipline to see what
happens and let the trade unfold both with a potential profit as well as a potential loss.
Many traders get nervous when a trade does not start to work and simply exit.
They did not follow the plan.
To their astonishment after they exit, the trade starts trending.Then there are those
who see open profit and cannot contain themselves and want to grab that profit. The
problem with that is possibly the trend continues and they did not follow their plan.
You need these rare big winners to offset all the small losses you will encounter. You
need to believe in the plan. As simple as it is, it is robust and can give you the power
to compound money over time.
Simple proprietary robust ideas that I use in my daily trading with a strong measure
of risk as well the proper mindset are the pillars of successful trend following.

■ Trend Retracement Rules
The concept of trend retracement can be applied in various ways. There are times
when for numerous reasons you are not in a trade, you prefer the trend retracement to
the trend breakout, or you want to increase your position by pyramiding. There is no
right or wrong and each has its own set of rules.The basis is the same; you are trading
with the trend and you are only taking low‐risk trades.
The reality is also the same that you will have many trades that simply do not work.
You will have small losses, small profits, and rare big winners. This is trend following.
For aggressive traders you even want to pyramid. Pyramiding is adding to positions.
This is a personal issue and left to the discretion of the trader. Greater profits can be
created as well as greater drawdowns. It is important to bear in mind that there is a
drawdown out there that can stop you from trading.

■ Just Do It

105
YOUR COMPLETE ROBUST TRADING PLAN

I know many aspiring traders who have read countless books, have learned or developed their own trading strategies, and who have analyzed a number of markets; but
they’ve failed to pull the trigger when it comes to real‐time trading. As you know, part
of your education is your knowledge and your experience. If you want to make money
with trading, then eventually you have to take the plunge and get started.

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 7

Trend Breakouts

R

emember that hypothetical trades have severe limitations and are used for educational purposes only. The following examples are hypothetical and should not be
utilized to provide historical data or make real‐life predictions.

107

FIGURE 7.1 ArthroCare Corporation

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ ArthroCare Corporation
ArthroCare Corporation was a high‐momentum stock that was one of the strongest
at the time of the signal (Figure 7.1). Going through the conveyor belt of checklist
items, it hit all the criteria.
THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

108
Review
1. Strongest via smoothed rate of change.
2. Not more than 1 percent risk of total account size.
3. MACD positive and above zero line.
4. Not more than 5 percent of the portfolio was allocated to health care and
medical appliances.
5. Did not have 20 percent open trade equity versus core equity.
6. Experienced a breakout trade of X days.
7. No more than 10 longs at the time.
8. After entry the shares started to progress and the hard stop of Y days ago
was replaced by the average true range stop. This trade worked; however, as
discussed repeatedly, most trades will not work.

FIGURE 7.2 Baidu

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ Baidu
Baidu (Figure 7.2) is a Chinese Web services and search engine company that is often
likened to Google.
Review

2. Not more than 1 percent risk of total account size.
3. MACD positive and above zero line.
4. Not more than 5 percent of the portfolio was allocated to China or Internet.
5. Did not have 20 percent open trade equity versus core equity.
6. Experienced a breakout trade of X days.
7. No more than 10 longs at the time.
8. After entry the shares started to progress and the hard stop of Y days ago was
replaced by the average true range stop. This trade worked; however, as discussed repeatedly, most trades will not work. The reason I wanted to present
this idea was to show the patience that is needed in order to succeed. Those
who were not patient or disciplined and did not let the trade work would lose.
The average true range stop is not perfect as any methodology is not perfect
but does a very good job keeping you in trades when they work. More so, the
average true range also is good to get you out of trades that do not work.

TREND BREAKOUTS

1. Strongest.

109

FIGURE 7.3 30‐Year U.S. Government Bond

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ The 30-Year U.S. Government Bond

110

1. Strongest via smoothed rate of change.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

Typically, U.S. government bonds (Figure 7.3) are considered safe long‐term investments.

2. Not more than 1 percent risk of total account size.
3. MACD positive and above zero line.
4. Not more than 5 percent of the portfolio was allocated to interest rates or
government bonds.
5. Did not have 20 percent open trade equity versus core equity.
6. Experienced a breakout trade of X days.
7. No more than 10 longs at the time.
8. We have an additional check when trading futures that the dollar risk per
contract does not exceed $2,000.
9. After entry the contract started to progress and the hard stop of Y days ago
was replaced by the average true range stop. This trade worked; however, as
discussed repeatedly, most trades will not work.

FIGURE 7.4 The Canadian Dollar

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ The Canadian Dollar

1. Strongest via smoothed rate of change.
2. Not more than 1 percent risk of total account size.
3. MACD positive and above zero line.
4. Not more than 5 percent of the portfolio was allocated to currencies.
5. Did not have 20 percent open trade equity versus core equity.
6. Experienced a breakout trade of X days.
7. No more than 10 longs at the time.
8. We have an additional check when trading futures that the dollar risk per
contract does not exceed $2,000.

111
TREND BREAKOUTS

I selected this example to exemplify the reality of trend following. In the prior examples I presented many trades that worked. However, in the real world this is not the
case as there will be many trades in which you will have small losses, small profits, and
on rare times big profits. Figure 7.4 is a great presentation for this.
You will see the first trade was a loss (dashed lines). The second trade also was a loss.
However, the third trade was a profit. Successful trend followers take every trade. They
have no idea if the trade will work or not. They just keep on putting on low‐risk trades
and then see what happens.They have the patience to let the trades work over time as long
as they are working.

FIGURE 7.5 Feeder Cattle

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ Feeder Cattle

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

112

Feeder cattle, shown in Figure 7.5, is an interesting example. The first trade worked
and there was a profit. What I have seen from inexperienced traders is that they would
debate taking the next signal thinking that possibly the trade couldn’t go higher. They
could have been reinforced with this wrong thinking when the trade did not work. It
did not work not just once but twice! Two small losses followed. However, on the next
trade the feeder cattle trade started working. The point here is that we must be disciplined
110 percent when trend following.We must take every signal.We do not know the future. Anything
can happen. The only thing in our control is how we approach risk. This is why risk
management is so important.
Reviewing the trade thought process . . .
1. Strongest via smoothed rate of change.
2. Not more than 1 percent risk of total account size.
3. MACD positive and above zero line.
4. Not more than 5 percent of the portfolio was allocated to meats.
5. Did not have 20 percent open trade equity versus core equity.
6. Experienced a breakout trade of X days.
7. No more than 10 longs at the time.
8. We have an additional check when trading futures that the dollar risk per
contract does not exceed $2,000.

FIGURE 7.6 Short Trade Example

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ International Flavors and Fragrances

1. Weakest via smoothed rate of change.
2. Not more than 1 percent risk of total account size.
3. MACD negative and below zero line.
4. Not more than 5 percent of the portfolio was allocated to specialty chemicals.
5. Did not have 20 percent open trade equity versus core equity.
6. Experienced a breakout trade of X days.
7. No more than 10 shorts at the time.
8. After entry the shares started to progress and the hard stop of Y days ago
was replaced by the average true range stop. This trade worked; however, as
discussed repeatedly, most trades will not work.

113
TREND BREAKOUTS

Figure 7.6 is an example of a short trade.
The concept I want to show is that money can be made both in bull markets and bear
markets. It does not matter. The key is to put on low‐risk trades. Have the discipline and
patience to put the trades on when you have a signal, and when/if they work, have the
patience to follow them via the average true range stops. This trade was for 70 bars or
days.Too often greed sets in and traders want to take the quick profits. However, as Jesse
Livermore pointed out, the greatest profits are made by doing nothing and being patient.
Another point is that it does not matter if you are trading daily bars or hourly bars.
The concepts that I have presented are viable on all time frames.

FIGURE 7.7 Royal Bank of Canada

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ Royal Bank of Canada

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

114

Figure 7.7 is another stock example, this time examining the Royal Bank of Canada.
You never know how long a trade will continue.You need to be flexible in expectations and rigid in your rules. This hypothetical trade lasted for 36 bars. When the trades
work, we want to be taken out only by the average true range stop. If the trade does not
work, we have our hard stop, which is ourY day’s stop, which protects it, and if the trade
does start working, we simply follow it and follow our rules. The rules are very simple
yet robust and powerful.
1. Strongest via smoothed rate of change.
2. Not more than 1 percent risk of total account size.
3. MACD positive and above zero line.
4. Not more than 5 percent of the portfolio was allocated to banking sector.
5. Did not have 20 percent open trade equity versus core equity.
6. Experienced a breakout trade of X days.
7. No more than 10 longs at the time.
8. After entry the shares started to progress and the hard stop of Y days ago
was replaced by the average true range stop. This trade worked; however, as
discussed repeatedly, most trades will not work.

FIGURE 7.8 TJX Companies

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ TJX Companies

If Richard Donchian can do it,
If the dentist can do it,
So can you!

115
TREND BREAKOUTS

The TJX Companies trade is a great example of being flexible and still having trades
not work. As you can see, there was a short. This short trade did not work and a small
loss was incurred. Luckily the short was covered as the shares rallied and big losses
could have been incurred. Several months later a buy signal was received. As Murphy’s
Law would have it, the trade did not work after a short period of time. Traders at this
point would have experienced two small losses in a row and frustration could set in.
There is nothing to get upset about.
This is the trend shown in Figure 7.8. You will have countless losses. If you can’t
take the losses, you should not trend follow. The most important reason for your potential success is how you think or your mental state.You have to just keep on putting
on the trades and follow the plan. Hopefully at this point you have internalized that
anything can happen. You will have rare big profits at times. You need to have the patience to let them work. These big rare profits more than make up for ALL the losses
you will incur. This is why the losses need to be kept small.
Successful trend following boils down to having a simple and robust plan, strong
discipline, and the patience to let it work over time.
There will be long periods when you do not make money. At this point you will
question yourself and ask yourself if trend following does not work anymore. I can tell
you from my own personal experience, I have been there, but the years of successful
trading have reinforced me. In addition, there have been generations of successful
trend followers. Richard Donchian trend followed for decades.

FIGURE 7.9 Cotton Trade Example

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

■ Cotton Trade

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

116

You can see in Figure 7.9 there are two short trades. Initially on the first short one
could have gotten nervous. The short was entered and almost immediately the trade
reversed. An inexperienced trader or a trader who is not following the exact plan
could have panicked and closed the position. However, the trade soon reversed and
started moving in the direction of the short. When we are trend following in the proprietary methodology I am teaching, you have two seatbelts to protect you, so there
should not be any fear. When you drive a car you wear a seatbelt and do not have fear!
You need to believe in the viability of the plan and mostly understand this is not a get
rich quick overnight plan.
It is truly a marathon and takes a great deal of endurance to get through all the
periods that are very tough and all the trades that do not work.
