risky strategy that can produce outstanding profits. The trick is to
find an active selloff, like the bottom dropping out of the financial
sector in 2008. Once you locate it, enter the weakening instrument
and ride the downside while protecting your position with a percentage based stop loss. Exit discipline is the key here, because
these volatile markets are subject to violent short squeezes.
A simple analog filter will improve your short sale stock picking performance considerably. Hedge funds, as well as other institutions with
the firepower to trigger short squeezes, gang up on the same stocks
time after time. You can see this activity in the vertical spikes that follow
breakdowns of highly liquid issues, especially at popular technical levels
like a neckline, round number, or triangle apex. To avoid this fate, look
back at your short candidate’s history in the year prior to the intended sale
and observe what happened whenever support broke. You’ll find one of
three scenarios:
1.	The technicals worked, and the price didn’t pop back above new
resistance (confirmation).
2.	The technicals partially worked, with a quick spike above new
resistance followed by another selloff (failure/confirmation).
3.	The technicals failed, and short sellers were trapped in a major
squeeze (failure).
The second scenario presents the most advantageous short selling
conditions. It implies that you can stand aside during the breakdown and
set a short sale order above new resistance at a common level, like the
20-day SMA or a partially filled gap. Even better, you can review analog
breakdowns in the prior year or two and compute the average Fibonacci
retracement of bounces after the downswings that broke support. You’re
on the right track if computed percentages match an obvious resistance
level just above the most recent breakdown. This investigation can also tell

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

129

you if the breakdown marks the end (climax) of a selloff or the start of a
new downtrend. Zoom out as far as you can go, and look at prior periods
when the market traded at or near the same price level. Simply stated,
don’t sell short if the instrument printed a series of notable reversals near
that price. This is especially true when a particular turning point has persisted for years or decades.
The failure/confirmation scenario offers the survivalist trader
excellent short sale opportunities in all time frames. In Figure 6.4, Canadian Solar carves out an Adam and Eve double top pattern on the
60-minute chart. Support at 14.28 breaks, triggering a common sell signal
that most traders will use to establish short positions. The selloff pauses
F I G U R E

6.4

Canadian Solar double top breakdown.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

130

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

after an initial thrust, and price shoots higher in a short squeeze that lifts
above the breakdown level (1), shaking out early sellers. The covering
stops fall like dominoes and trigger further upside momentum, with the
bounce ending at the 62% selloff retracement (2). Price then rolls over,
yielding a second sell signal when it crosses the same support/resistance
level as the first one (3). This “failure of a failure” signal offers more reliable
trade entry for two reasons: (a) the short side is no longer overcrowded,
and (b) the market tends to burn just one side of the tape before reestablishing a trend, higher or lower. Finally, note how price behavior along
the 50-bar EMA (4) during the initial rally and subsequent selloff shows
fractal behavior, with reversals near the moving average offering reliable
entry points for short and long positions.
Ironically, it’s often too late to sell short by the time you see a selloff
start to gather steam. In many cases, traders who sold short at higher levels
are already looking to cover and take profits just when you’re finally convinced it’s safe to hit the order button. These better-positioned folk add
considerable buying power to the market when they close out, which is
why you’ll probably get crushed in a short squeeze right after you take on
risk. Short sale profits also depend on the time of month. Positions entered
during options expiration tend to get burned because put/call unwinding
overwhelms the natural forces of supply and demand. Risk is also unnaturally high near month-end when buying power can surge due to markup
activity. In a nutshell, positive seasonal forces can make a falling market
float like a butterfly for a week or two. My advice during these periods is
simple and to the point: don’t sell short at all unless the tape is fully
engaged in a momentum bear market.
It’s urgent that traders pay close attention to the buy-sell swing
when choosing to sell short. Oversold markets approaching downswing
support have washed out a limited supply of sellers, which means they
can rally on very little volume. To avoid this scenario, keep several overbought-oversold indicators at hand to examine your setup before entering
the market. My favorite filtering tool for position short sales lasting at least
one to three weeks is the smoothed 14-day Wilder’s relative strength index
(RSI) described in Chapter 4. Stand aside when the indicator reaches the
bottom 20% of its range and then turns higher. This roll up predicts that
selling pressure is nearing its end and ready to give way to another buy
swing. Markets will also snap back quickly when they stretch too far in one
direction. You can measure this rubber band effect with a 20-period Bollinger Band. A simple rule: never sell short when a price bar drops 75% to

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

131

100% outside the bottom band. This extension predicts a sharp reactionary
swing and a vertical squeeze against the short seller. Add high volume to
a downward push through a bottom band and you have the makings of a
nasty bear trap. This effect is heightened considerably when a market sells
off into a horizontal band as opposed to a downsloping band.
To sum things up, let’s take a giant step back and examine the dos
and don’ts of successful short selling. This handful of bullet points has
the power to change the weak-handed market player into a short selling gunslinger.
• Do short rallies, not selloffs. In other words, enter positions
when the major indices are overbought and pushing into obvious
resistance levels. Other short sellers, i.e., your competition, get
shaken out after prices creep higher for a few days, ensuring
easier profits when the market finally rolls over.
• Don’t jump into short sales when the index futures get hit with
automated selling programs unless you’re a day trader who’s
prepared to scale out when the algorithms push into support
pivots. These programs are highly opaque, meaning you have no
idea when they’re going to end suddenly and give way to a substantial bounce.
• Do short the weakest sectors. Every market environment yields
a selection of leaders and laggards. Focus your firepower on the
weakest instruments that can’t find buying interest, even in the
most favorable conditions. You’ve got a helpful friend at your side
when trading these perennial losers. It’s called gravity.
• Don’t short the strongest sectors. Top picking is a loser’s game,
even when it’s played on the pages of your favorite financial
journal or newsletter. You don’t know when oil, steel, or Apple
will stop racing for the heavens, and neither does anyone else. So
just stop guessing and stick to short plays that have already rolled
over and are starting to break down.
• Do watch the calendar like a hawk. Seasonal events like window
dressing, first day of the month, and options expiration can screw
up the best short sale patterns. And don’t forget the clock while
you’re at it. Short sales taken during the choppy midday hours are
less likely to profit than first or last hour positions.
• Don’t short a dull market. The major indices spend four out of
every five days, on average, moving sideways and shaking out

132

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

both long and short positions. It’s your job to find the one day in
five when the trend is alive and well. It’s also your job to find the
rare day when that trend is pointed lower, and not higher.
• Do short the indices when stocks look confused and are pulling
both ways. There are frequent periods when the major averages
sell off even though a variety of sectors keep running higher.
Respond appropriately by selling short the weakest index funds
so you don’t have to guess where all the buyers are hiding.
• Don’t avoid big story short sales. The homebuilding and
financial sectors were caught in historic bear markets in 2008, for
obvious reasons. You can avoid most shakeouts in overshorted
stocks and sectors by zooming out to the weekly charts and using
longer-term patterns to find your sell and short cover signals.
• Do watch closely for false breakouts. Reliable short sale signals
will trigger right after a strong stock mounts notable resistance
to shake out other sellers, posts a notable high, and then breaks
down through the same level. The signal is especially effective
when it ties into bearish price action in longer time frames.
• Don’t get paranoid. Be patient while your short sale sets up for
a profitable breakdown. Markets tend to fall fast and hard when
they finally break but cause a ton of second-guessing while they’re
shaking around and probing higher levels. An even-minded personality, a good night’s sleep, and a well-placed stop loss will ease
the anxiety while you wait.

50-Day Moving Average Strategies
More swing trades spin off price action at or near the 50-day moving
average than anywhere else on the price chart. This might sound illogical
because swing traders look for positions that will last just a few days. But
so many patterns set up at this intermediate average that it becomes a
focal point for all types of market entries. So, why is this popular technical
setting so powerful in finding short-term trading opportunities? Perhaps
it’s because classic technical books and investment tomes tell readers that
the 50-day moving average will support pullbacks in uptrends and resist
them in downtrends. As a result, many traders try to anticipate reversals by
placing limit buy or sell orders right in front of the average. This increases
volatility and generates a variety of chart patterns for those still left on

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

133

the sidelines. The price level also denotes a hidden breaking point for
investors, funds, and institutions. It goes something like this. Longer-term
players who buy upside momentum or sell downside momentum expect
a few setbacks along the way, but they don’t expect a major change in
trend to throw positions deep into the hole. With this in mind, the 50-day
moving average pinpoints a line in the sand where these shareholders
or short sellers get emotional and start to take action. The activity burst
when they enter or exit the market has an unintended effect: it gives
sidelined traders a great opportunity to step in and take advantage of the
growing volatility.
There’s endless debate about the right calculation to use for the
50-day MA, with the most common math, i.e., the simple moving average or SMA, just taking the last 50 bars and dividing by the total. It’s
not exactly rocket science, and technicians have tweaked the output in
many ways over the years, trying to build a better mousetrap. The most
popular variation is the exponential moving average (EMA). This version
addresses a double count error in the original calculation and produces a
reading that responds more quickly than the original math. Since the early
bird tends to get the market worm, the exponential setting is now the most
popular choice in the professional community. It’s also the way I look at
the market. So, from this point forward, the discussion will focus on the
exponential moving average as opposed to the simple moving average.
Back in the glory days of the 1990s, the reaction phase after a strong
breakout would find buyers well before a deep pullback, but that happens
less often in our diabolical modern markets. Nowadays, many breakouts
get thrown back to the 50-day EMA in a counterimpulse that wipes out the
profits of bag holders chasing the initial rally and then failing to place protective stops. With this in mind, the survivalist trader exercises patience
and lets the market retrace fully before taking on risk. Here’s how it works.
Find the 50-day EMA on a new breakout and place an alert a point or two
above it. Then sit back and wait. It could be days or weeks before price
hits your alert and tests the moving average, but the odds are very good
that it will eventually return. Once you get your signal, look to buy when
the selloff gathers steam into the moving average, or wait until the pattern
in the next lower time frame—i.e., the 60-minute chart for a daily setup—
carves out an upside reversal pattern.
A second trading setup that utilizes the 50-day EMA is a simple
variation of the first one. The pullback after a breakout usually shows
a natural support price where traders expect the market to reverse. The
trendline connecting the highs in a cup and handle pattern is a good

PART THREE

134

Rediscovering Profitability

example. But chart dynamics often place the 50-day moving average just
far enough below this level that support gives way and drops price into
the target, drawn to it like a moth to the flame. Most traders set their stop
losses just below the natural support level and get washed out during the
rinse job. They exit the trade and watch in disbelief when fresh buyers
show up at the 50-day EMA, triggering a major reversal back above the
contested support line.
We can see this common dynamic at work in the AK Steel breakout
pattern illustrated in Figure 6.5. The stock posts a January swing high at
13 and pulls back. It rallies to within one point of this level in April, moves
sideways for two weeks, and then breaks out (1). Momentum carries the
F I G U R E

6.5

AK Steel magnet move.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

135

uptrend to 16, where it stalls out and rolls over in a pullback. The stock
returns to breakout support for three sessions (2) and then rolls over,
hitting the 50-day EMA (3) and shooting higher immediately. Two weeks
later, the recovery clears the original breakout level for the second time
(4) and continues higher, confirming the new uptrend (5). These price
swings might look chaotic, but consider how well they track the actionreaction-resolution cycle, outlined in Chapter 2. In this case, the fireworks
are centered on the complex reaction phase, in which there’s a failure
swing into the 50-day EMA followed by a failure of a failure upswing over
support and, finally, a rally continuation that “resolves” the breakout.
This scorched earth dynamic works just as well on the short side,
where support breaks down after a long basing pattern, price thrusts
lower and then bounces up through resistance, hitting the moving average
from below. I guess the moral of the story is that our diabolical markets
often reward those who are late to the party, rather than early. So, in
anything less than ideal market conditions, we need the discipline to wait
for a breakout or breakdown to fail and accelerate toward the 50-day EMA
instead of jumping into the momentum chase or entering the pullback
trade. This delayed execution mentality follows my long-standing advice
to trade behind, ahead of, or opposed to the crowd, but never with it.
Narrow range plays at the 50-day EMA give traders extra time to
enter low risk positions on either side of the market. Look for the following
scenario. Price breaks down on strong volume and triggers an active
selloff. The stock eventually finds support and begins a recovery back up
to the 50-day EMA. This bounce stalls, and price bars contract right across
the moving average. The stock then drops like a rock as selling pressure
resumes with a fury. The trick is to watch this play in progress and to
sell short within the narrow range bars at moving average resistance. This
entry method has two advantages over waiting for the selloff to begin and
then chasing the market lower. First, there are a lot of upticks in a narrow
market, so you can get filled at the exact price you want. Second, the dull
action lets you place a tight stop loss because any buying spike above the
moving average tells you to get out of the trade.
Another useful technique is to combine two time frames on the same
instrument, to pick out short- and long-side opportunities at the 50-day
EMA. This 3D charting is a powerful strategy because it lets you execute
big trades with very small patterns. First, locate a pullback play where
the chart shows different types of support or resistance, i.e., convergence,
at the same price level as the 50-day EMA. Then zoom in and watch the
same stock in a shorter-term view, such as the 60-minute chart. In this

136

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

scenario, you expect a reversal at the 50-day EMA but don’t know when
to enter the market. The short-term chart solves your problem because
it sets up its own reversal pattern. This lets you take an entry when the
60-minute pattern breaks out or breaks down. Quite often, this small-scale
trend turns out to be the straw that breaks the big camel’s back, cascading
the larger-scale setup into a substantial rally or selloff.
The 50-day EMA works well in combination with relative strength
indicators, such as Stochastics and Wilder’s RSI. You’ll often see the
indicator hit an overbought or oversold level and then reverse just ahead
of a major price swing off the big moving average. You can even apply
the 50-period EMA to your intraday charts and utilize identical entry, exit,
and timing strategies. The 50-period EMAs on 15-minute and 60-minute
charts work in the same way as their daily cousins, with one important
distinction—there’s a lot more noise buried within the intraday signals.
In other words, price will routinely chop through the moving average
several times, even though support or resistance isn’t violated. As a result,
applying the indicator to intraday market analysis requires a good read
of the broader charting landscape. And, in those shorter time frames, the
most reliable signals come when price sells off from a much higher level,
or rallies from a much lower level, into the moving average.

Volume
Throughout our market educations, we’re taught that volume will reveal
the intention of price. In other words, we’re supposed to believe that the
flow of buying and selling pressure predicts price direction, intensity, and
timing, at least when it’s interpreted correctly. But there’s a major problem
with volume in our modern diabolical markets—it doesn’t tell the truth
anymore. OK, that’s an exaggeration to some extent. Of course there are
many scenarios in which raw volume data and carefully analyzed accumulation-distribution indicators are vital to accurate price prediction. But
these are the exceptions to the rule in this brave new world, where overreliance on volume as a predictive tool will get you into a lot of trouble.
Yes, you heard me correctly. Traders should just ignore volume most
of the time because it gets in the way of making money. This is a relatively
new phenomenon. A few years ago, volume exhibited most of the predictive characteristics ascribed to it in the classic technical analysis books.
But times have changed, with derivative instruments, dark pools, liquidity

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

137

rebates, and iceberg strategies now corrupting the predictive power of
this supply-demand information. Add in the skyrocketing number of total
transactions generated by orders being subdivided into micro units, and
it’s nearly impossible to make sense of the order flow in a typical market
day, week, or month.
Consider the three volume sources that are corrupting your nightly
investigation of the stock market:
• Pension and mutual funds, which move slowly and cover their
tracks, within the broad noise of daily market movement
• High frequency trading algorithms, generating profits through
minor fluctuations in the bid-ask spread
• Massive programs trading index derivatives and exchange-traded
funds that generate lockstep adjustments through component
shares and related sectors
In order to deal with this minefield, it’s best to limit your volume
investigation to extreme events and price-volume correlations at swing
highs and lows. Event-driven volume generates prints that fall so far
outside the norm that their influence cannot be ignored in your market
analysis. Even then, volume data can still be misleading. A perfect example
arises when a stock gets added to the S&P 500 index. The announcement
routinely generates enormous volume as index funds scramble to purchase
shares, but buying in sync with the funds no longer guarantees a profit
because the stock’s rise can trigger a barrage of predatory algorithmic
responses.
So when do you bite the bullet and actually believe the volume data
you’re staring at? The most reliable scenario is a high volume breakout
or breakdown. Look for a minimum of three times the 60-day moving
average of volume to print for that event. In addition, price should thrust
away from a support-resistance level in a wide range bar. When price and
volume work together in this fashion, chances are good that the emerging
trend will yield to substantially higher prices or lower prices. This dynamic
follows the Power Spike scan in Chapter 12 of The Master Swing Trader.
The analysis works best on speculative stocks that are popular with the
retail and momentum crowd. Most of these issues aren’t components in
broad index funds, so they can avoid the influence of basket strategies
that force entire sectors to move in lockstep. In addition, it’s easier to align
high volume activity to events, milestones, and developments that are
company-specific.

PART THREE

138

F I G U R E

Rediscovering Profitability

6.6

Volume patterns on speculative stocks have greater predictive value than similar activity on mid caps or blue
chips. Junior biotech Novavax gaps higher on heavy volume in April after a swine flu outbreak focuses speculative attention on its influenza drug. Volume spikes again in early June when the World Health Organization gets
set to declare a pandemic and again three weeks later when Spain chooses the company’s drug for a nationwide vaccine program. The stock then breaks out above the April high in July, following the release of positive
research data.
