
risk. I don't try to pick a bottom or top.
Does that imply that if you are bullish, you will always wait for short-term strength before
entering a position, or will you sometimes buy on a reaction?
If I am bullish, I neither buy on a reaction, nor wait for strength; I am already in. I turn bullish at
the instant my buy stop is hit, and stay bullish until my sell stop is hit. Being bullish and not being
long is illogical.
Do you ever use contrary opinion as an aid to your trading?
Sometimes. For example, at a recent goldbug conference, virtually all the speakers were bearish. I
said to myself, "Gold is probably near a bottom." [The market did indeed rally after that
conference.]
Would you buy because of that type of input?
Oh no, the trend was still down. But it might get me to lighten up my short position.
What was your most dramatic or emotional trading experience?
Dramatic and emotional trading experiences tend to be negative. Pride is a great banana peel, as are
hope, fear, and greed. My biggest slip-ups occurred shortly after I got emotionally involved with
positions.
How about some actual "war stories"?
I prefer not to dwell on past situations. I tend to cut bad trades as soon as possible, forget them, and
then move on to new opportunities. After I bury a dead trade, I don't like to dig up the details
again—at least not in print. Maybe some evening, after dinner, sitting around a fire, off the record,
deep in the Tahoe winter...
Can you describe specific trading mistakes that you learned from?
I had a "thing" for silver for years. One of my first losses was in silver, as were many of my worst
losses. It seemed to get into my blood and hypnotize me. It inveigled me to pull my protective stops
so as to avoid getting bear-raided. Naturally, it would hold momentarily and then collapse some
more. I got killed so many times by silver spikes that I started thinking I was some kind of
werewolf. I worked on myself with hypnosis and positive imagery. I also avoided walks in the full
moon. So far it seems to be working.
How do you pick your trades?
Mostly by my trading system, although occasionally, I will get an impulsive flash and override my
system. Fortunately, I don't usually take on a big enough position to do any lasting damage to my
portfolio.
What are the elements of good trading?
The elements of good trading are: (1) cutting losses, (2) cutting losses, and (3) cutting losses. If you
can follow these three rules, you may have a chance.
How do you handle a losing streak?
I handle losing streaks by trimming down my activity. I just wait it out. Trying to trade during a
losing streak is emotionally devastating. Trying to play "catch up" is lethal.
Since you are primarily a systems trader, wouldn't following a system imply no changes of
trading activity during losing periods?
I have incorporated some logic into my computer programs, such as modulating the trading activity
depending on market behavior. Still, important decisions need to be made outside the mechanical
system boundaries , such as how to maintain diversification for a growing account when some
positions are at position limit or when markets are too thin.
Psychologically, I tend to alter my activity depending on performance. I tend to be more aggressive
after I have been winning, and less so after losses. These tendencies seem OK. In contrast, a costly
tendency is to get emotional over a loss and then try to get even with an overly large position.
Are you a self-taught trader, or did another trader teach you worthwhile lessons?
I am a self-taught trader who is continually studying both myself and other traders.
81

Do you decide where you are getting out before you get in on a trade?
I set protective stops at the same time I enter a trade. I normally move these stops in to lock in a
profit as the trend continues. Sometimes, I take profits when a market gets wild. This usually
doesn't get me out any better than waiting for my stops to close in, but it does cut down on the
volatility of the portfolio, which helps calm my nerves. Losing a position is aggravating, whereas
losing your nerve is devastating.
What is the maximum percentage of equity you will risk on any individual trade?
I intend to risk below 5 percent on a trade, allowing for poor executions. Occasionally I have taken
losses above that amount when major news caused a thin market to jump through my stops.
What was your single worst "thin market" loss?
All markets are too thin when I want to get out of a bad position in a hurry. Most markets have, on
occasion, moved rapidly against me due to surprise news. As soon as the news is digested, the
market thickens up again at a new level. During the big sugar bull market when prices moved from
10 cents to 40 cents, I was carrying thousands of contracts and I gave up several cents getting out of
my position. [Each cent in sugar is equivalent to $1,120 per contract.]
Very few traders have enjoyed the spectacular success you have. What makes you different?
I feel my success comes from my love of the markets. I am not a casual trader. It is my life. I have a
passion for trading. It is not merely a hobby or even a career choice for me. There is no question
that this is what I am supposed to do with my life.
What are the trading rules you live by?
a. Cut losses.
b. Ride winners.
c. Keep bets small.
d. Follow the rules without question.
e. Know when to break the rules.
Your last two rules are cute because they are contradictory. Seriously now, which do you
believe: Follow the rules, or know when to break the rules?
I believe both. Mostly I follow the rales. As I keep studying the markets, I sometimes find a new
rale which breaks and then replaces a previous rale. Sometimes I get to a personal breakpoint.
When that happens, I just get out of the markets altogether and take a vacation until I feel that I am
ready to follow the rales again. Perhaps some day, I will have a more explicit rale for breaking
rales.
I don't think traders can follow rales for very long unless they reflect their own trading style.
Eventually, a breaking point is reached and the trader has to quit or change, or find a new set of
rales he can follow. This seems to be part of the process of evolution and growth of a trader.
How important to trading success is varying the size of the bet?
It might be a good idea depending on the reason for doing so. Consider, though, if you had a
successful modification policy, say "M" for changing system "S," then you might be better off just
trading "M."
How important is gut feel?
Gut feel is important. If ignored, it may come out in subtle ways by coloring your logic. It can be
dealt with through meditation and reflection to determine what's behind it. If it persists, then it
might be a valuable subconscious analysis of some subtle information. Otherwise, it might be a
dangerous sublimation of an inner desire for excitement and! not reflect market conditions. Be
sensitive to the subtle differences between "intuition" and "into wishing."
What was your worst year? What went wrong?
One of my worst years was 1980. The bull markets had ended, but I kept trying to hold on and buy
back in at lower prices. The markets just kept on breaking. I had never seen a major bear market
before, so I was all set up for an important educational experience.
What happened to the money management rules in your system in 1980? Did you override
82

them?
I continued to trade even though my system was largely out of the markets due to the enormous
volatility. I tried to pick tops and bottom is in what I considered grossly overbought and oversold
markets. The markets just kept on going and I lost a lot. Eventually, I saw the futility of my
approach and quit for a while.
What is the most important advice you can give the average trader?
That he should find a superior trader to do his trading for him, and then go find something he really
loves to do.
Do you believe chart reading can be used for successful trading?
I consider trend following to be a subset of charting. Charting is a little like surfing. You don't have
to know a lot about the physics of tides, resonance, and fluid dynamics in order to catch a good
wave. You just have to be able to sense when it's happening and then have the drive to act at the
right time.
What was your personal experience in October 1987?
I made money on the day of the October 1987 crash. I also made money for the month as a whole,
and for the year, as well. I lost on the day after the crash, however, since I was short the interest
rate markets. Most trend traders were likely either out or short stocks and stock indexes during the
crash.
Are the markets different now than they were five to ten years ago because of the much
greater current participation by professional managers?
No. The markets are the same now as they were five to ten years ago because they keep changing—
just like they did then.
Does trading become more difficult as your size increases?
It becomes more difficult because it is harder to move large positions without moving the market. It
becomes easier because you have more access to competent people to support you.
What type of support do you mean?
A team of experienced brokers with professional attitudes. Experienced' traders can be very
supportive by just being there for sharing joys and sorrows. Also, the old-timers seem to be able to
smell the beginnings and endings of major moves. I also receive important support from my
friends, associates, and family.
Do you use any outside advisory services?
I keep track of a lot of outside advisers, mostly by reading the business press or hearing from my
brokers. The services usually break even, except when they start to gloat, then they are likely
headed for trouble.
How about market letters?
Market letters tend to lag behind the market since they generally respond to demand for news about
recent activity. Although there are certainly important exceptions, letter writing is often a beginning
job in the industry, and as such may be handled by inexperienced traders or non-traders. Good
traders trade. Good letter writers write letters.
Do you use the opinions of other traders in making trading decisions, or do you operate
completely solo?
I usually ignore advice from other traders, especially the ones who believe they are on to a "sure
thing." The old-timers, who talk about "maybe there is a chance of so and so," are often right and
early.
At what point did you get the confidence that you could keep on winning as a trader?
I vacillate between (a) "I can keep on winning," and (b) "I have just been lucky." I sometimes get
most confident of my ability just before a major losing streak.
How similar are the price patterns in different markets?
Common patterns transcend individual market behavior. For example, bond prices have a lot in
83

common with the way cockroaches crawl up and down a wall. Unfortunately for cockroach
followers, there is usually no one around to take the other side of a trade.
Does the stock market behave differently from other markets?
The stock market behaves differently from all other markets and it also behaves differently from
the stock market. If this is hard to understand, it is because trying to understand the markets is a bit
futile. I don't think it makes any more sense trying to understand the stock market than trying to
understand music. A lot of people would rather understand the market than make money.
What do you mean, "The stock market behaves differently from the stock market"?
The stock market behaves differently from itself in that easily identifiable patterns seldom exactly
repeat.
What is your long-term outlook for inflation, the dollar, and gold?
Inflation is part of the way societies sweep away the old order. All currencies eventually get
debased—like it or not. Compute one penny invested at the time of Christ, compounded at 3
percent per year. Then consider why nobody has anywhere near that amount these days.
Gold tends to be dug up, refined, and then buried again. The geographical entropy of all gold on the
planet seems to decrease over time. A lot has been collected in vaults. I project the trend as one
toward a central world gold stash.
Do great traders have a special talent for trading?
Good traders have a special talent for trading just as good musicians and good athletes have talents
for their fields. Great traders are ones who are absorbed by the talent. They don't have the talent—
the talent has them.
What is the balance between talent versus work in trading success?
I don't know where one starts and the other stops.
How much of a role does luck play in trading success?
Luck plays an enormous role in trading success. Some people were lucky enough to be born smart,
while others were even smarter and got born lucky.
How about a serious answer?
"Luck" or "smarts" or "gift" are words indicating an attitudinal proclivity for mastery. One tends to
do well at one's calling. I think most good traders have a little extra spark about trading. Some
people are natural musicians or painters or salesmen or analysts. I think it is difficult to acquire
talent for trading. However, if it is already there, it can be discovered and developed.
What effect has trading had on your personal life?
My personal life is integrated with my trading life.
Is the joy of winning as intense as the pain of losing?
The joy of winning and the pain of losing are right up there with the pain of winning and the joy of
losing. Also to consider are the joy and pain of not participating. The relative strengths of these
feelings tend to increase with the distance of the trader from his commitment to being a trader.
When you made your first few million, did you lock some of it away to avoid the Jesse
Livermore experience? [Livermore was a famous speculator of the early twentieth century
who made and lost several fortunes.]
I feel the Livermore experience was a function of his psychology and had little to do with the
location of his assets. In fact, I remember reading that Jesse Livermore used to lock some of his
winnings away and then find a key when he needed to get at them. Therefore, locking up winnings
would be necessary to emulate his experience, not to avoid it. Furthermore, you would probably
also need to overtrade and have wipeouts, while you simultaneously fired up your emotions with
the burning desire to "win it right back." Acting out this drama could be exciting. However, it also
seems terribly expensive. One alternative is to keep bets small and then to systematically keep
reducing risk during equity drawdowns. That way you approach your safe money asymptotically
and have a gentle financial and emotional touchdown.
84

I notice there is no quote machine on your desk.
Having a quote machine is like having a slot machine on your desk— you end up feeding it all day
long. I get my price data after the close each day.
Why do so many traders fail in the marketplace?
For the same reason that most baby turtles fail to reach maturity: Many are called and few are
chosen. Society works by the attraction of the many. As they are culled out, the good ones are left,
and the others are released to go try something else until they find their calling. The same is true for
other fields of pursuit.
What can a losing trader do to transform himself into a winning trader?
A losing trader can do little to transform himself into a winning trader. A losing trader is not going
to want to transform himself. That' s the kind of thing winning traders do.
How would you rate the relative importance between psychology and market analysis to
successful trading?
Psychology motivates the quality of analysis and puts it to use. Psychology is the driver and
analysis is the road map.
You have focused a lot on the field of psychology. Can you tell by talking to a person whether
that person would probably be a winning or losing trader?
Yes, the winning traders have usually been winning at whatever field they are in for years.
What traits do you look for to identify the winning trader personality?
1. Не/she loves to trade; and
2. Не/she loves to win.
Don't all traders want to win?
Win or lose, everybody gets what they want out of the market. Some people seem to like to lose, so
they win by losing money.
I know one trader who seems to get in near the start of every substantial bull move and works his
$10 thousand up to about a quarter of a million in a couple of months. Then he changes his
personality and loses it all back again. This process repeats like clockwork. Once I traded with him,
but got out when his personality changed. I doubled my money, while he wiped out as usual. I told
him what I was doing, and even paid him a management fee. He just couldn't help himself. I don't
think he can do it any differently. He wouldn't want to. He gets a lot of excitement, he gets to be a
martyr, he gets sympathy from his friends, and he gets to be the center of attention. Also, possibly,
he may be more comfortable relating to people if he is on their financial plane. On some level, I
think he is really getting what he wants.
I think that if people look deeply enough into their trading patterns, they find that, on balance,
including all their goals, they are really getting what they want, even though they may not
understand it or want to admit it.
A doctor friend of mine tells a story about a cancer patient who used her condition to demand
attention and, in general, to dominate others around her. As an experiment prearranged with her
family, the doctor told her a shot was available which would cure her. She constantly found excuses
to avoid appearing for the shot and eventually avoided it entirely. Perhaps her political position was
more important than her life. People' s trading performance probably reflects their priorities more
than they would like to admit.
I think that some of the most flamboyant and interesting traders are playing for more than profits
alone; they are probably also playing for excitement. One of the best ways to increase profits is to
do goal setting and visualizations in order to align the conscious and subconscious with making
profits. I have worked with a number of traders in order to examine their priorities and align their
goals. I use a combination of hypnosis, breathing, pacing, visualization, gestalt, massage, and so
forth. The traders usually either (1) get much more successful, or (2) realize they didn't really want
to be traders in the first place.
Surely, some people lose because they lack the skill, even though they really want to win.
It is a happy circumstance that when nature gives us true burning desires, she also gives us the
85

means to satisfy them. Those who want to win and lack skill can get someone with skill to help
them.
I sometimes have dreams related to the impending direction of a market. Although these
dreams tend to be very infrequent, uncannily they often prove right. Have you had any
similar experiences?
I know several people who claim to have market insights during dreams. I think one of the
functions of dreams is to reconcile information and feelings which the conscious mind finds
intractable. For instance, I once told a lot of my friends that I expected silver to keep on going up.
When it went down instead, I ignored the signs and tried to tell myself it was just a temporary
correction. I stood to lose face and money. I couldn't afford to be wrong. Around that time, I had
dreams of being in a big, shiny, silver aircraft that stalled out and started going down toward an
inevitable crash. I eventually dumped my silver position, even went short, and the dreams stopped.
How do you judge success?
I don't judge success. I celebrate it. I think success has to do with finding and following one's
calling regardless of financial gain.
Don't be fooled by the humor in Seykota's comments; there is a great deal of serious wisdom in his
pithy replies. For me personally, the most striking comment was: "Everybody gets what they want
out of the market." When Seykota first made this remark, I thought he was merely being cute. But I
soon realized he was deadly serious. My reflexive response to this premise was disbelief: It implies
that all losers want to lose and all winners who fall short of their goals (like myself) are fulfilling
some inner need for a constrained threshold of success—a difficult proposition to swallow.
Although my rigidly logical mind would normally dismiss the idea, my respect for Seykota's
knowledge about markets and people forces me to consider the potential truth of the statement that
everybody gets what they want out of the market—a most provocative concept.

86

Larry Hite-Respecting Risk
Larry Hite's interest in the financial markets was sparked by a college course, but his path to Wall
Street was as circuitous as Moses' to the Land of Israel. His early adult years did not offer any clue
that this was a young man headed for eventual major success. First, his academic performance was
inauspicious. Then he went through a string of odd jobs, never managing to hold any for very long.
Eventually, he drifted into a dual career of actor and screenwriter. While not recording any major
successes, he managed to support himself, and enjoyed his work. One of his movie scripts, which
never found its way into production, was optioned so often that he began to view it as a source of
steady income.
One day, Hite heard H. L. Hunt on the radio describing how he made his fortune buying up lots of
cheap oil right options, which gave him the opportunity for occasional windfall profits with
minimal risk. That same night, Hite briefly met Brian Epstein, the manager of the Beatles, at a
party. The two ideas fused in his mind, leading to another career change. He thought to himself,
"Here is something [a rock promoter] that has the potential for making a lot of money with a
minimal investment." Although he landed a few record contracts for some of his groups, none ever
reached true stardom. Once again, although his success was limited, he managed to earn a
satisfactory living in a self- employed position.
Meanwhile, Hite's real interest remained in the financial markets. "You often hear about people
working on Wall Street to become screenwriters. I may be the only person who ever worked as an
actor and a scriptwriterto pay formy Wall Street career," he says jokingly. In 1968, Hite finally
decided to pursue his primary interest. While fascinated with the futures markets, he didn't have the
slightest idea how to break into that field, so he began as a stockbroker. Several years later, he
became a full-time commodities broker.
More than a decade passed before Hite, convinced that he had learned the ingredients necessary for
successful long-term trading performance, took the initial steps that led to the ultimate formation of
Mint Investment Management Company. He realized that his trading ideas needed to be subjected
to rigorous scientific testing. With an offer of partnership, but no immediate pay, he enlisted Peter
Matthews, who held a Ph.D. in statistics. One year later, he hired Michael Delman, a designer of
computer systems for a defense electronics firm. Matthews and Delman brought their own ideas to
the table, but perhaps even more significantly, their work provided the mathematical proof that
Hite's trading concepts were indeed statistically sound. Hite is emphatic that Mint's success would
not have been possible without Matthews and Delman.
Mint's objective was never to make the largest percentage return. Rather, Hite's philosophy was to
aim for the best growth rate consistent with extremely rigorous risk control. It is in this perspective
(return relative to risk) that Mint really shines. From the inception of trading in April 1981 through
mid-1988, Mint registered an average annual compounded return of over 30 percent. But it is their
consistency that is most impressive: their annual returns have ranged from a worst of plus 13
percent to a best of plus 60 percent. Their largest loss in any six-month period was only 15 percent
and under 1 percent in any twelve-month period (not just calendar years).
Not surprisingly, Mint's stellar performance has resulted in a spectacular growth of equity under
management. In April 1981, they began trading with $2 million; today, they manage over $800
million. Significantly, there is no evidence that the surge of money under management has had any
deleterious effect on performance. Hite believes that Mint can ultimately manage $2 billion—an
unprecedentedly large sum for a futures fund.
Our interview was conducted over lunch at Windows of the World atop New York's World Trade
Center, on a day it was blanketed with clouds. We took the hint when we were the last ones left in
the restaurant and finished the interview in Hite's office.
How did you first get interested in markets?
When I was in college, I took a business course with a professor who had a trenchant sense of
humor. To give you an example, he also worked as a bank examiner. One day, before leaving the
bank following an audit, he turned to the bank president and, as a joke, said, "Got you!" The man
had a heart attack on the spot. After that, they did another audit and found that the bank president
had embezzled $75,000. Anyway, in class one day, this professor is reviewing all the financial
87
