
In the original edition I then used the following words to describe
an example of this type of opportunity. I used an example that was still
fairly recent at that time. I said:

“Immediately prior to the 1954 congressional elections, certain
investment funds took advantage of this type of situation. For several
years before this time, American Cyanamid shares had sold in the mar-
ket at a considerably lower price-earnings ratio than most of the other
major chemical companies. I believe this was because the general feel-
ing in the financial community was that, while the Lederle division
represented one of the world’s most outstanding pharmaceutical


94 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

organizations, the relatively larger industrial and agricultural chemical
activities constituted a hodge-podge of expensive and inefficient
plants flung together in the typical ‘stock market’ merger period of the
booming 1920's. These properties were generally considered anything
but a desirable investment.

“Largely unnoticed was the fact that a new management was steadi-
ly but without fanfare cutting production costs, eliminating dead wood,
and streamlining the organization. What was noticed was that this com-
pany was ‘making a huge bet’—making a major capital expenditure, for
a company its size, in a giant new organic chemical plant at Fortier,
Louisiana. So much complex engineering was designed into this plant
that it should have surprised no onc when the plant lagged many
months behind schedule in reaching the break-even point. As the prob-
lems at Fortier continued, however, the situation added to the general-
ly unfavorable light in which American Cyanamid shares were then
being regarded. At this stage, in the belief a buying point was at hand,
the funds to which I have already referred acquired their holdings at an
average price of 45%. This would be 22% on the present shares as a
result of a 2-for-I stock split which occurred in 1957.

“What has happened since? Sufficient time has elapsed for the com-
pany to begin getting the benefits of some of the management activities
that were creating abnormal costs in 1954. Fortier is now profitable. Earn-
ings have increased from $1.48 per (present) common share in 1954 to
$2.10 per share in 1956 and promise to be slightly higher in 1957, a year
in which most chemical (though not pharmaceutical) profits have ran
behind those of the year before. At least as important, ‘Wall Street’ has
come to realize that American Cyanamid’s industrial and agricultural
chemical activities are worthy of institutional investment. As a result, the
price-earnings ratio of these shares has changed noticeably. A 37 per cent
increase in earnings that has taken place in somewhat under three years
has produced a gain in market value of approximately 85 per cent.”

Since writing these words, the financial community’s steady upgrad-
ing of the status of American Cyanamid appears to have continued. With
earnings for 1959 promising to top the previous all-time peak of $2.42
in 1957, the market price of these shares has steadily advanced. It now
is about 60, representing a gain of about 70 per cent in earning power
and 163 per cent in market value in the five years since the shares
referred to in the first edition were acquired.



When to Buy 95

I would like to end the discussion of American Cyanamid on this
happy note. However, in the preface to this revised edition I stated I
intended to make this revision an honest record and not the most favor-
able sounding record it might appear plausible to present. You may have
noticed that in the original edition I referred to this 1954 purchase of
Cyanamid stock by “certain funds”; these funds are no longer retaining
the shares, which were sold in the spring of 1959 at an average price of
about 49. This was of course significantly below the current market but
still represented a profit of about 110 per cent.

The size of the profit had nothing whatsoever to do with the deci-
sion to sell. There were two motives behind this decision. One was that
the long-range outlook for another company appeared even better. You
will find this discussed in the next chapter as one of the valid reasons
for selling. While not enough time has yet passed to give conclusive
proof one way or the other, so far comparative market quotations for
both stocks appear to have warranted this move.

However, there was a second motive behind this switch of invest-
ments which hindsight may prove to be less creditable. This was concern
that in relation to the most outstanding of competitive companies, Amer-
ican Cyanamid’s chemical (in contrast to its pharmaceutical) business was
not making as much progress in broadening profit margins and estab-
lishing profitable new lines as had been hoped. Concern over these fac-
tors was accentuated by uncertainty over the possible costs of the com-
pany’s attempt to establish itself in the acrylic fiber business in the highly
competitive textile industry. This reasoning may prove to be correct and
still could turn out to have been the wrong investment decision, because
of bright prospects in the Lederle, or pharmaceutical, division. These
prospects have become more apparent since the shares were sold. The
possibilities for a further sharp jump in Lederle earning power in the
medium-term future center around 1) a new and quite promising antibi-
otic, and 2) in time a sizable market for an oral “live” polio vaccine, a field
in which this company has been a leader. These developments make it
problematic and a matter that only the future will decide as to whether
this decision to dispose of Cyanamid shares may not have been an invest~
ment mistake. Because studying possible mistakes can be even more
rewarding than reviewing past successes, I am going to suggest—even at
the risk of appearing presumptuous—that anyone seriously interested in
bettering his investment technique mark these last several paragraphs and
reread them after having read the coming chapter on “When to Sell.”


96 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCG

"my

Now let me turn to the next and morg Q
of purchasing opportunity which I cited in Teg
th wk iy
A somewhat similar situation may be y iy *,

of 1957 in the case of the Food Machinery -Sc ‘ga

A few large institutional buyers have likeg ang bey i

h
Many more, however, seem to feel that ; in es oe ay
interest they want evidence concerning Cen, ‘pi spt ty shy
ing shares. To understand this attitude it is), Sin’ ots : 5
the background. Sag a e sy A .

“Prior to World War II this company }, Mee at ,
diversified line of machinery manufacture, S yb An
agement and equally brilliant develop, aR alt iy “a

Machinery had become one of the spectagy, ny aye a, “ te “ .
of the prewar period. Then during the war, ; Ny Way & Ss
eh 4 S&
related line of ordnance manufacture at why? Sy. on e
bl ful, ve) . ‘gt " NN
comparably successful, the company built up Shy RX ait

Vy
ness. Reason for this was a desire to stabilize a ay & as coh A an %
&

machinery business through the manufacy, & on tye ~~ n
sales of which over the years could be conti, or ee if «lh we ney
research in much the same manner as had 5 n° ot ae a at Sy
ee Du pag the) tle
in the machinery and ordnance divisions, oy yh ty
“By 1952, four separate companies . a y ey!
y P panies hag | Mae Hy Ay
converted into four (now five) divisions, Xe eM TS
gy yd 4
slightly less than half the total sales volum, n
included, slightly more than half if only the. i oni’ un yd 4
. i hey
ities are considered. Before and in the can] yy “ans Titty ba, ts
chemical units varied enormously. One Was Y on ‘a a : i
ing field with broad profit margins and exo, tes “dy is Oy ‘ A yy
ANS
4 r
%

the industry. Another suffered from obsole, Sy ss i
poor morale. The average of all left much toy Pl wish y KN ‘gy ts
with the real leaders among chemical con, Sy Oa ~~ “ag

were intermediate products without basic Min « “spi yh
were plenty of low-profit raw materials, by pag ty’ Ar Ng ua
profit margins that could be built from thes, Sy Yay rn at
“The financial community reached S016 Wt dae ty
sions on all this. The machinery divisions~, Prey el &
of 9 to 10 per cent per annum (comparab), . fy, wa,

as a whole), with a demonstrated ability toqet bi Se
tthe eis, yy, ve y

a
ee



When to Buy 97

and commercially worthwhile new products year after year, and with
some of the lowest cost plants in their respective fields—represented
the highest grade investment. However, until the chemical divisions
could demonstrate broader over-all profit margins and other evidence
of intrinsic quality, there was litle desire to invest in this combined
enterprise.

“Meanwhile, the management went aggressively to work to solve
this problem. What did they do? Their first move was through internal
promotions and external recruitments to build up a top management
team. This new team spent money on modernizing old plant, develop-
ing new plant, and on research. Entirely aside from plant expenditures
that are normally capitalized, it is impossible to undergo major mod-
ernization and plant expansion without running up current expenses as
well. It is rather surprising that all the abnormal expenses that occurred
in 1955, 1956, and 1957 did not cause reported chemical earnings to
decline during that period. The fact that earnings held steady gives
strong indication of the worth of what had already been done.

“In any event, if projects have been properly planned, the cumula-
tive effect of those already completed must in time outweigh the abnor-
mal expense of those still to come. Something of this sort might have
happened as far back as 1956 if research expenditures in that year had
not been increased about 50 per cent above the 1955 levels. This was
done even though in 1955 these expenditures for chemical research
were not far below the average of the industry, and those for machinery
research were well above that of most segments of the machinery busi-
ness. In spite of continuing this higher level of research, such an earning
spurt was expected in the second half of 1957. At midyear the company’s
modernized chlorine cells at South Charleston, West Virginia, were
scheduled to go on stream. Unexpected troubles, characteristic of the
chemical industry but from which this company had been surprisingly
free in most of its other modernization and expansion programs, indi-
cate that it will be the first quarter of 1958 before this earning spurt will
now occur.

“T suspect that until this earning betterment comes and chemical
profit margins grow and continue to broaden for a period of time, the
institutional buyer will generally fail to look beneath the surface and
will largely stay away from this stock. If, as I suspect will happen, such a
development manifests itself in 1958 and 1959, financial sentiment some
time in that period will come around to recognizing the basic improve-


98 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

ment in fundamentals that started several years before. At that time the
stock, which may then continue to grow for years, will be selling at a
price that has advanced partly because of the improvement in per-share
earnings that had already occurred but even more because of the
changed price-earnings ratio that results from a general reappraisal of
the company’s intrinsic quality.”

I believe the record of the past two years emphatically validates
these comments. Possibly the first general recognition of what had been
happening beneath the surface came when in the depression-like year
of 1958, a year when nearly all chemical and machinery companies
showed a decided drop in earning power, Food Machinery reported
profits at an all-time peak of $2.39 per share. This was moderately above
the levels of the several preceding years when the general economy was
at higher levels. It was a tip-off that the chemical divisions were at last
being brought to a point where they could take their place along with
the machinery end of the business as a highly desirable and not a mar-
ginal investment. While 1959 profits are not yet available as these words
are written, the sharp gains in earning power reported for the first nine
months over the corresponding period of 1958 give further assurance
that the long period of reorganizing the chemical divisions is bearing
rich fruit. The 1959 gains are perhaps particularly significant in that this
is the year in which the ordnance division is in transition from its for-
mer principal product of an armored personnel and light equipment
amphibious tank-like carrier made of steel, to an aluminum one that can
be dropped from the air by parachute. This means that 1959 was the one
year in the recent past or foreseeable future in which ordnance activi-
ties made no significant contribution to total earning power. Yet an
important new earning peak was attainted.

How is the market responding to all this? At the end of September
1957, when writing of the first edition was concluded, these shares were
selling at 25%. Today they are at 51,a gain of 102 per cent. It is begin-
ning to look as though the financial scntiment I mentioned in the orig-
inal edition is beginning “to recognize the basic improvement in funda-
mentals that started some years before.”

Other events are confirming this trend and may give further impetus
to it. In 1959 the McGraw-Hill Publications inaugurated a new custom.
They decided each year to give an award for outstanding management
achievement in the chemical industries. To determine the first winner



When to Buy 99

of this honor they selected an unusually distinguished and informed
pancl of ten members. Four represented leading university graduate
schools of business administration, three came from major investment
institutions with heavy holdings in the chemical industry, and three
were leading members of prominent chemical consulting firms. Twenty-
two companies were nominated and fourteen submitted presentations.
This award for management accomplishment did not go to one or
another of the giants of the industry, the managements of several of
which, with very good reason, are highly respected in Wall Street.
Instead it went to the Chemical Divisions of the Food Machinery
Corporation which, two years before, had been regarded by most and is
still regarded by many institutional stock buyers as a rather undesirable
investment!

Why is a matter of this sort of major importance to long-range
investors? Tirst, it gives strong assurance that, plus or minus the trend of
general business activity, the earnings of such a company will grow for
years to come. Informed chemical businessmen would not give this kind
of award in the industry to a company that did not have the research
departments to keep developing worthwhile new products and the chem-
ical engineers to produce them profitably. Secondly, this type of award will
leave its impression on the investment community. Nothing is more desir-
able for stockholders than the influence on share prices of an upward
trend of earnings multiplied by a comparable upward trend in the way
each dollar of such earnings is valued in the market place, as I mentioned
in my concluding remarks about this company in the original edition.

Other matters besides the introduction of new products and the
problems of starting complex plants can also open up buying opportu-
nities in the unusual company. For example, a Middle Western electronic
company was, among other things, well known for its unusual and
excellent labor relations. It grew to a point where size alone forced
some change in its method of handling employees. An unfortunate
interplay of personalities caused friction, slow-down strikes, and low
productivity in an enterprise heretofore known for its good labor rela-
tions and high labor productivity. At just this time the company made
one of the very few mistakes it has made in judging the potential mar-
ket for a new product. Earnings dropped precipitously and so did the
price of the shares.

The unusually able and ingenious management made plans at once
to correct this situation. While plans can be made in a matter of weeks,


100 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

putting them into effect takes much longer. As results from these plans
began coming through to carnings, the stock reached what might be
called buying point A. However, it took about a year and a half before all
the benefits could flow through to the profit statement. Toward the end
of this period a second strike occurred, settlement of which was the last
step needed to enable the company to restore competitive efficiency.
This strike was not a long one. Nevertheless, while this short and rela -
tively inexpensive strike was occurring, word went through the finan-
cial community that labor matters were going from bad to worse. In
spite of heavy buying from officers of the company, the stock went
lower. It did not stay lower for long. This proved to be another of the
right sort of buying opportunities from the standpoint of timing, and
might be called buying point B. Those who looked beneath the surface
and saw what was really happening were able to buy, at bargain prices,
a stock that may well grow for them for many years.

Let us see just how profitable it might have been if an investor had
bought at either buying point A or buying point B. I do not intend to
use the lowest price which a table of monthly price ranges would show
that this stock reached in either period. This is because only a few hun-
dred shares changed hands at the extreme low point. If an investor had
bought at the absolute lows, it would have been more a matter of luck
than anything else. Instead, I will use a figure moderately above the low
in one case and several points above in the other. In each instance a
good many thousand shares were available and changed hands at these
levels. I will use only prices at which the shares could easily have been
bought by anyone making a realistic study of the situation.

At buying point A the stock had slipped in just a few months by
about 24 per cent from its former peak. Within about a year those who
bought here would have had a gain in market value of between 55 per
cent and 60 per cent. Then came the strike that produced buying point
B. The stock dropped back almost 20 per cent. Strangely enough, it
remained there for some weeks after the strike ended. At this time, a
brilliant employee of a large investment trust cxplaincd to me that he
knew how good the situation was and what was almost sure to happen.
Nevertheless he would not recommend the purchase to his financial
committee. He said certain of the members were sure to check with
Wall Street friends and not only turn down his recommendation, but
rebuke him for bringing to their attention a company with a sloppy
management and hopeless labor relations!



When to Buy 101

As I write this not so many months later, the stock has already
risen 50 per cent from buying point B. This means that it is now up
over 90 per cent from buying point A. More important, the company’s
future looks brilliant, with every prospect that it will enjoy abnormal
growth for years to come just as it did for some years before the com-
bination of unusual and temporary unfortunate occurrences produced
buying points A and B. Those who bought at either time got into the
right sort of company at the right sort of time.

In short, the company into which the investor should be buying is
the company which is doing things under the guidance of exceptional-
ly able management. A few of these things are bound to fail. Others will
from time to time produce unexpected troubles before they succeed.
The investor should be thoroughly sure in his own mind that these
troubles are temporary rather than permanent. Then if these troubles
have produced a significant decline in the price of the affected stock and
give promise of being solved in a matter of months rather than years, he
will probably be on pretty safe ground in considering that this is a time
when the stock may be bought.

All buying points do not arise out of corporate troubles. In indus-
tries such as chemical production, where large amounts of capital are
required for each dollar of sales, another type of opportunity sometimes
occurs. The mathematics of such situations are usually about like this: A
new plant or plants will be erected for, say, $10 million. A year or two
after these plants are in full-scale operation, the company’s engineers
will go over them in detail. They will come up with proposals for spend-
ing an additional, say, $1’4 million. For this 15 per cent greater total cap-
ital investment the engineers will show how the output of the plants can
be increased by perhaps 40 per cent of previous capacity.

Obviously, since the plants are already profitable and 40 per cent
more output can be made and sold for only 15 per cent more capital
cost, and since almost no additional general overhead is involved, the
profit margin on this extra 40 per cent of output will be unusually
good. If the project is large enough to affect the company’s earnings as
a whole, buying the company’s shares just before this improvement in
earning power has been reflected in the market price for these shares
can similarly mean a chance to get into the right sort of company at the
right time.

What is the common denominator of each of the examples just
given? It is that a worthwhile improvement in earnings is coming in the


102 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

right sort of company, but that this particular increase in earnings has
not yet produced an upward move in the price of that company’s shares,
I believe that whenever this situation occurs the right sort of investment
may be considered to be in a buying range. Conversely, when it does not
occur, an investor will still in the long run make money if he buys into
outstanding companies. However, he had then better have a somewhat
greater degree of patience for it will take him longer to make this
money and percentage-wise it will be a considerably smaller profit on
his original investment.

Does this mean that if a person has some money to invest he should
completely ignore what the future trend of the business cycle may be
and invest 100 per cent of this fund the moment he has found the right
stocks, as defined in Chapter Three, and located a good buying point, as
indicated in this chapter? A depression might strike right after he has
made his investment. Since a decline of 40 to 50 per cent from its peak
is not at all uncommon for even the best stock in a normal business
depression, is not completely ignoring the business cycle rather a risky
policy?
