
than the probability that it will be trading at $385. What I'm saying is
that under the right circumstances, it might actually be more likely

that gold will be trading at $360 than at $385. If my expectations,
which assume nonrandom price behavior, are correct, it will imply
profit opportunities because the market is pricing options on the
assumption that price movements will be random.
Could you give me a stock market example?
I'll give you a stock index example. Last year [1998], it was my belief
that stocks were trading on money inflows rather than their own
intrinsic fundamentals. IBM wasn't going up because the analysts
were looking at IBM and saying, "Here's the future earning stream
and we predict the price should rise to this level." IBM was going up
because people were dumping money into the market, and managers
were buying IBM and other stocks because they had to invest the
money somewhere.
A market that is driven by inflows can have small corrections, but
it has to then immediately recover to new highs to keep generating
new money inflows. Otherwise, money inflows are likely to dry up,
and the market will fall apart. Therefore, this type of market is likely
to either trend higher or break sharply. There is a much smaller-thannormal chance that the market will go down 5 or 6 percent and stay
there. Based on this assumption, last year I implemented an option
strategy that would make a lot of money if the market went down big,
make a little bit if the market went up small, and lose a small amount
if the market went down small and stayed there. The market kept up
its relentless move upward for the first half the year, and I made a
small amount of money. Then the market had a correction and didn't
recover right away; the next stop was down 20 percent. I made an
enormous amount of money on that move.

tUESTIONING THE O B V I O U S

Each of your examples has been very market specific. If I said to
you that you could come up with any alternative model you

wished instead of Black Scholes, but you had to apply it to all
markets, could you do any better than Black-Scholes?
No, given that restriction, the assumption that prices are random is as
good as any other assumption. However, just because Black and
Scholes used a one-size-fits-all approach doesn't mean it's correct.
Don't other firms such as Susquehanna [a company whose principal was interviewed in The New Market Wizards] also trade on
models based on perceived mispricings implied by the standard
Black-Scholes model?
When I was on the floor of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, I was
typically trading on the other side of firms such as Susquehanna.
They thought they had something special because they were using a
pricing model that modified the Black-Scholes model. Basically, their
modifications were trivial.
I call what they were doing TV set—type adjustments. Let's say I
have an old-fashioned TV with an aerial. I turn it on, and the picture is
not quite right. I know it's supposed to be Mickey Mouse, but one ear
is fuzzy and he is a funny color green. What do I do? Do I sit down and
calculate where my aerial should be relative to the location of the
broadcast antenna? No, I don't do that. What I do is walk up to the TV,
whack it a couple of times, and twist the aerial. What am I doing? I'm
operating totally on feedback. I have never thought once about what is
really going on. All I do is twist the aerial until the picture looks like
what I think it should—until I see Mickey Mouse in all of his glory.
The market-making firms would make minor adjustments to the
Black-Scholes model—the same way I twisted the aerial to get
Mickey Mouse's skin color to be beige instead of green—until their
model showed the same prices that were being traded on the floor.
Then they would say, "Wow, we solved it; here is the model!" They
would use this model to print out option price sheets and send in a
bunch of kids, whom we called "sheet monkeys," to stand on the floor
and make markets. But did they ever stop to think about what the
right model would be instead of Black-Scholes?" No. They merely

JOHN BENDFR

twisted the aerial on the TV set until the picture matched the picture
on the floor.
This approach may be okay if you are a market maker and all you
are trying to do is profit from the price spread between the bid and
the offer rather than make statements about which options are fundamentally overpriced or underpriced. As a trader, however, I'm trying to
put on positions that identify when the market is mispriced. I can't
use a model like that. I need to figure out fundamentally what the real
prices should be, not to re-create the prices on the floor.
Even though you manage a quarter of a billion dollars you seem
to keep an incredibly low profile. In fact, I've never seen your
name in print. Is this deliberate?
As a policy, I don't do interviews with the media.
Why is that?
My feeling is that it is very difficult for a money manager to give an
honest interview. Why would I want to be interviewed and tell the
world all my best investment ideas? Let's say I am a fund manager
and I have just identified XYZ as being the best buy around. Why
should I go on TV and announce that to the world? If I really believe
that is true, shouldn't I be buying the stock? And if I am buying it,
why would 1 want any competition?
Well, you may already be in the position.
Exactly. The only time anyone touts a position is when they have it on
and want to get out. When you turn on some financial TV program
and see someone tell you to buy a stock, there's a good chance he's
telling you to buy what he wants to sell. I've seen fund managers recommend the stock on TV and then seen their sell orders on the floor
the same day.
There is an alternative scenario. You could be bullish on XYZ and
have just bought your entire position. If that is the case, it would
be beneficial for you to have other people buying the stock, even
if you have no intention of selling it.
Isn't that also self-serving and unethical?
No, I would argue that if I own XYZ and want to get out of it, and
then I go on TV to tout the stock—that is unethical. But if I have
just bought XYZ and own all I want, and I am a long-term

Q U E S T I O N I N G T H E OBttOUS

investor who doesn't intend to get out of the stock for another six
to eight months, I don't see anything wrong with recommending

the stock.
Maybe not in that case. But being on the floor, I've seen all sorts of
conflicts between trade recommendations and a firm's own trading
activity.
Such as?
I'll give you an example that is a matter of public record and involves
over-the-counter stocks—those total dens of thievery. It became recognized that some companies recommended stocks to their clients
and then sold the same stocks themselves all day long. Not only were
these firms the largest sellers of a stock on the day after they recommended it, but they were also the largest buyers of the stock during
the preceding week. Here is how they explained it—I'm paraphrasing,
but I am not making any of this up: "These over-the-counter stocks
have very little liquidity. If we just recommend the stock, our clients
won't be able to buy it because the market will run away. Therefore
we have a to buy a few million shares of the stock before we recommend it, so that when we do, we have supply to sell our customers."
The SEC, which looked into this practice, accepted their argument,
and they continue to do this. It's perfectly legal.
If you took the cynical attitude that all Wall Street recommendations are made to get the firm's large clients or the firm itself out of
positions, you would make money. I had a friend who made money
using exactly that strategy. In my own trading, when I am estimating
the price probability distribution for a stock, and a number of Wall
Street firms put out buy recommendations on that stock, it grossly
changes the probability distribution—the chances of that stock dropping sharply become much larger.
Why is that?
If a bunch of brokerage firms recommend AOL, after two or three
weeks, we figure that everyone who wanted to buy the stock has
already bought it. That's the same reason why most fund managers
underperform the S&P: They buy the trendy stocks and the stocks
where all the good news is. The fact is that they may be buying a good
company, but they're getting it at a bad price. Conversely, when a

JOHN BENDER

stock gets hit by really bad news, and every analyst downgrades the
stock, it's probably a good buy. It may be a bad company, but you are
getting a good price—not necessarily right away, but after a few weeks
when all the selling on the news has taken place. It's not the current
opinion on the stock that matters, but rather the potential change in
the opinion.

It doesn't sound like you have a very high regard for Wall Street
analysts.
If you tune in CNBC and see a stock that has announced horrendous
earnings and is down 40 percent, the next morning, you'll see every
analyst on the Street dropping the stock from their recommended list.
Where were they the day before? Even though the news is already out
and the stock is down 40 percent in after-hours trading, they get
credit for recommending liquidation of the stock on the previous
day's close because the market hasn't officially opened yet. When you
look at their track record, it appears that they recommended liquidating the stock at $50, even though at the time, the stock was trading at
$30 in the off-the-Hoor market before the official exchange opening.
Conversely, if a stock announces good news, and the stock is trading
sharply higher before the official exchange opening, analysts can recommend a buy and get credit for issuing the recommendation on the
previous close.

Bender provides some very important insights for option traders,
and we'll get to those in a moment. But the most important message
of this chapter is: Don't accept anything; question everything. This
principle is equally relevant to all traders, and I suspect to all professions. The breakthroughs are made by those that question what is
obviously "true." As but one example, Before Einstein, the idea that
time was a constant seemed so apparent that the alternative was not
even considered. By questioning the obvious and realizing that the
accepted view had to be wrong (that is, time was variable and
dependent on relative velocity), Einstein made the greatest strides in
the history of science.
One of the basic tenets of option theory is that the probabilities of

BJIEST-IONIN6

different prices on a future date can be described by a normal
curve.* Many traders have tweaked this model in various ways. For
example, many option market participants have realized that rare
events (very large price increases and decreases, such as the October
19, 1987, stock market crash) were far more common in reality than
predicted by a normal curve and have adjusted the curve accordingly.
(They made the tails of the curve fatter.) Bender, however, has gone
much further. He has questioned the very premise of using a normal
curve as the starting point for describing prices. He has also questioned the convention of using a single model to describe the price
behavior—and by implication option prices—of different markets and
stocks. By ditching the concept that price movements behave in the
random fashion implicitly assumed by a normal distribution and by
dropping the assumption of a universal model, Bender was able to
derive much more accurate option pricing models.
Ideally, options should be used to express trades where the
trader's expectations differ from the theoretical assumptions of standard option pricing models. For example, if you believe that a given
stock has a chance that is much greater than normal of witnessing a
large, rapid price rise before the option expiration date, then purchasing out-of-the-money call options might be a much better trade
(in terms of return versus risk) than buying the stock. (Out-of-themoney call options are relatively cheap because they will only have
value at expiration if the stock price rises sharply.)
As another example, let's say there is an upcoming event for a
stock that has an equal chance of being bullish or bearish. But if it is
bullish, you expect that a large price rise will be more likely than a
moderate price rise. Standard option pricing models, of course,

*To be precise, the representation is a lognormal curve, which is a normal curve of the log
values of stock prices. In a lognormal curve, an increase by a factor x is considered as
likely as a decrease by a factor 1 /x. For example, if x = 1.25, a price increase by a factor of 1.25 (25 percent) is considered as likely as a price decrease by a factor of
1/1.25, or 0.80 (20 percent). The lognormal curve is a better fit than the normal
curve because prices can rise by any amount, but can decline only by 100 percent. If
applied to prices instead of the log of prices, the symmetry of a normal curve could
only be achieved by allowing for negative prices (an impossible event), which in fact
is what some early option theoreticians did.

assume that a moderate price rise is always more likely than a large
price rise. Insofar as your assumptions are correct and not already
discounted by prevailing option prices, it would be possible to construct an option trade that would stack the odds in your favor. As one
example, you might sell at-the-money call options and use the premium collected to buy a much larger number of cheaper out-of-themoney call options. This strategy will break even if prices decline,
lose moderately if prices rise a little, and win big if prices rise a lot.
The key to using options effectively is to sketch out your expectations of the probabilities of a stock moving to different price levels. If
these expectations differ from the neutral price assumptions that
underlie a normal distribution curve and standard option pricing
models, it implies that there are option strategies that offer a particularly favorable bet—assuming, of course, that your expectations
tend to be more accurate than random guesses.

CLAUDIO GUAZZONI
Eliminating the Downside

Sometimes you discover that your most firmly held convictions are wrong, or
at least subject to exceptions. One common flaw committed by investors
is that they chase recent performance, a tendency that results in the
largest investment inflows occurring at a manager's equity peaks and the
largest withdrawals near the equity lows. To counter this natural human
inclination toward poor investment timing, I have often counseled
investors to separate the processes of selecting and timing investments—
that is, to select the investment, but then wait for it to experience a
period of below-average performance before investing their funds. Any
prospective investor for Guazzoni's fund who followed this advice would
still be waiting on the sidelines. The fund has yet to register a losing
month. Returns have also been impressive, averaging 37 percent annualized since the fund's launch date over five years ago.
Guazzoni's family emigrated from Italy when he was sixteen. Both his
parents are nuclear physicists (his mother was also an Olympic skier)
who were recruited by the U.S. Department of Defense as part of a classified cold war program, which Guazzoni explained was designed to harbor noteworthy European scientists in the United States, a very safe

distance from the Soviet Union's reach. Guazzoni, however, speaks English without any trace of an accent. He also speaks five other languages
fluently.
I arrived at our arranged meeting spot, the Yale Club reading room, at
the exact appointed time, 10 A.M. The cavernous room was virtually
deserted, and only a man and a woman immersed in an apparent busi-

239

CLAUDIfl3«!UAZZONJ

ness meeting occupied the quadrant of the room specified by Guazzoni
in his meeting instructions. I found a comfortable, aged leather sofa, and
while waiting for Guazzoni, I worked on the introduction for an interview
I had conducted the previous evening. The oversize dimensions of the
room, the furnishings, and the large oil canvases all combined to create
an aura of the early twentieth century. Even the ubiquitous ashtrays
served as a jarring anachronism.
I had expected Claudio Guazzoni to be a man in his fifties or sixties,
with neatly trimmed hair, and wearing a finely tailored suit. Perhaps this
mental image was fostered by my preconceptions of what the principal of
a European-named investment firm would look like. I was therefore surprised when 1 was approached by a man in his thirties, sporting a goatee
and a ponytail.
I latter learned that Guazzoni's choice of hairstyle had an unusual origin. In Milan, where Guazzoni was born, it is customary for men to give
their new wives jewelry as a wedding present. In line with this tradition,
he took his fiancee to Harry Winston, one of Manhattan's most exclusive
jewelry stores, and asked her to choose whatever she desired. After an
hour of looking at and trying on different items, his fiancee, who is not
overly keen on material possessions, made Guazzoni a deal he couldn't
refuse. "Look," she said, "purchasing an extravagant piece of jewelry
requires little effort on your part; instead, how about allowing your hair to
grow, promising me not to cut it for two years'?" Guazzoni could not
refuse.
Guazzoni explained how his longer hair affected the way people
responded to him at business meetings. Apparently, it placed Internet
company entrepreneurs at ease, but more traditional corporate types and
investment bankers often ended up directing their conversation at Guazzoni's subordinates. "Ever since I've grown my hair," he said, "I get a lot
more time to sit back and listen at meetings. It's actually been very helpful to be more of an observer."
We began the interview in the reading room and continued it several
hours later in the dining room, seated at a sun-drenched table that overlooked Grand Central Station.

E L I M I N A T I N G THE D O W N S I D E

In our interview, don't be concerned about censoring what you
might say, because I will give you a chance to review your quotes
before the book is printed.
Actually, anything I say, you can print, because I never have done anything in my life that I am ashamed of. We are not rocket scientists.
Some people like to complicate things through fancy formulas and
black boxes, but what we do is very simple.
How so?
We simply judge people's characters and their abilities to get themselves out of trouble.
By people, do you mean CEOs?
The CEOs and other top management. Judging a person's character
and ability to get himself out of a box is more of an inherent trait then
an acquired skill.
In other words, what you're doing is very qualitative instead of
quantitative.
Extremely so. We judge a person's character. As one example, we look
for people who don't cheat on their wives.
How would you know that? I'm assuming you don't hire detectives to trail the CEOs when you are considering a prospective
investment.
Assume you are at a restaurant with a CEO, discussing the outlook of
his company, and an attractive woman walks by. If his attention is no
longer focused on you, then. . . . Also, a lot of people will freely boast
about their escapades. My attitude is that if someone will cheat on
his wife, then he will cheat on me too.
Are you seeking out companies that are in trouble?
Not at all! Eighty percent of the business we do is acquisition finance.
Define that for me.
Notwithstanding the mature state of the U.S. economy, small pockets
of industries still exist that are very fragmented with lots of so-called
mom-and-pops. In certain of these industries, consolidators have naturally developed to purchase and roll up these mom-and-pops as part
of a larger nationwide group.
Can you give me an example of one of these companies.
We currently have thirteen companies in our portfolio, and each of

C L A U D I O 6UAZZONI1

them is a consolidator in a particular industry group. One example is
a firm that consolidates the hearing aid industry. As a bit of background, among people over sixty, only one-third of those who need
hearing aids wear them. In the under-sixty category, about 10 to 15
percent of the population needs hearing aids because of damage
caused by loud rock concerts and Walkman players, but virtually no
one in this age group wears them. A sizable stigma still exists, similar
to eyeglasses in the 1950s or 1960s. Although there is a huge market
potential, hearing aids are distributed in a very haphazard and fragmented manner. There are one or two large corporations that in my
opinion are less than ethical—I'm sure you've seen their ads on latenight television. The bulk of the industry, however, consists of smallscale mom-and-pop shops, which have one or two primary brands of
hearing devices that they push.
The CEO of our consolidator wants to become the Pearle Vision
of hearing aids. He is rolling up mom-and-pop outlets and standardizing the stores. He makes sure that there is a hearing doctor at each
location, just as there is an ophthalmologist at each Pearle Vision
site. When he buys a hearing aid retailer, he gives them shares in the
company and puts them through a rigorous corporate training program. The end result is that it doesn't matter whether a customer
goes to one of the company's stores in Manhattan or Palm Beach. In
either case, the service will be the same, and there will be a choice of
forty models, including ones in bold colors and computerized versions.
Could you term this type of approach as reverse franchising, in
the sense that existing outlets are being consolidated into a
chain?
Not exactly, because the stores are owned by the company.
What's the advantage of converting existing stores instead of just
opening new ones?
This process retains customers and eliminates competition.
Is this a new type of approach to forming a chain business?
It's relatively new, although Pearle Vision and LensCrafters consolidated the eyeglass industry some time ago.

E L I M I N A T I N G THE

How do you enter into the equation?
We finance the acquisitions. At times, we also identify and negotiate
the acquisitions.
How is what you do different from venture capital?
The companies we invest in are already listed on a stock exchange,
whereas venture capitalists typically come in at a much earlier stage.
Although the companies already exist, they need money to grow. We
finance their expansion, and in return they give us privately placed
equity.

Obviously, they're not just giving you equity at the market price.
There must be some beneficial structure.
The deals are very structured, with our returns guaranteed by the
company. As long as the company stays in business, we are assured a
minimum preferred return on equity of between 10 and 20 percent. If
the company does well, our upside is heavily skewed.
How are these guarantees achieved?
We use half a dozen different types of proprietary structures, but in
all these variations, as long as the company stays in business, our
returns are preferred* and guaranteed.
So even if the company stock is $ 10 when you make the deal and
it goes down to $5, you still make a minimum return?
Seven dollars, $5, or $3, our returns are still the same. If, however,
the stock goes from $10 to $15, we share in a large portion of the
upside. And from $ 15 to $20, we might share in an even larger portion of the upside.
Why would a company raise money by doing a guaranteed deal
