
186/396

“There is an iron law of house prices,” he
wrote. “The more house prices rise relative to
income and rents, the more they will subsequently fall.”
The problem for Kelly, once he had these
thoughts, was what to do with them. “This
isn’t my day job,” he says. “I was working on
medieval population theory.” By the time I
got to him Kelly had angered and alienated
the entire Irish business and political establishment, but he was himself neither angry
nor alienated, nor even especially public.
He’s not the pundit type. He works in an office built when Irish higher education was
conducted on linoleum floors, beneath fluorescent lights, surrounded by metal bookshelves, and generally felt more like a manufacturing enterprise than a prep school for
real estate and finance—and likes it. He’s
puckish,
unrehearsed,
and
apparently—though in Ireland one wants to be
careful about using this word—sane. Though

187/396

not exactly self-denying, he’s clearly more
comfortable talking and thinking about subjects other than himself. He spent years in
graduate school, and collected a doctorate
from Yale, and yet somehow retained an almost childlike curiosity. “I was in this position—sort of being a passenger on this ship,”
he says. “And you see a big iceberg. And so
you go and ask the captain: Is that an
iceberg?”
HIS WARNING TO his ship’s captain took the

form of his first ever newspaper article. Its
bottom line: “It is not implausible that [Irish
real estate] prices could fall—relative to income—by 40 to 50 percent.” At the top of the
market, he guessed, prices might fall by a
staggering 66 percent. He sent his first piece
to the small-circulation Irish Times. “It was a
whim,” he says. “I’m not even sure that I believed what I was saying at the time. My position has always been, ‘You can’t predict the
future.’” As it happened, Kelly had predicted

188/396

the future, with uncanny accuracy, but to believe what he was saying you had to accept
that Ireland was not some weird exception in
human financial history. “It had no impact,”
Kelly says. “The response was general
amusement. It was what will these crazy
eggheads come up with next? sort of stuff.”
What the crazy egghead came up with next
was the obvious link between Irish real estate prices and Irish banks. After all, the vast
majority of the construction was being funded by Irish banks. If the real estate market
collapsed, those banks would be on the hook
for the losses. “I eventually figured out what
was going on,” says Kelly. “The average value
and number of new mortgages peaked in
summer 2006. But lending standards were
clearly falling after this.” The banks continued to make worse loans, but the people borrowing the money to buy houses were growing wary. “What was happening,” says Kelly,
“is that a lot of people were getting cold feet.”

189/396

The consequences for Irish banks—and the
economy—of the inevitable shift in market
sentiment would be catastrophic. The banks’
losses would lead them to slash their lending
to actually useful businesses. Irish citizens in
hock to their banks would cease to spend.
And, perhaps worst of all, new construction,
on which the entire economy was now
premised, would cease.
Kelly wrote his second newspaper article,
more or less predicting the collapse of the
Irish banks. He pointed out that in the last
decade the Irish banks and economy had
fundamentally changed. In 1997 the Irish
banks were funded entirely by Irish deposits.
By 2005 they were getting most of their
money from abroad. The small German
savers who ultimately supplied the Irish
banks with deposits to re-lend in Ireland
could take their money back with the click of
a computer mouse. Since 2000, lending to
construction and real estate had risen from 8

190/396

percent of Irish bank lending (the European
norm) to 28 percent. One hundred billion
euros—or basically the sum total of all Irish
bank deposits—had been handed over to
Irish commercial property developers. By
2007, Irish banks were lending 40 percent
more to property developers alone than they
had to the entire Irish population seven
years earlier. “You probably think that the
fact that Irish banks have given speculators
€100 billion to gamble with, safe in the
knowledge that the taxpayers will cover most
losses, is a cause for concern to the Irish
Central Bank,” Kelly wrote, “but you would
be quite wrong.”
THIS TIME KELLY sent his piece to a newspaper

with a far bigger circulation, the Irish
Independent. The Independent’s editor
wrote back to say he found the article offensive and wouldn’t publish it. Kelly next turned
to the Sunday Business Post, but the editor
just sat on the piece. The journalists were

191/396

following the bankers’ lead and conflating a
positive outlook on real estate prices with a
love of country and a commitment to Team
Ireland. (“They’d all use this same phrase,
‘You’re either for us or against us,’” says a
prominent Irish bank analyst in Dublin.)
Kelly finally went back to the Irish Times,
which ran his piece in September 2007.
A brief and, to Kelly’s way of thinking,
pointless controversy ensued. The public relations guy at University College Dublin
called the head of the Department of Economics and asked him to find someone to
write a learned attack on Kelly’s piece. (The
department head refused.) A senior executive at Anglo Irish Bank, Matt Moran, called
to holler at him. “He went on about how ‘the
real estate developers who are borrowing
from us are so incredibly rich they are only
borrowing from us as a favor.’ He wanted to
argue but we ended up having lunch. This is
Ireland, after all.” Kelly also received a flurry

192/396

of worried-sounding messages from financial
people in London, but of these he was dismissive. “I get the impression there’s this
pool of analysts in the financial markets who
spend all day sending scary e-mails to each
other.” He never found out how much force
his little newspaper piece exerted on the
minds of people who mattered.
It wasn’t until almost exactly one year
later, on September 29, 2008, that Morgan
Kelly became the startled object of popular
interest. The stocks of the three main Irish
banks, Anglo Irish, AIB, and Bank of Ireland,
had fallen by between a fifth and a half in a
single trading session, and a run on Irish
bank deposits had started. The Irish government was about to guarantee all the obligations of the six biggest Irish banks. The most
plausible explanation for all of this was Morgan Kelly’s narrative: that the Irish economy
had become a giant Ponzi scheme, and the
country was effectively bankrupt. But it was

193/396

so starkly at odds with the story peddled by
Irish government officials and senior Irish
bankers—that the banks merely had a “liquidity” problem and that Anglo Irish was
“fundamentally sound”—that the two could
not be reconciled. The government had a report newly thrown together by Merrill Lynch,
which declared that “all of the Irish banks
are profitable and well-capitalized.” The difference between the official line and Kelly’s
was too vast to be split. You believed either
one or the other, and up until September
2008, who was going to believe this guy
holed up in his office wasting his life writing
about the effects of the Little Ice Age on the
English population? “I went on TV,” says
Kelly. “I’ll never do it again.”
KELLY’S COLLEAGUES IN the University College

economics department watched his transformation from serious academic to amusing
crackpot to disturbingly prescient guru with
interest. One was Colm McCarthy, who, in

194/396

the Irish recession of the late 1980s, played a
high-profile role in slashing government
spending, and so had experienced the intersection of finance and public opinion. In
McCarthy’s view the dominant narrative inside the head of the average Irish citizen—and his receptiveness to the story Kelly
was telling—changed at roughly ten o’clock
in the evening on October 2, 2008. On that
night Ireland’s bank regulator, a lifelong
Central Bank bureaucrat in his sixties named
Patrick Neary, came live on national television to be interviewed. The interviewer sounded as if he had just finished reading the collected works of Morgan Kelly. The Irish bank
regulator, for his part, looked as if he had
been dragged from a hole into which he
badly wanted to return. He wore an insecure
little mustache, stammered rote answers to
questions he had not been asked, and ignored the ones he had been asked.

195/396

A banking system is an act of faith: it survives only for as long as people believe it will.
Two weeks earlier the collapse of Lehman
Brothers had cast doubt on banks everywhere. Ireland’s banks had not been managed to withstand doubt; they had been
managed to exploit blind faith. Now the Irish
people finally caught a glimpse of the guy
meant to be safeguarding them: the crazy
uncle had been sprung from the family cellar. Here he was, on their televisions, insisting that the Irish banks’ problems had nothing whatsoever to do with the loans they’d
made . . . when anyone with eyes could see,
in the vacant skyscrapers and empty housing
estates around them, evidence of bank loans
that were not merely bad but insane. “What
happened was that everyone in Ireland had
the idea that somewhere in Ireland there was
a little wise old man who was in charge of the
money, and this was the first time they’d
ever seen this little man,” says McCarthy.

196/396

“And then they saw him and said, Who the
fuck was that??? Is that the fucking guy who
is in charge of the money??? That’s when
everyone panicked.”
ON THE MORNING of the day the Irish govern-

ment planned to unveil a brutal new budget,
I took my seat in the visitors’ gallery of the
Irish parliament. Beside me sat an aide to
Joan Burton, who, as the Labor Party’s financial spokesperson, was at the time a fair
bet to become Ireland’s next minister of finance, the unnatural heir to an unholy mess.
Down on the floor the seats are mostly
empty, but a handful of politicians, Burton
included, discuss what they have been discussing without intermission for the past two
years: the nation’s financial crisis.
The first thing you notice when you watch
the Irish parliament at work is that the
politicians say everything twice, once in English and once in Gaelic. As there is no one in
Ireland who does not speak English, and a

197/396

vast majority who do not speak Gaelic, this
comes across as a forced gesture that wastes
a great deal of time. I ask several Irish politicians if they speak Gaelic, and all offer the
same uneasy look and hedgy reply: “Enough
to get by.” The politicians in Ireland speak
Gaelic the way the Real Housewives of
Orange County speak French. To ask “Why
bother to speak it at all?” is of course to miss
the point. Everywhere you turn you see both
emulation of the English and a desire, sometimes desperate, for distinction. The Irish insistence on their Irishness—their conceit that
they are more devoted to their homeland
than the typical citizen of the world—has an
element of bluster about it, from top to bottom. At the top are the many very rich Irish
people who emit noisy patriotic sounds but
arrange officially to live elsewhere so they
don’t have to pay tax in Ireland; at the bottom, the waves of emigration that define
Irish history. The Irish people and their

198/396

country are like lovers whose passion is
heightened by their suspicion that they will
probably wind up leaving each other. Their
loud patriotism is a cargo ship for their
doubt.
ON THIS DAY, in addition to awaiting word on

the budget, the Dáil (pronounced “Doyle”),
as the Irish call their House of Representatives, had before it what should have been a
controversial piece of business: to vote on
whether to call elections to fill its four empty
seats. The ruling party, Fianna Fáil, held a
slim majority of two seats and, because they
are universally believed to have created a financial catastrophe, an approval rating of 15
percent. If the elections were held immediately, they’d have been tossed from
power—in itself a radical idea, as they have
more or less ruled Ireland since its founding
as an independent state, in 1922. Yet they
successfully resisted the call to fill the empty

199/396

seats, right up until they were tossed from
power in February 2011.
A bell rings for a vote, and Irish politicians
stream in. A few minutes before the vote, the
doors to their chamber will be closed and
guarded. A politician who is late is a politician who cannot vote. A glass barrier separates the visitors’ gallery and the floor: I ask
my tour guide about it. “It’s not to stop
people from throwing things at their government,” she says, then goes on to explain.
Some years ago an Irish politician came late,
after the doors had been locked. He ran up to
the visitors’ gallery, jumped down from it into the press gallery, ten feet below, and from
there rappelled down the wall to the floor.
They allowed the vote, but put up the glass
barrier. They disapproved of the loophole,
but rewarded the guy with the wit to exploit
it. This, she claims, is very Irish.
The first to take his seat is Bertie Ahern,
the prime minister from June 1997 until May

200/396

2008 and Political Perp No. 1. Ahern is
known both for a native shrewdness and for
saying lots of spectacularly dumb-sounding
things that are fun to quote. Tony Blair has
credited him with a kind of genius in how he
brokered the Northern Ireland peace negotiations; on the other hand, seeking to explain
the financial crisis, he actually said,
“Lehman’s was a world investment bank.
They had testicles everywhere.” Ahern spent
his last days in office denying he’d accepted
bribes from property developers, at least in
part because so much of what he did in office
seemed justified only if he were being paid
by property developers to do it. But Bertie
Ahern, too, obviously believed in the miracle
of Irish real estate. After Morgan Kelly published his article predicting the collapse of
the Irish banks, for instance, Ahern famously
responded to a question about it by saying,
“Sitting on the sidelines cribbing and moaning is a lost opportunity. I don’t know how

201/396

people who engage in that don’t commit
suicide.”
Now Ahern is just another Irish backbencher, with a hangdog slouch and a face
mottled by broken capillaries. To fill the
empty hours he’s taken a second job writing
a sports column for the Rupert Murdoch
Sunday tabloid News of the World, which
just might be the least respectable job in
global journalism.* Ahern’s star, such as it
was, has fallen. When the Irish land boom
flipped from miracle to catastrophe, a lot of
important people’s status, along with perhaps their sense of themselves, flipped with
it. An Irish stockbroker has told me that
many of the former bankers, some of whom
he counts as clients, “actually physically look
different.” He’d just seen the former CEO of
Allied Irish Banks, Eugene Sheehy, in a restaurant, being heckled by other diners. Sheehy once had been a smooth, self-possessed
character whose authority was beyond

202/396

question. “If you saw the guy now,” says my
stockbroker friend, “you’d buy him a cup o’
tea.”
The Irish real estate bubble was different
from the American version in many ways. It
wasn’t disguised, for a start. It didn’t require
a lot of complicated financial engineering
beyond the understanding of mere mortals.
It also wasn’t as cynical. There aren’t a lot
Irish financiers, or real estate people, who
have emerged with a future. In America the
banks went down but the big shots in them
still got rich; in Ireland the big shots went
down with the banks. Sean Fitzpatrick, a
working-class kid turned banker who built
Anglo Irish Bank more or less from scratch,
is widely viewed as the chief architect of Ireland’s misfortune: today he is not merely
bankrupt but unable to show his face in public. Mention his name and people with no interest in banking will tell you with disgust
how he disguised millions of euros of loans

203/396

made to himself by his own bank. What they
don’t mention is what he did with the
money: invested it in Anglo Irish bonds!
When the bank failed Fitzpatrick was listed
among its creditors, having (in April 2008!)
purchased five million euros of Anglo Irish
subordinated floating rate notes.
The top executives of all three big banks
operated in a similar spirit: they bought
shares in their own companies right up to
the moment of collapse, and continued to
pay dividends, as if they had capital to burn.
Virtually all of the big Irish property developers who behaved recklessly signed personal guarantees for their loans. It’s widely
assumed that they must be hiding big piles of
money somewhere, but the evidence thus far
suggests that they are not. The Irish Property
Council has counted twenty-nine suicides by
property developers since the crash—in a
country where suicide often goes unreported
and undercounted. “I said to all the guys,

204/396

‘Always take money off the table.’ Not many
of them took money off the table,” says Dermont Desmond, an Irish billionaire who
made his fortune from software in the early
1990s, and so counts as old money.
The Irish nouveau riche may have created a
Ponzi scheme, but it was a Ponzi scheme in
which they themselves believed. So, too, for
that matter, did some large number of ordinary Irish citizens who bought houses for
fantastic sums. Ireland’s 87 percent rate of
homeownership is the highest in the world.
There’s no such thing as a nonrecourse mortgage in Ireland: the guy who pays too much
for his house is not allowed simply to hand
the keys to the bank and walk away. He’s on
the hook, personally, for whatever he borrowed. Across Ireland people are unable to
extract themselves from their houses or their
bank loans. Irish people will tell you that, because of their sad history of dispossession,
owning a home is not just a way to avoid

205/396

paying rent but a mark of freedom. In their
rush to freedom, the Irish built their own
prisons. And their leaders helped them to do
it.
closing bell, the two men
who sold the Irish people on the notion that
they were responsible not merely for their
own disastrous financial decisions but also
for the ones made by their banks arrive in
the chamber: Prime Minister Brian Cowen
and Finance Minister Brian Lenihan. Along
with the leader of the opposition, and the
third in command of their own party, both
are children of politicians who died in office:
Irish politics is a family affair. Cowen happens also to have been the minister of finance from 2004 until mid-2008, when most
of the bad stuff happened. He is not an obvious Leader of Men. His movements are sullen and lumbering, his face numbed by corpulence, his natural resting expression a look
of confusion. One morning a few weeks
JUST BEFORE THE

206/396

before, he went on national radio sounding,
to well-trained Irish ears, drunk. To my less
trained ones he sounded merely groggy, but
the public is in no mood to cut him a break.
(Four different Irish people told me, on great
authority, that Cowen had faxed Ireland’s
440-billion-euro bank guarantee into the
European Central Bank from a pub.) And the
truth is, if you were to design a human being
to maximize the likelihood that people would
assume he drank too much you’d have a hard
time doing better than the Irish prime minister. Brian Lenihan, who follows on Cowen’s
bovine heels, comes across, by comparison,
as a decathlete in peak condition.
On this day, incredibly yet predictably, the
Parliament decides not to hold a vote to fill
three of its four empty seats. Then they adjourn, and I spend an hour with Joan Burton. Of the major parties in Ireland, Labor
offers the closest thing to a dissenting opinion and a critique of Irish capitalism. As one

207/396

of only eighteen members of the Irish House
of Commons who voted against guaranteeing
the banks’ debts, Burton retains rare credibility. And in an hour of chatting about this
and that she strikes me as straight, bright,
and basically good news. But her role in the
Irish drama is as clear as Morgan Kelly’s:
she’s the shrill mother no one listened to.
She speaks in exclamation points with a
whiny voice that gets on the nerves of every
Irishman—to the point where her voice is
parodied on national radio. Now, when I ask
her what she would do differently from what
the Irish government is doing, even she is
stumped. Like every other Irish politician,
she is at the mercy of forces beyond her control. The Irish bank debt is now Irish government debt, and any suggestion of default will
only raise the cost of borrowing the foreign
money they now can’t live without. “Do you
know that Irish people are now experts on
bonds?” says Burton. “Yes, they now say one

208/396

hundred basis points rather than one percent! They have developed a new
vocabulary!”
As the scope of the Irish losses has grown
clearer, private investors have been less and
less willing to leave even overnight deposits
in Irish banks, and completely uninterested
in buying longer-term bank bonds. The
European Central Bank has quietly filled the
void: one of the most closely watched numbers in Europe has been the amount the ECB
has loaned to the big Irish banks. In late
2007, with the markets still suspending their
disbelief, the banks had borrowed 6.5 billion
euros. By December of 2008 the number had
jumped to 45 billion. As Burton spoke to me
the number was rising, from around 86 billion to a fresh high of 97 billion. That is,
from November 2007 to October 2010 the
Irish banks have borrowed 97 billion euros
from the European Central Bank to repay
private creditors. In September 2010 the last

209/396

big chunk of money the Irish banks owed to
their bondholders, 26 billion euros, came
due. Once the bondholders were paid off in
full, a window of opportunity for the Irish
government closed. A default of the banks
would now not be a default to private investors but a bill presented directly to
European governments. This, by the way, is
why there are so many important-looking
foreigners in Dublin dining alone at night.
They’re here to make sure someone gets his
money back.
One measure of how completely the Irish
can’t imagine offending their foreign financial rulers is how quickly Burton declines to
contemplate such a default. She bears no responsibility at all for the banks’ private
debts, and yet when we creep up on the possibility of simply walking away from them,
she veers away. Actually, she ups and leaves.
“Oh, I have to go,” she says. “I have to meet
the finance minister with the bad news.”
