
I have seen this way too often.
Investors, probably out of greed, will invest with a trader when he or she has a
good run. They believe it is almost safer to invest in this fashion. As trend followers
do the untraditional, I look to buy successful trend followers when they have a steep
drawdown. It is as if I am buying on sale. Every manager will have a drawdown and this
is the time to jump on board.
Open trade equity is my open profits at any one time. I am constantly monitoring this. As I stated earlier, I let my profits run and cut my losses short. The greater
the profits I have on open trade equity, the greater the risks I am allowing. I compare
my open trade profits/open trade equity to my core equity. My core equity is really
the true value of my account. Core equity includes my cash equity as well as closed
positions. Open positions are not really mine until I close them. If I measure my risks
against my core equity and my open trade equity, I am enhancing my risks. Some
traders are OK with this; however, as I stated earlier, I am looking to achieve realistic
returns over time, all the while controlling my risks to a manageable level.
I cap my total open trade equity versus my core equity at 20 percent of my core
equity. When at times I get to that level I stop taking new positions or trades.
This mitigates to some degree the potential of drawdowns. Putting this in simple
terms, considering if I have a $100,000 account size (closed equity plus core equity)
and my open trade profits are $20,000, I stop taking new trades. That simple!

89

Due to the leverage involved in commodity trading, I use additional
levels of risk management. Margin to equity is how much margin money I need to put up
versus how much equity I have in my account. I am constantly managing and monitoring
my margin to equity every day. The greater the margin to equity, the greater the potential risk. My comfort level is not to surpass 15 percent margin to equity. The same holds
when I invest with other trend followers. I do not like to surpass 20 percent.
The higher the margin to equity, the more positions and more potential risk!

Margin to Equity

Over the years I made one mistake after the next. I learned
to risk only approximately 1 percent of my account, I learned to cap my sector risk, I
learned to cap my open trade equity as well as to cap my margin to equity, but I still made
a mistake. What happened was that when my account was relatively small, $100,000 or
$200,000, I would risk a maximum of $2,000 a trade. The issue became apparent as my
account grew over time. A 1 percent risk on a $200,000 dollar account size is $2,000
and 1 percent risk on a $500,000 account size is $5,000 for a one‐lot trade.
Bearing in mind that most trades do not work, I learned that it was not prudent
to risk $5,000 on a one lot. After making this mistake I added the filter to my models

Dollar Risk per Contract

MANAGING THE RISKS WHEN TREND FOLLOWING

Additional Risk Measures When Commodity
Trading and Forex Trading

that I am not willing to take a trade if I am risking too much on a dollar level risk per
contract. In one model of my managed accounts I cap my dollar per contract risk at
$2,000 a contract and on my slightly more aggressive managed account model I cap
my dollar per contract risk at $2,500.
This approach can be applied to stock market trading. You can look at not just the
percentage risk but also the dollar per share risk. As there is a tremendous variance in
the stock market, you need to come up with your own dollar max per share risk. My
personal preference is $20 a share.
I have learned over the years that that biggest percentage trades that
work come from quiet markets and from position sizing.
The smaller the risk per trade, the more shares or contracts that I can put on. The
example is that for the same $1,000 risk on one trade I might put on 300 shares and on
another trade I might for the same $1,000 risk put on 600 shares. Given the fact that
I did not increase my total dollar risk, if the 600 shares move in the direction of the
trend, I can make much more money. This is the key to position trading.
Our job as successful trend followers is to try to manage the only thing we can
manage and that is the risk!
Profits take care of themselves.
I have learned over the years that anything can happen and actually will happen.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

90

■ Choose Markets to Reduce Risk
We have boundless choices of what to trade. There are thousands of stocks and numerous currencies and commodities. Even when we have a well‐thought‐out plan with
exact entries and exact exits it can be confusing. If we change our time frame this even
offers more options.
Too many options become confusing and my goal is to simplify the trading process.
We know we cannot trade everything.
Do not trade the wrong markets!
Trade a market that is MOVING, either up or down, if you can put on a low risk.
You know you should buy when the market goes up and sell when the market goes
down. It is very obvious. So stay away from a market that is choppy or just moving
sideways, and start trading a market with nice trends.
What I learned many years ago from Ned Davis Research, an advisor to many
large hedge funds, was to look to buy the strongest trending markets and look to
sell the weakest trending markets. What I learned over the years, however, was
that I could not just buy the strongest or sell the weakest. I could only buy the
strongest or sell the weakest if I could put on a low‐risk trade. We have already
discussed what a low risk trade is . . . but . . . the question becomes what is a
strong or weak market?

The only way to approach it has to be quantitative. There has to be no
guessing or interpreting.
The simple way I learned to do this was to look at a rate of change. Another word
for rate of change is momentum. We look to measure momentum and identify a potential universe that I am open to trade. This approach is tactical. Almost like how a
shark identifies the weakest of its prey. A shark does not look to attack the strongest
in a pack of seals. The shark looks for a sick, frail, or young cub that is potentially an
easier target. The lion also gets its prey this way as well. In a pack of bison he identifies
his target. We as trend followers identify our target.
The strongest markets with the possibility they will get stronger and
the weakest markets with the possibility they will get weaker.
It is just a possibility. There are no guarantees and every trade regardless of anything is 50/50.

■ We Are Dealing with Uncertainty!

Inputs: Price(Close), Length1(2),Length2(5),Length3(7);
Plot1(RateofChange(Price, Length1) + (RateofChange(Price, Length2)
+ (RateofChange(Price, Length3))/3));
Place this code on a chart. If you are looking at a group of stocks or currencies you
can rank them in order to determine the strongest and the weakest components. As far
as commodities they need to be nominally adjusted.
Once you determine the strongest and the weakest, this becomes your tactical
portfolio or the portfolio in which you look for a signal for entry for either a long or
a short.

91
MANAGING THE RISKS WHEN TREND FOLLOWING

As I learned over the years: Keep it simple and stupid. In order to determine
the momentum, a simple formula is calculated between the differences between two
periods. The rate of change calculation compares the current price with the price n
periods ago. Depending on your degree of sensitivity you can choose that period. The
rate‐of‐change indicator is momentum in its purest form. It measures the percentage
increase or decrease in price over a given period of time.
The problem is that if you look at just one period it can distort. I prefer to look
at an average of the rate of change and even look at three periods and average them.
Working in this fashion, each market is assigned a numerical value. Depending on your
platform or simply in Excel you can quickly identify the strongest markets and the
weakest. When I am trading on a daily time frame, I look to the higher time frame of
weekly markets. I use several different weekly periods to smooth out the noise.
In Metastock this is a simple code to use an indicator or it can be easily done in Excel.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

92

In regard to stock investing, I use the IBD50 as a basis of stocks to look at and
within this group rank the stocks by a smoothed rate of change. The IBD50 are the
strongest momentum stocks based on Investor’s Business Daily parameters based on
CANSLIM1, which mostly includes fundamental aspects but is a great place to start
identifying strong stocks.
More so I look on a daily basis on 52‐week new highs and new lows.
This is another area of interest. In conjunction with that I look at all‐time
new highs and all‐time new lows.
This simply becomes a general universe, and then I rank the stocks based on a
smoothed rate of change. I will not try to short a stock if it is below $20 and suggest you
pass as well. More so I would not look to buy stock if it is under $10. The volatility can
kick up in these shares. Another area that needs to be paid attention to is volume. Make
sure there is enough volume. Otherwise you can get into a very negative situation.
As another layer of risk management, even though I have risk per trade, risk per
sector, open trade equity risk, and margin to equity, I look to cap my number of positions both long and short. I know that having overlapping risk management should
help me in my goal of mitigating some of the inherent drawdowns. I cap the number of
markets that I trade in each direction. For example, I will not trade more than 10 markets on the long side and no more than 10 markets on the short side. Again, you can
determine how many depending on your risk tolerance. This is a personal preference.
As far as the S&P 500 I look to go long when the S&P 500 is above the 200 exponential day moving average. When the S&P 500 is below the S&P 200 I would be more
apt to be out of the market or short.
Clearly, when one looks at some of the past big trades that worked from the IBD50,
long trades can go much further to the upside while short trades have a floor. Bull markets seem to creep up over time, however, bear markets crash with thunder at times.
That is why it is very important to be aware of the 200 exponential moving average
at all times.
If you are above the 200 exponential moving average the coast is clear. If you are
below . . . look out and be careful!

■ Note
1. CANSLIM stands for:
C — Current quarterly earnings per share have increased dramatically
from the same quarters’ earnings reported in the prior year.
A — Annual earnings increase over the last five years.
N — There is something new or innovative in the company such as new

products, new management, and other new issues. More so it is to be
noted that the company’s stock has reached new absolute highs.
S —There is a small supply and large demand for a this particular stock
which creates a large demand as well as there is a positive environment in
which stock prices can run. Additionally look for low debt‐equity ratios.
L — Look for leaders versus weaker stocks within the same industry. Use
the relative strength index as a guide. Buy Strength!
I — Look for stocks with institutional support as well as that those institutions have above average performance.
M — Determining market direction by reviewing market averages daily or
in my personal opinion verify that the averages are above a 200 day moving average.

93
MANAGING THE RISKS WHEN TREND FOLLOWING

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 6

Your Complete
Robust Trading
Plan
Should I enter this trade?
Should I wait?
I made some money; should I take it?
I think the market will come back; I am not going to exit now with my loss!
I am sure the market will continue rising!
Shoot . . . What do I do now?
A trader with a complete robust trading plan will not ever say—or even think—
these questions or statements.You MUST have a solid trading strategy. Having a trading strategy is probably the single most important thing you can do in order to succeed
with trading. Having a trading strategy means having a predefined set of rules that you
have developed or accepted for your trading. It means knowing what you’re doing
instead of just gambling. Too many people start off trading without a strategy, which
means that they’re completely unprepared.
When you have a complete, well‐thought‐out trading plan, you mitigate the emotional roller‐coaster.
You will know exactly what you need to do! It is your job to follow the plan. If you
can’t follow the plan, I strongly suggest you do not start trading.
First, I want to be very clear that this is exactly how I approach trend following. It is
not magic in any way whatsoever. It simply appeals to me as well as many others. There
are other ways to trend follow besides the breakout and retracement strategies that I use.
My goal is to share with you exactly what I do every workday.When a market does trend,
various methodologies can work such as moving average crossovers, Bollinger breakouts,
channel breakouts, or even stochastic. There is not one that is better than the other.

95

There is no holy grail system; rather, there is one that fits your personality.
There is no magic or perfect parameter. Be careful not to try to curve fit or make
parameters something they are not. What is more important are the risk measures and
the mental plan.
When you trade with a plan, you never have to worry about missing a trade. You
only want to try to put on low‐risk trades. If you miss a trade, it was not supposed to
happen as you would be putting on too much risk.
When you trend follow with a plan, there is no fear that the U.S. dollar will crash,
gold will go to $5,000, or the stock market will crash.You stand the possibility somewhere along the line of being able to put on a low‐risk trade in which you should not
risk more than approximately 1 percent.
I use two approaches in order to attempt to catch and ride trends. They both attempt to put on low‐risk trades in the direction of a trend and have various similarities.

■ Trend Breakout and Trend Retracement

Trend Breakout

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

96

How to determine what to buy or sell. This is the key to determing the universe to
trade.
Step 1: Identify the Universe

When using the trend breakout approach, I liken the thought process and trade process to the idea of a conveyor belt. All potential trades are on a conveyor belt. The
first filter I use in my attempt to put on low‐risk trades is to identify our universe of
potential trends. This is completed by ranking all potential markets by a smoothed rate
of change. This was discussed in an earlier section. We look at three rates of change
periods on a higher time frame and average them together. We smooth them in order
to be free of noise from sudden spikes. All markets that we look at are ranked from
strongest to weakest. We want to only focus on the strongest markets with the hope
that they will continue to trend and be strong, and vice versa we only want to focus
on the weakest markets with the hope that they will continue to trend and be weak.
Step 1 is about identifying the strongest markets and the weakest markets.
Step 2: Look for a Trend Breakout

The idea of the trade breakout was devised by Richard Donchian decades ago.
Countless trend followers have based their methodology on Richard Donchian’s thinking. Some famous trend followers that have used Donchian’s work are William Eckhardt and Richard Dennis from Turtle Trading fame.
The basis of this robust idea is simple: Buy the X day high and sell the
Y day low.

97
YOUR COMPLETE ROBUST TRADING PLAN

Donchian made it very simple: Buy the 20‐day high and sell the 10‐day low. Richard
Donchian lost virtually all of his money during the Great Depression. After analyzing
what he did wrong, he came to the conclusion that he would trade with the trend
breakout approach. He traded in this exact fashion for decades. I want to reiterate:
DECADES!
However, trend following is not easy in any aspect, and repeatedly throughout my
career over the last 18 years I have heard that trend following is dead. Even my wife
at times has asked me if trend following is over. There will always be periods in which
profits are elusive. Some of these periods are longer than we are comfortable with and
people give up. I have seen drawdowns lasting greater than two years.
In the 1980s Richard Dennis and William Eckhardt furthered their use of the
trend breakout concept when they made a bet that trend following can be taught.
This real event was the basis of the movie Trading Places with Eddie Murphy. Richard Dennis and William Eckhardt taught a select group of traders the trend breakout approach and called them Turtles or Turtle Trading. These traders all received
the same education and rules from Richard Dennis and William Eckhardt. The
learning curve only lasted two weeks. What is most ironic is the difference in
returns of the Turtles. They all had the same education, yet they invariably had different returns. There was only one reason why: how they thought and their mental
processes.
Trend breakouts are simple yet extremely effective!
Remember, simple does not negate profit potentials!
A proper trend following mindset is more important for success than
any methodology!
The trend breakout approach can use a multitude of variables. Richard Donchian
as well as the Turtle Traders used a 20‐day high with a 10‐day low as the breakout for
a buy and vice versa for a sell, a 20‐day low with a 10‐day high as the protection. The
actual variable is subjective and depends on the trader. Shortening these parameters
will lead to more false breakouts and extending them lessens false breakouts but gets
you into trades later. There are always trade‐offs when trend following.
Going back to our risk parameter, risk per trade, one measures the dollar risk
from the breakout high X to the Y period low to ascertain the risk (the distance from
X to Y and what each tick is worth). The trade should be passed if the dollar risk as
a percentage of core equity exceeds approximately 1 percent. The idea of 1 percent
is my personal opinion. There are others who are willing to entertain more risk and
benefit from greater potential reward. However … I want to point out in the strongest
of terms that many think they can handle the risk until they go through the inevitable
drawdown. When going through this drawdown they go into shock. This is the reason
I always look at how much risk I must take on in order to generate reasonable returns.
The signal is the breakout buy of X high with the risk to the Y low. The
signal for a breakout sell is vice versa.

In order to calculate the 1 percent risk, you calculate the difference between the
X day high to the Y day low. For example, you decide you want to use the breakout
parameters of buying the 20‐day high and selling the 10‐day low. Remember, there are
no magic number parameters, and the smaller the parameters, the more trades and
more false breakouts. More so, remember that most breakouts do not work and you
might be increasing the likelihood of more trades not working. Contrarily, if you use a
lower parameter, you will enter earlier and have greater potential profits. Again, there
is no free lunch. To further present, for example, the 20‐day or X day high you decide
on is 20 and the 10‐day low or Y low is 16, the difference is 4.You do not want to risk
more than 1 percent. For example, you have a $100,000 account and you want to risk
only 1 percent or $1,000; therefore you can put on 250 shares. Another point to consider: I would pass if the per share risk was too high. Again, that is a personal decision
and there is no exact parameter. It is a number you are comfortable with. More so, in
many trading platforms this calculation can be automatic.
In Step 2, you confirm the breakout risk is not more than 1 percent of your core
account size; if it is, go to the next step.
Step 3: Trade in the Direction of the MACD

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

98

In virtually every trading program or Internet chart software there is a momentum
indicator called the MACD. As part of our conveyor belt of trading ideas, I will only
consider taking the buy or sell if I am trading in both in the direction of the trend of the
MACD. For a buy, I want the MACD to be above the zero line and positively increasing. For a sell, I want the MACD to be below the zero line and negatively decreasing.
Figure 6.1 depicts Google. In this chart, we are buying an X period high, and this is
confirmed in the MACD by being above the zero line and increasing.

FIGURE 6.1 Google

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 6.2 HSBS

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

Leucadia
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 6.3

99
YOUR COMPLETE ROBUST TRADING PLAN

In Figure 6.2, showing HSBC, we would be selling an X period low. We are confirming with the trend that we are currently in a downtrend by the MACD being negative and below the zero line.
In Figure 6.3, showing Leucadia, the downtrend is confirmed by the MACD being
below the zero line and decreasing. We would have sold the X period low and follow
the trend.

Figure 6.4 shows a chart of Netflix, in which we are trading with the trend confirmed by the MACD above the zero line and increasing. We would have bought an X
period high to see what would happen.

FIGURE 6.4 Netflix

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

100

Step 3 is about trading only in the direction of the MACD. If long, confirm you are
above the zero line. If short, confirm you are below the zero line.
Step 4: Limit the Number of Trades in Each Direction

As another filter in order to attempt to mitigate some of the inherent drawdowns,
I limit the maximum number of positions I will have at any one point. I have overlapping levels of protection. Again, the number of positions of longs and shorts is
subjective. I personally do not want more than 10 longs or 10 shorts at any time.
The more positions, the more risk. Going down my conveyor belt idea, I will not
take the trade even if the other prior parameters hit if this upcoming trade will
put me over 10.
So for Step 4, do not exceed more than 10 longs and 10 shorts. Now on to Step 5.
Step 5: When Trading Commodity Futures Contracts Limit
the Maximum Dollar Risk per Contract
