
322

the resultant number. The result of this last calculation is placed in a variable
(nap). The stop price is updated on successive bars by adding tmp multiplied by
another parameter (sfpb, a correction rate coefficient) to the existing stop price.
The current stop price is adjusted, however, only if the adjustment will move the
stop closer to the current price level. The computations are identical to those used
when calculating an exponential moving average (EMA). The only difference is
that, in a standard exponential moving average, the stop price would be corrected regardless of whether the correction was up or down and there would be no
offset involved. In this model, stpb determines the effective length of an exponential moving average that can only move in one direction, in toward the prices.
Test of Highest-High/Lowest-Low Stop
In this test (modeltype = l), tire initial money management stop parameter controls the maximum degree of the stop’s tightness on the first bar. It is stepped from
0.5 to 3.5 in increments of 0.5.
Each row in Table 14-2 presents data on the in-sample performance of each
of the values through which the parameter was stepped (ZNSTP). The last row
describes the behavior of the model with the best parameter value (as found in the
stepping process) retested on the out-of-sample data. Table 14-2 may be interpreted in the same way as the other optimization tables presented in this book, in the
table, DRAW represents drawdown, in thousands of dollars.
This stop appears to have been consistently too tight, as evidenced by a decreased
percentage of winning trades when compared with the baseline MSFS model. In the
previous test, the best solution (mmcrp parameter 1.5, ptlim parameter 4.5) had 39%
wins, had a risk-to-reward ratio of - 1.46, and lost an average of $1,581 per trade. In
the current test, the best solution has only 28% of the trades winning in-sample and
29% out-of-sample. Many potentially profitable trades (some of the trades that would
have been profitable with the basic MSES, using an optimal fixed stop) were converted to small losses. The tightness of this stop is also demonstrated by the total number
of bats the average trade was held (4), compared with the usual 6 to 8 bars. The average risk-to-reward ratio (-2.52 in-sample and -2.38 out-of-sample) and the average
loss per trade ($1,864 in-sample, $1,818 out-of-sample) have also significantly worsened when compared with the optimal fixed stop. The 2-bar HI-ILL stop is obviously
no great shakes, and one would be better served using a fixed, optimally placed stop,
like that which forms part of the MSES when used with optimized parameters, such
as those discovered and shown in the test results in Table 14-1.
Test of the Dynamic ATR-Based Stop
In this model, the two parameters (represented in the code as mmsip and apa) are
multipliers for the average true range. They are used when calculating placement of
the stop on the entry bar and later bars, respectively. The entry bar stop parameter

323

T A B L E

14-P

Portfolio Performance for the l-Bar Highest-High/Lowest-Low Trailing
Stop with the Optimal Fixed Profit Target Found in Table 14-l

OUT-OF-SAMPLE
2.50 [ -32591

I

I

-15111 -1748l

I

0.711

-22.41

I

-2.381

I

1.000~

I

I

34501

17931

I

281

I

-1SlSl

I

4

(FIRST in Table 14-3) and the parameter for the stop after the entry bar (LATER) are
both stepped from 0.5 to 3.5 in increments of 0.5.
As with the previous tests of stops, the parameters had a gradual effect on
performance and did not interact with one another to any great extent. An examination of the average performance for each value of the entry bar stop parameter
reveals that the best results, in terms of risk-to-reward ratio, were obtained when
that parameter was set to 2. For the parameter that applied to later bars, the best
average result was achieved with values of either 2 or 2.5. For individual combinations of parameters, a FIRST parameter of 2 and a LATER parameter of 2.5 produced the best overall performance, with the least bad risk-to-reward ratio and
nearly the smallest loss per trade. This stop model was marginally better than the
optimal fixed stop, used as a baseline, that had a risk-to-reward ratio of - 1.46, as
opposed to - 1.40 in the current case. As in Table 14-1, the best solution is shown
in boldface type. The percentage of winning trades (42%) was also marginally better than that for the optimal fixed stop (39%).

Test of the MEMA Dynamic Stop
There are three parameters in this model: the initial money management stop pxameter, which sets the stop for the first bar; the ATR offset parameter (ATRO in
Table 14-4); and the correction or adaptation rate coefficient (COEFF), which
determines the relative rate at which the stop pulls in to the market or, equivalently,
the speed of the modi@ed exponential moving average underlying this model. All
three parameters are optimized with an extensive search.
Table 14-4 shows portfolio performance only as a function of the ATR offset
and the adaptation rate coefficient, the most important parameters of the model.
The initial stop parameter was fixed at 2.5, which was the parameter value of the
optimal solution.

32.4

Portfolio Performance as a Function of First-Bar and LaterBar Stop Parameters Using the Dynamic ATR-Based StopLoss Model

Again, the model responded in a well-behaved manner to changes in the parameter values. There was some interaction between parameter values. This was
expected because the faster the moving average (or adaptation rate), the greater the
average true range offset must be to keep the stop a reasonable distance from the
prices and achieve good performance. The best overall portfolio performance (the
boldfaced results in Table 14-4) occurred with an ATR offset of 1 and an adaptation
rate coefficient of 0.3 (about a 5-bar EMA). Finally, here is a stop that performed
better than those tested previously. The risk-to-reward ratio rose (- 1.36), as did the
percentage of winning trades (37%) and the average trade in dollars ( - $1,407).
TEST OF THE PROFIT TARGET
This test is the best stop thus far produced: The MEMA stop had an initial money
management parameter of 2.5, an average true range offset of 1, and an adaptation

rate coefficient of 0.30. In the original MEMA test above (the results reported in
Table 14-4), the optimal fixed profit target was used. In the current test, the optimal
fixed profit target is replaced with a shn’nking profit target, i.e., one that starts out
far away from the market and then pulls in toward the market, becoming tighter
over time. The intention is to try to pull profit out of languishing trades by exiting
with a limit order on market noise, while not cutting profits short early in the course
of favorably disposed trades. The approach used when constructing the shrinking
T A B L E

1 4 - 4

Portfolio Performance of the EMA-Like Dynamic Stop as a Function
of the ATR Offset and Adaptation Rate Coefficient with an Initial Stop
Parameter of 2.5 ATR Units

326

profit target is very similar to the one used when constructing the MEMA stop. An
exponential moving average is initialized in an unusual way; i.e., the running sum
is set to the entry price plus (long) or minus (short) some multiple @Tim) of the
average true range. In this way, the profit target limit begins just as the fixed profit
target limit began. After the first bar, the price at which the limit is set is adjusted
in exactly the same way that an exponential moving average is adjusted as new bars
arrive: The distance between the current limit price and the current close is multiplied by a parameter @rga). The resultant number is then subtracted from the current limit price to give the new limit price, pulling the limit price in tighter to the
current close. In contrast to the case with the stop, the limit price is allowed to move
in either direction, although it is unlikely to do so because the limit order will take
the trade out whenever prices move to the other side of its current placement. The
second parameter (p&z) controls the speed of the moving average, i.e., the shrink
age rate. The rules are identical to those in the test of the MEMA stop above, except
as they relate to the profit target limit on bars after the first bar.

limprice
stpprice

=
=

entryprice
min

entryprice

+

ptlim

~Lawest~lo,
mstp

+

l

2,

atr;

cbl,

atr,;

break;
case

2:

case

3:

case

4:

limprice
stpprice
break;

=
=

entryprice
entryprice

+

ptlim
mmtp

*
*

atr;
atr;

327

stpprice = max (Highestthi. 2, cb),
entryprice + mwtp * atr);
break;
case 2:
case 3:
case 4:
limprice = entryprice
ptlim
l
atr;
stpprice

=

entryprice

+

break;
default: nrerror("mvalid
I
ts.exitshortlimit('C',
ts.exitshortstop('D',

nmletp

f

atr;

modeltype");

limprice);
stpprice);

1
else (

stpprice = max(stpprice, Lowesf(lo,Z,cb));
break;
case 2:
stppcice = max(stpprice, cls[cbl -stpa*atr);
break;
case 3:
trap = tbiicbl atpa * at=) - stpprice;
if(tmp > 0.0) stpprice += stpb l tmp;
break;
case 4:
mp = ChiIcbl sepa * atrl sfpprice;
if(tmp > 0.0) stpprice += stpb * tmp;
limprice = limprice - ptga'(limprice-cls[cbl);
break;
)
ts.exiflonglimit('F', limprice);
ts.exitlongstopC'G', stpprice);
if(cb-entrybar >= maxhold) ts.exitlongclose('E'l;
1
else if(ts.positionO < 0) ( // shorts
ewitch(modeltype) (
case 1:
stpprice = min(stpprice, Highesf(hi,P,cb));
break;
case 2:
stpprice = min(stpprice, cls[cbl+stpa*atr);
break;

328

case

3:

ts.exitshortatop(‘J’,
if<&-entrybar

>=

s t p p r i c e ) ;
maxhold)

ts.exitshortclose(‘H’);

1
)

The code fragment above shows the implementation of the shrinking limit,
along with the MEMA stop reported in Table 14-4.
Table 14-5 provides information on the portfolio performance as the initial
profit target limit @lim in the code, INIT in the table) and the shrinkage coefficient @&a in the code, COEFF in the table) are varied. The parameter that controlled the initial placement of the profit target, in average tree range units away
from the price, was stepped from 2 to 6 in increments of 0.5. The shrinkage coefficient was stepped from 0.05 to 0.4 in increments of 0.05. The best combination
of parameters produced a solution that was an improvement over the fixed profit
target limit. The risk-to-reward ratio became - 1.32, the percentage of winning
trades remained the same at 37%, but the average loss per trades was less at
$1,325. Again, the model was well behaved with respect to variations in the parameters. The results indicate that care has to be taken with profit targets: They tend
to prematurely close trades that have large profit potential. As can be seen in Table
14-5, as the initial profit target placement became tighter and tighter, the percentage of winning trades dramatically increased, as more and more trades hit the profit target and were closed out with a small profit. On the down side, the
risk-to-reward ratio and the average worsened, demonstrating that the increased
percentage of winning trades could not compensate for the curtailment of profits
that resulted from the tight profit target. Sometimes it is better to have no profit
target at all than to have an excessively tight one. The same was tme for the shrinkage rate. Profit targets that too quickly moved into the market tended to close
trades early, thereby cutting profits short.

TEST OF THE EXTENDED TIME LIMIT
In all the tests conducted so far, a position was held for only a maximum of 10
days. Any position that still existed-that had not previously been closed out by

Portfolio Performance as a Function of the initial Profit Target Limit
Placement and the Shrinkage Coefficient

the stop or profit target-was closed out after 10 days, regardless of its profitability. In this test, an exit strategy that uses an adaptive MEMA stop, with optimal
parameters and a shrinking profit target, is examined. The only difference between
the test reported in Table 14-6 and the one reported in Table 14-5 is in the extension of the maximum time a trade may be held, from 10 to 30 days. The initial
profit target limit is reoptimized by stepping it from 5 to 7 in increments of 0.5.
Likewise, the shrinkage rate coefficient is stepped from 0.05 to 0.4 in increments

of 0.05. The code is the same as for the previous test. Only the setting of the maxhold parameter, which controls the maximum time a trade may be held, is
changed.
The best performance was achieved with an initial target parameter of 5.5
and a shrinkage coefficient of 0.1. The average risk-to-reward ratio went from
- 1.32 to ~ 1.22. The percentage of wins remained the same, but the average trade
lost only $1,236, rather than $1,325 in the previous test. Extension of the time
limit improved results, but not dramatically. Most trades were closed out well
before the time limit expired; i.e., the average trade only lasted between 6 and 10
bars (days).

MARKET-BY-MARKET
EXIT

RESULTS

FOR

THE

BEST

Table 14-7 reports on performance broken down by market for the best exit strategy discovered in these tests, i.e., the one that used the MEMA stop and the
shrinking profit target and in which the time limit was extended to 30 days. Both
in- and out-of-sample results are presented, and consistency between the two can

Portfolio Performance as a Function of the Initial Profit Target Limit
Setting and the Shrinkage Coefficient When the Trade Limit Is
Increased to 30 Days

be seen.
In both samples, profits for the NYFE occurred on the long side, but not on
the short. Substantial profits occurred in both samples for Feeder Cattle-for long
and short positions in-sample, but only for short positions out-of-sample. Live
Hogs were profitable in both samples for both long and short positions. The
Deutschemark and Japanese Yen showed profits in-sample on the long side, but
had overall losses out-of-sample. The only exception was a small profit in the
Japanese Yen on the short side, but it was not enough to overcome the losses on
the long side. Lumber was strongly profitable on the long side in-sample, but only
TABLE

14-7

Performance Broken Down by Market for Best Exit Strategy
with EMA-Like Stop, Shrinking Profit Target, and Trade Time Limit
Extended to 30 Days

332

PART III

The Study of Exits

had a very small profit on the long side out-of-sample. The two most outstanding
performers were Feeder Cattle and Live Hogs which, even despite the random
entries, could actually be traded. In-sample, there was a 10.9% annualized return
for Feeder Cattle and a 15.5% return for Live Hogs. Out-of-sample, the returns
were 43.1% and 3 1.9%, respectively. There were more profitable results out-ofsample than in-sample, but this could easily have been due to the smaller sample
and fewer trades taken in the out-of-sample period.
CONCLUSION
Exits do make a big difference. By improving the risk management and profit target elements in an exit strategy, losses can be cot and the risk-to-reward ratio can
be enhanced. The improvements in the tests above, however, were not as good as
expected. For example, although the best exit did appear capable of pulling profits from random trades taken in two markets, no profits were obtained on the portfolio, which is somewhat inconsistent with our earlier experiences (Katz and
McCormick, March 1998, April 1998) in which profitable systems were achieved
with random entries on the S&P 500. In those studies, exits were toned to the market under examination, rather than keeping parameters constant across an entire
portfolio as done in the investigations above. This difference may account for the
poorer results in the current set of tests. In general, better results can be obtained
(albeit with much greater risk of curve-fitting and over-optimization) by tuning the
various components of a trading model to the specific characteristics of an individual market. It should also be kept in mind that the tests conducted here were
fairly harsh with respect to transaction costs. For some markets (e.g., the S&P
500), commissions are almost negligible in terms of its typical dollar volatility,
and only slippage is a factor. However, in many smaller markets, great numbers of
contracts would have to be traded, causing the issue of commissions to become a
very significant consideration. In our earlier study, little or no transaction costs
were assumed, and a market in which the commission component would be fairly
small (i.e., the S&P 500) was examined. This factor may also have contributed to
the difference in findings.
When compared with the standard exit strategy used in the tests of entry
methods, which lost an average of $2,243 per trade and had a standard deviation of
$304, the best exit strategy thus far developed reduced the loss per trade to $1,236,
representing a reduction in loss per trade of over 44%. The reduction is substantial
enough that many of the better (albeit losing) entry models would probably show
overall profitability if they were combined with the best exit strategy.

333

WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
. Exits can make a substantial difference in overall performance. The
attempts described in this chapter have yielded an extra $1,000 per trade
over the standard exit strategy used in tests of entry models.
. Just as with entries, finding a good exit is like searching for a tiny island
of inefficiency in a sea of &cient market behavior. While such islands
are there, they are difficult to find.

C H A P T E R

I S

ADDING Al TO EXITS

I n this chapter, the modified standard exit strategy (MSES) is explored with the
addition of elements based on neural networks and genetics. In Chapter 11, neural network forecasters were developed for use in generating entries. One of the
particular neural forecasters (the time-reversed Slow %K net) attempted to predict
whether tomorrow’s prices would be near the low or high end of the range of
prices that would occur over the next several days. This network can be added to
an exit strategy: If the net suggests that the market is near the top of its near-future
range and a long position is being held, it would probably he a good idea to exit
before the market begins to move down. Likewise, if the net forecasts a rising
market while a short position is being held, the trade should be exited before the
market begins to rise.
The first test conducted below explores the use of the time-reversed Slow
%K network (developed when studying entries) as an additional element to our
modified standard exit strategy. The net, which generates what might be called a
signal exit, cannot be used on its own for exiting because it will not always close
out a trade. This network was designed to provide entry signals. When it generates
a signal, the market is likely to behave in some expected manner. However, the
absence of a signal does not mean that the market will not do something significant. When a position is being held, at some point an exit has to be taken, and that
action cannot be postponed until a significant event is finally predicted. The
MSES, in this case, guarantees that all trades have some money management protection and are exited after a given amount of time. The neural net, however, can
possibly improve the strategy by occasionally triggering an exit when a predicted
move against the trade is expected. In this way, the net may turn a certain proportion of losing trades into winners.

The second batch of tests (one for the long side, one for the short) involves the
use of a genetic algorithm to evolve a set of rules tcr generate a signal exit. The rules
are used in a manner similar to the way the net is used, i.e., to generate additional
exits, witbin the context of the MSES, when the market is likely to reverse. The rule
templates and rule-generating methodology are the same as those used in Chapter
12, where evolved rules generated entries. In the current tests, rules are evolved to
generate additional exits within the context of the MSES. The rules are used as signal exits. The additional exits will, it is hoped, improve profitability by turning some
losses into wins and by killing other trades before they become larger losses.
More sophisticated exits can be developed using the techniques described above.
Although not explored in this chapter, a neural network could be evolved to produce
outputs in the form of placements for stops and limits, as well as for immediate, outright exits. Genetically evolved rules could also be employed in this manner.
When used in the context of entries, neural networks proved to be fairly good
forecasters. It-sample, incredible profits were produced due to the accurate predictions. Out-of-sample, the nets yielded much better than chance results (albeit
not very profitable on the whole portfolio). Real predictive ability was demonstrated. Using such forecasts to exit trades before the market reverses should
improve system performance, even if only by eliminating a small percentage of
bad trades. The same applies to the genetically evolved rules. However, when the
rules that produced entry signals for rare event trades are applied to exits, great
improvement in exit performance should not be expected. Given the nature of the
rules, only a small number of signals are likely to be generated, which means that
only small numbers of trades will be affected. If only a few of the large number of
trades that will be taken are improved, only a small overall benefit will be evidenced. Since the rules are being reevolved for the tests below, more inslances of
exit opportunities may be found than were discovered for entry opportunities.
TEST METHODOLOGY FOR THE NEURAL EXIT
COMPONENT
The larger of the two best neural networks, trained to predict the time-reversed
Slow %K, are used. The preprocessing and forecast-generating logic are identical
to those discussed in Chapter 11. A series of predictions are generated using the
18-14-4-1 net (18 first-layer neurons, 14 neurons in first middle layer, 4 in the second middle layer, and 1 output). The MSES is also used. Along with the exits provided by the MSES, an additional exit condition is being added: If the predicted
reverse Slow %K is greater than some threshold, indicating that the market is high
relative to its near-future price range, any long position is exited. Likewise, if the
net’s prediction indicates that the market is near the low of its neat-future price
range, by being below 100 minus the previous threshold, any short position is exited. Exits triggered by the neural net forecasts are taken at the close of the bar.
