
T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[123]

the future. That’s because picking a number like 20 percent per year would turn that initial $28,000* into
$752,000 after 20 years and more than $4.3 million after
30 years. At an astronomical rate like 25 percent per year
(a return that is still lower than the past returns of one of
our portfolios of smaller magic formula stocks), that
$28,000 would have become more than $1.6 million in 20
years and over $13.4 million in 30 years.† But who’s really
counting, and with numbers like that, thank heaven I had
the good sense not to mention it.
But I will say this. If you are still in middle school or
even high school and you are approached by anyone—and
I mean anyone, no matter how fancy their scooter or how
persuasive their sales pitch—and they want you to purchase a single stick of gum for 25 cents, I have just three
words of advice:
*From investing the maximum allowable $4,000 per year in an IRA over the
next two years and then the increased maximum of $5,000 per year for the
following four years equaling $28,000 over the six years.
†
It’s fascinating to note that if you had decided to contribute $5,000 per
year for the remaining 24 years of this 30-year period, rather than stopping
contributions after just six years as we did in this example, your IRA
account would have grown to approximately $16.5 million after 30 years
versus the $13.4 million from just those six contributions. Had we decided
to talk about compound interest, the relatively smaller benefit from those
last 24 contributions would have illustrated how truly important starting as
early as possible is to achieving the full benefits of compounding.

[124]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Don’t do it!
I say that not because at any moment you could be
forced to stand in the corner with a wad of gum stuck to
your nose. I say that because if you understood how a wellinvested quarter could possibly turn into more than $200 by
the time you hit middle age,* you might not squander so
much money on a single stick of gum! You might not spend
money on a lot of things. Instead, you might start thinking
about saving money whenever possible and spending time figuring out a good way to invest it. That’s what I’m saying.
Unfortunately, one thing I’m not saying is that using
the magic formula for your investments going forward will
guarantee results similar to the stellar performance of the
past. I can’t know that.† But I can say this:
I believe that using the magic formula and the principles
behind the magic formula to guide your future investments will
*Twenty-five cents invested at a return of 25 percent a year for 30 years
would get you more than $200. Of course, I’m not saying you would actually achieve this type of return (as you know, I would never say that).
†
Though, since the market averages returned roughly 12 percent per year
(including dividends) during the course of our 17-year study and my best
guess for the market averages going forward is closer to 6 to 10 percent per
year, you may want to start by adjusting down your hopes and/or expectations for the future absolute results of using the magic formula by 3 or 4
percent per year as compared to the results found in the study. But, once
again, I can’t really know.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[125]

remain one of your very best investment alternatives. I believe
that if you are able to stick with the magic formula strategy
through good periods and bad, you will handily beat the market
averages over time. In short, I believe that, even after everyone
knows the magic formula, your results will continue to be not
only “quite satisfactory,” but with a little luck, extraordinary.
So, here’s the deal. If you do end up using the magic
formula and if it helps you earn enough money that you
feel grateful for your good fortune, you might consider
this. In reality, all the time and effort put into stock market investing isn’t a very productive use of time. Usually,
when you buy or sell shares in a publicly traded company,* you are merely buying from or selling to another
shareholder. In other words, the underlying company is
not involved. It receives nothing from the transaction.
Many people argue that all this buying and selling
activity is, nevertheless, quite useful. Through the buying
and selling of shares, these people would argue, an active
marketplace for the company’s shares is established. Theoretically, if a company needs additional money, it can
decide to sell additional shares into this marketplace. It
can use the proceeds to pay bills, build factories, or
expand in some other way. This is all true. Also, if Jason
*A company that files its financial information with the government and
whose shares the general public may buy and sell.

[126]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

decides to expand his gum store chain from 10 stores to
300, he can sell some shares in his new and growing business directly to the public and raise money for the expansion. Since the buyers of Jason’s Gum Shop shares know
that there will be a marketplace for selling those shares
after their initial purchase, Jason may have an easier time
raising money for his business. The people who see great
value in stock trading are right about this, too.
I’m just not one of those people. Yes, it is nice to have
a marketplace. In fact, it’s very important. It’s just that
more than 95 percent of the trading back and forth each
day is probably unnecessary. The market would still be
fine without almost all of it. The market would certainly
be fine without your contribution.
In fact, the first day of class each semester, I tell all of
my MBA students that I’m about to teach them skills that
have limited value. It’s not that they won’t have the potential to make a lot of money from what they learn. It’s that
there are probably higher and better uses for their time
and intellect. As a consequence, in exchange for teaching
them, I always ask my students to find some way to give
back.*
So, for you, too, I hope this book and the step-by-step
instructions that follow will help you reach all of your
*For some more thoughts, see the box at the end of the chapter.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[127]

investment goals. I strongly believe that it will. I also hope
that those investment goals will include using some of
your good fortune to make a difference in those areas that
are important and have meaning to you.
Good luck.

There are, of course, many worthwhile things to do
with your money in addition to caring for those near
and dear to you. Whether it involves supporting medical research, aiding the poor, promoting social justice, or supporting pretty much any worthy cause that
you believe in, all would obviously be wonderful
choices for your charitable dollars. But since this
entire book is about investing your money in places
where it can earn a high return on capital, I have one
additional thought that you might consider.
It is our education system that nurtures the entrepreneurs, scientists, engineers, technologists, and
high-level workforce that help our economy grow and
thrive. Over time, the performance of the stock market reflects this progress. Yet it is very clear that we
are wasting much of our future potential. In almost
every major city in the United States, barely half of
entering public school ninth-graders end up graduat-

[128]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

ing from high school. Think about that for a moment.
Undoubtedly, there are many reasons for this devastating waste, but the problems, whatever they might
be, clearly cut across all grade levels. Many students
enter the ninth grade already four and five grade levels behind.
So how should we solve this problem? Obviously,
teaching young people should be a top priority, and
spending money to teach children the skills necessary
to become productive members of society should be a
great investment. Talk about a high return on capital!
Just as obvious is that there are negative costs to
doing a bad job—crime, drugs, and welfare, to name
a few. So, how are we trying to solve this problem?
Under capitalism, it would be pretty straightforward. If we were trying to fix a business like Just
Broccoli, we would first try to change a few things.
Maybe we would fire bad managers, hire better salespeople, or do some advertising, but eventually, if
results didn’t improve, we would just close the stores.
Under our system of capitalism, companies that can’t
earn an adequate return on capital eventually go out
of business. That’s very healthy. Instead of continually throwing money into investments that achieve

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[129]

poor returns, under capitalism money is systematically redirected into businesses that can make productive use of new capital. That’s how our economy
continues to grow and thrive over time.
So how would you fix the public school system?
First, you would try to make some changes. You
might fire bad teachers, pay more for good teachers,
remove bad principals, and at the end of the day,
close bad schools. The money spent on the bad
schools would be redirected to schools (public or private) that could get a higher return on the capital
spent. Unfortunately, in the case of inner-city public
schools, the same problems have been going on for
over 40 years and the “fixes” have been going on for
just as long!
The difference is this. In capitalism, if the fixes
don’t work, the business closes. With public schools,
this rarely happens. It’s almost impossible to fire bad
teachers, pay more for good teachers, or close bad
schools. In short, there are no penalties for poor performance, incentives for good performance, or consequences for running a poor business.
As a result, money spent on bad teachers or bad
schools is almost never redirected to teachers or

[130]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

schools that can achieve higher returns on that capital! So if we want to apply what we have learned about
capitalism, any solutions, whether they involve public
school reform, charter schools, or voucher programs,
need to address these issues. Otherwise, we’ll be
stuck with a Just Broccoli school system for a long
time to come!*
*If you have further interest, some web sites you might consider:
successforall.net, alliance forschoolchoice.com, schoolachievement.org,
democratsforeducationreform.org.

Step-by-Step Instructions

Here’s the big picture. As you know, the magic formula
has achieved excellent results in the past. So our goal is to
create an easy-to-follow plan that will help reproduce
those good results. But before we adopt any strategy, we
need to consider a few things.
First, since the returns reported in this book were
based on holding a portfolio of roughly 30 stocks
selected by the magic formula, we should make sure that
our plan includes holding at least 20 to 30 stocks at one
time. Remember, the magic formula works on average, so
holding many stocks that are ranked highly by the magic
formula should help keep us close to that average over
time.*
Second, in our tests, each stock was held for a period
*Obviously, if you are already good at analyzing businesses and doing your
own research and are merely using the magic formula as a guideline to find
attractive individual stocks, these diversification rules do not apply to you.
On the other hand, if you are doing a limited amount of work on individual
stocks or no work at all (like most investors), diversifying with 20 or 30
magic formula stocks is most definitely the right plan for you.

[132]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

of one year. Holding stocks for one year is still fine for taxfree accounts. For taxable accounts, we will want to adjust
that slightly. For individual stocks in which we are showing
a loss from our initial purchase price, we will want to sell a
few days before our one-year holding period is up. For those
stocks with a gain, we will want to sell a day or two after the
one-year period is up. In that way, all of our gains will
receive the advantages of the lower tax rate afforded to
long-term capital gains (a maximum 15 percent tax rate
under federal guidelines for stocks held more than one
year), and all of our losses will receive short-term tax treatment (a deduction against other sources of income that
otherwise could have been taxable at rates up to 35 percent). Over time, this minor adjustment can add significantly to our after-tax investment returns.
Lastly, be aware that getting started will be the hardest part. We probably don’t want to buy all 30 stocks at
once. To reproduce the results from our tests, we will
have to work into our magic formula portfolio over the
course of our first year of investing. That means adding 5
to 7 stocks to our portfolio every few months until we
reach 20 or 30 stocks in our portfolio. Thereafter, as
stocks in our portfolio reach the one-year holding mark,
we will replace only the 5 to 7 stocks that have been held
for one year. If that’s a little confusing, don’t worry, stepby-step instructions are about to follow.
Now that we have that settled, we need to discuss a

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[133]

few simple ways to find our magic formula stocks. There
are many choices for screening packages to help us sort
through the universe of available stocks, both Web-based
programs and software programs that utilize the Web for
updates. Some of these options are available for free,
while others can cost up to $99 per month or even more.
Each has advantages and disadvantages based on ease of
operation and the reliability, flexibility, and breadth of
data sources. Most will generate a reasonable set of magic
formula stocks if certain conditions are applied, which are
discussed below.
One screening option was created specifically for this
book, magicformulainvesting.com. The magicformula
investing.com site is designed to emulate the returns
achieved in our study as closely as possible. This site is
currently available for free. Step-by-step instructions for
selecting stocks using magicformulainvest ing.com follow.
Other options include, but are not limited to, the
screening packages available at businessweek.com, aaii
.com, moneycentral.msn.com, powerinvestor.com, and
smartmoney.com. Though these sources are generally fine,
and are available either for free or at a reasonable price, they
are not specifically designed to generate magic formula
stocks. They will only give a rough approximation of the
magic formula results because of differences both in the criteria the user can select and the underlying data sources.
General screening instructions are available on each site.

[134]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Option 1: MagicFormulaInvesting.com
Step 1

Go to magicformulainvesting.com.
Step 2

Follow the instructions for choosing company size (e.g.,
companies with market capitalizations over $50 million,
or over $200 million, or over $1 billion, etc.). For most
individuals, companies with market capitalizations above
$50 million or $100 million should be of sufficient size.
Step 3

Follow the instructions to obtain a list of top-ranked
magic formula companies.
Step 4

Buy five to seven top-ranked companies. To start, invest
only 20 to 33 percent of the money you intend to invest
during the first year (for smaller amounts of capital, lowerpriced Web brokers such as foliofn.com, buyandhold.com,
and scottrade.com may be a good place to start).
Step 5

Repeat Step 4 every two to three months until you have
invested all of the money you have chosen to allocate to your
magic formula portfolio. After 9 or 10 months, this should

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[135]

result in a portfolio of 20 to 30 stocks (e.g., seven stocks
every three months, five or six stocks every two months).
Step 6

Sell each stock after holding it for one year. For taxable
accounts, sell winners after holding them a few days more
than one year and sell losers after holding them a few days
less than one year (as previously described). Use the proceeds from any sale and any additional investment money
to replace the sold companies with an equal number of
new magic formula selections (Step 4).
Step 7

Continue this process for many years. Remember, you must
be committed to continuing this process for a minimum of three
to five years, regardless of results. Otherwise, you will most
likely quit before the magic formula has a chance to work!
Step 8

Feel free to write and thank me.

Option 2: General Screening Instructions

If using any screening option other than magicformula
investing.com, you should take the following steps to best
approximate the results of the magic formula:

[136]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

• Use Return on Assets (ROA) as a screening criterion.

Set the minimum ROA at 25%. (This will take the
place of return on capital from the magic formula study.)
• From the resulting group of high ROA stocks,
screen for those stocks with the lowest Price/Earning (P/E) ratios. (This will take the place of earnings
yield from the magic formula study.)
• Eliminate all utilities and financial stocks (i.e., mutual funds, banks and insurance companies) from
the list.
• Eliminate all foreign companies from the list. In
most cases, these will have the suffix “ADR” (for
“American Depository Receipt”) after the name of
the stock.
• If a stock has a very low P/E ratio, say 5 or less, that
may indicate that the previous year or the data being
used are unusual in some way. You may want to eliminate these stocks from your list. You may also want
to eliminate any company that has announced earnings in the last week. (This should help minimize the
incidence of incorrect or untimely data.)
• After obtaining your list, follow steps 4 and 8 from
the magicformulainvesting.com instruction page.

Appendix

IMPORTANT NOTICE: This appendix is not required reading. To utilize the magic formula strategy
successfully, you must understand only two basic concepts. First, buying good companies at bargain prices
makes sense. On average, this is what the magic formula does. Second, it can take Mr. Market several years
to recognize a bargain. Therefore, the magic formula
strategy requires patience. The information that follows in this section is merely additional commentary
on these two points.
This appendix includes background information
about the magic formula for those with a higher level of
understanding of financial statements. It also compares
the logic and results of the magic formula strategy with
other studies and methods that have demonstrated an
ability to beat the market.

The Magic Formula
The magic formula ranks companies based on two factors:
return on capital and earnings yield. These factors can be measured in several different ways. The measures chosen for the
study in this book are described in more detail as follows:*
1. Return on Capital

EBIT/(Net Working Capital + Net Fixed Assets)
Return on capital was measured by calculating the ratio
of pre-tax operating earnings (EBIT) to tangible capital
*For purposes of the study, earnings-related numbers were based on the latest 12-month period, balance sheet items were based on the most recent balance sheet, and market prices were based on the most recent closing price.
Utilities, financial stocks and companies where we could not be certain that
the information in the database was timely or complete were eliminated.
Adjustments were also made for certain non-interest bearing liabilities. The
study was structured so that an average of 30 stocks was held during the
study period. Stocks with only limited liquidity were eliminated from the
study. Market capitalizations were determined based on 2003 dollars. Both
the number of companies in each decile as well as the number of companies
in each market capitalization group fluctuated as the number of companies
in the database varied during the study period.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[139]

employed (Net Working Capital + Net Fixed Assets).
This ratio was used rather than the more commonly used
ratios of return on equity (ROE, earnings/equity) or return
on assets (ROA, earnings/assets) for several reasons.
EBIT (or earnings before interest and taxes) was used in
place of reported earnings because companies operate
with different levels of debt and differing tax rates. Using
operating earnings before interest and taxes, or EBIT,
allowed us to view and compare the operating earnings of
different companies without the distortions arising from
differences in tax rates and debt levels. For each company,
it was then possible to compare actual earnings from operations (EBIT) to the cost of the assets used to produce
those earnings (tangible capital employed).*
Net Working Capital + Net Fixed Assets (or tangible
capital employed) was used in place of total assets (used in an
ROA calculation) or equity (used in an ROE calculation).
The idea here was to figure out how much capital is actually
needed to conduct the company’s business. Net working
capital was used because a company has to fund its receivables and inventory (excess cash not needed to conduct the
business was excluded from this calculation) but does not
*For purposes of the study and in the interest of simplicity, it was assumed
that depreciation and amortization expense (noncash charges against earnings) were roughly equal to maintenance capital spending requirements
(cash expenses not charged against earnings). It was, therefore, assumed
that EBITDA − Maintenance Cap/Expenditures = EBIT.

[140]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

have to lay out money for its payables, as these are effectively an interest-free loan (short-term interest-bearing debt
was excluded from current liabili-ties for this calculation). In
addition to working capital requirements, a company must
also fund the purchase of fixed assets necessary to conduct
its business, such as real estate, plant, and equipment. The
NOTE: Intangible assets, specifically goodwill, were
excluded from the tangible capital employed calculations. Goodwill usually arises as a result of an acquisition of another company. The cost of an acquisition
in excess of the tangible assets acquired is usually
assigned to a goodwill account. In order to conduct
its future business, the acquiring company usually
only has to replace tangible assets, such as plant and
equipment. Goodwill is a historical cost that does not
have to be constantly replaced. Therefore, in most
cases, return on tangible capital alone (excluding
goodwill) will be a more accurate reflection of a business’s return on capital going forward. The ROE and
ROA calculations used by many investment analysts
are therefore often distorted by ignoring the difference between reported equity and assets and tangible
equity and assets in addition to distortions due to differing tax rates and debt levels.
