century and describes the kind of new era theories that arose in association
with many of them.
Part Three considers psychological factors that underlie market behavior.
Chapter 9 argues that, with the true value of the markets so poorly defined
by economic and financial theory, and so difficult to compute, the public
relies on some largely psychological anchors for market value. Chapter 10
describes some important results from social psychology and sociology that
help us understand why so many different people change their opinions at
the same time.
Part Four investigates attempts on the part of academic and popular thinkers to rationalize market bubbles. Chapter 11 considers the efficient markets
theory. Chapter 12 discusses the theory, often advanced during a bubble, that
the public has just learned some important fact—even though the “fact” either
is questionable or has already been widely known for some time.
Part Five, Chapter 13, considers the implications of speculative bubbles for
individual investors, institutions, and governments. Several prescriptions for
urgently needed policy changes are offered at this time of vulnerability in
both the stock market and the real estate market, as are suggestions for ways
in which individual investors can lower their exposure to the consequences
of a “burst” bubble.
This edition of the book has also added, as an appendix, the revised version of the Nobel lecture I gave at the Nobel Prize events in Stockholm in
December 2013. The Nobel lecture puts many of the arguments of the book
into a broader context, with additional references to academic discussions of
some of the basic conclusions here.
I have created a website, irrationalexuberance.com, which will present new
information related to the topics in this book and will provide regular updates
for some of the data and charts shown in this book.

Preface to the Second Edition, 2005

I

n the preface to the first edition of this book,
reproduced following this one, I described
this book as a study of the millennium stock market boom, the boom that
afflicted much of the world in the years leading up to 2000. A number of
those who read the book have told me they think this book addressed a
much broader subject. They are right: this book is really about the behavior
of all speculative markets, about human vulnerability to error, and about the
instabilities of the capitalist system.
When I was writing the first edition, mostly in 1999, the stock market boom
seemed invincible. The S&P 500 index had gone up 34% in 1995, 20% in 1996,
31% in 1997, 26% in 1998, and 20% in 1999. Similar strings of stock market
price increases had occurred in many other countries. So many years in a
row of such spectacular increases could not be the result of mere chance, or
so it seemed to many people then—and to the experts who encouraged this
view. The stock market boom was widely viewed as the harbinger of a new
economic era. But my book took a very different, and much dimmer, view of
this stock market boom.
When the book appeared on store shelves in March 2000, I was on sabbatical
from Yale, and I embarked on an extended ten-country book tour. Obviously,
at that point in history, no one knew that March 2000 was to represent the
peak of the market. Talking with so many people about the errors I thought
they were making led me to ideas about how to strengthen the arguments
presented in this new edition.

xix

xx

P RE FACE TO T HE SEC OND EDITION, 2005

A few memories still strike me today, years later, about the kind of human
errors that I encountered on my tour. I remember appearing on a radio talk
show and hearing a woman tell me that she just knew I was wrong: the stock
market has a pronounced uptrend; it has to go up generally. The tremor in her
voice made me wonder what accounted for her emotions.
I also recall seeing a man who came to two of my book talks, each time sitting in the back and looking agitated. Why did he come back a second time,
and what was upsetting him so?
I remember giving a talk presenting my bearish view of the market to a
group of institutional investors, and then listening as a major institutional
portfolio manager told me that he agreed with me, but was nevertheless
going to ignore everything I had just said as he managed his portfolio. He
believed that the views I expressed ultimately did not have enough authority
to be taken seriously by his clients and colleagues, and that he could not alter
his portfolio allocation based solely on what might seem to be one person’s
idiosyncratic opinion—even if he himself agreed with it.
But most of what I remember is people cheerfully and with apparent interest
listening to my talk and then blithely telling me that they did not particularly
believe me. Some kind of collective conclusion had been reached about the
stock market—and it had a powerful hold on people’s minds.
After 2000, the stock market boom abruptly ended; the U.S. stock market,
and the markets in the same countries whose stock prices had also soared,
came down substantially from their peaks in 2000. By the time the S&P 500
reached bottom in March 2003 it had fallen by half in real (inflation-corrected)
terms. This outcome led to a change in investor psychology.
I remember having breakfast with a woman and her husband at the very
end of 2000, when the market was down substantially from its peak, the tech
stocks down more than 50%. She said she did the investing for the family,
and in the 1990s she had been a genius. He agreed. Now, she confided, her
self-esteem had collapsed. Her perception of the market was all an illusion, a
dream, she said. Her husband did not disagree.
But, as profound as the psychological reaction to this stock market drop has
been for some people, it appears that collective enthusiasm for stocks is more
enduring than one might think; it seems, in large measure, that the enthusiasm
is still not over. The stock market has not seen as big a drop as would have
been predicted by the extreme overpricing of the market in 2000—at least
not yet—and this intense psychological correction has not been experienced
by most people.
The stock market has not come down to historical levels: the stock market
price-earnings ratio as I define it in this book is still, at this writing, in the
mid-20s, far higher than the historical average. Moreover, the market for
homes has produced a situation in which median home prices are sometimes

PREFA C E T O T H E S ECO N D E D ITIO N , 2005

xxi

ten times buyers’ per capita income or more. Irrational exuberance really
is still with us.
In a broad sense, this book, from its first edition in 2000, has been about
trying to understand the change in thinking of the people whose actions
ultimately drive the markets. It is about the psychology of speculation, about
the feedback mechanism that intensifies this psychology, about herd behavior
that can spread through millions or even billions of people, and about the
implications of such behavior for the economy and for our lives. Although
the book originally focused directly on current economic events, it was, and
is, about how errors of human judgment can infect even the smartest people,
thanks to overconfidence, lack of attention to details, and excessive trust in
the judgments of others, stemming from a failure to understand that others
are not making independent judgments but are themselves following still
others—the blind leading the blind.
The presumed enlightened opinion that people tend to rely on for economic
judgments is often rather like the “man of smoke” in Aldo Palazzeschi’s
eponymous surrealistic 1911 novel. The protagonist is made only of smoke;
he is virtually nothing at all, but he acquires a public persona and authority
that is a construct of the collective imagination, until the public changes its
mind, deciding he is not the font of truth, whereupon he disappears completely. Events such as that represented in Palazzeschi’s novel are a reality: un­­
substantiated belief systems, insubstantial wisps, do create bouts of irrational
exuberance for significant periods of time, and these bouts ultimately drive
the world economy.
I have revised the book in this second edition to try to extend its argument that variations caused by changing attitudes, irrational beliefs, and foci
of attention are an important factor in our changing economic lives, and to
examine the consequences for our economy and our future. I have recast the
examples of these variations in terms of more recent events. Notably, I have
added a chapter about the enormous home price boom that many countries
have been experiencing since the late 1990s, and I have broadened the discussion throughout the book to consider speculation in real estate. Beyond
that, this edition extends and improves the basic arguments in a number of
directions. I have been thinking about the issues in this book for five more
years since the first edition, and the research on behavioral economics, which
I closely follow, has made substantial progress over that interval as well.
The issues that are treated in this book are serious, and of continuing rele­
vance today. People in much of the world are still overconfident that the stock
market, and in many places the housing market, will do extremely well, and
this overconfidence can lead to instability. Significant further rises in these
markets could lead, eventually, to even more significant declines. The bad
outcome could be that eventual declines would result in a substantial increase

xxii

P RE FACE TO T HE SEC OND EDITION, 2005

in the rate of personal bankruptcies, which could lead to a secondary string of
bankruptcies of financial institutions as well. Another long-run consequence
could be a decline in consumer and business confidence, and another, possibly
worldwide, recession. This extreme outcome—like the situation in Japan since
1990 writ large—is not inevitable, but it is a much more serious risk than is
widely acknowledged.
Lest raising these possibilities seem alarmist, one should note that we
are already living with some of the unpleasant repercussions of past over­
confidence. The stock markets of many countries dropped by half from their
2000 peak by 2002, and have rebounded only a little. Overinvestment by
corporations, encouraged by the booming stock market, led to a collapse of
investment spending in the early years of the twenty-first century, and to a
worldwide recession.
The boom years of the 1990s created a business atmosphere akin to a gold
rush, and led many people to distort their business decisions, the results of
which will weigh upon us for many years to come. Part of this change in business atmosphere was a decline in ethical standards, a decline in the belief in
integrity, honesty, patience, and trust in business. A string of scandals affecting corporate boards, accounting firms, and mutual funds surfaced after the
market dropped.
These extravagant years eventually led to severe budgetary problems for
governments, both national and local. In the 1990s—with the stock market
going up, investors reaping capital gains, and the economy booming—tax
revenues rose, and many governments found it difficult to restrain increases
in expenditures. After the stock market decline, tax revenues fell, throwing
many governments into severe deficit crises. By 2002, the average government
deficit among member countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development was 3% of gross domestic product. The government deficits have in turn led to troubled attempts to restrain spending, with uneven
consequences for different constituencies.
An additional consequence of the intense stock market boom of the late
1990s was the home price boom, which began around 1997 or 1998 and then
intensified after 2000 throughout many countries of the world. The home
price boom appears to have begun around the time in 1997 that the stock
market boom was engendering a proliferation of “new era” theories about the
economy, and it is still going very strongly in many cities despite a stock market
correction. We have yet to see the full consequences of these price changes.
Speculative instability appears to be increasingly important to the world
economy. We are focusing more intently on the unpredictable markets. It is
not that the existing stock markets are demonstrably becoming more volatile.
There is no obvious long-run trend to greater stock market volatility. It is rather
that the number of people participating in these markets is increasing, and that

PREFA C E T O T H E S ECO N D E D ITIO N , 2005

xxiii

the scope of speculative markets, the kind of risks that are traded, is broadening. More and more electronic markets are being created every year, trading a
wider and wider range of risks, and more and more people, in both advanced
and emerging countries, are being drawn in to participate in these markets.
People will increasingly fear that their livelihoods really depend on their
wealth, wealth that is highly unstable because of market changes. So, over
the longer run, people will increasingly pay attention to market movements.
There is an increasing perception that the price of assets matters very much
to our lives. People increasingly believe that they must defend their private
property and doubt that they can depend on social institutions to save them if
things turn out badly. They see merciless capitalism as the wave of the future.
There is a name for this economic system—“the ownership society”—and
President George W. Bush, among others, likes to use this term. People must
take ownership of their own future, and plan for their future as property
owners in many senses of the word. There is indeed much to be said for the
ownership society in terms of its ability to promote economic growth. But by
its very nature it also invites speculation, and, filtered through the vagaries
of human psychology, it creates a horde of risks that we must somehow try
to manage.
I do not know the future, and I cannot accurately predict the ups and downs
of the markets. But I do know that, despite a significant slip in confidence
since 2000, people still place too much confidence in the markets and have too
strong a belief that paying attention to the gyrations in their investments will
someday make them rich, and so they do not make conservative preparations
for possible bad outcomes.

Preface to the First Edition, 2000

T

his book is a broad study, drawing on a
wide range of published research and
historical evidence, of the enormous recent stock market boom. Although it
takes as its specific starting point the current situation, it places that situation
in the context of stock market booms generally, and it also makes concrete
suggestions regarding policy changes that should be initiated in response to
this and other booms.
The need for such a book is particularly urgent today, in view of the widespread and quite fundamental disagreement about the stock market. When
people disagree at such a basic level, it is usually because they possess only
pieces of the overall picture. Yet meaningful consensus can only be achieved by
laying out all the available facts. I have therefore tried in this book to present
a much broader range of information than is usually considered in writings
on the market, and I have tried to synthesize this information into a detailed
picture of the market today.
Why did the U.S. stock market reach such high levels by the turn of the millennium? What changed to cause the market to become so highly priced? What
do these changes mean for the market outlook in the opening decades of the new
millennium? Are powerful fundamental factors at work to keep the market as
high as it is now or to push it even higher, even if there is a downward correction? Or is the market high only because of some irrational exuberance—wishful
thinking on the part of investors that blinds us to the truth of our situation?
The answers to these questions are critically important to private and public
interests alike. How we value the stock market now and in the future influences
xxv

xxvi

P RE FAC E TO T HE FIR ST EDIT ION, 2000

major economic and social policy decisions that affect not only investors but
also society at large, even the world. If we exaggerate the present and future
value of the stock market, then as a society we may invest too much in business
start‑ups and expansions, and too little in infrastructure, education, and other
forms of human capital. If we think the market is worth more than it really is,
we may become complacent in funding our pension plans, in maintaining our
savings rate, in legislating an improved Social Security system, and in providing other forms of social insurance. We might also lose the opportunity to use
our expanding financial technology to devise new solutions to the genuine
risks—to our homes, cities, and livelihoods—that we face.
To answer these questions about today’s stock market, I harvest relevant
information from diverse and, some would say, remote fields of inquiry.
Insights from these fields too often go unnoticed by market analysts, but
they have proved critical in defining similar market episodes throughout
history, as well as in other markets around the world. These fields include
economics, psychology, demography, sociology, and history. In addition to
more conventional modes of financial analysis, they bring potent insights to
bear on the issues at hand. Much of the evidence is drawn from the emerging field of behavioral finance, which, as the years go by, is looking less and
less like a minor subfield of finance and more and more like a central pillar
of serious finance theory.
I marshal the most important insights offered by researchers in these
fields. Taken as a whole, they suggest that the present stock market displays
the classic features of a speculative bubble: a situation in which temporarily
high prices are sustained largely by investors’ enthusiasm rather than by
consistent estimation of real value. Under these conditions, even though the
market could possibly maintain or even substantially increase its price level,
the outlook for the stock market into the next ten or twenty years is likely to
be rather poor—and perhaps even dangerous.
I do not purport to present a wholly new conception of financial market
behavior. This book is a work neither of economic theory nor of econo­metrics,
although it partakes in both. Rather, it is an attempt to characterize the complex
nature of our real markets today, considering whether they conform or do not
conform to our expectations and models. By assembling the most relevant
evidence, economic and otherwise, on the state of the market, I hope to correct what I consider to be the perilous policy paths now being followed by
legislators and economic leaders. I also hope to challenge financial thinkers
to improve their theories by testing them against the impressive evidence
that suggests that the price level is more than merely the sum of the available
economic information, as is now generally thought to be the case.
Within the past generation the branch of financial theory that is derived
from the assumption that all people are thoroughly rational and calculating

PREFA C E T O T H E F IRS T E D ITIO N , 2000

xxvii

has become the most influential analytical device to inform our mastery of
the market. Those financial theorists who consider the market price to be a
cunningly efficient processor of financial information have had a profound
effect on the systematic management of the world’s wealth, from the corner
stockbroker right up to the Federal Reserve. But most of these scholars of
finance and economics shrink from public statements about the level of the
stock market (although they are often more loose‑lipped in expressing their
opinions at lunch and over beers) because they do not want to be caught saying things in public that they cannot prove. Assuming the mantle of scientific
detachment, these financial economists tend to fall back on the simple but
elegant model of market efficiency to justify their professional position.
However, there are serious risks inherent in relying too heavily on such
pristine models as the basis for policy discussion, for these models deal only
with problems that can be answered with scientific precision. If one tries too
hard to be precise, one runs the risk of being so narrow as to be irrelevant.
The evidence I present in the following chapters suggests that the reality of
today’s stock market is anything but test‑tube clinical. If the theory of finance
is to grow in its usefulness, all economists eventually will have to grapple
with these messier aspects of market reality. Meanwhile, participants in public
debate and economic policy formation must sort out this tangle of market
factors now, before it is too late.
Among the unanticipated consequences of today’s investment culture is that
many of the tens of millions of adults now invested in the stock market act as
if the price level is simply going to keep rising at its current rate. Even though
the stock market appears based on some measures to be higher than it has ever
been, investors behave as though it can never be too high, and it can never go
down for long. Why would they behave this way? Their logic is apparently
consistent with the free‑rider argument. That is, if millions of researchers and
investors are studying stock prices and confirming their apparent value, why
waste one’s time in trying to figure out reasonable prices? One might as well
take the free ride at the expense of these other diligent investors who have
investigated stock prices and do what they’re doing—buy stocks!
But unknown to most investors is the troubling lack of credibility in the
quality of research being done on the stock market, to say nothing of the clarity and accuracy with which it is communicated to the public. Some of this
so‑called research often seems no more rigorous than the reading of tea leaves.
Arguments that the Dow is going to 36,000 or 40,000 or 100,000 hardly inspire
trust. Certainly some researchers are thinking more realistically about the market’s prospects and reaching better‑informed positions on its future, but these
are not the names that grab the headlines and thus influence public attitudes.
Instead the headlines reflect the news media’s constant attention to trivial
factoids and “celebrity” opinion about the market’s price level. Driven as their

xxviii

P RE FAC E TO T HE FIR ST EDIT ION, 2000
