
282 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
With regard to the second promise, that the observed performance of
the selected candidate is a reliable estimate of its future performance, the
news is not good. Jensen and Cohen 29 point out that, when MCP is applied
in situations where randomness plays a significant role in observed performance, the observed performance of the best-performing candidate
overestimates its expected (future) performance. In other words, when
observed performance is significantly determined by luck, it is gives a positively biased estimate. This is the case in TA rule data mining.
Observed performance is a reliable estimate of the best candidate's
future performance in situations where randomness is nonexistent or so
low that it can never influence the choice of the wining candidate. Such is
the case in a music competition or a competition at doing mathematical
proofs, where it is merit, not luck, that carries the day.
The bottom line: the MCP selected candidate is the candidate most
likely to do best in the future so long as a large number of observations
are used to compute the performance statistic. Nevertheless, in problems
where randomness has a significant impact, observed performance is
positively biased, and the selected candidate's future performance will, in
all probability, be worse than the performance that allowed it to win the
competition.
MCP Efficacy in Low Randomness Situations
First, consider the application of MCP to problems with low randomness.
At this end of the spectrum, a candidate's observed performance is dominated by merit, and Mep is effective in identifying superior merit.
This problem is exemplified by the task of hiring a new first violinist
for a symphony orchestra. 3o The universe of candidates consists of the set
of musicians applying for the job. Each is asked to perform a challenging
composition, without prior rehearsal, for a panel of judges. The judges'
evaluation is the figure of merit. This acid test of instrumental competence, known as sightreading, is effective because great performances do
not occur by luck. If luck is a factor, it is a minor one. For example, a great
musician may have an off day because of a marital spat or a flat tire on the
way to the audition, but even these random influences will have only a
small effect on a truly meritorious musician.
In this situation, observed performance is an accurate indicator of
true merit and an excellent predictor of future performance. This is
depicted in Figure 6.14. Each candidate's merit, which is equivalent to
his expected performance, is indicated by the arrow. Both musicians
are excellent, although one is slightly better. The distribution of possible performance surrounding each candidate's merit is narrow, indicating the minor impact of randomness on observed performance. Note

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

283
Expected
Performance
Higher Merit
Candidate

Probability

Expected
Performance
Lesser
Candidate

J.
Poor

l\/. l\
Excellent

I
I

Performance

FIGURE 6.14 Low randomness-small merit differential. True merit shines
through thin fog of randomness.

that there is no overlap in the distributions so that even if the better
candidate has an unlucky performance (i.e., at the extreme low end of
the distribution) and the lesser candidate has an extremely lucky one,
the better candidate will still be selected. This is another way of saying
that randomness is unlikely to inflate the inferior competitor's performance sufficiently such that it would be selected over the higher merit
candidate.
MCP Efficacy in High Randomness

Now consider a situation at the opposite end of the randomness spectrum, TA rule data mining. Here, randomness has a major impact on observed performance, for even the most potent TA rules or models possess
relatively little predictive power. This is a consequence of the complex
and highly random nature of financial markets. The probability distribution of observed performance of a rule with an expected return of zero is
illustrated in Figure 6.15. Although zero is the most likely return, far
higher or lower returns are possible due to good or bad luck. If the rule is
unlucky in the back test, observed performance will be negative. Even
more problematic for the objective technician is when good luck shines
on the worthless rule and it earns a positive rate of return. This may fool
the objective technician into believing that TA gold has been found. In
fact, the rule's signals coincided favorably with the market's fluctuations
purely by accident.
Although an extremely positive or negative average return is unlikely
for an individual rule, it becomes increasingly likely as more rules are
back tested. Just as the greater the number of people playing the lottery

284 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Probability

Possible
But
Rare

Bad luck
Negative Returns

Good Luck

o

Positive Returns

Annualized Return
FIGURE 6.15

Probability distribution of observed performance.

increases the chance that there will be someone lucky enough to win
twice, the greater the number of rules back tested increases the chance
that a rule will have an extraordinarily lucky observed performance. This
is the rule that would be picked by the data miner. The bottom line: when
observed performance is primarily due to randomness, it is likely that the
best observed performance, among a large set of observed performances,
will be largely an effect of randomness.
To see how luck might impact a data miner, imagine that you are observing a data miner at work. Furthermore, imagine that you are in the
fortunate position of knowing what no data miner ever knows, the true
expected return of each rule that is back tested. Suppose the data miner
back tests twelve different rules, and you know that each of the rules has
an expected return of 0 percent. All the data miner knows are the observed returns produced by each rule's back test. In Figure 6.16, each
rule's observed performance is depicted by an arrow on the probability
distribution. Each distribution is centered at zero, reflecting the fact that
each rule has an expected rate of return of zero. Notice that one rule got
lucky, producing an observed return of +60 percent. This is the rule that
would be selected by the data miner. In this case, the data-mining bias was
a positive 60 percent.
If the data miner were to test an even greater number of rules, the
chance of an even more positive observed performance would be increased. As will be discussed, the number of rules tested during data mining is one of five factors that impact the size of the data-mining bias. In
Figure 6.17, 30 rules are tested, and one managed to produce an observed
performance of 100 percent. This is the rule that would be selected by the
data miner. You know it is highly probable that its future performance will
be disappointing.

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

285

r·····················································.

60%

FIGURE 6 .• 6 Twelve different rules (each has an expected return of 0 percent).

FIG RE 6.17 Data mining more rules increases probability of more extreme luck.

286 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

The Risk of Picking an Inferior Rule
The prior examples assumed that all rules were of equal merit (all had expected returns equal to zero). Naturally, the data miner hopes that there is
at least one superior rule amongst all those tested, and that the superior
rule's observed performance will identify it as such. Unfortunately, this is
not always the case.
This is another negative consequence of high randomness. The superior
rule, the one with highest expected return, may not get picked, because an
inferior rule's lucky performance wins the data mining competition. An intuitive sense of the likelihood of this unfortunate result is portrayed in Figure
6.18. It shows the distribution of observed performance for two rules with
nearly identical expected performances, but one is indeed superior. However, the considerable overlap of the distributions gives a sense there is a
substantial chance the rule of lesser merit will produce the highest observed performance, causing it to get picked.
However, when the difference in expected returns (merit) between
the truly best rule and the next best rule is large enough, the data miner
can be more confident that best-observed performance will reliably
point to the superior rule. This is illustrated in the Figure 6.19. In other
words, when the difference in merit between the best rule and its nearest competitor is large, merit will be more likely to shine through the
fog of randomness. This is the illumination that guides the data miner to
the gold.
Practically speaking, the data miner is never aware of the risk of picking an inferior rule. That would require knowledge of true merit (expected
return), which is a population parameter and hence never known. The

Probability

r--Expeeted Return--l

i lesser Merit Candidate i

Low

o
Performance

FIGURE 6.18

High randomness and small merit difference.

High

287

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

Probabi Iity
r------------------------------l

Expected
I
Return
j
! Inferior Rule
I

j

Bad
Luck

i

~---------------1--------------~

Expected
Return
Superior Rule

//T"~_
Low

o

+20%

High

Performance
1~IGUHE 6.19 High randomness and large merit difference (superiority overcomes randomness).

data miner never gets to see the full consequences of the data-mining bias
until, as the song says, the future is past.

Five Factors Determine the Magnitude
of the Data-Mining Bias
Let us recap briefly what has been established thus far:
• The data-mining bias is defined as the expected difference between
the observed performance of a rule that wins the data mining competition and its true expected performance.
• Observed performance refers to the level of performance achieved by
a rule in back testing. Expected performance refers to the rule's theoretical performance in the future.
• The observed perfomlance of the highest-perfomling rule found by
data mining is positively biased. Therefore, its expected performance
out of sample will be less than the in-sample observed performance
that allowed it to beat other rules tested.
• Observed performance is a combination of randomness and predictive power. The greater the relative contribution of randomness, the
larger will be the magnitude the data-mining bias.
The relationship between the data-mining bias and the relative contribution of randomness is illustrated in Figure 6.20. As explained in the next
section, the degree of randomness encountered in a given data mining
venture depends on five factors that characterize the venture.

288 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Large

Data
Mining
Bias
No Bias

MERIT

,

LUCK

Spectrum of Randomness

FIGURE 6.20 Relationship of data-mining bias to degree of randomness.

The Five Factors Defined.

Five factors determine the degree of

data-mining bias. They are:
1. Number of rules back-tested: This refers to the total number of

rules back tested during the data-mining process en route to discovering the highest-performing rule. The larger the number of rules tested,
the larger the data-mining bias.
2. The number of observations used to compute the performance
statistic: The larger the number of observations, the smaller the
data-mining bias.
3. Correlation among rule returns: This refers to the degree to which
the performance histories of the rules tested are correlated with each
other. The less correlated they are, the larger the data-mining bias.
4. Presence of positive outlier returns: This refers to presence of
very large returns in a rule's performance history, for example a very
large positive return on a particular day. When these are present, the
data-mining bias tends to be larger, although this effect is reduced
when the number of positive outliers is small relative to the total number of observations that are used to compute the performance statistic. In other words, more observations dilute the biasing effect of
positive outliers.
5. Variation in expected returns among the rules: This refers to the
variation in true merit (expected return) among the rules back tested.
The lower the variation, the greater the data-mining bias. In other
words, when the set of rules tested have similar degrees of predictive
power, the data-mining bias will be larger.
How Each Factor Impacts the Data-ll1ining Bias. Figures 6.21
through 6.25 depict the relationships between each of the five factors and

289

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

Large

OM Bias

O"'---------

~

1

Many
Log of Number of Rules Back-Tested

FIGURE 6.21

Number of rules back tested (1).

Large

OM Bias

Ol-

.... _-

_- .. _---

1

~

Many
Number of Observations

FIGURE 6.22 Number of observations used to compute performance statistic (2).

Large
.... _-- ..... _-_._-- . ...... _-

.

.....

OM Bias

OL-_-+---t---+---t---+-_

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Correlation Coeffient

FIGURE 6.23 Correlation among rule returns (3).

1.0

290 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Large

DM Bias

OL-

____+_

High

Low

Number & Magnitude of Outliers Relative to Number of Observations Used to
Compute Performance Statistic

FIGURE 6.24

Presence of positive outlier returns (4).

Large

....
DM Bias

OL-_----'-_ _--'-_ _-'-_-'_ _--L____+
Low Variance
(All Rules'" Merit)

High Variance
(One Very Superior Rule)

FIGURE 6.25 Variance in expected ROI-degree of difference in merit in rule
universe(S).

the magnitude of the data-mining bias. These relationships pertain specifically to data mining ventures where the performance statistic being used
is the rule's mean rate of return. Because the sampling distribution of
other performance statistics, such as the Sharpe ratio, will differ from the
distribution of the mean return, the relationships between the five factors
and the data mining bias may also be different.
The astute reader will wonder how such curves could have been developed, given that a rule's expected performance is never known (it is a
population parameter) but must be known to measure the data-mining
bias. The reader is correct; the data-mining bias is never known for actual
rules. However, it can be known for artificial rules and can therefore be
investigated. An artificial rule is a computer-simulated trading signal

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Gold of Objective TA

291

whose accuracy (fraction of correct signals) can be set experimentally.
This makes it possible to know the expected return of the artificial rule.
The preceding curves were based on a set of tests done on artificial rules.
The results of these tests, which are described in the next section, show
how the five factors impact the data-mining bias.

EXPERlMEN1i\L INVESTIGUION
OF THE DA1l\-M1NING BIAS
Scientists make observations and draw inferences from them. Sound inferences depend on accurate observations. Thus, a key task is determining the
accuracy of the procedure used to make observations. The process of measuring the random and systematic error that may be present in an observational procedure is called calibration. One way to calibrate the accuracy of
a procedure is to test it on a problem whose correct answer is known. This
makes it possible to measure its random and/or systematic errors.
Objective technicians are the scientists of the TA world. Their primary
procedure is rule back testing. The observable produced is a performance
statistic. On the basis of this statistic, an inference is made about a rule's
predictive power or expected performance. Therefore, objective technicians are properly concerned with the random and or systematic error
that that may be present in performance statistics obtained by back testing. Chapter 4 showed that performance statistics are subject to random
error due to sampling variability. This chapter is concerned with a form of
systematic error that stems from data mining-the data-mining bias.
This section describes the results of experiments that investigate the
data-mining bias by examining how each of the five factors impacts the
size of the bias. This is done by data mining a universe of artificial trading
rules (ATRs). Unlike real TA rules, ATRs are ideal for this purpose because their expected return can be known because it is under experimental control. This allows us to measure the data-mining bias associated
with the rule that had the best-observed performance. This, in turn, tells
us how accurately its observed performance, a statistic which is known to
the data miner, portrays its expected performance, the population parameter the data miner wishes to knOw.
Artificial Trading Rules and
Simulated Performance Histories

The ATR performance histories produced in these experiments are composed of monthly returns. The expected return of an ATR is controlled

292 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

by manipulating the probability of a profitable monthly return. This
probability can be expected to manifest over a very large number of
months, a manifestation of the Law of Large Numbers. However, over
any small sample of months, the actual fraction of profitable months will
vary randomly about the specified probability level. This variation introduces the crucial element of randomness into the experiments. An ATR
performance history can be generated for any specified number of
months (e.g., 24).
When the probability of a profitable month is known, as it is with an
ATR, its expected return can be determined precisely. This, in turn, allows
the data-mining bias associated with the rule to be measured. The expected return of an ATR is given by the formula used to compute the expected value of a random variable:
EV = p(profitable month) x average gain - p(losing month)
x average loss

The average gain and average loss are also known because the ATRs
were applied to the absolute monthly percentage changes for the S&P 500
over the period August 1928 through April 2003. The term absolute means
the sign of the S&P's actual monthly change was ignored. In the ATR tests
the algebraic sign ( + or -) of the ATR's monthly return was determined by
a random process that is described below. Over this time period, comprising nearly 900 monthly observations, the average absolute monthly return
for the S&P 500 was equal to 3.97 percent. Thus, the formula for calculating an ATR's expected return is:
ER = ppm x 3.97 - (1 - ppm) x 3.97

Where ppm is defined as the probability of a profitable month.
ATR performance histories were generated by Monte Carlo simulation. Specifically, the absolute monthly changes in the S&P 500 were sampled with replacement from the 900-month history. A monthly return,
without its sign, was chosen at random, and a roulette wheel, simulated
by a computer, determined if that particular month was a gain or loss.
This represented one month of the ATR's performance history. The probability of a profitable month was set by the experimenter. A probability of
0.70 would be as if the roulette wheel had 100 slots with 70 designated as
profit and 30 designated as loss. This procedure for generating monthly
ATR returns was repeated for a specified number of months, another variable under experimental control. The performance history is then summarized with a statistic-mean monthly return, annualized. This procedure is
illustrated in Figure 6.26.

293

Data-Mining Bias: The Fool's Cold of Objective TA

n-month mean
Return = 7
Absolute

I

Monthly
j
Returns

S&P 500

1928 -2003

Random
Sampling
With
Replacement

FIGURE 6.26

Random Device
With
Probability of
Profitable month
Set Experimentally

ATR
Performance
History

Of
M months

Monte Carlo generation of ATR performance histories.

Let's consider what the expected return for an ATR would be under four
different settings for probability of a monthly gain: 1.0, 0.63, 0.50, and 0.0. An
ATR with p(gain) set at 1.0 (all months profitable) would have an expected
monthly return equal to the S&P 500's average absolute monthly return of
+3.97 percent per month or a 47.6 percent annualized noncompounded return. This value can be obtained by plugging into the formula for the expected value of a random variable. The same formula tells us that an ATR
with probability of a gain month set to 0.63 would have an expected return of
+12.4 percent. An ATR with probability of gain set to 0.50 would have an expected return of zero whereas a probability of gain equal to zero would earn
a return of -3.97 percent per month or -47.6 percent per year.
Bear in mind that these are expected values that would be earned
over a very large number of months. Over any small number of months,
the ATR's observed mean return can vary from this value. The smaller the
number of months comprising the ATR's performance history, the larger
will be the random variation from the expected mean return.
To simulate the effect of data mining, for example picking the bestperforming ATR of 10, 10 ATR performance histories were generated. The
one with highest mean return was selected, and its observed return was
noted. This process was repeated a total of 10,000 times. The 10,000 observations were used to form the sampling distribution for the statisticmean return of the highest performing ATR selected from 10.
Experiment Set 1: Data Mining ATRs of Equal Merit

In the first set of experiments, all ATRs were specified to have equal predictive power. This was accomplished by setting p(gain) to 0.50 for all
ATRs, thus giving them all an expected return of zero.

