
Gold had few significant monthly drawdowns during this period. Every one occurred due to a major
bout of fear that drove up the demand for cash at the expense of gold, other currency hedges, as well
as risk assets.
Monthly candlestick A: The October 2008 panic from the Lehman Brothers bank collapse that
threatened to bring down the global banking system and introduced the term systemic risk into the
mainstream media.
Monthly candlesticks B through E: Assorted bouts of panic that a Greek sovereign default
threatened, which in turn could start a wave of sovereign and/or bank defaults.
Look at the monthly charts in Figure 9.7 comparing the EURUSD and gold from December 2008 to
July 2011.
FIGURE 9.7 EURUSD (top) versus Gold (bottom), December 2008 through July 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Note that the EURUSD was in a flat trading range while gold kept steadily rising. This was one of
many signs, both technical and fundamental, that markets were dumping both currencies during this
period and seeking refuge in other kinds of assets, be they commodities or other currencies. A look at
commodities like gold, silver, oil, and copper would have confirmed this move out of cash into hard
assets.
In short, if you see gold rising, chances are good that demand for the USD, EUR, or both is falling.
The EURUSD will tell you which one is stronger.
If one of them is stronger than most of its crosses, then you know that its strength is genuine, which
in turn tells you something deeper about the state of the markets. If not, the opposite would hold.
Here are some very simple examples of how you'd compare gold, the EURUSD, and the EUR and
USD crosses to gain a deeper understanding of what's happening and how you might profit. My goal
here is to just introduce you to the thought process involved rather than cover every possible scenario.
If gold is up and the EURUSD is down (the USD is the stronger of the two), then (assuming the
USD is still a low-yielding safe haven currency):
If the USD is up versus most of its counterparts, that USD strength is real, not just relative to
the EUR. That could mean it's a risk off environment (because the USD is a safe haven
currency) and you should start thinking about moving into safe haven assets. It could also
signal a fear-driven flight to liquidity instead of U.S. economic strength, as we saw in the
summer and fall of 2008 and 2011.
If the USD is down versus most of its counterparts, that USD strength is only relative to the
EUR. That could mean it's a risk off environment because both the U.S. and Euro-zone

economies are struggling, and that markets are worried about a loss of purchasing power in
both currencies from policies of both the Fed and ECB that risk cutting the purchasing power
of both the USD and EUR.
If gold is up and the EURUSD also is up (the EUR is the stronger of the two), then:
If the EUR is up versus most of its counterparts, that strength is real, not just relative to the
USD. That could mean it's a risk on environment (because the EUR is a risk currency) and you
look to go into risk assets, or it indicates that something good is happening with the Euro-zone
economy relative to the rest of the world.
If the EUR is down versus most of its counterparts, then sentiment about the EUR, and
particularly the USD, is negative. Given that the EUR is a risk currency and the USD is a safe
haven currency, that dual weakness shouldn't be due to overall market sentiment in favor of
either risk appetite or risk aversion. Instead it is likely due to policy decisions from both the
United States and the EU that are slamming both currencies. For example, both the European
Central Bank and the U.S. Federal Reserve could be in strong easing modes or engaging in
potentially inflationary stimulus programs that threaten the purchasing power of both
currencies.
Again, other scenarios are conceivable. The goal here is to demonstrate how to do some basic
intermarket analysis using gold, the EURUSD, and the relevant EUR and USD crosses.

Other Currency versus Commodity Correlations
There are many currency versus commodity correlations, and like other kinds of correlations they can
change over time.

USD versus Commodities
As with the EURUSD, the USD and commodities tend to push each other in opposite directions
(though not as strongly). Here's why.
First, the U.S. imports many commodities, like oil, so higher prices for oil and other imported
commodities pressure the U.S. economy and the USD.
Second, commodities are usually priced in U.S. dollars, so higher commodity prices also imply a
less valuable USD.
Also, remember that the USD is a safe haven asset and commodities are risk assets, so by their very
nature they respond in opposite ways in times of optimism or fear. Note that this correlation may
change over the coming years. We are seeing signs of exporter nations making deals to conduct trade
among themselves without using dollars.

Gold Supports the AUD and NZD
Australia is one of the world's top gold producers, so rising gold prices help the AUD. Because of the
strong trade relationship between Australia and New Zealand, what's good for the AUD often also
benefits the NZD. The United States is one of the world's largest gold buyers, and also gold is priced
in dollars, so higher gold prices usually pressure the USD. So the AUDUSD and NZDUSD can also
be bought to ride rising gold prices, or sold when gold is falling.

Oil versus Risk Currencies: An Example of How Correlations Can
Change
Oil is a risk asset like the AUD, NZD, and CAD, so these all tend to move together. When there is
growth, economies consume more oil. Because oil is so essential, its price is built into almost all
economic activity. As noted before, so if oil prices spike too far too fast, they hurt growth, and that
positive correlation with risk assets, which rise or fall with growth prospects, becomes negative.
This negative correlation tends to be short lived, however. Rapidly rising oil prices have eventually
led to their own correction, as they bring fears of slowing growth, and so lower prices.
Note in Figure 9.8 how this divergence (oil rising and the S&P 500 falling) from September 2007
to June 2008 ultimately corrected and the positive correlation resumed (both the S&P 500 and oil fell
together) from July 2008 to December 2008.
FIGURE 9.8 S&P 500 versus Brent Crude Oil Monthly Charts, March 2007 to January
2009Divergence between the S&P 500 (a risk appetite barometer) and oil eventually ends as higher
oil prices hurt growth, which in turn reduces oil prices.
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Oil versus the CADJPY
Canada is a major oil exporter, so higher oil prices generally support a higher CAD. Japan is a major

oil importer, so higher oil hurts Japan and the JPY. The same holds true to a lesser degree for the
USDCAD. Why a lesser degree, even though the United States is an oil importer? Remember the trade
relationship between the United States and Canada noted earlier. What hurts Canada's biggest export
market ultimately hurts Canada and thus the CAD. This tight trade relationship tends to limit the
CAD's short-term gains against the USD. However it hasn't been strong enough to halt the USDCAD's
ongoing decade-plus decline, which reflects Canada's better economic performance.
We see a similar relationship with the EUR and CHF. If Europe is getting hurt, that weakness
eventually hurts the CHF because Europe buys most of Switzerland's exports. Here too, however, the
tight trade relationship may limit the EURCHF'S short-term volatility, but it hadn't prevented the
decade-plus downtrend as Switzerland's better economic fundamentals ultimately drive the pair
lower. Over the long term, fundamentals are the true drivers of price trends. That's why long-term
investors must consider longer-term fundamentals so carefully.
Again, there are exceptions to these rules.

THINKING LIKE A PRO, ONE STEP BEYOND
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
While you've learned a lot so far, beware that a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing.
As we have said from the beginning, we don't claim to teach you any secrets to fast riches. While
learning what we've taught will put you far ahead of the masses of the typically ignorant, reckless
forex beginners and casual gamblers who fill the ranks of the 70 percent of traders that fail, there is
nothing in this book that isn't known to the elite professional forex traders, including those who run
the forex trading departments of large financial institutions and thus control most of the daily volume
traded. If you feel you've got an insight into what's happening, assume the big boys and their
supercomputers have already seen the same thing. They have probably correctly anticipated what
most traders are likely to do, and probably have plans ready to exploit their advantage.

Mind Games
Some of these traders have enough capital to move markets in the short term and will do so when they
think they can fool the masses. They, too, understand support and resistance, know that buy and sell
orders cluster in swarms around the most popularly recognized s/r levels, and will attempt to profit
from them by a variety of means, like starting the false breakouts we saw in Chapter 4 when
discussing chart patterns.

Learn to Think Like These Pros
This includes the following. Remember the quotes from the start of Chapter 5 on trader psychology
and RAMM.
First, as always, remember that smart, low-risk trading and investing starts with the right attitudes
and expectations. Always assume that if you see a strong s/r point at which to place an entry or exit,
Big Brother and his machines have long ago seen it, positioned for it, hedged it, and planned to use it
against you. Sorry if I'm bursting your bubble. Fear not—there is hope, even for those of us who aren't

going to create sophisticated computerized trading systems or hire someone to do so.
Second, (once again) avoid day trading forex until you've tested (first on a practice account, then
with small positions on real accounts) and found methods that keep you profitable most months over
at least a six-month period. Until then, focus on multiday, multiweek, and multimonth positions. Shortterm money flows from the big boys, whether from attempted price manipulation as seen in our false
breakout examples or from simple random money flows from daily multinational business activity,
and can move markets over a matter of hours, perhaps days. Beyond that time frame, nobody except
for a few central banks has the cash to fuel a sustained price move in a given currency pair. The
fundamental and technical analysis that you can do, based on publicly available information and basic
technical indicators that are easily available to you, matters much more in these time frames.
Third, consider entering a bit later and exiting a bit earlier. That is, if you need to use entry and
exits entered in advance because you can't be sure you'll be monitoring the markets when your chosen
s/r levels are hit (usually the case), then enter at least some of your planned position after price has
moved well past support, and exit a bit earlier, just before where selling near resistance would begin.
You will sacrifice some profit, but you will be less prone to getting sucked into the false breakouts or
other manipulations that the big players love to orchestrate. Alternatively, use trailing stops to ride the
move until it reverses. The tighter the stop, the less of the move you give back, but the more likely you
are to be shaken out by short-term price movements. The looser the stop, the opposite applies. Many
traders will tighten their trailing stops as price approaches resistance. This reduces risk of loss from
reversals, but at a cost of being shaken out by normal price gyrations before the move has finished.
Fourth, if you believe you can be at your computer actively monitoring markets when your entry or
exit levels are hit, then:
Instead of using a preset entry point, wait to enter near support until after price has clearly
bounced higher per whatever trend-confirming indicators you use.
For exits, in addition to using trailing stops as discussed earlier, consider leaving at least some
of your position in the trade until you get confirmation from your indicators that the trend is
probably finished.

CHAPTER 10
Alternatives to Traditional Methods
This chapter is specifically for those who are smart enough to know that they need currency
diversification, would like some exposure to forex trading (versus more passive long-term buy-andhold investing) but are:
Unable or unwilling to do their own forex trading.
Seeking simpler, less time-consuming, lower-risk trading methods than those we've covered thus
far.
In this chapter we present the more traditional alternatives for those seeking currency exposure and
diversification with less risk, time, and effort.
Auto-trading systems.
Currency funds.
Managed currency accounts.
Then in Chapter 11, for the first time in any forex book, we'll look at two newer, smarter, easier,
and less demanding ways to get forex exposure.

AUTO-TRADING SYSTEMS: WELCOME TO THE
MACHINE
As the name implies, automated trading or algorithmic systems go beyond mere testing of systems to
actually applying them in real time to make real trades with live market data. When the programmed
system generates a buy or sell signal, the software automatically places the trade. These systems have
been widely used by institutional traders for many years in all financial markets. In recent years more
affordable versions have become much more popular with private traders, particularly those with
programming and testing expertise, or the means to hire it.
Assuming the system is well designed, it is back tested, and its performance is monitored,
programmed trading has some obvious advantages:
Never miss an opportunity: they can work 24/7.
No emotion, full discipline: they take the emotion out of trading as long as you're disciplined
enough to let the system work even when you believe the rules don't apply under current
conditions.
So if:
You develop a clear, unambiguous set of trading rules that can be expressed in programming
code.
You have the time and expertise to translate the rules into a program and back test it, or can hire

someone to do that.
Then auto-trading is the best way to execute that system.
However, those conditions don't apply to most of us, so the way most of us would exercise this
option is via the retail forex trading system market. Many forex brokers offer a wide variety of trading
systems as part of their offerings. There's nothing wrong with trying these, especially if they allow
you to paper trade them for a while to see for yourself how they work. There are legitimate providers
and there are scams, so four caveats are in order.
1. Trading systems are generally designed to work in specific kinds of environments, typically
either trending or range-bound markets, but not both. Before choosing a system, be clear on what
kind of markets and conditions it's designed for. A legitimate vendor will provide clear
information on what kind of conditions the system is designed for, its performance and length of
track record, likely profit and maximum drawdown, and so on. If your broker offers a variety of
systems and allows you to place and remove funds from a given system as quickly as you would
any other kind of trade, then you can just move in and out of these systems as market conditions
warrant.
2. As with any business proposal, if it sounds too good to be true, chances are that it is. If the
returns seem outsized and the price very low, well, I hope they let you paper trade it first or start
with very small amounts at risk. Otherwise, move on.
3. You want to see as long a track record as possible, and understand what the market conditions
were during the sample period. For example, in a time of growth and rising rates, systems that
buy carry trades will work well as risk currencies are favored. However, during global
downturns these systems will suffer.
4. Typically, the higher the returns claimed, the higher the risk of loss. If a system vendor claims
both high returns and high maximum drawdown, that's a sign of honesty. If vendors claim high
returns without a correspondingly high risk level, then be suspicious.
There are many online trader forums dedicated to the auto-trading topic; for example,
ForexFactory.com has links to one right on its homepage. Do an online search for these, and use them
to tap the experience of others. There's no reason that you shouldn't be able to access reputable, costeffective systems if you just do your homework.

CURRENCY FUNDS: FOREX ETFS, ETNS, AND MORE
As part of my research on forex currency funds, I asked one of the experts on exchange-traded funds
(ETFs) for his input. John Nyaradi is publisher of WallStreetSectorSelector.com. He's also a prolific
writer on ETFs whose credits include the book Super Sectors: How to Outsmart the Market Using
Sector Rotation and ETFs, which was included among the Year's Top Investment Books in the 2011
Stock Trader's Almanac. What he sent back was so good, I thought why not just pass it on as a quick
introduction? Here's what he wrote:
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) offer investors the ultimate in flexibility and portfolio
construction by making previously unavailable asset classes easily accessible to retail
investors. One of these major asset classes is forex, which, until recently, has been the domain
of specialists, and traders/investors have been required to open separate accounts and trade

forex as a separate segment of their investment portfolio.
However, with the advent of ETFs, investors can now get exposure to the benefits (and risks) of
forex trading in traditional brokerage accounts, including IRAs and qualified defined
contribution and 401(k) accounts.
Many investment avenues are available when using currency ETFs. One can go “long” a
particular currency with standard currency ETFs or one can “short” a currency, either by
shorting the particular ETF or by buying an “inverse” ETF that changes value in the opposite
direction of the underlying index. One can also leverage positions with ETFs that offer 2X
leverage to the underlying currency's index. Finally, ETFs that simulate the action of currency
pairs are available which can replicate the trading action of the underlying forex pairs
themselves.
Currency ETFs trade just like a stock, move with the underlying foreign exchange rate, and
offer a convenient, easy-to-understand way to participate in this market. While there are
differences between currency ETFs and spot forex trading, ETFs offer investors several unique
advantages.
Foremost, you can use currency ETFs within the confines of a standard brokerage account and
so all of the things you're used to with a standard stock account apply to currency ETFs. ETFs
allow margin, short selling, stop loss entry and exit opportunities, and reasonable commission
structures. Currency ETFs also offer standard stock market margin leverage, and for more
aggressive investors, options strategies on currency ETFs are available, including covered calls
and buying either puts or calls to amplify potential returns.
Beyond single-currency ETFs, investors can also use currency pair exchange-traded funds that
are available in major markets, including the British Pound/U.S. Dollar (GBP/USD) Euro/U.S.
Dollar (EUR/USD), and U.S. Dollar/Japanese Yen (USD/JPY).
Like all currency pairs, these ETFs reflect the relative value of the two currencies and fluctuate
in value as the underlying relationship of the currencies changes. In the case of the EUR/USD,
for instance, when the Euro appreciates relative to the U.S. Dollar, the value of the ETF
increases, and when the Euro loses value to the U.S. Dollar, the ETF declines in price.
Investors also can get exposure to the so-called “carry trade” via Barclays Capital Intelligent
Carry Index (ICI) that is designed to capture returns from investing in high-yielding currencies
with money financed by borrowing low-yielding currencies. The Barclays Carry ETN (ICI) uses
a pool of currencies for this strategy that includes major currencies like the U.S. Dollar,
Japanese Yen, Euro, Swiss Franc, British Pound, and Australian and New Zealand Dollars.
So it's easy to see that currency exchange-traded funds offer a simple, convenient way for
investors to develop and deploy a potent and flexible arsenal in the world of foreign exchange
trading.1
For a more complete, practical guide to currency funds visit thesensibleguidetoforex.com, under the
Bonus Materials tab click through to
Chapter 10—Guide To Forex ETFs, ETNs, and More. It covers:
Key Differences between ETFs and ETNs
Pros & Cons of Currency Funds vs. Trading Forex Pairs

Advantages of ETFs versus ETNs
For Further Investigation: Free Online ETF Resources

MANAGED ACCOUNTS: SHOULD YOU SEEK
PROFESSIONAL HELP?
You don't always have to be a successful trader to succeed at trading, if you can identify a
professional willing to trade for you.
The appeal of this approach is obvious for those who want forex exposure and lack the time, will,
or ability to do it themselves. As with anything else that requires skill and experience, most people
will get much better results by hiring a professional.
The whole trick is in knowing how to locate a trustworthy, competent, and cost-effective
professional. As with packaged auto-trading systems, the quality of product offered varies
dramatically. The big problems with picking professional managers are:
There is a lack of reliable information about a given professional's performance.
Most people don't have the expertise or time to evaluate a professional using whatever
information is available.
The one huge lesson I've learned from sitting through so many unconvincing, amateurish
presentations from reputable institutions seeking to manage funds under my control is this: if these
clowns are getting people's money despite their weak presentations, flimsy qualifications and/or short
track records, then there must be vast herds of investors who seek professional assistance yet don't
know how to pick the winners.
If you're one of them, that's fine. We all have to start somewhere. Just use common sense and do
your homework. If that's beyond your resources, seek the advice of someone both trustworthy and
qualified who can refer you to trustworthy forex professionals, or at least guide your decision-making
process and feed you the right questions to be asking.
Here are some pointers.
Unless you've got some very sharp and trustworthy advisors who can steer you to someone proven,
and are among the high-net-worth types they seek, skip down to the next section on social trading for
what may be the best way to find competent pros to follow. For those who do go the managed account
route, keep the following in mind.
Realistic risk/reward: As with any business or investment proposal, apply the smell test. Anyone
offering above-market returns without higher risk is most likely misleading you. If the rewardrisk ratio seems unrealistically high, then move on to someone else.
Registered and regulated: As the past years have demonstrated, oversight and enforcement even
in well-regulated markets are not always reliable, though it's still a mark of some legitimacy if
the advisor is registered with some official licensing body that in theory imposes some standards,
oversight, and accountability. If nothing else, it's a sign of greater seriousness on the part of the
management, and gives you an address for complaints and possible redress of damages or
improprieties.
Incorporated in countries with reliable rule of law: Not that the United States hasn't had its share
