
DAVID SHAW:

odds of winning on any particular spin of the wheel are only modestly
better than fifty-fifty, but its edge and the laws of probability will assure
that it wins over the long run.
There are many different types of statistical arbitrage. We will focus
on one example: pairs trading. In addition to providing an easy-to grasp
illustration, pairs trading has the advantage of reportedly being one of the
prime strategies used by the Morgan Stanley trading group, for which
Shaw worked before he left to form his own firm.
Pairs trading involves a two-step process. First, past data are used to
define pairs of stocks that tend to move together. Second, each of these
pairs is monitored for performance divergences. Whenever there is a statistically meaningful performance divergence between two stocks in a
defined pair, the stronger of the pair is sold and the weaker is bought.
The basic assumption is that the performance of these closely related
stocks will tend to converge. Insofar as this theory is correct, a pairs trading approach will provide an edge and profitability over the long run,
even though there is a substantial chance that any individual trade will
lose money.
An excellent description of pairs trading and the testing of a specific
strategy was contained in a 1999 research paper written by a group of
Yale School of Management professors.* Using data for 1963-97, they
found that the specific pairs trading strategy they tested yielded statistically significant profits with relatively low volatility. In fact, for the
twenty-five-year period as a whole, the pairs trading strategy had a higher
return and much lower risk (volatility) than the S&P 500. The pairs trading strategy, however, showed signs of major deterioration in more recent
years, with near-zero returns during the last four years of the survey
period (1994-97). A reasonable hypothesis is that the increased use of
pairs-based strategies by various trading firms (possibly including
Shaw's) drove down the profit opportunity of this tactic until it was virtually eliminated.
What does Shaw's trading approach have to do with pairs trading?
Similar to pairs trading, Shaw's strategies are probably also based on a
* Evan G. Gatev, William N. Goetzmann, and K. Geert Rouwenhort. Pairs Trading: Performance of a Relative Value Arbitrage Rule. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 7032; March 1999.

f HE Q U A N T I T A T I V E E D G E

structure of identifying securities that are underpriced relative to other
securities. However, that is where the similarity ends. A partial list of the
elements of complexity that differentiate Shaw's trading methodology
from a simple statistical arbitrage strategy, such as pairs trading, include
some, and possibly all, of the following:
Trading signals are based on over twenty different predictive techniques, rather than a single method.
Each of these methodologies is probably far more sophisticated than
pairs trading. Even if performance divergence between correlated
securities is the core of one of these strategies, as it is for pairs trading, the mathematical structure would more likely be one that simultaneously analyzes the interrelationship of large numbers of
securities, rather than one that analyzes two stocks at a time.
Strategies incorporate global equity markets, not just U.S. stocks.
Strategies incorporate equity related instruments—warrants, options,
and convertible bonds—in addition to stocks.
In order to balance the portfolio so that it is relatively unaffected by
the trend of the general market, position sizes are probably adjusted
to account for factors such as the varying volatility of different securities and the correlations among stocks in the portfolio.
The portfolio is balanced not only to remove the influence of price
moves in the broad stock market, but also to mitigate the influence of
currency price swings and interest rate moves.
Entry and exit strategies are employed to minimize transaction costs.
All of these strategies and models are monitored simultaneously in
real time. A change in any single element can impact any or all of the
other elements. As but one example, a signal by one predictive technique to buy a set of securities and sell another set of securities
requires the entire portfolio to be rebalanced.
The trading model is dynamic—that is, it changes over time to adjust
for changing market conditions, which dictate dropping or revising
some predictive techniques and introducing new ones.
I have no idea—and for that matter will never know—how close the
foregoing description is to reality. I think, however, that it is probably

DAVID SHAW

valid as far as providing a sense of the type of trading done at D. E.
Shaw.
Shaw's entrepreneurial bent emerged at an early age. When he was
twelve, he raised a hundred dollars from his friends to make a horror
movie. Since he grew up in the E.A. area, he was able to get other kids'
parents to provide free help with tasks such as special effects and editing. The idea was to show the movie to other kids in the neighborhood
for a 50-cent admission charge. But the plan went awry when the processing lab lost one of the rolls of film. When he was in high school, he
formed a company that manufactured and sold psychedelic ties. He
bought three sewing machines and hired high school students to manufacture the ties. The venture failed because he hadn't given much
thought to distribution, and going from store to store proved to be an
inefficient way to market the ties.
His first serious business venture, however, was a success. While he
was at graduate school at Stanford, he took two years off to start a computer company that developed compilers [computer code that translates
programs written in user languages into machine language instructions].
Although this venture was very profitable, Shaw's graduate school
adviser convinced him that it was not realistic for him to earn his Ph.D.
part-time while running a company. Shaw sold the company and completed his Ph.D. work at Stanford. He never considered the alternative
of staying with his entrepreneurial success and abandoning his immediate goal of getting a Ph.D. "Finishing graduate school was extremely
important to me at the time," he says. "To be taken seriously in the
computer research community, you pretty much had to be a faculty
member at a top university or a Ph.D.-level scientist at a leading
research lab."
Shaw's doctoral dissertation, "Knowledge Based Retrieval on a Relational Database Machine," provided the theoretical basis for building
massively parallel computers. One of the pivotal theorems in Shaw's dissertation proved that, for an important class of problems, the theoretical
advantage of a multiple processor computer over a single processor computer would increase in proportion to the magnitude of the problem. The
implications of this theorem for computer architecture were momentous:
It demonstrated the inevitability of parallel processor design vis-a-vis sin-

T H E Q U A N T I T A T I V E EDff

gle processor design as the approach lor achieving major advances in
supercomputer technology.
Shaw has had enough accomplishments to fulfill at least a half dozen
extraordinarily successful careers. In addition to the core trading business, Shaw's firm has also incubated and spun off a number of other
companies. Perhaps the best-known of these is Juno Online Services, the
world's second-largest provider of dial-up Internet sendees (after America
Online). Juno was launched as a public company in May 1999 and is
traded on Nasdaq (symbol: JWEB). D. E. Shaw also developed DESoFT,
a financial technology company, which was sold to Merrill Lynch, an
acquisition that was pivotal to the brokerage firm's rollout of an on-line
trading service. FarSight, an on-line brokerage firm, and D. E. Shaw
Financial Products, a market-making operation, were other businesses
developed at D. E. Shaw and subsequently sold.
In addition to spawning a slew of successful companies, D. E. Shaw
also has provided venture capital funding to Schrodinger Inc. (for which
Shaw is the chairman of the board of directors) and Molecular Simulations Inc., two firms that are leaders in the development of computational chemistry software. These investments reflect Shaw's strong belief
that the design of new drugs, as well as new materials, will move increasingly from the laboratory to the computer. Shaw predicts that developments in computer hardware and software will make possible a dramatic
acceleration in the timetable for developing new drugs, and he wants to
play a role in turning this vision into reality.
By this time, you may be wondering how this man finds time to sleep.
Well, the paradox deepens, because in addition to all these ventures,
Shaw has somehow found time to pursue his political interests by serving
on President Clinton's Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology and chairing the Panel on Educational Technology.
The reception area at D. E. Shaw—a sparsely furnished, thirty-onefoot cubic space, with diverse rectangular shapes cut out of the walls and
backlit by tinted sunlight reflected off of hidden color surfaces—looks
very much like a giant exhibit at a modern art museum. This bold, spartan, and futuristic architectural design is, no doubt, intended to project
the firm's technological identity.
The interview was conducted in David Shaw's office, a spacious,

D A V I D SHAW-3

high-ceilinged room with two adjacent walls of windows opening to an
expansive view to the south and west of Midtown Manhattan. Shaw
must be fond of cacti, which lined the windowsills and included a treesize plant in the corner of the room. A large, irregular-polygon-shaped,
brushed aluminum table, which served as a desk on one end and a conference area on the other, dominated the center of the room. We sat
directly across from each other at the conference end.

THE Q U A N T I T A T I V E EDGE

traditional von Neumann machine, named after John von Neumann,

has a single central processing unit (CPU) connected to a single
memory unit. Originally, the two were well matched in speed and
size. Over time, however, as processors became faster and memories
got larger, the connection between the two—the time it takes for the
CPU to get things out of memory, perform the computations, and

place the results back into memory—became more and more of a
bottleneck.

You began your career designing supercomputers. Can you tell
me about that experience?
From the time I was in college, I was fascinated by the question of
what human thought was—what made it different from a computer.
When I was a graduate student at Stanford, I started thinking about
whether you could design a machine that was more like the brain,
which has huge numbers of very slow processors—the neurons—
working in parallel instead of a single very fast processor.
Were there any other people working to develop parallel supercomputers at that time?
Although there were already a substantial number of outstanding
researchers working on parallel computation before I got started,
most of them were looking at ways to connect, say, eight or sixteen
processors. I was intrigued with the idea of how you could build a
parallel computer with millions of processors, each next to a small
chunk of memory. There was a trade-off, however. Although there
were a lot more processors, they had to be much smaller and cheaper.
Still, for certain types of problems, theoretically, you could get speeds
that were a thousand times faster than the fastest supercomputer. To
be fair, there were a few other researchers who were interested in
these sorts of "fine-grained" parallel machines at the time—for example, certain scientists working in the field of computer vision—but it
was definitely not the dominant theme within the field.

You said that you were trying to design a computer that worked
more like the brain. Could you elaborate?
At the time, one of the main constraints on computer speed was a
limitation often referred to as the "von Neumann bottleneck." The

This type of bottleneck does not exist in the brain because memory storage goes on in millions of different units that are connected to
each other through an enormous number of synapses. Although we
understand it imperfectly, we do know that whatever computation is
going on occurs in close proximity to the memory. In essence, the
thinking and the remembering seem to be much more extensively
intermingled than is the case in a traditional von Neumann machine.
The basic idea that drove my research was that if you could build a
computer that had a separate processor for each tiny chunk of memory, you might be able to get around the von Neumann bottleneck.

I assume that the necessary technology did not yet exist at that
time.
It was just beginning to exist. I completed my Ph.D. in 1980. By the
time I joined the faculty at Columbia University, it was possible to
put multiple processors, but very small and simple ones, on a single
chip. Our research project was the first one to build a chip containing
a number of real, multibit computers. At the time, we were able to
place eight 8-bit processors on a single chip. Nowadays, you could
probably put 512 or 1,024 similar processors on a chip.

Cray was already building supercomputers at the time. How did
your work differ from his?
Seymour Cray was probably the greatest single-processor supercomputer designer who ever lived. He was famous for pushing the technological envelope. With each new machine he built, he would use
new types of semiconductors, cooling apparatus, and wiring schemes
that had never been used before in an actual computer. He was also a
first-rate computer architect, but a substantial part of his edge came
from a combination of extraordinary engineering skills and sheer

D A V I D SHAVi

technological audacity. He had a lot more expertise in high-speed
technology, whereas my own focus was more on the architecture—
designing a fundamentally different type of computer.
You mentioned earlier that your involvement in computer design
had its origins in your fascination with human thought. Do you
believe it's theoretically possible for computers to eventually
think?
From a theoretical perspective, I see no intrinsic reason why they
couldn't.
So Hal in 2001 is not pure science fiction.
It's hard to know for sure, but I personally see no compelling reason
to believe that this couldn't happen at some point. But even if it does
prove feasible to build truly intelligent machines, I strongly suspect
that this won't happen for a very long time.
But you believe it's theoretically possible in the sense that a
computer could have a sense of self?
It's not entirely clear to me what it would mean for a computer to
have a sense of self, or for that matter, exactly what we mean when
we say that about a human being. But I don't see any intrinsic reason
why cognition should be possible only in hydrocarbon-based systems
like ourselves. There's certainly a lot we don't understand about how
humans think, but at some level, we can be viewed as a very interesting collection of highly organized, interacting molecules. I haven't yet
seen any compelling evidence to suggest that the product of human
evolution represents the only possible way these molecules can be
organized in order to produce a phenomenon like thought.
Did you ever get to the point of applying your theoretical concepts to building an actual working model of a supercomputer?
Yes, at least on a small scale. After I finished my Ph.D., I was
appointed to the faculty of the department of computer science at
Columbia University. I was fortunate enough to receive a multimillion-dollar research contract from ARPA [the Advanced Research
Projects Agency of the U.S. Department of Defense, which is best
known for building the ARPAnet, the precursor of the Internet]. This
funding allowed me to organize a team of thirty-five people to design

THE Q U A N T I T A T I V E

customized integrated circuits and build a working prototype of this
sort of massively parallel machine. It was a fairly small version, but it

did allow us to test out our ideas and collect the data we needed to
calculate the theoretically achievable speed of a full-scale supercomputer based on the same architectural principles.
Was any thought given to who would have ownership rights if
your efforts to build a supercomputer were successful?
Not initially. Once we built a successful prototype, though, it became
clear that it would take another $10 to $20 million to build a fullscale supercomputer, which was more than the government was realistically likely to provide in the form of basic research funding. At that
point, we did start looking around for venture capital to form a company. Our motivation was not just to make money, but also to take our
project to the next step from a scientific viewpoint.
At the time, had anyone else manufactured a supercomputer
using parallel processor architecture?
A number of people had built multiprocessor machines incorporating
a relatively small number of processors, but at the time we launched
our research project, nobody had yet built a massively parallel supercomputer of the type we were proposing.
Were you able to raise any funding?
No, at least not after a couple months of trying, after which point my
career took an unexpected turn. If it hadn't, I don't know for sure
whether we would have ultimately found someone willing to risk a
few tens of millions of dollars on what was admittedly a fairly risky
business plan. But based on the early reactions we got from the venture capital community, I suspect we probably wouldn't have. What
happened, though, was that after word got out that I was exploring
options in the private sector, I received a call from an executive
search firm about the possibility of heading up a really interesting
group at Morgan Stanley. At that point, I'd become fairly pessimistic
about our prospects for raising all the money we'd need to start a serious supercomputer company. So when Morgan Stanley made what
seemed to me to be a truly extraordinary offer, I made the leap to Wall
Street.

DAVID SHAW

T H E QUANTITAT1I

Up to that point, had you given any thought to a career in the
financial markets?
None whatsoever.
I had read that your stepfather was a financial economist who
first introduced you to the efficient market hypothesis.* Did that
bias you as to the feasibility of developing strategies that could
beat the market? Also, given your own lengthy track record, does
your stepfather still believe in the efficient market hypothesis?
Although it's true that my stepfather was the first one to expose me to
the idea that most, if not all, publicly available information about a
given company is already reflected in its current market price, I'm
not sure that he ever believed it was impossible to beat the market.
The things I learned from him probably led me to be more skeptical
than most people about the existence of a "free lunch" in the stock
market, but he never claimed that the absence of evidence refuting
the efficient market hypothesis proved that the markets are, in fact,
efficient.
Actually, there is really no way to prove that is the case. All you
can ever demonstrate is that the specific patterns being tested do
not exist. You can never prove that there aren't any patterns that
could beat the market.
That's exactly right. All that being said, I grew up with the idea that, if
not impossible, it was certainly extremely difficult to beat the market.
And even now, I find it remarkable how efficient the markets actually
are. It would be nice if all you had to do in order to earn abnormally
large returns was to identify some sort of standard pattern in the historical prices of a given stock. But most of the claims that are made by
so-called technical analysts, involving constructs like support and
resistance levels and head-and-shoulders patterns, have absolutely no
grounding in methodologically sound empirical research.
But isn't it possible that many of these patterns can't be rigor-

ously tested because they can't be defined objectively? For example, you might define a head-and-shoulders pattern one way
while I might define it quite differently. In fact, for many patterns, theoretically, there could be an infinite number of possible
definitions.
Yes, that's an excellent point. But the inability to precisely explicate
the hypothesis being tested is one of the signposts of a pseudoscience. Even for those patterns where it's been possible to come up
with a reasonable consensus definition for the sorts of patterns traditionally described by people who refer to themselves as technical analysts, researchers have generally not found these patterns to have any
predictive value. The interesting thing is that even some of the most
highly respected Wall Street firms employ at least a few of these "prescientific" technical analysts, despite the fact that there's little evidence they're doing anything more useful than astrology.
But wait a minute. I've interviewed quite a number of traders

There are three variations of this theory: (1) weak form—past prices cannot be used lo
predict future prices; (2) semistrong form—the current price reflects all publicly
known information; (3) strong form—the current price reflects all information,

What is an example of a market anomaly that existed but now no
longer works because it was publicized?
We don't like to divulge that type of information. In our business, it's

whether publicly known or not.

who are purely technically oriented and have achieved return-torisk results that were well beyond the realm of chance.
I think it depends on your definition of technical analysis. Historically, most of the people who have used that term have been members
of the largely unscientific head-and-shoulders-support-and-resistance
camp. These days, the people who do serious, scholarly work in the
field generally refer to themselves as quantitative analysts, and some
of them have indeed discovered real anomalies in the marketplace.
The problem, of course, is that as soon as these anomalies are published, they tend to disappear because people exploit them. Andrew
Lo at MIT is one of the foremost academic experts in the field. He is
responsible for identifying some of these historical inefficiencies and
publishing the results. If you talk to him about it, he will probably tell
you two things: first, that they tend to go away over time; second, that
he suspects that the elimination of these market anomalies can be
attributed at least in part to firms like ours.
