
MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

53

Blame the Unexpected News
It is easy to feel angry and hurt when a sudden piece of bad news
blows a hole in your stock. You buy something, it goes up, bad news
hits the market, and your stock collapses. The market did it to you, you
say? The news may have been sudden, but you are responsible for
handling any challenges.
Most company news is released on a regular schedule. If you trade
a certain stock, you should know well in advance when that company
releases its earnings and be prepared for any market reaction to the
news. Lighten up on your position if unsure about the impact of a coming announcement. If you trade bonds, currencies, or stock index
futures, you must know when the key economic statistics are released
and how the leading indicators or the unemployment rate can impact
your market. It may be wise to tighten your stops or reduce the size of
your trade in advance of an important news release.
What about a truly unexpected piece of news—a president gets shot,
a noted analyst comes out with a bearish earnings forecast, and so on?
You must research your market and know what happened after similar events in the past; you have to do your homework before the event
hits you. Having this knowledge allows you to act without delay. For
example, the stock market’s reaction to an assault on a president has
always been a sharp hiccup to the downside, followed by a complete
retracement, so a sensible thing to do is buy the break.
Your trading plan must include the possibility of a sharp adverse
move caused by sudden events. You must have your stop in place, and
the size of your trade must be such that you cannot get financially hurt
in the case of a reversal. There are many risks waiting to spring on a
trader—you alone are responsible for damage control.

Wishful Thinking
When the pain grows bit by bit, the natural tendency is to do nothing
and wait for an improvement. A sleepwalking trader gives his losing
trades “more time to work out,” while they slowly destroy his account.
A sleepwalker hopes and dreams. He sits on a loss and says, “This
stock is coming back; it always did.” Winners accept occasional losses,
take them, and move on. Losers postpone taking losses. An amateur
puts on a trade the way a kid buys a lottery ticket. He waits for the
wheel of fortune to decide whether he wins or loses. Professionals, to

54

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

the contrary, have ironclad plans for getting out, either with a profit
or a small loss. One of the key differences between professionals and
amateurs is their planning for exits.
A sleepwalking trader buys at 35 and puts in a stop at 32. The stock
sinks to 33, and he says, “I’ll give it a little more room.” He moves his
stop down to 30. That is a fatal mistake—he has breached his discipline and violated his own plan.
You may move stops only one way—in the direction of your trade.
Stops are like a ratchet on a sailboat, designed to take the slack out of
your sails. If you start giving your trade “more room to breathe,” that extra
slack will swing around and hurt you. When the market rewards traders
for breaking their rules, it sets up an even deeper trap in their next trade.
The best time to make decisions is before you enter a trade. Your
money is not at risk, and you can weigh profit targets and loss parameters. Once you’re in a trade, you begin to form an attachment to it.
The market hypnotizes you and lures you into emotional decisions.
This is why you must write down your exit plan and follow it.
Turning a losing trade into an “investment” is a common disease
among small private traders, but some institutional traders also suffer
from it. Disasters at banks and major financial firms occur when poorly
supervised traders lose money in short-term trades and stick them into
long-term accounts, hoping that time will bail them out. If you are losing in the beginning, you’ll lose in the end. Do not put off the hour of
reckoning. The first loss is the best loss—this is the rule of those of us
who trade with our eyes open.

A REMEDY FOR SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS
People who like to complain about their bad luck are often experts in
looking for trouble and snatching defeat from the jaws of victory. A
friend in the construction business used to have a driver who dreamed
of buying his own truck and working for himself. He saved money for
years and finally paid cash for a huge brand-new truck. He quit his job,
got gloriously drunk, and at the end of the day rolled his uninsured
truck down an embankment—it was totaled, and the driver came back
asking for his old job. Tragedy? Drama? Or fear of freedom and an
unconscious wish for a safe job with a steady paycheck?
Why do intelligent people with a track record of success keep losing
money on one harebrained trade after another, stumbling from calamity
to catastrophe? Ignorance? Bad luck? Or a hidden desire to fail?

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

55

Many people have a self-destructive streak. My experience as a psychiatrist has convinced me that most people who complain about
severe problems are in fact sabotaging themselves. I cannot change a
patient’s external reality, but whenever I cure one of self-sabotage, he
quickly resolves his external problems.
Self-destructiveness is such a pervasive human trait because civilization is built on controlling aggression. As we grow up, we are trained
to control aggression against others—behave, do not push, be nice.
Our aggression has to go somewhere, and many turn it against themselves, the only unprotected target. We turn our anger inward and learn
to sabotage ourselves. Little wonder so many of us grow up fearful,
inhibited, and shy.
Society has several defenses against the extremes of self-sabotage.
The police will talk a potential suicide down from the roof, and the
medical board will take the scalpel away from an accident-prone surgeon, but no one will stop a self-defeating trader. He can run amok in
the financial markets, inflicting wounds on himself, while brokers and
other traders gladly take his money. Financial markets lack protective
controls against self-sabotage.
Are you sabotaging yourself? The only way to find out is to keep
good records, especially a Trader’s Journal and an equity curve, shown
later in this book. The angle of your equity curve is an objective indicator of your behavior. If it slopes up, with few downticks, you’re
doing well. If it points down, it shows you’re not in gear with the markets and possibly in a self-sabotage mode. When you observe that,
reduce the size of your trades and spend more time with your Trader’s
Journal figuring out what you’re doing.
You need to become a self-aware trader. Keep good records, learn
from past mistakes, and do better in the future. Traders who lose
money tend to feel ashamed. A bad loss feels like a nasty comment—
most people just want to cover up, walk away, and never be seen
again. Hiding doesn’t solve anything. Use the pain of a loss to turn
yourself into a disciplined winner.

Losers Anonymous
Years ago I had an insight that changed my trading life forever. Back
in those days my equity used to swing up and down like a yo-yo. I
knew enough about markets to profit from many trades but couldn’t
hold on to my gains and grow equity. The insight that eventually got

56

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

me off the roller coaster came from a chance visit to a meeting of
Alcoholics Anonymous.
One late afternoon I accompanied a friend to an AA meeting at a
local YMCA. Suddenly, the meeting gripped me. I felt as if the people
in the room were talking about my trading! All I had to do was substitute the word loss for the word alcohol.
People at the AA meeting talked about how alcohol controlled their
lives, and my trading in those days was driven by losses—fearing them
and trying to trade my way out. My emotions followed a jagged equity
curve—elation at the highs and cold clammy fear at the lows, with fingers trembling above the speed dial button.
Back in those days I had a busy psychiatric practice and saw my
share of alcoholics. I began to notice similarities between them and losing traders. Losers approached markets the way alcoholics walked into
bars. They entered with pleasant expectations, but left with mean
headaches, hangovers, and loss of control. Drinking and trading lure
people across the line from pleasure to self-destructiveness.
Alcoholics and losers live with their eyes closed—both are in the
grip of an addiction. Every alcoholic I saw in my office wanted to argue
about his diagnosis. To avoid wasting time, I used to suggest a simple
test. I’d tell alcoholics to keep on drinking as usual for the next week,
but write down every drink, and bring that record to our next appointment. Not a single alcoholic could keep that diary for more than a few
days because looking in a mirror reduced the pleasure of impulsive
behavior. Today when I tell losing traders to keep a diary of their
trades, many become annoyed.
Good records are a sign of self-awareness and discipline. Poor or
absent records are a sign of impulsive trading. Show me a trader with
good records, and I’ll show you a good trader.
Alcoholics and losers do not think about the past or the future, and
focus only on the present—the sensation of alcohol pouring down
the gullet or the market pulsing on the screen. An active alcoholic is
in denial; he doesn’t want to know about the depth of his abyss, the
severity of his problem, or the harm he is causing himself and others.
The only thing that can pierce an alcoholic’s denial is the pain of hitting what AA calls “rock bottom.” It is each individual’s private version
of hell—a life-threatening illness, a rejection by family, a job loss, or
another catastrophic event. The unbearable pain of hitting rock bottom
punctures the alcoholic’s denial and forces him to face a stark choice:
he can self-destruct or turn his life around.

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

57

AA is a nonprofit voluntary organization whose only purpose is to
help alcoholics stay sober. It doesn’t ask for donations, advertise,
lobby, or take part in any public actions. It has no paid therapists;
members help each other at meetings led by long-term members. AA
has a system of sponsorships whereby older members sponsor and
support newer ones.
An alcoholic who joins AA goes through what is called a 12-Step
program. Each step is a stage of personal growth and recovery. The
method is so effective that people recovering from other addictive
behaviors have begun to use it.
The first step is the most important for traders. It looks easy, but is
extremely hard to take. Many alcoholics can’t take it, drop out of AA,
and go on to destroy their lives. The first step consists of standing up
at a meeting, facing a room full of recovering alcoholics, and admitting
that alcohol is stronger than you. This is hard because if alcohol is
stronger than you, you cannot touch it again. Once you take the first
step, you are committed to a struggle for sobriety.
Alcohol is such a powerful drug that AA recommends planning to
live without it one day at a time. A recovering alcoholic does not plan
to be sober a year or five years from now. He has a simpler goal—go
to bed sober tonight. Eventually those days of sobriety add up to years.
The entire system of AA meetings and sponsorships is geared toward
the goal of sobriety one day at a time.
AA aims to change not only the behavior but the personality in order
to reinforce sobriety. AA members call some people “sober drunks.” It
sounds like a contradiction in terms. If a person is sober, how can he
be a drunk? Sobriety alone is not enough. A person who has not
changed his thinking is just one step away from sliding back into drinking under stress or out of boredom. An alcoholic has to change his way
of being and feeling to recover from alcoholism.
I never had a problem with alcohol, but my psychiatric experience
had taught me to respect AA for its success with alcoholics. It was not
a popular view. Each patient who went to AA reduced the profession’s
income, but that never bothered me. After my first AA meeting I realized that if millions of alcoholics could recover by following the program, then traders could stop losing, regain balance, and become
winners by applying the principles of AA.
How can we translate the lessons of AA into the language of trading?
A losing trader is in denial. His equity is shrinking, but he continues
to jump into trades without analyzing what is going wrong. He keeps

58

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

switching between markets the way an alcoholic switches between
whiskey and cheap wine. An amateur whose mind isn’t strong enough
to accept a small loss will eventually take the mother of all losses. A
gaping hole in a trading account hurts self-esteem. A single huge loss
or a series of bad losses smash a trader against his rock bottom. Most
beginners collapse and wash out. The lifetime of an average speculator is measured in months, not years.
Those who survive fall into two groups. Some return to their old ways,
just like alcoholics crawl into a bar after surviving a bout of delirium.
They toss more money into their accounts and become customers of
vendors who sell magical trading systems. They continue to gamble,
only now their hands shake from anxiety and fear when they try to pull
the trigger.
A minority of traders that hit rock bottom decide to change. Recovery
is a slow and solitary process. Charles Mackay, the author of one of the
best books on crowd psychology, wrote almost two centuries ago that
men go mad in crowds, but come to their senses slowly, and one by one.
I wish we had an organization for recovering traders, the way recovering alcoholics have AA. We don’t because trading is so competitive.
Members of AA strive for sobriety together, but a meeting of recovering
traders could easily be poisoned by envy and showing off. Markets are
such cutthroat places that we don’t form mutual support groups or
find sponsors. Some opportunists hold themselves out as traders’ coaches,
but most make me shudder at their sharkiness. If we had a traders’ organization, I’d call it Losers Anonymous (LA). The name is blunt, but
that’s fine. After all, Alcoholics Anonymous does not call itself Drinkers
Anonymous. A harsh name helps traders face their impulsivity and selfsabotage. Since we do not have LA, you’ll have to walk on the road to
recovery alone. I wrote this book to help you along the way.

Businessman’s Risk vs. Loss
Years ago, when I began my recovery from losing, each morning I held
what I called a Losers Anonymous meeting for one. I’d come into the
office, turn on my quote screen, and while it was warming up I’d say,
“Good morning, my name is Alex, and I am a loser. I have it in me to
do serious damage to my account. I’ve done it before. My only goal for
today is to go home without a loss.” When the screen was up, I’d begin
trading, following the plan written down the night before while the
markets were closed.

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

59

I can immediately hear an objection—what do you mean, go home
without a loss? It is impossible to make money every day. What happens if you buy something, and it goes straight down—in other words,
you’ve bought the top tick of the day? What if you sell something short
and it immediately rallies?
We must draw a clear line between a loss and a businessman’s risk.
A businessman’s risk is a small dip in equity. A loss goes through that
limit. As a trader, I am in the business of trading and must take normal
business risks, but I cannot afford losses.
Imagine you’re not trading but running a fruit and vegetable stand.
You take a risk each time you buy a crate of tomatoes. If your customers do not buy them, that crate will rot on you. That’s a normal
business risk—you expect to sell most of your inventory, but some fruit
and vegetables will spoil. As long as you buy carefully, keeping the
unsold spoiled fruit to a small percentage of your daily volume, your
business stays profitable.
Imagine that a wholesaler brings a tractor-trailer full of exotic fruit to
your stand and tries to sell you the entire load. He says that you can
earn more in the next two days than you made in the previous six
months. It sounds great—but what if your customers don’t buy that
exotic fruit? A rotting tractor-trailer load can hurt your business and
endanger its survival. It’s no longer a businessman’s risk—it’s a loss.
Money management rules draw a straight line between a businessman’s risk and a loss, as you will see later in this book.
Some traders have argued that my AA approach is too negative. A
young woman in Singapore told me she believed in positive thinking
and thought of herself as a winner. She could afford to be positive
because discipline was imposed on her from the outside, by the manager of the bank for which she traded. Another winner who argued
with me was a lady from Texas in her seventies, a wildly successful
trader of stock index futures. She was very religious and viewed herself as a steward of money. Each morning she got up early and prayed
long and hard. Then she drove to the office and traded the living daylights out of the S&P. The minute a trade went against her, she’d cut
and run—because the money belonged to the Lord and wasn’t hers to
lose. She kept her losses small and accumulated profits.
I thought that our approaches had a lot in common. Both of us
had principles outside the market preventing us from losing money.
Markets are the most permissive places in the world. You may do any-

60

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

thing you like, as long as you have enough equity to put on a trade.
It’s easy to get caught in the excitement, which is why you need rules.
I rely on the principles of AA, another trader relies on her religious
feelings, and you may choose something else. Just make sure you have
a set of principles that clearly tells you what you may or may not do
in the markets.

Sober in Battle
Most traders open accounts with money earned in business or the professions. Many bring a personal track record of success and expect to
do well in the markets. If we can run a hotel, perform eye surgery, or
try cases in court, we can surely find our way between the high, the
low, and the close! But the markets, which seem so simple at first, keep
humbling us.
Little blood gets spilled in trading, but the money, the lifeblood of
the markets, has a major impact on the quality and the length of our
lives. Recently, a friend who writes a stock market advisory showed
me a stack of letters from his subscribers. The one that caught my
eye came from a man who made enough money trading to pay for a
kidney transplant. It saved his life, but I thought of what happened
to legions of others who also had big needs but traded poorly and
lost money.
Trading is a battle. When you pick up your weapon and put your
life on the line, would you rather be drunk or sober? You have to prepare yourself, choose your fight, go in when you are ready, and quit
after you’ve done what you’ve planned. A man who is cool and sober
calmly picks his fights. He enters and leaves when he chooses and not
when some bully throws him a challenge. A disciplined player chooses
his own game out of hundreds available. He doesn’t have to chase
every rabbit like a dog with its tongue hanging out—he lays an ambush
for his game and lets it come to him.
Most amateurs won’t admit they are trading for entertainment. A
common cover story is that they’re in the markets to make money. In
reality, most traders get tremendous thrills tossing money at half-baked
ideas. Trading financial markets is more respectable than betting on
ponies, but the kicks are just as good.
I tell my horse-playing friends to imagine going to a race where you
can place bets after the horses are out of the gate and take your money

MIND—THE DISCIPLINED TRADER

61

off the table before the race ends. Trading is a fantastic game, but its
temptations are very intense.

THE MATURE TRADER
Successful traders are sharp, curious, and unassuming people. Most
have been through losing periods. They graduated from the school of
hard knocks, and that experience helped smooth their rough edges.
Successful traders are self-assured but never arrogant. People who survive in the markets remain alert. They trust their skills and trading methods, but keep their eyes and ears open for new developments. Confident
and attentive, calm and flexible, successful traders are fun to be with.
Successful traders are often unconventional people, and some are
very eccentric. When they mix with others, they often break social rules.
The markets are set up for the majority to lose money, and a small group
of winners marches to a different drummer, in and out of the markets.
Markets consist of huge crowds of people watching the same trading vehicles, mesmerized by upticks and downticks. Think of a crowd
at a concert or in a movie theater. When the show begins, the crowd
gets emotionally in gear and develops an amorphous but powerful
mass mind, laughing or weeping together. A mass mind also emerges
in the markets, only here it is more malignant. Instead of laughing or
weeping, the crowd seeks each trader’s private psychological weakness and hits him in that spot.
Markets seduce greedy traders into buying positions that are too
large for their accounts and then destroy them with a reaction they cannot afford to sit out. They shake fearful traders out of winning trades
with brief countertrend spikes before embarking on runaway moves.
Lazy traders are the favorite victims of the market, which keeps throwing new tricks at the unprepared. Whatever your psychological flaws
and fears, whatever your inner demons, whatever your hidden weaknesses and obsessions, the market will seek them out, find them, and
use them against you, like a skilled wrestler uses his opponent’s own
weight to toss him to the ground.
Successful traders have outgrown or overcome their inner demons.
Instead of being tossed by the markets, they maintain their own balance and scan for chinks in the crowd’s armor, so that they can toss
the market for a change. They may appear eccentric, but when it
comes to trading they are much healthier than the crowd.

62

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Being a trader is a journey of self-discovery. Trade long enough, and
you will face all your psychological handicaps—anxiety, greed, fear,
anger, and sloth. Remember, you’re not in the markets for psychotherapy; self-discovery is a byproduct, not the goal of trading. The primary
goal of a successful trader is to accumulate equity. Healthy trading
boils down to two questions you need to ask in every trade: “What is
my profit target?” and “How will I protect my capital?”
A good trader accepts full responsibility for the outcome of every
trade. You cannot blame others for taking your money. You have to
improve your trading plans and methods of money management. It will
take time, and it will take discipline.
