
105

106 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
✓ A prohibition on offering favorable research to induce business for the
firm.
✓ Increased disclosures of conflicts of interest in research reports and
public appearances. These disclosures include information about
business relationships with or ownership interests in companies that
are the subjects of analysts’ reports.
✓ Disclosure in research reports of data concerning a firm’s ratings, such
as the percentage of ratings issued in each of the buy, hold, and sell
categories, and a price chart comparing the rated securities’ closing
prices and the firm’s rating or price targets over time.
✓ Restrictions on personal trading by analysts in securities of companies
that they analyze and/or report on.
Today, rules are made by FINRA (Financial Industry Regulatory Authority).
These rule changes helped investors identify conflicts of interest that can
compromise the objectivity of the sell-side analyst’s report. Pay close attention
to the disclosures and the relationships between the brokerage houses and
the companies that their analysts’ reports cover. Take these connections into
consideration when including their buy or sell recommendations in your plans
for future stock transactions.

Independent analysts: Where are they?
You are probably wondering where these independent analysts — people who
you can trust who don’t have investment banking connections — really are.
Although they do exist, most work for wealthy individuals or institutional
investors and provide research for people who manage portfolios of much
more than a million dollars and pay fees of at least $25,000 per year.
No one really knows exactly how many independent analysts are out there.
Estimates range from 100 to several hundred, but their ranks surely will grow
now that independent research will be a required part of selling to individual
investors.
In addition to independent research that you probably see distributed by
your brokerage house, as a small investor you can turn to some of the major
investment research firms such as Morningstar (www.morningstar.com)
and Standard & Poor’s (www.standardandpoors.com). They offer services
to individual investors through their publications and Internet sites at more
reasonable fees than many of the small independent analyst firms.
Nevertheless, you need to bear in mind that even these analysts are answering
to the companies or wealthy individuals that pay the greatest share of their
costs.

Chapter 7: Listening to Analyst Calls

The Importance of Analysts
No matter which analyst’s report you’re reading, you must remember that
the analyst’s primary income is coming either from the brokerage house or
the large institutional clients that he or she serves. Analysts rate stocks on
whether you need to consider purchasing them, but no standardized rating
system exists. The three most common breakdowns that you can expect to
see are shown in Table 7-1.

Table 7-1

Common Stock Recommendations from Analysts

Analysis by Company A

Analysis by Company B

Analysis by Company C

Buy

Strong Buy

Recommended List

Outperform

Buy

Trading Buy

Neutral

Hold

Market Outperformer

Underperform

Sell

Market Perform

Avoid

Market Underperformer

You can see from this table that you must understand how a company’s
analysts rate stocks for that company’s recommendations to have any value.
Company A’s “Buy” recommendation is its highest, but Company B uses
“Strong Buy” for its highest rating, and Company C uses “Recommended List”
for its top choice. Merely seeing that a stock is recommended as a “Buy” by a
particular analyst means little if you don’t know which rating system is being
used.
Unfortunately, when it comes to stock analysts, if the information is free, it’s
probably no better than that free lunch you’re always looking to find.
Someone has to pay the analyst, and if it isn’t you, you must find out who is
footing the bill before you use that advice to make decisions.
The best way to use analysts’ reports is to think of them as just one tool in
your bucket of trading tools. Analysts are one good way to find out about an
industry or a stock, but they’re not the final word about what you need to do.
Only your own research using fundamental and technical analysis can help
you make your investment decisions. We discuss fundamental analysis tools
in Chapters 5 and 6 and technical analysis tools in Part III.

107

108 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
Tracking how a company’s doing
Analysts are good resources for finding historical data about how a company
or industry is doing. Their reports usually summarize at least five years of
data and frequently provide a historical perspective for the industry and the
company that goes back many more years. In addition, analysts make projections about the earnings potential of the company they’re analyzing and
indicate why they believe those projections by including information about
new products being developed or currently being tested at various stages of
market development.
These reports help you track how a company is doing so you can find the
gems that may indicate when to expect a company to break out of a current
trading trend. For example, if an analyst covering a pharmaceutical company
mentions that a new drug is under consideration by the Food and Drug
Administration, you may look for news stories about the status of that drug
and monitor the stock for indications that drug approval may soon be
announced. Watching the technical charts may help you jump in at just the
right time and catch the upward trend as positive news is announced. Stocks
usually start to move in advance of news.

Providing access to analyst calls
In addition to reading reports, you can track companies by listening in on
analyst calls. Some calls are sponsored by the companies themselves to
review annual or quarterly results, and others are sponsored by independent
analysts.

Company-sponsored calls
Analyst calls sponsored by companies more often are earnings conference
calls primarily for institutional investors and Wall Street analysts. They occur
on either a quarterly, semiannual, or annual basis, and can be the richest
sources of information concerning a company’s fundamentals and future
prospects.
Senior management, which usually includes the chief executive officer (CEO),
president, and chief financial officer (CFO), talks about their financial reports
and then answer questions during these calls. The calls sometimes are
scheduled to coincide with announcements of major changes in a company’s
leadership or other breaking news about the company. After a formal statement, senior management answers questions from analysts. That’s when you
usually can get the most up-to-date information about the company and how
management views its financial performance and projections. We discuss
how to read between these lines and get the most out of these calls in the
next section of this chapter.

Chapter 7: Listening to Analyst Calls
Access to these calls used to be limited to professional analysts and
institutional investors, but today more than 80 percent of companies that
sponsor analyst calls open them to the media and individual investors,
according to a survey conducted by the National Investor Relations Institute.
This change primarily is credited to the SEC’s Fair Disclosure (FD) Regulation,
which requires companies to make public all major announcements that can
impact the value of the stock within 24 hours of informing any company
outsiders. This rule helps level the information playing field for individual
investors.
Analysts no longer can count on getting two or three days of lead time on
major announcements, which heretofore helped them inform major investors
about company news. Often that amount of lead time enabled analysts to
recommend buy or sell decisions to their key clients, but that same practice
hurt small investors and traders who weren’t privy to the news. Some complain
this new rule actually hurt the flow of information, because companies clammed
up in private conversations with analysts, making it harder for the analysts to
write their investigative reports. Since the regulation first took effect in 2000,
the fair disclosure rule helped to level the information playing field.

Seeking insider information
Investors began seeking insider information
about companies long before the scandals
that you now read about almost daily. In fact,
one of the first stories ever told about trading
on insider information involved the start-up of
one of today’s leading financial information
services — Reuter’s. Julius Reuter started his
news service in response to the desire investors had for insider information and how it
could impact stock prices. In 1849, Reuter used
trained homing pigeons to fly information about
closing stock prices from Europe’s mainland
across the English Channel to England, thus
giving his subscribers a jump on news about a
stock so they‘d be able to react before other,
less informed investors received the information. This story highlights a simple but powerful secret of investing: Information is power.
Investors with privileged access to information
hold a distinct advantage over other investors
who don’t have the same access.

Just to give you an idea of how insider information was used by analysts more recently, here
are a couple of examples. In February 1999,
during a tour of the headquarters of Compaq
Computer Corporation, the company’s treasurer
told a group of big-time investors that he was
concerned about softness in the software industry. Compaq shares dropped 14 percent before
most individual investors ever discovered such
a concern existed. In September 1999, executives at Apple Computer, Inc., called analysts
to alert them that an earthquake in Taiwan disrupted the production of iBook and Powerbook
notebook computers. The Apple execs wanted
to warn analysts that the company would not
meet its numbers for the quarter. The stock fell
7 percent in four days, and again, by the time
most investors found out, it was too late. The
new SEC fair disclosure rule prevents this kind
of favored treatment for insiders.

109

110 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
Independent analyst–sponsored calls
Firms that provide independent analysis also sponsor calls primarily for their
wealthy and institutional clients. During these calls, analysts often discuss
breaking news about a company or an industry that they follow. Doing so
gives their clients an opportunity to discuss key concerns directly with the
analysts. Unless you’re a client, opportunities for listening in on these calls
are rare.

Listening to Analyst Calls
Most company conference calls start with a welcome to all call participants,
followed by a discussion of the financial results being released or the purpose the company has designated for the call. After the CEO, president, and
CFO make their statements, other key managers may comment on the results
before the call is opened to questions from the listening audience.
The question-and-answer portion of the call usually is the most revealing
and enables you to judge just how confident senior managers are with their
reporting. The question-and-answer part of the call is when you’re most likely
to hear information that hasn’t been revealed in press releases or formal
annual or quarterly reports. Analysts and institutional investors usually are
given the first shot at asking questions, meaning before other listeners, the
press, or individual investors get their turn. Not all companies permit
individual investors to ask questions. Even when you can’t ask any questions,
listening to responses to the questions posed by analysts, institutional
investors, and the media still is worthwhile.
Be sure to listen closely to how the company’s senior managers answer those
questions. Chances are good that any question you may have will be answered
during the question-and-answer period. If not, you can always write or call the
company’s investor relations division to get an answer to your specific question.

Understanding the analysts’ language
Before ever listening to your first call, you must familiarize yourself with the
language used during the calls. Most of the common terminology is discussed
in Chapter 6, including earnings per share (EPS), EPS growth, net income,
cash, and cash equivalents, but not other terms that are unique to the analyst
call world. These include:
✓ Hockey stick: When companies say their revenues come in like a
hockey stick, company officials are not exactly talking about getting hit
with a puck. Instead, they’re talking about the shape of a hockey stick.
What they mean is that because most of their revenues are booked in

Chapter 7: Listening to Analyst Calls
the final days of the quarter, revenue charts take on the appearance of a
hockey stick. Most companies, in fact, book revenues this way, because
sales incentives are designed to encourage the sales force to close their
contracts before the end of a quarter. Salespeople have to meet their
quotas, and companies that are planning purchases frequently delay
those decisions until near the end of a quarter so they can negotiate
the best deals when the salespeople are most desperate to make a deal.
You’ve probably done the same thing yourself when buying a car or
other major item.
✓ Lumpy: Nope, the CEO isn’t talking about poorly cooked oatmeal
whenever he or she says revenues or orders were lumpy. This term
means that sales were uneven during the quarter, with some weeks
having low order rates and others having high order rates. The key is
finding out why sales were lumpy and whether lumpy sales are normal
for the company.
✓ Run-rate: Don’t worry, you won’t be asked how fast you can run a race.
The run-rate is the way senior management talks about how its current
performance can be projected over a period of time. For example, if the
current quarter’s revenues show a $1 million monthly run-rate, then you
can expect annual revenues to total close to $12 million. This concept
may work for companies with steady earnings but not for companies
whose products primarily are seasonal. For example, if a retail company
reports a run-rate of $1 million per month during the fourth quarter,
which of course includes holiday sales, you won’t expect that performance
to be indicative of a full 12-month performance. You must be certain that
you understand a company’s revenue picture before counting on run-rate
numbers.
If you hear other terminology that you don’t understand, write it down so you
can research it and thus be ready for the next time you hear it.

Developing your listening skills
In addition to what senior management is saying, you also need to listen to
how they’re saying it. If management is happy with the results, they’ll probably be upbeat and talking about a rosy future for the company. On the other
hand, if management isn’t so happy with the results, the mood probably will
be downbeat and apologetic as they try to explain why the company didn’t
perform as expected and, of course, make excuses for their failure to meet
expectations.
Learn to listen and read between the company lines. Try to listen in on every
earnings call. The first one you hear may not mean much unless you know
how the results differ from previous reports and projections. Before that first
call, you need to read analysts’ reports and become as familiar as possible
with the company’s earnings history. After you’ve followed a certain company’s

111

112 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
calls for a while, the information presented will mean much more to you.
Among the many indicators that may help you determine your trading
activity are signs relating to earnings expectations, revenue growth, analysts’
moods, company facts, and future projections.

Earnings expectations
Whether a company is meeting its own projections and analysts’ expectations
is the most important clue about how a company is doing and how the stock
market will react to its periodic reports. If the company fails to meet
expectations, the market will likely punish the stock by driving the price
down, and that can point to a good trading opportunity. If you believe the
setback is temporary and the company’s long-term prospects look good, you
may want to wait for the stock to bottom out before buying it. If you think
failing periodic expectations is a sign of long-term bad news, and you hold a
position in the stock, you may want to sell it as soon as possible. If you don’t
own it, you may want to consider shorting the stock. We discuss shorting a
stock at length in Chapter 18.

Revenue growth
Listen for information that indicates whether revenue growth kept pace
with earnings growth. This factor becomes even more critical whenever the
economy slows down, because a company may play with or manipulate the
numbers in a practice that’s known as window dressing, or making sure that
earnings meet expectations. However, manipulating revenues is much more
difficult. Growth in revenues is the key to continued earnings growth in the
future.
Although manipulating earnings may be difficult, we’ve seen companies do
it successfully for at least a few quarters and, in some cases, a few years.
A number of companies caught in recent Wall Street scandals successfully
manipulated these numbers with creative methods of booking revenue. One
account that you may want to watch for signs of revenue manipulation is
accounts receivable. If receivables rise dramatically above historical balances,
one of two things are likely — the company is having a hard time collecting
on its accounts or the company is booking fictitious revenue. Manipulation
may also be detected when a company reports revenue for items sold that
actually is greater than the company has the capacity to produce.
You may notice analysts questioning revenue-growth figures in great detail.
This examination by analysts can be a sign that they may suspect problems
with the numbers. Detecting any of these signs while listening to a call can be
a sign of possible trouble ahead, and you need to take a closer look before
buying the stock or holding what you already have.

Chapter 7: Listening to Analyst Calls
Analysts’ moods
You can find out a great deal about how analysts are responding to a company’s
report by merely listening to the tone of their questions. By listening to how
analysts are asking questions and what questions they are asking, you can
judge whether the analysts are downbeat on company prospects, especially
if they’re asking increasingly probing questions. On the other hand, you may
notice that analysts are upbeat and encouraging senior management to talk
even more positively about their results and future plans. When you’ve
followed the analysts’ calls for a company during several quarters, recognizing
whether the mood has changed won’t be difficult. When analysts receive
news positively, they often start their questions with some kind of
congratulatory remark.
Be sure to jot down the names of analysts, especially the ones making positive
remarks. The positive remarks from analysts with sell-side orientation may
not be as good a sign as the positive remarks from buy-side analysts. If you
don’t know what type of analyst is commenting, research his or her affiliations
and leanings after the call.
Buy-side analysts carry the most weight whenever they’re indicating a positive
reaction to the company’s financial news. Many buy-side analysts who attend
analyst calls already have a stake in the company, so they have a vested
interest in putting a positive spin on the news. If they’re positive, they’ll likely
revise their earnings estimates upward, which can be the first indication that
they’ll recommend additional buys and the stock may be getting ready to
enter an upward trend. This positive spin can give you the first sign of a good
trading opportunity, so watch your technical analysis for any signals of a
potential breakout. We discuss more about breakouts in Chapter 10.

Just the facts, ma’am
The best way to judge whether senior management is confident in their
reporting is determining how quickly they respond to questions. If senior
managers are confident with their numbers, they respond to questions
quickly, taking little time to think their responses through. If senior
managers are unsure of their reports, they’re more likely to take a good deal
of time checking through their papers to answer even the simplest questions.
You definitely need to think twice about buying or holding stock in a company
whose management shows a lack of confidence in reporting their numbers.

The future
You’re likely to get a good reading about how senior managers view the
company’s future prospects by listening to their vision for the company and
whether the results actually demonstrate that they are fulfilling that vision.
When managers are successfully fulfilling their vision, they clearly articulate

113

114 Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
their view of the company’s future and how they plan to get there. Ask
yourself whether management inspires you with its vision. If not, managers
most likely are not inspiring their employees, which can be an early sign that
the company is heading on a downward trend.

Employee satisfaction
Happy employees are a good sign that a company will be able to meet its
future expectations. If, during the call, you hear that the company is having
trouble attracting new employees or retaining its existing staff, you may be
looking at a sign of trouble on the horizon. High employee turnover is bad
for future growth, and so is having trouble finding and recruiting qualified
employees.
Analyst conference calls are best used as a research tool and not for taking an
immediate action based solely on the information you gather from them. You
need to consider them as just one more way of gaining more knowledge about
a stock that you’re thinking about buying, or of tracking stocks after you’ve
already bought them. Day traders and swing traders sometimes use the
information from analyst calls to trade after hours, but such trades can be
highly risky. We talk more about these two trading strategies in Chapters 16
and 17.

Locating Company Calls
Many companies list information about their upcoming earnings reports and
analyst calls on their company Web sites, while others simply post an audio
version after the event. Some companies offer their investors a service that
alerts them to upcoming events. If these services are not available for the
companies you plan to follow, your best way of tracking upcoming calls is
through one of two online sites: VCall (www.investorcalendar.com) and
Best Calls (www.bestcalls.com).
VCall is the leading Webcaster for official investor relations events. Many
companies use its services to run their events online. This Web site offers
you free access to live and archived corporate communications. In addition
to the calls, you can find copies of financial information released by the
company. VCall also enables you to set up e-mail alerts for the companies
you track that are served by VCall.
Best Calls is the leading resource site for locating earnings conferences on
the Internet. Although VCall is the leading provider for companies that play
host to calls, the only company calls that are listed on VCall’s site are for
companies that use its services. Best Calls, on the other hand, is the largest
single source for tracking analyst call schedules with links to the location for
