
T

he example of Tulipmania and similar events should remind the innovative investor that bubbles can appear quickly and violently, especially
in cryptoassets. These patterns have been repeated in bitcoin’s bubbles,
steem’s stratospheric summer rise, and zcash’s postrelease run. Given the
emerging nature of the cryptoasset markets, it’s important to recognize that
there is less regulation (some would say none) in this arena, and therefore bad
behavior can persist for longer than it may in more mature markets.
As activity grows in the bitcoin and cryptoasset markets, investors must look
beyond the madness of the crowd and recognize that there are bad actors who
seek easy prey in these young markets. The growth of new cryptoassets and
new investment products around them create a rapidly evolving marketplace
in which financial criminals can exploit profit-seeking motives, especially if
the innovative investor doesn’t perform proper due diligence. This chapter will
focus on Ponzi schemes, misleading asset issuers, and the cornering of markets
(also known as “pump and dump” schemes).
As we’ve mentioned, those who lack an understanding of bitcoin and
crypto­assets often express their disdain and ignorance with the proclamation,
“It’s just a Ponzi scheme.” So let’s start there.

155

Burniske 02.indd 155

9/9/17 1:46 PM

156 CRYPTOASSETS

PONZI SCHEMES
Ponzi schemes, also referred to as pyramid schemes, are the most dangerous type
of misleading asset. While it got its name from Charles Ponzi, an Italian who
lived from 1882 to 1949, it existed before he was born; he just made it famous.
The idea is simple: new investors pay old investors. As long as there are
enough new investors, old investors will continue to be rewarded handsomely.
For example, if an operator of a Ponzi scheme offered 20 percent returns into
perpetuity, some investors would be duped into initially believing the operator. Call this “Batch A” of investors. The operator would encourage Batch A
investors to tell their friends, who would become Batch B of even newer investors. The money Batch B investors invested would pay the 20 percent returns
promised to the Batch A investors who brought them into the scheme. From
there, Batch A and Batch B go and solicit Batch C, telling Batch C about this
amazingly easy and rewarding investment product. The capital from Batch C
goes to pay Batch A and Batch B, and so the Ponzi cycle continues indefinitely until there are not enough new investors to keep it going. The scheme
falls apart when people realize no real value has been created, and everything
is founded upon a scheme to dupe new investors into paying old investors.
Tragically, investors often don’t realize they are duping one another, and it is
the operator of the Ponzi scheme who makes out handsomely.
Before we turn to cryptoassets, let’s look at how Ponzi schemes have played
out in traditional assets.
Many think of bonds as a safe investment with steady cash flows. If they are
issued by a government, then they also have the full backing of that government. As we will soon see, bonds have not always been safe, and in what has
been labeled the first emerging market boom, many bonds turned out to be
Ponzi schemes.1
For about a century after the equity bubbles brought on by the Mississippi
Company2 and South Sea Schemes3 (we’ll cover the shady dealings of these
companies in the next section), British investors stuck close to governmentissued bonds.4 During the Napoleonic Wars from 1803 to 1815, the British
government issued over 400 million pounds of bonds, providing plenty of
opportunity to bond investors. However, once peace reigned again, the British
government had less need to borrow, and therefore the supply of government
bonds shrank.5
At about the same time, South America was in the throes of rebellion
against Spain, leading to the creation of new countries with a need for capi-

Burniske 02.indd 156

9/9/17 1:46 PM

“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”

157

tal to build their infrastructure and join the developed world. An English
newspaper claimed, “We may indulge the brightest hopes of these Southern
Republics. They have entered upon a career of endless improvement. And . . .
will soon attain the knowledge and freedom and civilization of the happiest
states of Europe.”6
The opportunity to make money was the focus of hungry British investors, and it was fueled by stories of how British innovation would make these
regions economic powerhouses, and that fabled gold and silver mines were up
for grabs.
Investors ended up dumping millions into these exotic and high-yielding
loans, with little to no information on where the money ended up. For the
most part, bonds were issued repeatedly to budding countries such as Chile,
Colombia, and Peru, with the newer issues going to pay off the older issues in
classic Ponzi finance. As put forth by Chancellor in his book, Devil Take the
Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation:
The payment of interest from capital, otherwise known as “Ponzi
finance,” created the illusion of viability although no money was
ever actually sent from South America to service the loans (to
which it must be added that the borrowing countries received
only a tiny fraction of the total sums for which they contracted).7

In other words, not only did very little of the money raised in Europe ever
make it to South America for its intended purpose, but little to no money was
ever sent from South America back to Europe to pay for the dividends the
bonds promised. In one famous instance, there wasn’t even the possibility of
repayment, as the bonds were floated for an imaginary country called Poyais.
These Poyaisian bonds remain the only bond for a fake country to be issued on
the London Stock Exchange.
As with all Ponzi finance, the South American loan bubble had to burst,
which it did in 1826. Every newly founded South American country defaulted
on its debt, except for Brazil, in what has become known as “The First Latin
American Debt Crisis.”8 Not only would this bubble hurt European investors,
it would hurt South America for decades to come, arguably even to the present as the region has been marred by continued defaults. For example, Chile,
Colombia, and Peru have spent 27.5 percent, 36.2 percent, and 40.2 percent of
their sovereign lives in default or rescheduling, never quite able to escape the
early precedent that was set.9

Burniske 02.indd 157

9/9/17 1:46 PM

158 CRYPTOASSETS

The Bitcoin Ponzi Myth
Criticisms of bitcoin and cryptoassets being Ponzi schemes have been circulating since bitcoin first hit investors’ radar screens.10 However, this criticism is
deeply misinformed, and the World Bank has joined us in this opinion. In a
2014 report it states:
Contrary to a widely-held opinion, Bitcoin is not a deliberate
Ponzi. And there is little to learn by treating it as such. The main
value of Bitcoin may, in retrospect, turn out to be the lessons it
offers to central banks on the prospects of electronic currency,
and on how to enhance efficiency and cut transactions cost.11

Historical Ponzi schemes require a central authority to hide the facts and
promise a certain annual percent return. Bitcoin has neither. The system is
decentralized, and the facts are out in the open. People can sell any time, and
they do, and no one is guaranteed any return. In fact, many longtime advocates
of the space warn people not to invest more money than they’re willing to lose.
Any good Ponzi operator would never say as much.

How to Spot a Ponzi Scheme Disguised as a Cryptoasset
The Ponzi scheme is a specific and easily identifiably structure that isn’t applicable to Bitcoin but could be to some phony cryptoassets. While a truly innovative cryptoasset and its associated architecture requires a heroic coding
effort from talented developers, because the software is open source, it can
be downloaded and duplicated. From there, a new cryptoasset can be issued
wrapped in slick marketing. If the innovative investor doesn’t do proper due
diligence on the underlying code or read other trusted sources who have, then
it’s possible to fall victim to a Ponzi scheme.
A new cryptoasset called OneCoin was met with much interest due to its
promise of providing a guaranteed return to investors. When the words “guaranteed return” appear, the innovative investor should always see an instant red
flag. All investors should always be deterred by an investment that purports
a guarantee (although annuities or other insurance-backed investments may
qualify).
Millions of dollars poured into OneCoin, whose technology ran counter
to the values of the cryptoasset community: its software was not open source

Burniske 02.indd 158

9/9/17 1:46 PM

“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”

159

(perhaps out of fear that developers would see the holes in its design), and it
was not based on a public ledger, so no transactions could be tracked.12
The community responded with reports of OneCoin as a Ponzi scheme.
One of the best articles on the topic, which received nearly 300,000 views
and over 1,000 comments, was loud and clear: “Buyer Beware! The Definitive
OneCoin Ponzi Exposé.”13 The Swedish Bitcoin Foundation stepped up to the
plate as well, with warnings about OneCoin as a “pyramid” and a “fraud.” The
Financial Conduct Authority in the United Kingdom also warned investors
against OneCoin.14 The swift action revealed the strength of a self-policing,
open-source community in pursuit of the truth.
To warn investors against Ponzi schemes like OneCoin, the SEC released
a memo titled “Investor Alert: Ponzi Schemes Using Virtual Currencies.” The
memo warned that cryptoassets can be an easy way for scammers to disguise
pyramid schemes.15 Investors should still consider this alert, not in thinking of bitcoin as a scam but in recognizing that scams may masquerade as
cryptoassets. Here are a few of the most important ways to recognize a Ponzi
scheme:
•
•
•
•

Overly consistent returns
Secretive and/or complex strategies and fee structures
Difficulty receiving payments
Comes through someone with a shared affinity

Just as investors duped by the allure of Latin American bonds should have
been more cautious, the innovative investor needs to keep an eye out for new
cryptoasset issues that don’t quite smell right.
We will go more deeply into specific vetting strategies regarding crypto­
assets in later chapters, but two “smell tests” are easy to begin with. First, do a
quick Google search for “Is _______ a scam?” If nothing pops up, then check
to see if the project’s code is open source. This can best be accomplished by
searching for, “_________ GitHub,” as most of these projects use GitHub as
their platform for collaboration. If nothing pops up with signs of the code on
GitHub, then the cryptoasset is likely not open source, which is an immediate
red flag that a cryptoasset and investment should be avoided.

MISLEADING INFORMATION FROM ASSET ISSUERS
Ponzi schemes are a particularly perverse form of misleading information
from asset issuers. However, sometimes the way in which issuers mislead

Burniske 02.indd 159

9/9/17 1:46 PM

160 CRYPTOASSETS

investors is subtler. As markets mature over time, there is more regulation on
what information asset issuers must provide and by whom that information
must be verified and audited. With cryptoassets, however, these standards are
not yet in place. To get an idea of what havoc misleading asset issuers can create, we’ll examine an example from early equities markets.
About 80 years after Tulipmania, in the early 1700s, the first international
bull market came to rise.16 Kick-started by infamous entities such as John
Law’s Mississippi Company in France and John Blunt’s South Sea Company in
Britain, the equity markets were whipped into a buying frenzy fueled largely
by duplicity. Both the Mississippi Company and South Sea Company had convoluted structures and were heavily marketed as pursuits to establish a presence and exploit trade in the burgeoning Americas, even though they had
only marginal success in doing so. Both Blunt and Law used elaborate and
unproven financial engineering to advance the price of their companies’ stocks
at all costs.
Law’s scheme was particularly intricate and dangerous, as it involved controlling France’s first central bank, in addition to the Mississippi Company,
which was the country’s largest enterprise. Law won his way into a place of
financial power in France with promises to resolve the country’s financial
woes, which were dire: the government was on the verge of its third bankruptcy in less than a century. Part of Law’s scheme involved issuing shares in
the Mississippi Company, the proceeds of which were then used to pay down
the national debt. It depended on artificially inflating the share price of the
Mississippi Company, of which he was also the largest shareholder. Such pressure and vast control allowed Law to manipulate shareholders into believing
the company’s prospects were great. The company was in charge of setting up
colonies for trade in the Louisiana territory, which spanned the equivalent of
nearly a quarter of the present-day United States, with New Orleans intended
to be its centerpiece. To recruit colonists to develop the area and lay the foundation of trade that would lead to future profits for the company, he shared
“rosy visions of the colony as a veritable Garden of Eden, inhabited by friendly
savages, eager to furnish a cornucopia of exotic goods for shipment to France.”
Law’s promises entranced investors and colonists alike, but the dreams he
spoke of were illusions, with no prospect of near-term profits, and therefore
little basis for the rising share prices of the Mississippi Company. When the
colonists arrived in the Louisiana territory what they found “was a sweltering,
insect-infested swamp. Within a year 80 percent of them had died of starvation or tropical diseases like yellow fever.”

Burniske 02.indd 160

9/9/17 1:46 PM

“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”

161

Meanwhile, Law tinkered with other monetary policy experiments to prop
up the shares of his company and pay down the national debt, such as doubling the supply of paper money in France in a little over a year. Law grew his
power to the point where, “It was as if one man was simultaneously running
all five hundred of the top U.S. corporations, the U.S. Treasury and the Federal
Reserve System.”17
JOHN LAW: CONVICTED MURDERER
AND COMPULSIVE GAMBLER
The French would have done well to better investigate the priors of John Law
before handing him control of the country’s finances. If they had done proper
due diligence, they would have discovered he was a compulsive gambler and
convicted murderer. In the 1690s he had escaped from prison in London—
where he was awaiting a death sentence—and fled to Amsterdam. At the
time, Amsterdam was a pioneer in new market structures, with the trading
of stock in the Dutch East India Company and establishment of the world’s
first central bank as gleaming examples. Law studied these systems closely,
which gave him the knowledge necessary to pull off his elaborate scheme
in France.18 The innovative investor would be wise to learn from France’s
mistake and always take the time to investigate the priors of cryptoasset
developers and advisors before putting money into the assets they create.
Fortunately, today it’s quite easy to find information on just about anyone
through Google searches.

While Law duped French investors and government officials for a few years,
by the middle of 1720 it was clear his financial engineering was unsustainable.
Shareholder losses were brutal, as the Mississippi Company would fall 90 percent in value by the end of 1720, leading to public outrage and a worsening of
France’s financial woes. Law’s machinations stunted France’s financial development for generations, as its population remained gun-shy of paper money and
stock markets, thereby losing out on the positives that came with responsible
innovation in markets.
Law’s grand Mississippi Company was best described in a cartoon that read:
This is the wondrous Mississippi land,
Made famous by its share dealings,

Burniske 02.indd 161

9/9/17 1:46 PM

162 CRYPTOASSETS
Which through deceit and devious conduct,
Has squandered countless treasures.
However men regard the shares,
It is wind and smoke and nothing more.19

Misleading Cryptoassets
One of the most important actions innovative investors can take to protect
themselves from misleading characters is to do their homework on the backgrounds of the main parties involved in a cryptoasset, especially if it’s been
newly issued. If not much can be found about the specific characters involved,
that’s immediately a bad sign, as it means the creators don’t want to be identified or held accountable for what happens with that asset.
Next, investigate the materials the cryptoasset team members have created.
If their website, white paper, or other materials are filled with typos, formatting mistakes, or anything else that shows a lack of care, then take this also as
a warning. A team who doesn’t care enough to present themselves well, likely
doesn’t care if they mislead investors.
Many conversations and much information flow takes place on Reddit,
Twitter, in Slack Channels, and so on, not on the well-manicured pages of tech
and investing websites. The lack of easily accessible information and standardization of necessary information are weaknesses of the cryptoassets space. It is
the reason, after all, that you are reading this book.
THE FINE LINE BETWEEN MISLEADING AND A MISTAKE
Dash, a coin that rose to fame in late 2016 and early 2017 due to its stratospheric price increase, had what many would call a misleading issuance.
In the first 24 hours that the coin went live, over 1.9 million dash were
mined, which was not part of the original plan. While Dash’s founder supplied
explanations—mainly that this was caused by an inadvertent software bug—a
concern many still hold is that the Dash team misled new investors.20 As of
March 2017, those first 24 hours still account for nearly 30 percent of the
coins outstanding.
This is a situation in which the innovative investor must discern the difference between a misleading issuer and an honest mistake. We believe that
Dash’s initial distribution could have been corrected, just as its competing

Burniske 02.indd 162

9/9/17 1:46 PM

“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”

163

anonymity cryptoasset, Monero, did, when it was forked off from Bytecoin to
solve for an unfair distribution of coins. The Dash team could have relaunched
to ensure a fair initial distribution. That said, Dash has worked to overcome
its rocky beginning and at the start of April 2017 was one of the top four
cryptoassets in network value.21 The asset is backed by a few interesting
innovations, and its team has successfully navigated to a position of increasing mainstream acceptance.

Misleading statements don’t even have to come from the progenitors of
cryptoassets; they can come from people who claim to manage the assets for
investors. We have seen many deceptive investment offerings that purport
to take investors’ money and place it into cryptoasset funds that will provide
“guaranteed” returns. For example, there’s a “Bitcoin Mutual Fund” website
that promises to provide 700 percent returns over a range of periods, from
2 hours to 48 hours, depending on the amount of money invested.22 The website is full of mistakes in spelling and grammar in the text, which provide
another red flag beyond the guaranteed returns. This is the equivalent of Law’s
Louisiana swampland.

CORNERING
Cornering a market refers to when one or more investors work to drive the
price of an asset up or down significantly. In the cryptoasset space, they are frequently referred to as “pump and dump” schemes, where loosely coordinated
groups work to pump up the price of a cryptoasset, exploiting crowd behavior,
before quickly selling to realize their profits. As with the other examples in this
chapter, cornering is nothing new in the history of markets.
In 1869, Jay Gould, who was a prototype of the “Robber Baron” and one of
the most vilified men in nineteenth-century America,23 decided he wanted to
corner the gold market.24 Cornering the gold market was a particularly dangerous proposition at the time, as gold remained the official currency of international trade, and the value of gold in the United States was largely dictated
by the federal government.
When Ulysses S. Grant became president of the United States in March
1869, the country was still dealing with the ramifications of the Civil War that
had ended four years prior.25 One of the biggest problems was the national

Burniske 02.indd 163

9/9/17 1:46 PM

164 CRYPTOASSETS

debt the country had accrued in fighting the war, which led many to doubt
the government’s credit worthiness. To re-instill faith, one of the first actions
Grant took was to sign a law that stated the federal government would buy
back U.S. bonds in “gold or its equivalent.”26 If the government were to buy
bonds with gold, the supply of gold in the market would increase, meaning
that the price of gold would decrease. Gold quickly fell to $130 an ounce, its
lowest point since 1862.27
Gold has been valued by civilizations over hundreds of centuries, and for a
savvy investor, a drop in price typically signifies a time to buy. Gould was not
satisfied, however, with buying gold and holding it patiently until he could
sell at a higher price and make an earnest profit. He had an ulterior motive
for driving gold up. He believed it would cause currency devaluation, which
would create an export boom that would benefit the Erie Railroad,28 a company in which he was intimately involved. Furthermore, there was the clear
opportunity to benefit from buying low and selling high.
Knowing that the federal government could control the price of gold with
its open market operations, Gould devised a plan to convince Grant, and
thereby the federal government, not to sell the gold it intended to. Since the
federal gold reserves were north of $100 million, which was greater than the
amount of gold in circulation, Gould rightly realized that controlling the federal government meant controlling the price of gold in U.S. markets.29 If he
could convince the government not to sell its gold, then there would be less
supply in the market, thereby driving the price up. The price would go up
even more if Gould could freely buy it without having to worry about a government dump.
Gould found the pawn he needed in Abel Corbin, who was involved in politics and was married to Grant’s sister, Jennie. Gould befriended Corbin, and
with the extra persuasion of a bribe, captured the ally he needed to sway the
government’s open market operations. Corbin first used his political influence
to appoint General Daniel Butterfield to the post of U.S. sub-Treasurer in New
York. Butterfield was instructed to alert Corbin to any government gold sales
in advance, which would protect Gould from being surprised by any government actions.30 Both Corbin and Butterfield were promised $1.5 million stakes
in the scheme, aligning their interests with Gould’s.31
More important than Butterfield, through the summer of 1869 Corbin
worked his way into the president’s confidence with the singular goal of convincing him to cease selling gold. Corbin also succeeded in getting Gould and
Grant to converse at social gatherings, allowing Gould to provide his con-
