
The consumer services sector has seen strong growth, too. Our time-
starved culture, with both parents working full time in more families, de-
mands quick and reliable service and is willing to pay for it. Grocery stores
offer more ready-to-eat or quick-to-prepare meals, discount stores now al-
most exclusively have centralized checkouts at the front of stores, and many
drugstores stay open 24 hours a day. Companies that provide the best overall
service at a competitive price survive and thrive, while those that don't fade
and eventually disappear.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the U.S. economy increased from
$6 trillion in 1991 to $10.1 trillion in 2001. During that time, consumer spend-
ing increased from 66 percent to 69 percent of the economy. Consumer ser-
vice firms are becoming a bigger piece of the economy, and we expect that
trend to continue. It’s not surprising that these companies have outperformed
the overall market over the past decade.

From 1993 through 2002, the S&P Retailing Index posted a cumulative re-
turn of 122 percent, sparked by stock price advances in bellwether names such

as Wal-Mart, Home Depot, and Target, versus a 102 percent gain for the S&P


RESTAURANTS

500. Because many consumer purchases other than food are discretionary (can
be put off for later), it’s not surprising that retail stocks generally outperform
during periods of economic strength and underperform during times of eco-
nomic weakness.

In the following sections, we examine some of the key characteristics and

trends of the major industries in the consumer services sector.

Restaurants

For simplicity, the restaurant industry can be split into quick-service restau-
rants (QSR, better known as fast food) and full-service restaurants. QSR pa-
trons visit a counter where they pay and receive their meals (erg, McDonald’s
and Wendy’s). Full-service customers are seated at a table and place orders
with a wait staff (e.g., Outback Steakhouse or Darden’s Red Lobster chain).
Because there aren't many ways to reinvent food service, the industry often
tries new concepts with different mixes of price, food quality, level of service,
menu offerings, and atmosphere.

Demographic shifts and changes in the workforce make the long-term
outlook for restaurants pretty bright. Eating food prepared by restaurants is
becoming a more attractive alternative to home meal preparation—with both
parents working in many households, there’s little time to cook and even less
for grocery shopping and cleanup. The economics of meal preparation are
shifting in favor of eating out as well because families are getting smaller.
Consider that it takes about the same amount of time to cook for a family of
six as it does for a family of four. Economy of scale for family meals just isn’t
as prevalent, and for single person households, it can simply take too much

time to prepare a well-balanced meal.

Investing in Restaurants: Understanding the Company Life Cycle

Restaurant chains experience the business life cycle like any other business.
Most new restaurant concepts start off in a speculative growth stage where
managers are trying to nail down operational details and estimate growth po-
tential for expansion. Many concepts fail; hence the term speculative growth. At
this stage, most investors are happy with strong sales growth, indicating that

the concept is gaining traction. Chains in this stage normally report negative

209


210

CONSUMER SERVICES

or, at best, inconsistent earnings. Within a short time, they cither fail or they
move on and become aggressive growth companies.

In the aggressive growth stage, restaurants must be profitable on a per unit
basis to support the opening of new stores. For example, the successful Cheese-
cake Factory chain funds all of its unit growth with profits from existing units.
During this growth stage, the company is earning a profit at current units, but
it’s spending so fast to open new units that free cash flow is typically negative.
One of the dangers is that a restaurant company outgrows its funding and bal-
ance sheet.

Even though current operations are profitable, rapid expansion often re-
quires more money than the business can generate internally. Thanks to oper-
ating leases, which are akin to renting space for a business, restaurants can
usually finance their expansion on a store-by-store basis and don't need to take
out a huge chunk of debt at one time. However, leases aren't a panacea. Star-
bucks has grown so fast over the past decade that ifa number of store locations
were unsuccessful, the company would be forced to pay through the nose to
exit the leases—most of which have terms approaching 10 or more years.

Like all companies, restaurants can’t grow aggressively forever. As expan-
sion opportunities dry up, profits from existing operations become increas-
ingly important and managers try to drive healthy same-store sales increases.
Strong same-store sales tell us that customers like what they're getting and
come back for more. ‘To keep customers interested (and boost profits), man-
agers look for new ways to squeeze out more money. Restaurants in the slow-
growth stage typically have strong free cash flows, solid returns on capital,
and usually start to pay out a dividend because theyre running out of invest-
ment opportunities in the business.

Few restaurants reach the slow-growth stage—most just go straight into
decline. To be a successful slow-growth restaurant chain, the concept has to
be ingrained in consumers. In the United States, McDonald’s, Wendy's, and
Red Lobster have long passed the stage where their stores were destinations or
chic places to visit. However, consumers know what to expect before they
walk into the stores or cruise into the drive-thru. It’s up to the restaurants to
maintain that familiarity with consistent advertising and service. Failure to
provide the quality of food or service that people expect can bring slow-
growth firms into the realm of decline.


RETAIL

Hallmarks of Successful Restaurants

> The best restaurants have already developed a successful concept. Most
restaurants fail to advance beyond the initial speculative growth stage, so
those that do have already passed one of the most difficult tests of run-
ning a successful chain.

> Replication is key. Investors need to determine if a restaurant’s concept
can be repeated in other geographic areas. Outback Steakhouse and
Cheesecake Factory serve menus that are popular throughout the country,
but that’s not the case for all chains and concepts. Darden’s China Coast
concept worked on a small scale in the early 1990s, but the complications
of Mandarin Wok cooking resulted in inconsistent food service across the
chain and led to its demise.

> Older chains must stay fresh, without having to reinvent themselves.
Darden remodels its Red Lobster and Olive Garden chains every seven
years or so. The process is expensive, but over the long term it’s necessary
for survival, and restaurants usually throw off enough cash to cover the
remodeling costs. If a chain waits too long, it will reach a point where the
locations look old and unattractive—and by then, they won't be generat-
ing sufficient profits and cash flow, and the costs to resuscitate the brand
will be prohibitive.

Retail

The retail game has undergone a major facelift over the past two decades.
First came the development of category killers, with specialized merchan-
dise and service. Chains such as Home Depot and Lowe's put many smaller,
regional players out of business in the home improvement area. In 1992, the
two firms posted combined sales of $8 billion; in 2002, they sold more than
$80 billion worth of nails, hammers, and appliances. Office Depot, Office
Max, and Staples did the same thing to the office supply business in the late
1980s and 1990s.

The second major shift has been the move off the mall. Once upon a time,
department stores were infallible in the world of retailing. Well-known chains
such as Sears that were once destinations in their own right became the anchor
tenants for malls. The stores aimed to provide customers with a one-stop shop-

ping experience, and some even housed full-service restaurants. Customers had

211


212

CONSUMER SERVICES

more time to shop and placed more value on the personal attention these
stores provided.

Over the past 20 years, however, traditional department stores have be-
come dinosaurs. Nowadays, companies such as Sears and JC Penney are
struggling to remain relevant—a battle that chains such as Montgomery
Ward and Woolworth have already lost. Changing consumer trends are
largely, but not totally, to blame. In this era of dual-income households,
shoppers want selection, quality, and reasonable prices, and they want it fast.
And they've shown a willingness to shift their spending to stores that can
provide this experience.

Firms such as Wal-Mart, Target, and Kohl's have stolen the thunder of the
traditional department stores with innovation and efficiency. These are the
firms that developed everyday low prices, pioneered centralized checkouts at
the front of stores, and set up shop in freestanding locations with more con-
venient parking. Whereas, Sears and Penney averaged © percent and 1 percent
annual sales growth, respectively, from 1998 to 2002, Wal-Mart, Target, and
Kohl's averaged 15 percent, 10 percent, and 24 percent, respectively. Over the

next several years, we expect this divergence to continue.

Investing in Retail: Understanding the Cash Conversion Cycle

One of the best ways to distinguish excellent retailers from average or below-
average ones is to look at their cash conversion cycles. The cash cycle tells us
how quickly a firm sells its goods (inventory), how fast it collects payments

The Cash Conversion Cycle is...

Days in Inventory oh Days in Receivables — Days Payable Outstanding
365 = Inventory turnover 365 = Receivables turnaver 365 + Payables turnover
ae ne rr ~ — @ es
Cost of Cost of
eee . Sales = Accounts oe _ Accounts
goods + Inventory receivable goods + avable
sald sald nM

Figure 15.1. The cash canversian cycle. Source: Morningstar, Inc.


RETAIL

from customers for the goods (receivables), and how long it can hold on to
the goods itself before it has to pay suppliers (payables). Figure 15.1 illustrates
the cash conversion cycle, and Figure 15.2 shows the conversion cycle for
Home Depot.

Naturally, a retailer wants to sell its products as fast as possible (high in-
ventory turns), collect payments from customers as fast as possible (high
receivables turns), but pay suppliers as slowly as possible (low payables turns).
The best-case scenario for a retailer is to sell its goods and collect from cus-
tomers before it even has to pay the supplier. Wal-Mart is one of the best in
the business at this: 70 percent of its sales are rung up and paid for before the

firm even pays its suppliers.

Example: Home Depot

Balance sheet ($billians) 2002 2001
Beginning inventory 67 66
Ending inventory 8.3 67
Average Inventory 15 66
Accaunts receivable 1 09
Accounts payable 4.6 3.4
Incame statement ($ billians) 2002 2001
Sales 58.2 53.6
Cost of goods sold 40.1 37.4

2002 Cash Conversion Cycle = 34 days

365 = Inventory turnover + 365+ Receivables turnover — 365 + Payables turnever
365 = (40.1 7.5) + 365 = (58.2 = 1.1) — 365 = (40.1 = 4.6)
68 days in inventory +  7days in receivables — 41 days payable outstanding

2001 Cash Conversion Cycle = 37 days

365 = Inventoryturnever + 365 Receivables turnover — 365 + Payables turnover
365 = (37.4 + 6.6) + 365 = (53.6 = 0.9) — 365 + (37.4 + 3.4)
64 days in inventory +  6daysin receivables — 33 days payable outstanding

Figure 15.2 Cash Conversion Cycle far Home Depot. Source: Marningstar, Inc.

213


214

CONSUMER SERVICES

Looking at the components of a retailer’s cash cycle tells us a great deal. A
retailer with increasing days in inventory (and decreasing inventory turns) is
likely stocking its shelves with merchandise that is out of favor. This leads to
excess inventory, clearance sales, and, usually, declining sales and stock prices.

Days in receivables is the least important part of the cash conversion cycle
for retailers because most stores either collect cash directly from customers at
the time of the sale or sell off their credit card receivables to banks and other
finance companies for a price. Retailers don't really control this part of
the cycle too much. However, some stores, such as Sears and Target, have
brought attention to the receivables line because they've opted to offer cus-
tomers credit and manage the receivables themselves. The credit card busi-
ness is a profitable way to make a buck, but it’s also very complicated, and it’s
a completely different business from retail. We're wary of retailers that try to
boost profits by taking on risk in their credit card business because it’s gener-
ally not something they're very good at.

If days in inventory and days in receivables illustrate how well a retailer
interacts with customers, days payable outstanding shows how well a re-
tailer negotiates with suppliers. It’s also a great gauge for the strength of a re-
tailer. Wide-moat retailers such as Wal-Mart, Home Depot, and Walgreen
optimize credit terms with suppliers because they're one of the few (if not
the only) games in town. For example, 17 percent of P&G's 2002 sales came
from Wal-Mart. The fortunes of many consumer product firms depend on
sales to Wal-Mart, so the king of retail has a huge advantage when ordering
inventory: It can push for low prices and extended payment terms.

Home Depot finally started taking advantage of its competitive position
by squeezing suppliers in 2001 and 2002. Days payable outstanding for the
home improvement titan has historically been around 25. In 2001, the figure
hit 33 days, and by 2002, it exceeded 40 days. By holding on to its cash longer
and reducing short-term borrowing needs, Home Depot increased its operat-
ing cash flow from an average of $2.4 billion from 1998 to 2000 to $5.6 billion

from 2002 to 2003.

Hallmarks of Successful Retailers
> Sometimes you never get a second chance to make a good first impres-

sion. Retail is a fickle business, and shoppers have plenty of alternatives,


RETAIL 215

Common Investing Pitfall: Are Those Same-Store Sales Growth

Numbers Accurate?

Every quarter and, for most restaurants and retailers, every month, same-store sales
numbers are released. Same-stare sales grawth measures sales at locations open for
at least a year and excludes sales increases attributed to current openings. For pur-
poses of reporting, same-store sales are also known as comparable-stare sales or
comps.

But, what if a new store doesn’t fully mature in 12 months? The process of that new
store reaching maturity in year two or year three helps boost the same-store sales fig-
ure, while sales at alder stores may nat be growing at all or are declining.

This is a very important consideration for companies that are transitioning from aggres-
sive growth into slower or steadier grawth. As long as they can open a greater number
of stores year after year, the comps will look impressive. But every company’s expansion
plan reaches an inflection point—they’re still growing, just not as fast. This has twa
effects. First, opening fewer stores obviously translates into smaller new store sales
growth. Second, having fewer stores entering those productive years two and three also
lowers comps.

The combination of slower new store growth and lower camps can send overall
growth and the stock price plunging quickly. From 1995 to 2000, Office Depot aver-
aged 14 percent per year in new store growth. However, the office supply stare busi-
ness quickly became saturated when competitors Staples and Office Max alsa
engaged in aggressive expansion plans. In 1999 and 2000, the last two years af its
rapid expansion, Office Depot's tatal same-store sales increased 6 percent and

7.5 percent. In 2001, new store growth stopped and same-store sales declined

2 percent; the stock price sank below $10 fram a high in the mid-$20's in 1999.

so companies have to make a concerted effort to keep stores clean and
fresh. Lowe’s has benefited mightily in its battle with Home Depot be-
cause its stores are widely perceived to be more aesthetically pleasing and
easier to navigate. Home Depot is reinvesting in its stores, but as we
mentioned in the restaurant section, maintenance and renovation is eas-

ier than reinvention.


216

CONSUMER SERVICES

> Keep an eye out for store traffic. You don’t want to see a traffic bottleneck

at the checkout aisles, but you don’t want to see empty parking lots on
weekends either. This is particularly true for specialty retail companies
such as clothing stores that cater to a particular demographic. Traffic to
teen hot spot Abercrombie & Fitch and women's outfitter Chico’s FAS has
remained relatively robust even in times of lax consumer spending. These
stores have carved out a brand identity and won customer loyalty, and their
stock prices held up during the tough market conditions in 2001 and 2002.
Remember, though, specialty retailers have a much shorter shelf life than
traditional retailers do, so these investments have to be monitored much
more closely.

Successful retailers have a positive employee culture. After all, retail is
about customer service—period. Sam Walton helped build Wal-Mart into

the largest retailer (and largest company) in the world based on sales using

Common Investing Pitfall: How Healthy Is the Balance Sheet with All

Those Leases?

Many retailers use operating leases to “rent” space for their stores. Because these
leases aren't capitalized and are kept off the balance sheet, they understate a firm’s
total financial obligations and can artificially inflate financial health. The leases aren't
inherently bad or sneaky; in fact, their existence is core to most retailers’ expansion
plans. Lease obligations can be found in the footnates of a firm's 10-K under the head-
ing “commitments and contingencies.”

Be sure to give a retailer a thorough checkup before declaring it to be in tip-top finan-
cial shape. For example, Tommy Hilfiger appeared ta have pretty good financial
health gaing into 2002. The firm had $387 million in cash and $638 million in total
debt. However, the specialty apparel fim also had $273 million of future financial
obligations inthe form of operating leases. If we add off-balance sheet leases to the
debt on the balance sheet, the total comes to $911 million, and the coverage ratios
don't loak as robust. Tommy Hilfiger entered 2002 with declining sales and stagnat-
ing profits and cash flow. When Hilfiger announced that it needed to clase many of
its retail stores in October 2002 and pay to break the leases, the stock price was
hammered.



INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

the premise that the customer is always right. During its growth heyday in
the 1990s, Home Depot's employees were always visible and customers
usually walked away satisfied. In 2001 and 2002, Home Depot's service
waned noticeably, largely due to an influx of part-time employees who

didn’t have the same connection to the company.

Conclusion

As we've mentioned numerous times in earlier chapters, great companies in
attractive industries generate returns on invested capital that far exceed the
cost of capital. However, retail is generally a very low-return business with
low or no barriers to entry. Retail bellwethers Wal-Mart and Walgreen earn
little more than 3 cents profit for every dollar of sales, so store management is
critical. The problem is that many retailers don’t execute as flawlessly as these
two and flame out as soon as trouble hits.

The sector is rampant with competition. Think of all the specialty ap-
parel shops that try to imitate Abercrombie & Fitch and Gap. A few succeed;
most fail, but the point is that nothing exists to prevent new concepts and
stores from being launched. There are few, if any, barriers to entry. Customers
may be swayed to buy a cool $50 sweater, but they'll quickly go to the store
next door if the same sweater can be had for $40.

The primary way a firm can build an economic moat in the sector is to be
the low-cost leader. Wal-Mart sells items that can be purchased just about
anywhere, but it sells it all for less than the competition, and consumers keep
coming back for the bargains. Others may try to imitate Wal-Mart’s strategy
in the short run but lack the economies of scale to remain profitable employ-

ing the strategy in the long run.

Investor's Checklist: Consumer Services

> Most consumer services concepts fail in the long run, so any investment
in a company in the speculative or aggressive growth stage of the busi-
ness life cycle needs to be monitored more closely than the average stock
investment.

> Beware of stocks that have already priced in lofty growth expectations.
You can make money if you get in early enough, but you can also lose

your shirt on the stock’s rapid downside.

217


218

CONSUMER SERVICES

The sector is rife with low switching costs. Companies that establish store
loyalty or store dependence are very attractive. Tiffany's is a good exam-
ple; it faces limited competition in the retail jewelry market.

Make sure to compare inventory and payables turns to determine which
retailers are superior operators. Companies that know what their cus-
tomers want and how to exploit their negotiating power are more likely to
make solid bets in the sector.

Keep an eye on those off-balance sheet obligations. Many retailers have
little or no debt on the books, but their overall financial health might not
be that good.

Look for a buying opportunity when a solid company releases poor
monthly or quarterly sales numbers. Many investors overreact to one
month’s worth of bad same-store sales results, and the reason might just
be bad weather or an overly difficult comparison to the prior-year pe-
riod. Focus on the fundamentals of the business and not the emotion of
the stock.

Companies also tend to move in tandem when news comes out about the
economy. Look for a chance to pick up shares of a great retailer when the

entire sector falls—keep that watch list handy.


16

Business Services

WHILE THE COMPANIES in our business services sector operate in relative
obscurity, the sector deserves more attention. Here, we can find a large num-
ber of firms running wonderful, wide-moat businesses—just the kind we like
to buy at the right price and hold as long-term investors.
