
Elliott Wave trading is one of the more difficult strategies to
master, as it requires a great deal of practice and experience in order
to be able to identify waves effectively under different market conditions. As many professional Elliott Wave traders will agree, however, learning to trade these waves can potentially be very rewarding.
169

c05.indd 169

1/13/09 10:05:04 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

D ivergence Trading — Separate Paths
Also an effective analytical tool if used in the correct manner, priceoscillator divergences have long been acknowledged by technical
traders and analysts as a solid indicator of potential impending price
reversals. Of course, by no means should it be inferred in any way that
divergences will always predict a reversal, or even that they are correct
a majority of the time. But well-defined price-oscillator divergences,
especially on longer-term charts, can be surprisingly accurate in many
instances. Furthermore, catching a major price reversal at the correct
time can be so potentially profitable that only a few accurate divergences are needed to offset the inevitable false signals.
Price-oscillator divergence can be spotted with just two elements
on a price chart. The first element is price, while the second element is
an oscillator that runs either above or below price.This second element
could be Stochastics, RSI, MACD or any similar oscillator as described
in Chapter 3. A divergence occurs when there is an imbalance between
the price element and the oscillator element. They begin to go separate ways and start telling opposite stories. This is when the oscillator is
providing a strong hint that price may be losing its current momentum,
and a change in price direction may therefore be impending.
So, for example, bearish divergence (which hints at an impending reversal back down) occurs when price hits a higher high while
the oscillator hits a corresponding lower high. Exhibit 5.13 displays
a typical instance of bearish divergence.
The indication after a clear bearish divergence signal is that
price may soon turn and go back down as the higher high in price
loses its upward momentum and begins falling.

170

c05.indd 170

1/13/09 10:05:04 AM

D i v e r g e n c e Tr a d i n g — S e p a r a t e P a t h s

EXHIBIT 5.13

Bearish Divergence

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

Bullish divergence (which hints at an impending reversal back
up) occurs when price hits a lower low while the oscillator hits a
corresponding higher low. Exhibit 5.14 displays a typical instance of
bullish divergence.
The indication after a clear bullish divergence signal is that price
may soon turn and go back up as the lower low in price loses its
downward momentum and begins rising.
Divergences are often used as hints, or early indications, of possible turns and reversals. Much less often are they employed exclusively as a full-fledged, self-sufficient trading strategy. But used in

171

c05.indd 171

1/13/09 10:05:04 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXHIBIT 5.14

Bullish Divergence

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

conjunction with other trading tools, divergences can often be a
remarkably effective method for helping to time major market turns.

M ultiple Timeframe Trading — Timing Is
Everything
A trading method used very extensively by many foreign exchange
traders involves the use of multiple timeframes. To trade in this
manner, a trader might first look at a long-term timeframe like a
monthly or weekly chart to determine the overall direction of the
trend, if any. If a decisive long-term trend is in place, the trader
should only trade in this direction.

172

c05.indd 172

1/13/09 10:05:05 AM

M u l t i p l e T i m e f r a m e Tr a d i n g — T i m i n g I s E v e r y t h i n g

Then, the trader may drill down to a shorter timeframe like the
daily or 4-hour chart to look for dips, or pullbacks, in the trend.
As mentioned in the section on trend trading, these are countertrend moves that provide an advantageous location to enter in the
direction of the trend. For example, in a strong long-term uptrend,
a minor downward retracement would represent a potential high
probability entry to get in on the trend at a good price.
Finally, the trader may drill down even further to an even shorter
timeframe like the 30-minute or 15-minute chart to pinpoint and time
exact entries. For example, if a retracement in an uptrend is identified
on the 4-hour chart, the trader could go down to the 15-minute chart
to wait for a resistance breakout in the direction of the trend before
finally entering into a long position.
What makes multiple timeframe trading so powerful is that it puts
traders on the right side of the market while also pinpointing the highest probability entries available. Perhaps the best manifestation of multiple timeframe trading can be found in Dr. Alexander Elder’s Triple
Screen, as described in the following Tips & Techniques section.

TIPS AND TECHNIQUES

The Triple Screen
Dr. Alexander Elder, a psychiatrist by trade and an expert in technical analysis, is one of the world’s foremost authorities on trading.
Among other prominent books, Elder wrote the international bestselling classic, Trading for a Living, and the comprehensive trading
tome, Come Into My Trading Room: A Complete Guide to Trading.

173

c05.indd 173

1/13/09 10:05:05 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

TIPS AND TECHNIQUES (CONTINUED)
In both of these classics, he writes about one of his most
well-known trading strategies based upon the multiple timeframe
approach. It is called the “Triple Screen.”
In Come Into My Trading Room: A Complete Guide to Trading
(John Wiley & Sons, 2002), Elder writes,
“Triple Screen resolves contradictions between indicators and timeframes. It reaches strategic decisions on
long-term charts, using trend-following indicators—this is
the first screen. It proceeds to make tactical decisions
about entries and exits on the intermediate charts, using
oscillators—this is the second screen. It offers several
methods for placing buy and sell orders—this is the third
screen, which we may implement using either intermediate- or short-term charts.”
“Begin by choosing your favorite timeframe, the one
with whose charts you like to work, and call it intermediate. Multiply its length by five to find your long-term timeframe. Apply trend-following indicators to long-term charts
to reach a strategic decision to go long, short, or stand
aside. Standing aside is a legitimate position. If the longterm chart is bullish or bearish, return to the intermediate charts and use oscillators to look for entry and exit
points in the direction of the long-term trend. Set stops
and profit targets before switching to short-term charts, if
available, to fine-tune entries and exits.”
Elder’s Triple Screen is a simple but ingenious multiple
timeframe approach to forex trading. To trade this technique,
the trader would begin with a favorite timeframe, like a 4-hour
chart, and call it intermediate. To get the long-term chart, the
intermediate chart would be multiplied by five (a factor of 4–6
times may actually be more flexible and practical). Therefore, the

174

c05.indd 174

1/13/09 10:05:05 AM

P o i n t s & F i g u r e Tr a d i n g — P o i n t i n g O u t B r e a k o u t s

TIPS AND TECHNIQUES (CONTINUED)
long-term chart might be the daily chart (4-hour chart  6 = 24–
hour chart). To get the short-term chart, the intermediate chart
would be divided by 4-6. Therefore, the short-term chart in this
case might be a 1-hour chart (4-hour chart ÷ 4 = 1-hour chart).
On the long-term chart, the first screen, one would focus on
trend-following indicators like moving averages, MACD, or trendlines
to decide whether to go long, sell short, or stay out of trading altogether due to a lack of trend. On the intermediate chart, the second screen, one would use oscillators like Stochastics or RSI to
identify a likely pullback entry zone. Finally, on the short-term chart,
the third screen, one would look for a support/resistance breakout
in the direction of the long-term trend to pinpoint the trade entry.

P oint & Figure Trading — Pointing Out
Breakouts
Though visually distinct from all the other chart-trading strategies
discussed thus far, point & figure (p&f ) trading is, in many ways,
very similar to traditional support and resistance breakout trading on
bar or candlestick charts. The primary difference lies in the look and
functionality of the price charts themselves. Many forex charting
platforms include an option to view charts using the p&f structure.
As described in Chapter 3, p&f charts actually represent price in a
radically different manner from the more familiar bar and candlestick charts. Exhibit 5.15, which displays a typical forex p&f chart,
shows just how differently they can look.
Point & figure trading is trading that is based exclusively upon
price action, which makes it ideally suited to the foreign exchange
market. Originating in the 19th century, this type of financial
175

c05.indd 175

1/13/09 10:05:05 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

EXHIBIT 5.15

Point & Figure Chart

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

charting is older than some of the more popular charting methods in common use today. P&f charts are a pure price action play
because these charts generally exclude all other elements (like time,
volume, and opens/closes) other than price. Therefore, a p&f practitioner can focus all attention on the behavior of price action, which
is the most important factor from a technical analysis perspective.
Without extraneous elements to clutter the landscape, p&f charts
excel at representing clear evidence of such important technical
characteristics as trend, support/resistance, and breakouts.
As shown in Exhibit 5.15, p&f charts are constructed with columns
of boxes alternately labeled with Xs and Os. An X column means that

176

c05.indd 176

1/13/09 10:05:06 AM

P o i n t s & F i g u r e Tr a d i n g — P o i n t i n g O u t B r e a k o u t s

price has risen in that column. Conversely, an O column means
that price has declined in that column. When a reversal occurs on any
column, a new column is created going in the opposite direction. As
mentioned earlier, there is no time, volume, opens, or closes on p&f
charts. Only when price moves a sufficient amount, regardless of time,
will an existing column grow or a new column be started.
Two extremely important variables can alter the way p&f
charts look and act. The first variable is box size. This is the minimum amount that price needs to move before a new box within an
existing column is created. For example, if a column of Xs (which
denotes a rising trend) has 10 boxes in the column, price would
need to move an additional amount equal to the preset box size
before another X would be added onto the top of the column. For
example, if a trader sets the box size on the p&f charting software
to 10 pips per box, which is a common setting, price would need to
move 10 pips above each X box in order to add another X box on
top. In the same way, price would need to move 10 pips lower than
each box in an O column in order to add another O box on the
bottom of the column.
The second important variable is reversal amount. This is the
amount of pips that price needs to reverse before a new column is
created. A new column is only started when a reversal in an existing
column exceeds the reversal threshold. The most common setting for
the reversal amount is three boxes, or three “points.” If the box size
is set at 10 pips and the reversal amount is set at three boxes, the
reversal amount in pips is 30 pips. So in a rising column of X boxes,
for example, price would need to turn back down against the
uptrend by at least 30 pips before a new O column would be started.

177

c05.indd 177

1/13/09 10:05:06 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

The significance of these two variables should be fully recognized and appreciated, as they are what make p&f charts so effective at representing only the most important major market moves,
disregarding all of the minor fluctuations known as “noise.” For
this reason, p&f charts are excellent indicators of both trend and
support/resistance.
Because p&f charts outline support and resistance so well, one of
the primary trading strategies in most common use with these charts
is breakout trading. One notable distinction between bar charting
and p&f charting, within the realm of support/resistance, lies in the
interpretation of double and triple tops and bottoms. In the world
of bar and candlestick charting, a double top is a potentially bearish
reversal signal. In p&f terminology, however, a double top is a resistance point where traders should be looking for a bullish break to
the upside. The same distinction holds true for double bottoms, as
well as triple tops and bottoms.
P&f charts also have their own version of diagonal trendlines,
which are drawn at strict 45 degree angles. Chart patterns like triangles are very prevalent as well. Like the horizontal support and
resistance levels on these charts, the main method for trading trendlines and patterns on p&f charts is through breakouts.
Because point & figure trading focuses exclusively on price
action, the most important aspect of technical trading, p&f practitioners are able to view and interpret market movement with
exceptional clarity. Perhaps for this reason, p&f charts have withstood the test of hundreds of years to fulfill one of its current roles
today as an increasingly relevant analytical tool for foreign exchange
traders.

178

c05.indd 178

1/13/09 10:05:06 AM

C a r r y Tr a d i n g — I n t h e I n t e r e s t o f I n t e r e s t

C arry Trading — In the Interest of Interest
As discussed in Chapter 4 on fundamental analysis, carry trading
involves the simultaneous purchase of a high-interest currency and
sale of a low-interest currency. This creates an interest rate differential yield that the trader can earn on a daily basis.
The carry trade is primarily a longer-term fundamental investment strategy that seeks to earn this interest rate differential while
assuming the substantial risks of exchange rate volatility. A strategy
that combines the carry trade with technical analysis to help mitigate this risk will be described in this section’s Tips & Techniques.
The fundamental concept behind the carry trade is that when
investors’ risk aversion is not exceedingly high, international capital
tends to flow towards higher-yielding currencies, thereby contributing to a general exchange rate appreciation in these currencies at the
expense of the lower-yielding currencies. Of course, this is far from
a rule, but only a tendency that occurs when the overall market sentiment is towards a greater risk appetite (as opposed to greater risk
aversion).
It should be stressed here that interest rate differentials go
both ways, and that if a trade carries a negative interest rate differential, the daily charges to the trader’s account on open positions can become prohibitively expensive in many instances. This
is because the interest rate differential, whether the trader is paid
or charged the amount, is based on the full leveraged size of the
trade as opposed to just the fractional amount that the trader puts
up in margin for the trade. So, for example, if $1,000 is required
to open a full $100,000 position at 100:1 leverage, any interest rate

179

c05.indd 179

1/13/09 10:05:06 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

differential on the trade would be paid or charged as a percentage
of the full $100,000 amount instead of just the $1,000 amount. This
can add up to a substantial sum if a trade is kept open over a prolonged period of time.
At the time of this writing, a commonly carry-traded currency
pair is the NZD/JPY, which presently carries a large interest rate
differential. The New Zealand dollar currently has a high interest
rate while the Japanese yen has a low interest rate. Carry traders
who are long NZD/JPY, which means they have borrowed JPY to
buy NZD, would be paid based on the high interest rate differential. Conversely, non-carry traders who are short NZD/JPY, which
means they have borrowed NZD to buy JPY, would be charged
based upon the high interest rate differential.
With most retail foreign exchange brokers, this payment or
charge is settled at “rollover,” which generally occurs at the end of
each business day. This time can vary among brokers. During rollover, open positions that carry a positive interest rate differential are
credited directly into the traders’ trading accounts. Conversely, those
positions that carry a negative interest rate differential are debited
directly from the traders’ trading accounts.
Carry trading allows foreign exchange traders to receive substantial interest payments on a daily basis for holding high-interest
positions open. Of course, the risk of adverse price moves can
potentially erase all of those daily interest gains, and then some.
But with the help of a high probability carry trading strategy (as
described next) and solid risk controls, trading exclusively in the
direction of positive interest yield is one of the most prudent and
sensible ways to trade long-term positions in forex.

180

c05.indd 180

1/13/09 10:05:07 AM

C a r r y Tr a d i n g — I n t h e I n t e r e s t o f I n t e r e s t

TIPS AND TECHNIQUES

The Technical Carry Trade
A variation on traditional buy-and-hold carry trading incorporates
the intelligent use of technical analysis. This method is aptly
named, Technical Carry Trading. What sets this approach apart
from traditional carry trading is its strict trade entry criteria that
screens out low-probability carry trades where price has already
over-extended itself. Technical carry trading is a simple strategy
for optimizing trade entries/exits that decreases exchange rate
risk and maximizes potential exchange rate profit, while also taking advantage of daily interest payments based upon the traditional carry trade model.
The principle behind technical carry trading is that the highest probability strategic entries into long-term carry trade positions are near long-term support/resistance levels. Therefore, if
a substantial positive interest rate differential can be achieved
by buying (going long) a currency pair (as in the example of NZD/
JPY), the highest probability entry would be near long-term support. When price on the pair is near long-term support, the historical probability is that price should eventually rise. On the flip side,
if the positive interest differential can be attained by selling short
a currency pair, the highest probability entry would be near longterm resistance.
The first step in technical carry trading is to identify those
currency pairs that have a high enough interest rate differential
to warrant holding a long-term carry position. The threshold might
be set at around 300 basis points (or 3 percentage points) or
more. Perhaps more importantly, however, the likely future direction of the rate differential should be examined, as this will
affect the exchange rate outlook of the currency pair enormously.
The future direction of interest rates can be analyzed through central bank statements, economic conditions, the inflation outlook,

181

c05.indd 181

1/13/09 10:05:07 AM

F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e t h o d s a n d S t r a t e g i e s

TIPS AND TECHNIQUES (CONTINUED)
and other fundamental analyses of the countries/regions in
question.
After screening currency pairs according to the current and
potential future interest rate differentials, the second step in the
technical carry trade process is technical selection. Of the currency pairs chosen in the first step, the trader might choose to
trade only those pairs whose current price is in the bottom onethird of their long-term vertical range (near support). Or, if a pair is
entrenched in a long-term uptrend channel, the trader may choose
only to enter long when price is near the bottom of the channel
(again, near support). The primary principle here is to trade only
when price is in a high-probability location, like near support when
going long or near resistance when selling short.
The last step in the technical carry trade process is trade
execution. In order to spread risk and avoid the need to pinpoint entries, technical carry trading may employ a scaled-entry
approach. This involves entering into a long-term carry trade using
multiple fractional entries. These smaller positions would be
spaced evenly within a support/resistance trading zone (as in the
bottom one-third of a long-term range) in order to distribute risk
across a wide price region. Exits in the form of profit limits and
stop losses would be technically based. If a long carry trade is
entered near support, the profit target could be placed near resistance (e.g., the top one-third of the long-term range). Stop losses
on a long carry trade could be placed somewhere right below longterm support, much like with other types of technical trades.
Technical carry trading is all about increasing the chances of
a profitable trade while simultaneously earning substantial leveraged interest. Since good trading, in general, involves maximizing probabilities under precarious circumstances, the technical
carry trade strategy performs its function well. At the very least,
it improves the outlook of the traditional carry trade dramatically.

182

c05.indd 182

1/13/09 10:05:07 AM

N e w s Tr a d i n g — A l l t h e N e w s T h a t ' s F i t t o P r o f i t F r o m

N ews Trading — All the News That ’s Fit to
Profit From
Like carry trading, news trading also falls under the general category of fundamental analysis. News trading is simply the attempt to
exploit immediate market reactions to major news and economic
data announcements.
Many forex news traders will wait patiently before each major
news announcement (as described in Chapter 4), ready to pounce
on a trade if the opportunity presents itself. These traders often will
have already memorized the consensus (expected) numbers, and
would then just wait to see if the actual numbers announced on their
up-to-the-second news feed differ considerably from the consensus. If so, the direction of the trade according to the deviation from
consensus is determined, and the trade is taken. If all works well on
a trade like this, the trader will have jumped on a strong price run
either early on or somewhere in the middle of the movement.
Some news traders employ a variation of this method by just
watching and waiting during the initial price reaction to the news,
which they deem to be unreliable, and then entering the trade on the
secondary reaction.This secondary reaction could either be a complete
reversal of the initial reaction, or it could be a continuation of the initial move after a pullback or consolidation. This approach is perhaps
easier and less frenzied than the first type of news trading, as success in
this case does not necessarily depend entirely upon the speed of entry.
Yet other news traders will wait for the news to come out, and
then trade technically in the attempts to capture quick profits.Technical
trading in this manner necessitates the analysis of very-short-term
