
Markets and Margin

43

the book revolve around the S&P 500, gold, crude oil, euro, and com. Many
other contracts are also relevant in today's trading environment, including
U.S. Treasury bonds, the CAC 40, DAX, soybeans, Japanese yen, silver, and
the eurodollar.
The funny thing about trading is that you do not need to be in a market
to benefit from the correlative effects of that market's activity. For example, when you short the euro in futures, you are essentially buying the dollar as well; therefore, you do not need to be also be short the yen, for you
would be exposing yourself to the same long dollar risk. If you are buying
gold, you do not need to also buy silver and double expose yourself to a
precious metal long side bias. Or if you are long com, it is rare that you
need to also participate in all of the grain complexes, wheat-soybean. As
always, choose the markets you are most comfortable with.

S&P 500
The S&P 500 is one of the most widely tracked indexes. It contains stocks
of 500 large-cap corporations. It is a mixture of stocks that trade on the
NYSE Euronext and NASDAQ. The success of the S&P 500's ability to
gauge the U.S. economy is rivaled only by the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Over 20 years ago the CME launched the first-ever stock-index futures
on the S&P 500.
The S&P 500 futures contract was meant to fill a need for money managers and investors with large stock portfolios seeking to minimize their
exposure to risk. In 1998 a smaller version of the S&P 500 futures contract
was introduced, the Emini S&P 500. One-fifth ofthe size of the full-size S&P
500 futures contract, the Emini has gained in volume and liquidity over the
years. In fact, it is the preferred contract of many institutional traders because of its electronic execution. As of this writing the notional daily value
of the traded Emini S&P 500 is over $140 billion. This is a gross exaggeration of the value of the actual shares traded on a daily basis.
The S&P 500 futures contract plays a significant role in determining the
opening of price of the actual index on the NYSE. This is due in large part
to the fact that the Emini S&P 500 futures contract trades 23.5 hours per
day five days a week.

Gold
Metals come in two general categories, precious and nonprecious. The
precious metals are gold, silver, platinum, and palladium. They tend to
be prized for their jewelry qualities even though they also have industrial
and financial applications as well. The two precious metals that sit at the
forefront of all precious metals trading are gold and silver. From India to

44

DESIGNING THE TRADE

New York, gold's long precious metals history has given it a seat on several
commodities exchanges and has helped it to develop a robust OTC market
in the past decade.
With the average mining expense of gold at $238 per ounce, it is a wonder that the price of gold stagnated in the $300 per ounce range for almost
a decade. Couple the high cost of mining with the limited supply of gold
worldwide, and gold has the potential to continue on a significant bull run.
As of this writing the price of gold has exceeded $950 per ounce. The last
previous time it exceeded $800 was January 21, 1980; adjusted for inflation
that would be approximately $2,398.21.

Crude Oil
The finding and drilling of oil has changed the world as we know it for
the past 100 years. Crude oil's impact on the environment, on economies
around the world, and on substitute goods will continue to affect the world
for another century to come. Energy trading became a significant part of
futures in 1978. Energy futures and OTC contracts cover a wide array of
energy products from crude oil to electricity, with crude oil leading the
pack. OTC energy trading can be directly attributed to the Commodities
Futures Modernization Act of 2000. With the liberalization of the futures
rules, energy contracts have become quite popular to trade.
The crude oil market has three large players: Saudi Arabia, Russia, and
the United States. With over five thousand varieties of crude oil available, it
is no surprise that OTC oil futures have played a significant role in reshaping the commodities landscape. The most commonly sought-after crude oil,
sweet crude, is also becoming the most difficult to come by. Couple that
with limited access to the most touted crude oil alternative, natural gas,
and we have an energy market that will be overheated for years to come.

Euro
The OTC foreign exchange market is a several trillion dollars a day industry. Quite literally, more money is moved daily in the forex market than
in the U.S. equity market and all of the futures exchanges combined. This
market is raw capitalism at work. With a six-day, 24-hour time schedule,
it is one of the most exciting places around to put your money, retail or
institutional.
Fueling a significant portion of this growth has been the creation of
one of the most important currencies in the twenty-first century, the euro.
Consolidating the economies of the 15 countries that are members of the
European Union, the euro was launched in January 2002. Affecting the lives

Markets and Margin

45

of over 500 million people, the euro has surpassed the dollar in terms of use
and value.

Corn
Com is one of the most versatile commodities in the world. Whether used
for livestock feed or whiskey, sweetener or fuel, com is a staple in the
lives of people around the globe. With over 600 million metric tons being
produced worldwide, it is a valuable part of the economy in a number of
countries. The United States alone accounted for 280 million metric tons.
Couple the agricultural uses of com with its potential to be used as a fuel
additive or fuel alternative to gas, and com production may be seen as being more in its infant stage. With China currently producing only 131 million
metric tons and Brazil at 35 million metric tons, these two countries alone
have the ability to expand their com production, particularly to meet demands of the burgeoning economies.

BECOMING A SOPHISTICATED TRADER
True progress quietly and persistently moves along without notice.
-St. Francis of Assisi (Founder of the Franciscan order, 1181-1226)
The world is changing right before our eyes. The roles of the exchanges, speculators, hedgers, regulators, and products are being affected
by a global need to connect. What was once a cloistered club centered in
a few select regions has expanded in both amazing and frightening ways.
While the United States' prominence as a world power is slowly being economically diffused, it also opens the doors for a new form of economic
prosperity.
Part of the success of the retail trader, going into the twenty-first century, is his willingness to evolve not only his approach but his mind-set to
what trading is really all about. The trading isolationism to which he has
subjected himself is not being mirrored by his professional counterparts.
In fact quite the opposite is occurring; a spirit of cooperation in the shared
end goal of making money is at the forefront of the professional trader's
mind. Your success as a trader will come from your ability to adopt this
exact same frame of mind.
The other part of your success as a retail trader will come from sheer
luck. The first-century philosopher Seneca came up with the quote, "Luck
is what happens when preparation meets opportunity." The opportunities

46

DESIGNING THE TRADE

are abundant; what will make all the difference is how you prepare yourself
today for the trading world of tomorrow.

WHAT DO THES E CHANGES ltl EAN
F OR YOUR TRADING?
Why does the consolidation of exchanges in the United States, increased
activity in exchange trading around the world, new and exotic trading products being invented, and the daisy chain of the various markets that can be
traded matter to you, the retail trader? The level of sophistication of your
trading needs to transcend the basic goal of just making money. With new
and better opportunities, the primary requirement that traders will need is
the ability to protect themselves from loss. By focusing on loss protection
as your first order of business, you move yourself from the arena of trading
dabbler to trading professional.
In much the same way your professional counterparts attempt to maxin1ize their risk management, so will you. It is the badge of the professional
to be able to practice or demo trade or back-test trading ideas with the end
goal of showing how well he manages risk in addition to returns. A professional trader who has 40 to 50 percent returns but also has a maximum
drawdown of 50 percent is far less desirable than a professional trader who
shows 20 to 30 percent returns with a maximum drawdown of 5 percent.
Why would you expect anything less from yourself ?
By knowing all of the tools at your disposal-cash, OTC, futures, and
options-and how they dovetail with one another, you begin to improve
your odds of success, solely by diminishing your odds of defeat. This can
be done in your own demo trading or with skilled back-testing on the right
trading platform. However you do it, the goal is to now think outside of
the rigid box of short-term profits and look for an overall healthy way to
preserve your capital while you pursue the best opportunity possible, no
matter what it is or where it is traded.

(;11 \I-'I'('; R 3

Some Essentials

of Trading

he secret to trading is often thought to be more a function of time
frame than a function of skill. In much the same way that university
students and alumni promote and defend their alma mater, come hell
or high water, so do proponents of the different schools of trading. With
almost fanatical zeal, traders will tout the benefits of being a day, position,
or swing trader.
One trader will say going home flat is the only way to trade; another
trader will say that the trend is your friend. Who's to say either is 100 percent right? As with many things in life, success in trading is not cut and dry.
If it were, everyone who attends a trading seminar or reads a trading book
would be able to emulate the success of the speaker or author immediately.
Each trader has to find his own path to success, using the information that
he acquires along the way as a guide post towards his end goal.
George Soros, Warren Buffett, and Richard Dennis are each successful in their own right. George Soros founded the Quantum Fund with the
express purpose of speculating. Much of his trading revolved around shorttern1 and opportunistic currency moves, long before he established his
non-profit company. Warren Buffett took a different approach. Known as a
value investor, Warren Buffett's buy and hold strategy turned many of his
shareholders into multi-millionaires. Richard Dennis, on the other hand,
used commodity options as a way to trade himself to wealth.
All of these men are considered professional traders, yet each has his
own way of doing things, his own strategy for protecting himself from
loss, and his own variety of success in trading the markets. It's a lot like
professional sports. In professional sports there are no two players that

T

47

48

DESIGNING THE TRADE

are just alike. You can point to two athletes in the same sport, with similar size, strength, speed, training, and ability. While both are professional
athletes and can become hall-of-famers, it could be for entirely different
reasons.
This chapter is the most important chapter in the book. It lays the foundation with your choice of approach to the market and utilization of the
various strategies presented. Overall, it will help clarify how you operate
in the markets. You may discover that you operate just like a professional
trader or, that you have a long way to go. It also sets up how your attitude
toward trading.
We explore the three common types of traders-day, swing, and position traders-and delineate the advantages and disadvantages of each. We
then look at whether or not being a trader focused solely on time is a realistic option when attempting to mimic a professional trader interacting
with the markets.
We spotlight the necessary components found in a successfully designed trade: entry, loss target, and profit target numbers. Following, we
look at the daisy chain interaction of the cash, futures, and options markets. This sheds light on why the strategies work.
Finally, we look at the essential trade setups of trends and countertrends and explore them in depth. We show how each type of trader can
benefit from them, as dependent on their end goals.
Many of the topics that are touched on in this chapter are explained
more fully in my earlier book, Winning the Trading Game. Nevertheless,
it is not essential to have read it in order to understand the concepts presented here. The strategies and ideas that we cover can be incorporated
into any trading system or program. By identifying the key components, as
presented in this chapter, and utilizing your own system or approach to the
market, you benefit from the inforn1ation.

THREE DIFFERENT TYPES OF TRADERS
Being called a day trader, swing trader, or position trader is both a badge of
honor and a title. The majority of traders entering the field come through
one of these gateways. Depending on the book they've read or the guru
they're following at the time, a trader can feel a sense of belonging.
The problem with being a "time frame specialist" is that it holds you
back. While any time frarne may earn you money, there are times when the
market dictates which time frame is better. By not listening to the market
and insisting instead on trading a specific time frame, you lose opportunities for profits and limit your success.

Some Essentials of Trading

49

The market is the great dictator of time frame decisions. To ignore the
market's rhythms is to make it difficult to let your profits ride and cut your
losses as necessary. Being a time frame specialist can limit your chances
to manage your losses. Various loss strategies that apply to one time frame
can apply to another time frame, if the trader is willing to look beyond his
horizon.
That being said, there are three traditional time frame categories that
most traders fall into: day, swing, and position. No time frame is superior to
another. They each have their own pros and cons. The secret to being a pro
in successful trading is to move from one time frame to another seamlessly
(if it makes sense), and knowing when it makes sense to do so.

Day Trader
Investopedia defines day trader as "A stock trader who holds positions for
a very short time (from minutes to hours) and makes numerous trades each
day. Most trades are entered and closed out within the same day."
The name could be day trader, scalper, or active trader, but the process
is the same. You execute trades intraday in order to achieve your profit
goals, with the express purpose of being fiat in your trading at the end of
the day.
Whether you are attempting to earn a few hundred dollars or even
thousands, the practice is to take many small chances throughout the day
without risking all your capital. By minimizing how much you are trying
for, whether it's a few points on the Emini S&P or a couple hundredths of a
cent in currency trading, the belief is that you are risking less and therefore
will have much greater longevity than the swing or position traders.
On the surface, this logic is sound. Problems arise when the market
significantly moves against you when you least expect it, or when slippage
occurs, or when there is a spread involved in the quoted bid ask price. Any
of these three situations can diminish how much you are able to make and
at the same time how much you are losing.
Couple this with a trader's need to be right about the markets-as opposed to being profitable-and you run into what could be characterized
as slow death. Every day the trader is gaining a little, but losing more. As
time goes on he finds his account value slowly eroding, until eventually he
either has no more trading capital or he can't make any headway.
In the end the demise of the day trader comes about because of two
things: time and commissions. Since day trading is supposed to save you
money with a diminished time frame, it inversely requires more of your
time to monitor, prepare, and participate. For those who simply want to
make a little extra money or for those who are looking to supplement their
retirement, the commitment can easily far exceed the rewards. Spending

50

DESIGNING THE TRADE

10 to 12 hours a day involved in the markets, while mentally stimulating,
can make anyone's retirement feel like a chore.
The second failure of the day trader comes by way of commissions.
Now even E*TRADE has jumped on the bandwagon and joined the futures
revolution by offering 99-cent commissions. Commission rates are playing
limbo around the world, to actively recruit futures and forex traders. The
problem is that no matter how low they go, they will always beat the customer. You have to think of the commodities house as a bookie joint. No
matter what side the customer is on, long or short or whether he wins or
loses, the brokerage makes money. And the dirty little secret of the industry is the fact that the lower the commissions, the more the customers will
trade.
Like anything in life, if you think that you are getting a deal for something you buy regularly, you simply buy more of it. That's how Costco and
Sam's Club work. Those two companies are continually making recordbreaking profits. There is no material difference between how these retail
outlets generate business and trading. The perceived discount in trading
encourages the traders to trade more. Does this mean that there is less
slippage or that the market is less likely to move against you? No! Not only
have all your risks stayed the same, but you have increased your exposure
to them simply because it seemed cheaper to do so.
One of the most influential studies on the topic, "Do individual day
traders make money?" (Brad M. Barber et al., 2004), took a serious look at
the day trading phenomena by analyzing 130,000 investor accounts. Their
abstract put forth many straightforward conclusions, one of which was,
"Heavy day traders earn gross profits, but their profits are not sufficient to
cover transaction costs." This is an alarming revelation. If you are solely
a day trader, you are not working for yourself: You are working for the
brokerage.
The goal of the day trader must be to make a gross profit, with the
aim of keeping as much as possible and giving as little as possible back in
transaction costs.

Swing Trader
Investopedia defines a swing trader as "A style of trading that attempts to
capture gains in a stock within one to four days."
The level of research that has been conducted on day trading simply
doesn't exit for swing trading. The flexibility of the time frame means that
a trader may hold onto a trade for a few days or a few weeks, depending
on the end goal.
Like their day trading counterparts, swing traders attempt to gain a
few hundred dollars or more and they also attempt to limit their exposure

Some Essentials of Trading

51

to the markets by minimizing the amount of time spent in the trade.
There is the assumption that the market moves in a particular direction,
whether up or down, for only a finite amount of time before it retraces or
pulls back.
The role of the swing trader is essentially to pick when the move begins
and to get out right when the move ends. This ability is akin to being able to
pick market highs and lows. The swing trader is looking to find out when
the market is going to explode on fundamental or technical information
and how much of a profit they can gain while it is moving.
This is nearly an impossible task to undertake. Many swing traders
tend to be system or black-box traders. They look for the market to be
packaged as a black-and-white scenario of "get in here and exit there." The
problem with this style of trading is that its predictive nature can lead to
a lot of false entries and exits. You can be fooled by false entry signals or
exit trades too early, losing all your profits by chasing the markets to catch
that last little move.
If the market could be predicted to behave in a certain way then there
would be no need for books, videos, and seminars about trading. We would
be better off learning how to read tarot cards or astrological charts. The
markets are really a microcosm of human psychology coupled with a dose
of insider trading.
With the limited knowledge afforded to the retail trader, it is difficult
to pick absolute tops and absolute bottoms. By attempting to trade within
these parameters there is a significant need for risk management as opposed to money management in order to protect yourself from the unknown.
The weakness of the majority of swing trading is the belief that stop
losses or risking only 2 percent is sufficient risk management. This could
not be further from the truth. While less demanding in actual face time in
front of the trading screen, swing trading requires a lot of preparation time
to detemline entry, profit, and loss exits. This preparation time is essential
in order to set i trade and forget it. A lack of preparation time along with
an insufficient risk plan leads many swing traders to give up.

Position Trader
A position trader (trend trader) is defined as "a trader who attempts to
capture gains through the analysis of an asset's momentum in a particular
direction." What these position traders are looking to do is to make the big
bucks, no matter what the day-to-day fluctuations may be. This is similar
to buying and holding stocks. The belief is that there are only two ways
to make money in the markets: either you can afford to make quick sniper
attacks or you catch a trend at its beginning and hold on.

52

DESIGNING THE TRADE

There is sound logic in wanting to be a position trader, particularly in
the current commodity bull market. The euro has increased from .89 cents
to breaking over $1.50. If you had traded a euro futures contract you would
have made $76,250; if you had held onto a euro spot trade you would have
made $61,000. The same thing has happened with crude oil. Crude oil, has
gone from a price of $12lbarrel to breaking over $100lbarrel. A position
trader that caught that entire move would have made $88,000.
Position trading can have great rewards, as the above examples can
attest to. The core problem with position trading is that only with 20/20
hindsight can we see the actual result of buying and holding. During the
wild fluctuations of the markets' movements it becomes difficult to maintain a conviction. Long or short, position trading can be unnerving at times.
Rarely does a market simply move straight up or straight down. The
peaks and valleys along the way give the illusion that a trend has stopped or
a move is reversing itself, only to have it resume unexpectedly. While on the
surface these moves may not amount to much more than a few percentage
points here and there, the margin leverage makes it difficult to hold onto
trades for the long haul. For example, if you trade a market with a 10 to 1
leverage, a 4 percent move against you is the equivalent of a 40 percent loss.
What trader would willingly give up 40 percent gains in order to make
just 10 percent? None in their right mind, but that is what is asked of the
position trader time and time again. By not knowing if the particular market they are trading has reached its plateau, a position trader must be
willing to give up what he has for the possibility of gaining more. This
simple fact makes it difficult for small retail traders to be both psychologically and financially prepared to properly hold onto trades for the long
haul, even if they know that the market will continue in the direction
they expect.
