
In the Womb

111

threat: competition and jealousy. Liz Cheval addressed the rivalry head
on when she declared, “At the end of the day, the numbers are there in
black and white. Either you made money or you didn’t.” 7
The Turtles would soon learn that trading for Dennis over the fouryear life of the program was more complicated then the black-andwhite world described by Cheval. The Turtle trading experiment was
about to become an experiment inside an experiment, with newly conﬁdent Turtles just as quickly burdened with self-doubt.

7
Who Got What to Trade
“It’s interesting where the truth ultimately ends up. What you read
on the front of the newspaper and what really happens can often
be the difference between black and white.”
Anonymous Turtle in interview

When the Turtles ﬁrst started working together the atmosphere was
pretty carefree. After all, they had been selected and trained by the trading king of Chicago. But their complacency was short lived. In just a
few months they became the equivalent of insecure earthlings being
analyzed from afar—just like in an old Twilight Zone episode. The
initial experiment of nature versus nurture was one thing, but now
there was another experiment underway, intentional or not.
Money was mother’s milk in a Turtle’s world. Since without Dennis’s
money to trade, there would be no Turtle program. But soon the Turtles learned that there was little rhyme or reason when it came to how
much money each of them got from Dennis to trade. This was no small
matter; it made the difference between making millions or not. Again,
the movie Trading Places comes to mind, with the scene in which Billy
Ray exclaimed, “The whole thing was an experiment, fool! And you
and me were the guinea pigs! They made a bet over what would happen to us!” 1
Sam DeNardo, a ﬁrst-year-class Turtle, who received a $1 million
allocation from Dennis but rationalized away the smaller amounts
given to second-year-class Turtles. He thought Dennis ﬁgured he didn’t
need to risk as much with the second-year class: “He started those guys
up with different amounts. It would have been nice to know at the time
how fast he wanted us to go, how aggressive, or how conservative. I
think that was part of what he was trying to discover.”
The outside world was hearing that the Turtles had it made in the

114

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

shade, but behind the scenes Dennis was making unequal allocations
to his students. His action created tension within the ranks, but no one
was about to complain openly. After all, they, were making more money
than they ever had before. Yet being a Turtle was clearly a doubleedged sword.
Jeff Gordon, discerned overall friction before allocations even became an issue. He saw some people in the Turtle program as being
there only because of a previous acquaintance with Dennis, while others were hired through the ad. Dennis referred to the people who had
had a connection with him as a “control group.” Gordon said, “They
were just chosen for other reasons.”
Gordon and several other traders thought the people like him (those
who had been hired and screened from the want ads) were superior
traders. Dennis thought there was no difference. This was small potatoes to the real ofﬁce tension to come.
With different amounts of money being allocated, the Turtles started
to earn wildly different amounts. Mike Cavallo, for example, was one
of the early leaders. He described everyone as doing well initially, but
said that then in the spring of 1984 they all got crushed.
At that point, midyear, when the Turtles in the ﬁrst class were all in
the red, Dennis came in and said that they were all trading well. He
then increased their equity. This made no sense to the Turtles. They
were shocked. They were down big, and Dennis was going to give them
more money?
Cavallo could not believe it: “I might have thought he’d say, ‘Well, I
think the program has been a failure. I’m going to close you down.’
Instead, he increased equity especially for a few of us that he thought
who were trading the best. I was one [along with] Curt [Faith] and Howard [Seidler]. I guess we were trading the best at that time.” The word
“best” made little sense when comparing Turtle performance data (see
Appendix). They were all going up and down as a group in general.
Over time, however, the ones who perceived unfairness in the disparate allocations became frustrated. Erle Keefer said some Turtles spoke
up vociferously about the allocation of money. He recalled, “You’ve got
guys like Curt Faith and Mike Cavallo who go down to minus 50 percent, minus 70 percent and not only are they given a reload, but they’re
given even more money.”

Who Got What to Trade

115

They all sat in the classroom together. They all learned the same
rules. They then went to the ofﬁce together and initially all received
the same amount of money to trade. Almost out of the gate everyone
started to lose, but some of the biggest losers were given even more
money to trade.
Many Turtles thought Dennis was subjectively guessing who was
going to be a great trader, as opposed to letting the actual trading results
dictate greatness. The rub for many was that Dennis and Eckhardt always argued that trading should be based on true logic. Now some saw
Dennis allocating money in a “losing game” fashion, meaning they
could not understand why he was not using the scientiﬁc method in
his trading allocations just the way he had taught the Turtles to do in
their trading.
More and more frustration boiled over at how herky-jerky the allocation process had become. In 1986, for example, the money management business as a whole had a very difﬁcult year. Jeff Gordon was
quick to point out his success: “I produced plus 65 percent that year
without a double-digit drawdown.”
How did Dennis reward Gordon in terms of an allocation for the
next year? Dennis decreased his allocation and his incentive fee. It
seemed to resemble a science experiment: “Add acid to base and note
the reaction.” However, it was Dennis’s game, and he alone had the
right to make the rules.
Gordon was frank about his ultimate difference of opinion with
Dennis and the eventual outcome: “He didn’t like my risk control.
Well, he was the guy making the decisions. Did I appreciate that? No,
because I knew how I had done. On a reward-to-risk basis I was wiping
everybody else out.” Dennis’s act of lowering Gordon’s incentive fee,
which no matter his allocation meant less proﬁt, was not interpreted
well: “After that I wasn’t terribly enthusiastic about remaining in the
Turtle program. I wasn’t providing Rich what he wanted. I left the program in July of 1987.”
But Gordon had a problem, however. Like all Turtles, he had signed
a contract to trade exclusively for Dennis for ﬁve years. If he quit the
program, he could not trade for others. Gordon knew what he was up
against. “You didn’t want to get into a lawsuit with somebody who has
$200 million,” he said.

116

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

Dennis did not care whether Gordon had a “decent” risk-adjusted
return. Dennis wanted big rewards—absolute returns. It is not surprising that Dennis cut Gordon prematurely. Given Dennis’s strong philosophical underpinnings (“follow my rules”), and given the fact that
Dennis and Gordon had political differences (Gordon supported Hart
in the 1984 presidential race, not Mondale), this appeared to be as
much about butting heads as about making money.
But Gordon was not alone. Echoing similar concerns, Jim DiMaria
addressed allocations as well: “I think the ﬁrst year [Turtles] were all
given the million-dollar trading limits to start. Then in the second year,
there were eight of us. I think three were given a million, two were
given $600,000, and three were given $300,000. I was one of the
$300,000 ones, which is ﬁne. It was still a job. I was a little surprised,
but we did get a draw.”
Dennis and Eckhardt matched DiMaria’s prior $18,000 salary, but
the Turtle allocation process was a mystery. DiMaria said, “Everyone
sort of believed in ‘the market is never wrong’ and ‘technical versus
fundamental,’ but then when the money distribution went out, it was
like there was no correlation between who got the money and what the
performance was.”
DiMaria was at the bottom in equity and near the top in performance. That type of discrepancy continued throughout the whole program. Adding fuel to that ﬁre was the common knowledge that, one
turtle was soon getting twenty times what others got.
It bears repeating: The Turtles all had the same rules and the same
training. At the same time their earnings were based on an incentive
structure tied to their total account value, and some Turtles were trading millions while some were trading thousands. That’s a formula for
internal strife. Conversation after conversation regarding allocations
peeled away the rivalries and ill will below the surface.
As time marched on under Dennis’s roof, it became apparent that the
one Turtle who got the largest allocation of all was purportedly not following Dennis’s rules as taught. Almost every Turtle brought all discussions back to Curtis Faith, who had perhaps half the money in the
program at one point. DiMaria was blunt: “His trading was pretty erratic.
He’d have great months, but he took enormous risks to get there.”
In 1989, the Wall Street Journal described Curtis Faith as “the most

Who Got What to Trade

117

successful Turtle.” The article included a chart showing the performance numbers of fourteen Turtles, but conspicuously absent from the
chart were Faith’s performance numbers. Only in the text of the article
was there mention of “trading records” showing that Faith made about
$31.5 million in proﬁts during the Turtle program.2
However, if you look at the big picture this headline was problematic. If Faith was trading the most money, and hence earning the most
from incentive fees, then the Wall Street Journal was in severe error by
saying he was the most “successful” Turtle. To appreciate the imbalance between Faith and the other Turtles, consider an example: Trader
“John” is given $20 million to trade and trader “Mary” is given $20,000
to trade. They both get a 15 percent incentive fee and both produce
plus 50 percent returns. It can’t be said with a straight face that John is
unilaterally more successful.
During research, I found a chat forum posting with what appeared
to be an inside view of the Turtles’ allocations. The post reiterated the
$31.5 million that Faith purportedly made, but also said that the entire
Turtle group “made around $100 million.” This chat forum posting
emphasized that Faith had made 30 percent of the total. It concluded
with faulty logic, “What Jerry Parker made 5 years later trading a much
larger equity base is not relevant.”
That posting conveniently left out the critical fact that Faith was
trading upward of twenty times the equity base of other Turtles. In other
words, Faith made more because he was trading more. But there are no
performance numbers demonstrating that he was the best-performing
Turtle.
However, as long as the risk Faith was taking was within the parameters, this was not considered a big deal. DiMaria was quick to correct
that view: “No, not within the parameters. That was sort of the standing
joke. There were parameters and then there were Curtis parameters.
He just got to do whatever he wanted. It’s as if the whole thing was decided on ‘who knows what?’ criteria. Who were going to be the good
traders and who weren’t? And returns be damned. It was totally fundamental. It was, ‘Mike Cavallo, he’s like the smartest guy in the program. We got to give him a lot of money.’ I was at the other end of the
spectrum. Maybe because I was a control person and they thought I
wasn’t going to be anything.”

118

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

Faith saw it differently, saying there was a certain amount of variability when they were taught the S1 and S2 trading systems. He saw
his subjective choices as key to his success. Faith was also the most
openly competitive in his public statements about his experience. It
could be that when Faith said he wanted to beat everyone in the room,
he was motivated by his lack of a college degree (Jehovah’s witnesses do
not advocate college as part of their religions practice). Or he simply
may have had a healthy “I will show them” chip on his shoulder.
At ﬁrst blush, DiMaria’s initial comments could have been “sour
grapes.” However, they weren’t made purely out of self-interest; he saw
other Turtles getting the short end of the allocation stick. He said,
“George Svoboda was an absolute genius and probably had the potential to be the best trader of all and might be.” However, as the program
went on, many Turtles saw that the correlation between trading success
and the amount of money they were given by Dennis as not very good.
Yet DiMaria added, “I think at the end of the ﬁrst year I was one of
the top performers, if not the top performer. My bonus was like $10,000
when other people were getting $600,000. I had a kid and all and it was
tough. It was very, very difﬁcult.”
Twenty years later, the regret of not being given the opportunity to
trade a larger account for Dennis still comes across in DiMaria’s voice.
There was a touch of Rodney Dangerﬁeld’s “no respect.” However, it is
worth noting that today DiMaria has a continuous month-by-month
track record dating back to 1988. That’s a twenty year track record in
stark contrast to Faith’s lack of performance numbers over the last
20 years.
While many Turtles like DiMaria thought Dennis was playing favorites, Mike Cavallo bluntly disagreed. He thought allocations were all
performance driven. In 1984, Dennis decided that trading grains wasn’t
worth his time anymore. He gave those grain accounts to Howard
Seidler, Faith, and Cavallo to trade.
Talk about even more tension. Everyone in the room knew about
these grain accounts. They all knew they created the potential for trading much larger, with the chance to earn much more through incentive fees. Cavallo agreed: “I would say, sure there was some jealousy. I
think it’s just human nature. People are in this great job that’s so much
better than anything they’ve ever done, so much fun, and so lucrative,

Who Got What to Trade

119

and who are now making six-ﬁgure incomes for the ﬁrst time, get jealous of the people making seven-ﬁgure incomes.”
Although no one knew to the penny what other Turtles were making, it was obvious some were trading much more money than others.
Everyone was worth basically the same when the Turtles started. Then,
within eighteen months to two years, a few Turtles were millionaires
and many were not, but all the while everyone was generating very
similar returns. This was tension personiﬁed.
Cavallo also saw more than just allocation issues at play. He witnessed some Turtles who were less conﬁdent in their trading. There
were Turtles actually imitating other Turtles. He saw a few trying to
piggyback others’ trading orders.
However, in the end, it all kept coming back to allocations. For instance Jerry Parker was not happy about being allocated such a small
amount either. Parker thought he was trading just as well as the Turtles
who were getting the big allocations. The performance numbers support that. At one point in 1986, Parker was trading $4.2 million for
Dennis. Then, in 1987, he was trading $1.4 million. Parker made plus
124 percent for 1986 and plus 36 percent for 1987.
Erle Keefer said that politics was the reason why Parker received
smaller allocations from Dennis. Keefer said that Parker believed that,
too. He said, “Jeff Gordon and Jerry are the political polar opposites of
Rich. Jerry was about the biggest polar [opposite].”
Dennis was giving positive reinforcement in the form of larger allocations not only to Turtles who were willing to take bigger risks, but also
apparently to those with whom he had become closer friends. Parker
was a Republican. Obviously, he wasn’t Dennis’s favorite Turtle.
Parker may have been the ﬁrst Turtle hired, but Dennis was still a
human being. Keefer added, “He still had his favorites. Curt was a favorite. Mike Cavallo was a favorite. Then you look at some other people and you say, ‘Why did they get less money?’ Maybe they just didn’t
want to pull the trigger on big numbers?”
Parker was by no means the only Turtle whose allocation was cut
back after big performance runs. Many other Turtles with seriously
eye-popping performance had their money under management
slashed. Liz Cheval, Paul Rabar, and Mike Carr all had their allocations cut.

120

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

The fear of not knowing what to expect next was a constant in the
Turtles lives. Turtles would get calls without explanation to increase or
decrease 20 percent of their account size. They scratched their heads,
wondering what was going on. Some Turtles joked that perhaps they
were in a cruel psychological experiment. Others seriously considered
the possibility that they were being ﬁlmed like Jim Carrey in the Truman Show.
Mike Cavallo, who viewed the allocation process as a meritocracy,
did end up having some questions, too. He thought Dennis was partly
awarding trading aggressiveness, placing bigger bets with Turtles he
thought were trading better, but even Cavallo could not understand
Dennis’s decision-making logic when it came to Faith. He said, “It
seemed like Curt was trading too aggressively and too riskily and yet
was getting rewarded for it. He was making the most, although probably not on a risk-adjusted basis. So at the time, it was just sort of puzzling. I’m not particularly a jealous person, so I wasn’t too worried
about it.”
Cavallo knew Dennis had become very successful as a very young
man by taking big risks. The implication was that Faith was Dennis’s
chosen one. Others said the C&D brain trust were enamored with the
fact that Faith was so young.
It become increasingly apparent that the whole subject of allocations issues was just an entry into the central sticky issue of the program: favoritism. The disparity began almost out of the gate. There was
a heating oil trade only weeks after the Turtles’ initial training in 1984.
The Turtles were supposed to be trading much smaller sizes. They
were supposed to be trading “one lots” or just one futures contract.
Faith apparently traded much larger and made more money than all
of the other Turtles. Cavallo thought Faith had exceeded what they
were allowed to trade, but he also thought an arguably reckless or “go
for the jugular” attitude may have elevated him in Dennis’s eyes.
It kept coming across loud and clear from assorted Turtles: Faith’s
trading didn’t reﬂect what they’d been taught. Cavallo, the Harvard
MBA, was brutally honest: “It wasn’t at all what we were taught. In fact,
you could say it was slightly counter to what we were taught.” Even
though Cavallo was making millions and was easily considered a topgrossing Turtle at the time, the fact that Dennis gave more and more

Who Got What to Trade

121

money to Faith perplexed him. Cavallo had no ax to grind in talking
about Faith. In fact, years later he served on the board of directors of a
ﬁrm Faith had started.
Why was Cavallo concerned about Faith’s style of trading? He worried that Faith was risking so much that he could ultimately be ruined
(as in mathematical risk of ruin). From that ﬁrst day of class Eckhardt
had pressed home the point of managing risk, but many Turtles saw it
almost immediately being ignored by one of their own.
DiMaria, who was only eighteen months older than Faith, saw everyone playing by the rules during the program except Faith. He said,
“That would go to position sizing, markets traded . . . he was the special boy wonder. So he could do things that the rest of us couldn’t. He
probably doesn’t realize that. Did he have special rules ahead of
the game, or did he change the game and then ask if those new rules
were okay?”
Jeff Gordon was the ﬁrst to broach Faith’s religion. He said, “Curtis
was a Jehovah’s Witness. A person of faith, a religious person, someone
who you’d think would have morals. I am not saying that Curtis does
not have morals or religious convictions. But when it came to handling
Richard Dennis’s money, Curt could have cared less if he lost it all.
That’s how he conducted himself. The fact of the matter is, in retrospect that appears to be what Rich wanted. Rich wanted people who
would be really aggressive.”
The most remembered and controversial trade in the program
was that 1984 heating oil trade. All the Turtles were trading $100,000
in the ﬁrst month, and Faith made much more money pyramiding
than the others. Dennis loved it. Gordon was shocked: “It was actually
kind of strange because Curtis started getting personal calls from Rich,
and he would come in the morning and say, ‘Hello, well Rich and I
were talking last night and he said, ‘da da da.’ Nobody else was getting
these calls.”
Faith saw the 1984 heating oil trade differently, saying that he bought
three futures contracts per the rules and quickly added the maximum
twelve contracts he was allowed. Heating oil went straight up, and all
of the Turtles had big proﬁts.3
But Faith, said he saw something odd in the other Turtles’ trading.
He said he was the only Turtle to have “on” a full position. It was Faith’s

122

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

view that every single other Turtle had decided for some reason to not
trade the system as Dennis and Eckhardt had taught them. He wondered if they had even been in the same class with him.4
Because this was a very volatile trade, the price of heating oil soon
plummeted. The Turtles began to exit. Faith believed that the right
thing to do was to hold on (and not exit) as heating oil dropped. Soon
it began to rise again, surpassing the previous high. Faith was apparently the only Turtle with all twelve contracts “long.” He said, “We had
all been taught exactly the same thing but my return for January was
three times or more than the best of the other Turtles.” 5
Mike Cavallo and Russell Sands both reinforced the point that Faith
had a helping hand that other Turtles did not have. They said Dennis
guided Faith at the liquidation point on this trade. It appeared that
Faith was in a special “no fail” setup to which the other Turtles were
not privy.
Was all of this tension designed by Dennis just to see how other
Turtles would react? Or was Faith getting extra ongoing instruction
because he and Dennis had become friends?
Mike Shannon connected the dots in very human terms: “I think
some of the Turtles had different motivations for doing what they did. I
did it because I just found at the end of the day, I just truly enjoyed the
experience. You take guys like Jim Kenney and Anthony Bruck, I think
their view was a little bit more artistic. Curt Faith, on the other hand,
was driven by his father. His father was a Jehovah’s Witness and he had
to pay a tithing to the church. It was like his dad was a stage mom almost . . . [He] would come up and we’d look at this guy and some of
their beliefs are just a little bit off the wall.”
Now, Mike Shannon was no angel, but his words revealed a realworld picture of the goings-on in the ofﬁce. The bottom line: Given
the millions Faith was trading, given the clear allocation discrepancies,
given the clear discontent, this drama over allocations and extra assistance was just as much a part of being a Turtle as the rules they were
taught.
Shannon was sympathetic when he described the situation: “[Curtis] made no secret of it. Look, he wasn’t running around giving us
copies of [Jehovah’s Witness brochures] or anything bizarre like
