
thing after another would come up that I thought was nutty, but they didn’t want me to say anything. And
then the question is, do you say anything? I don’t get in fights just to get in fights.”
Buffett had been originally attracted to Gutfreund, the reserved, thoughtful man in love with his work, who
arrived every day at seven a.m., lit up the first of his huge Temple Hall Jamaican cigars, and wandered among
the shirtsleeved traders to tell them, “You’ve got to be ready to bite the ass off a bear every morning.”19
Indeed, it appeared to employees who made presentations in board meetings that Buffett was a “relatively
passive” board member.20 He seemed to understand little of the details of how the business was run, and
adjusting to a business that wasn’t literally made of bricks-and-mortar or run like an assembly line was not
easy for him. 21 Since he had made the investment in Salomon purely because of Gutfreund and now didn’t
like the way it was working out, he always had another choice, which was to sell his investment and resign
from the board.22 Wall Street boiled with rumors that Buffett and Gutfreund had had a falling out; that
Buffett was either going to sell or to fire Gutfreund and bring in someone else to run the firm.23 But it hadn’t
come to that. Someone as prominent as Buffett selling and resigning from the board as a major investor would
be a shocking gesture that would drive down Salomon’s stock price and cost his own shareholders, as well as
make him look capricious or vindictive or unreliable. By now his reputation had become part of Berkshire’s
value. Moreover, he hadn’t given up on Gutfreund. His whole reason for investing was Gutfreund, and when
Buffett threw his arms around someone, it took an ax to split them apart. Thus, as the holidays approached,
he and Gutfreund struggled uneasily to work out their differences.
Meanwhile, the high cost of 1987 was not quite over. A belated note from Katharine Graham to members of
the Buffett Group arrived two weeks before the end of the year. Some of them went into shock. She had sent
them a bill. As it turned out, they had not been her guests. Instead, they themselves had been paying for the
extravaganza in Williamsburg that Kay had put on! The total was “somewhat breathtaking,” she
acknowledged, adding, “I’m really sorry it’s so late and so much. I hope Xmas is still merry and I’m still your
friend.”24
Buffett did have a merry Christmas, but for another reason: His present to himself was Coca-Cola. It would
make up for a great deal of the unhappiness from Salomon. At a White House dinner some time earlier, he
had reconnected with his old friend Don Keough, who was now president and chief operating officer of the
company; Keough had convinced him to switch from his own concoction of Pepsi dosed with cherry syrup to
the newly introduced Cherry Coke. Buffett tried it and liked it. His family and friends were gobsmacked
when the man so famously loyal, especially to Pepsi, performed this turnaround. For years, however, KO
stock had been too expensive for Buffett to consider. Now, however, the company had gotten into trouble, its
bottlers locked in a fierce price war with Pepsi that had taken the price of Coke down to around $38 a share.
Rumor said that it had become a takeover target of the dreaded Perelman, and the company was buying back
its own stock. Although still expensive, it had the same quality of a great brand under duress as American
Express had had earlier.
The way Warren looked at it, Coca-Cola was no cigar butt, yet it was pouring forth a waterfall of cash, and
spending only a small portion of that to operate. Its cash flow each year had value; that was something he
could quantify in his head. Since he had studied the company for years, he knew how much money it had
made in the past and he could make a sensible judgment of how much Coca-Cola’s businesses were going to
grow for many years in the future.25 Adding up those estimates of cash flow year after year gave him an
ultimate value.
Predicting the company’s prospects many years from now wasn’t a precise science, however. Buffett applied
a margin of safety to his estimates. He did this simply by taking a whack at the number, rather than using
some complicated model or formula. He used no computers or spreadsheets in doing any of these
calculations; if the answer didn’t hit him over the head like a caveman’s club, in his view, the investment
wasn’t worth making.
After the estimate came the decision. He had to compare what Coca-Cola would ultimately be worth as a
business—the bird in the bush—to the bird in the hand, which was Berkshire’s cash. Simply by investing the

cash in government bonds that had no risk of losing money, Berkshire could earn a certain amount over that
same period. He compared the two. By that yardstick, Coca-Cola was a beauty, and in fact, there wasn’t any
other stock he knew of that stacked up better. Buffett started buying it.
When Coca-Cola products turned up at Buffett’s shareholder meeting in 1988, Berkshire shareholders began
swigging Coke in imitation of him. They had no idea that, through Berkshire, they also owned the stock. The
meeting took on a whole new tenor that year when a thousand people showed up at the Joslyn Art Museum
auditorium. This was the year that the Frozen Corporation, no longer a quasi-partnership, officially joined
big-time corporate America and listed itself on the New York Stock Exchange. The Berkshire meeting had to
be delayed because so many people showed up that shareholders were having trouble finding parking spots.
Buffett had an inspiration. He rented two school buses and persuaded a few hundred shareholders to follow
him after the meeting, like the Pied Piper of commerce, to the Nebraska Furniture Mart. Part of the appeal
was the chance to meet the indomitable Mrs. B, about whom Buffett had been writing and talking for five
years. The shareholders were so charmed by the tiny tank of a woman perched on her electric cart in the
carpet department—and by her prices—that they spent $57,000.26
By year’s end, the shareholders still did not know that Berkshire had purchased more than fourteen million
shares of KO at a cost of almost $600 million.27 Because his every action now moved markets, Buffett had
gotten special dispensation from the SEC not to disclose his trades for a year. He was buying so much KO
stock and the company itself was repurchasing so much that, rather than compete against each other and bid
up the price, “they would buy half and Buffett would buy half” of the daily trading volume, according to
Walter Schloss.28 Berkshire soon owned more than six percent of the company, worth $1.2 billion.29 In
March 1989, when his position was revealed, the resulting hullaballoo caused so much demand that the New
York Stock Exchange had to stop trading the stock to keep the price from skyrocketing out of control.
Coca-Cola’s CEO, Roberto Goizueta, had glowed with delight at the famous investor’s endorsement. He
asked Buffett to join his board, possibly the most prestigious in North America. Buffett had accepted with
alacrity, steeped himself in all things Coca-Cola, and met a number of new people who were fellow board
members, including Herbert Allen, the blunt-spoken, straight-shooting chairman of Allen & Co. The two
became allies. Allen invited the Buffetts to his Sun Valley conference, which was emerging as the
quintessential elephant-bump for corporate CEOs. At Sun Valley, investors, Hollywood, and media moguls
met to mingle and play every July.
Buffett knew this meant adding a new annual event to his calendar, but Sun Valley was important and he
wanted to attend. Moreover, he now had the means to arrive in style. In keeping with his rising stature as a
member of the CEO Club, he had just swapped the used Falcon for a fancy new Challenger jet that cost
nearly $7 million. He revealed the airplane—which he had dubbed the Indefensible— in his shareholder
letter, making sport of himself with St. Augustine’s prayer: “Help me, oh Lord, to become chaste—but not
yet.” He would soon write his shareholders that he wanted to be buried in the jet.
On his way to the airport to fly to Sun Valley, Buffett visited his sister-in-law Dottie in the hospital. Frail,
twig-thin, a longtime alcoholic, Susie’s sister had contracted a severe case of Guillain-Barré syndrome, an
autoimmune disorder of unknown origin and sudden onset that can cause almost total paralysis of the nervous
system, including the respiratory system and other organs. Dottie was in a coma. She was so debilitated that
her doctors recommended discontinuing treatment and letting nature take its course.
Susie, distraught, refused to allow this. She remained in Omaha throughout the summer and fall to nurse
Dottie, who underwent a slow and arduous process of extensive care and physical therapy. Since Susie was in
Omaha for an extended stay, she had taken an apartment in Dottie’s building, across the hall from her sister.
While there, she helped Howie campaign for Douglas County commissioner, an office that governed Omaha
and its environs. He was running as a pro-choice Republican, in a race where being Republican helped and
being pro-choice didn’t hurt. Buffett had chosen not to back his son financially, once again confounding the
perception that a rich man’s son had plenty of cash, so Howie had to raise his own funds. But Susie stuffed
envelopes and attended fund-raisers, covering herself with campaign buttons and showing her break-front
smile everywhere, in order to put the family imprimatur behind her son. Her presence made everything

easier.30 When Howie won the race, Buffett was exceptionally pleased. Farming had never resonated with
him; politics made his heart race. He felt that Howie was starting to mature and detected the stirrings of
ambition in his son. The Buffetts began to talk of Howie’s running for Howard’s old seat in the second
Congressional district.
While Peter remained in San Francisco, two of Buffett’s three children were now nearby—the two who had
always wanted his attention the most. Susie Jr. had recently moved back to Omaha following the birth of her
second child, Michael, after mentioning to her father—without telling her husband—that Allen wanted to run
the Buffett Foundation, which needed professional management after undergoing a strategic reorganization
under the direction of family friend and activist Shirley Smith. Warren seized this chance by the throat. It not
only brought his daughter home but also looped Big Susie closer to him.
Having his daughter around pleased Warren in another way. Susie Jr. shared her mother’s caretaking quality,
although packaged in a more businesslike style. He would now have two women in Omaha to look after him.
More women to look after him was something that he had always rationalized. “Women don’t mind taking
care of themselves,” he said. “Men mind taking care of themselves. I think women understand men better
than men understand women. I’ll eat asparagus before I give up women.” His desire to be taken care of by
women was so overwhelming that he mostly left it up to the women to settle any differences in their hell-bent
desire to do what, in each of their opinions, was in his best interest. Susie Jr. and Astrid began to work out
their respective roles.
The network of connections he had forged now brought Buffett a business that would certainly put him in
favor with all his women—Borsheim’s, an Omaha jewelry store. Louis Friedman, the brother-in-law of Mrs.
B, had founded this company, which carried high-and mid-range merchandise at discount prices. Buffett had
learned how strongly women preferred jewelry to clothes, no matter how well clothing “held its value.” The
person most likely to be pleased by this purchase was Big Susie, who had been assembling an impressive
collection of jewelry given by her contrite husband. Susie Jr. also appreciated jewelry, as did Warren’s sisters
and Kay Graham. The only one not that interested in jewelry was Astrid, who was uncomfortable with
expensive things, though if he gave her jewelry, she certainly wouldn’t turn it down.
So Warren’s Christmas shopping for the women in his life was simplified in 1989. He worked out a system:
earrings, pearls, watches, everybody would get a variation on some theme each year. But he himself got
nothing to equal the hefty chunk of Coca-Cola that he’d bought so happily the year before. Worse still, he
got a lump of coal in his stocking in the form of a new book, Liar’s Poker, written by former Salomon bond
salesman Michael Lewis. Named after a bluffing game that traders played using the serial numbers on dollar
bills, the book captured Salomon’s swaggering, innovative, energetic culture and how it had begun to break
down in 1986 and 1987. Liar’s Poker turned into a whopping bestseller; it depicted the firm’s eccentricities
so memorably that Salomon would never again live down its reputation as a sort of zoo for the most
aggressive and uncouth people on Wall Street.31 The end of the 1980s takeover boom was another problem
for Buffett, for while he was still arbitraging announced deals, his usual feeding territory was empty. With no
great businesses to buy, Buffett once again lowered his standards as he had when buying Hochschild-Kohn.
The lure this time was other CEOs, who, fearing for their jobs or their autonomy, began to offer him more
special deals to invest. For Berkshire, he bought three apparently lucrative “convertible preferred” stocks, all
structured along the lines of the Salomon deal, paying him on average nine percent, which gave him a floor
on his return while also giving him the right to convert in case the companies did well. Each of these
companies was quite different. Champion, a poorly managed paper business, was thought to be “in play”
among takeover artists.32 Gillette, a business with a huge “moat” around its brand—like See’s Candies,
invulnerable to competition—was being temporarily shunned by investors. And Pittsburgh-based US Air,
formerly called Allegheny Airlines, a weak regional player in a newly deregulated industry, was also “in
play.”
Like the Salomon preferred stock, the terms of these special deals meant that critics suddenly viewed Buffett
as protecting the interests of entrenched CEOs. It was of course in the interest of his own shareholders to
maximize their returns while protecting them from risk, but Buffett now looked like one of those boardroom

insiders who depended on special deals to get ahead.
In the age of the buyout funds and corporate raiders, this level of greed was chump change. Buffett could
have easily been a buyout king himself. But what his determination to stay friendly and on the side of
management did make clear was that he was now one of the guys at the country club. Ben Graham had
always felt that if someone traded in stocks, this necessarily made him an outsider—because he had to be
willing to displease a company’s management. Buffett, who wanted to be liked by everyone, had been trying
to bridge that gap since his earliest investing days when he became friends with Lorimer Davidson at GEICO.
Now, “Many Wall Street investors say Mr. Buffett’s special deals amount to a kind of gentlemanly protection
game,” said one news story.33
In the end, what looked like sweetheart deals turned out to be no more than finely handicapped bets. Only
Gillette turned into a winner, ultimately earning Berkshire $5.5 billion. US Air was the worst. Buffett had
made a number of remarks over the years about the stupidity of investing in things with wings. Then the
company suspended its dividend and, like Cleveland’s Worst Mill, the stock plunged. “That was the dumbest
fucking thing, going into that deal!” one friend exploded. “What the hell are you guys doing? You violated
every one of your principles!”34 Buffett would later agree, saying, “As soon as the check cleared, the
company went into the red and never came out. I have an 800 number I call and say, ‘My name is Warren
Buffett and I’m an Air-aholic.”35 Charlie Munger’s dry comment was, “Warren didn’t call me on that one.”
Salomon, the model for these deals, was also not doing well. After the crash and the near-escape from
Perelman, the merger business had been slow to get back on its feet, and talented bankers left for elsewhere.
Gutfreund had restructured the firm once again in another round of layoffs. But the managing directors no
longer feared him. “People kept threatening John and he would try to buy them,” said one vice chairman. At
first the firm had three, then seven vice chairmen. “Honk if you’re a vice chairman” became a joke around
The Room.
Already fragmented into disparate power bases, Salomon now evolved into a system of warlords: a
corporate-bond warlord, a government-bond warlord, a mortgage-bond warlord, an equities warlord.36
One ruled above them all: the warlord of bond arbitrage, a soft-spoken, brilliant mathematician, the fortyyear-old John Meriwether. The shy, self-effacing “J.M.,” a former PhD candidate, expressed his outsize
ambitions through a team of professors he had lured with Wall Street salaries from schools like Harvard and
MIT. These “arb boys” hunched protectively over their computers, fiddling with mathematical models
portraying the bond universe, an oasis of intellect amid the belching, sweating traders, who more often swung
from their gut. Like handicappers assembling the financial version of the Daily Racing Form, the arbs were
launching a revolution in the bond business, and the edge their computer tip sheet gave them against the rest
of the suckers produced most of Salomon’s profits. They lived inside Meriwether’s little bubble on the trading
floor and felt they had earned their arrogance. J.M. was enormously forgiving of mistakes but relentless
toward anyone he considered stupid, and the arbs were his personally chosen elite. He had a deeply complex
personal relationship with his team, and spent nearly all his time with them, engaging in one of his three
obsessions: work, gambling, and golf. Many an evening after the markets closed the arbs sat together, playing
liar’s poker to hone their handicapping skills.37 The boyish-looking, blank-faced Meriwether usually won.
Despite his passivity and limited influence as a board member, Buffett certainly understood arbitrage. But the
board’s knowledge of Salomon’s business details went only so far, and Buffett did not understand computers,
which were becoming important to every business and intrinsic to the new Wall Street. He did know,
however, that he was now a director of a corporation that was utterly dependent on computers, and he had
certainly figured out that computers increased risk. He once visited Mark Byrne, the son of Jack Byrne, who
traded foreign exchange options for Salomon.
“Mark was bright and young, and he had a computer in his home so he could trade all the time. He had it
rigged so that if the Japanese yen moved more than a certain amount, it rang a bell or something and woke
him up in the middle of the night.

“I said to Mark, ‘Now let me get this straight. You’ve got this computer here, and at three in the morning,
after you’ve been doing who knows what—we won’t even ask—until one or two in the morning, you’re
asleep, and this bell rings. And you get up and stagger over to the computer, and you see that the yen-dollar
relationship is such-and-such.
“‘Tell me, is there any limit to what you can punch in to the computer in terms of the size of the trade that
you’d do? Does the computer rebel if you make a mistake?’
“And he said, ‘No, I can type whatever I want.’
“‘So,’ I said. ‘Well. If you’ve had a little too much to drink, and you punch three extra zeroes in there by
mistake, is the firm committed? Does it have to follow through with the trade?’
“And he said, ‘Yeah.’
“So I had these nightmares of this guy, at three in the morning, maybe with a girl still in the bed or
something, going over there in a daze and sort of punching something into the computer in the middle of the
night and then staggering back to bed. And finding out the next morning that instead of a trillion yen, he’d
put in a quadrillion yen.”
To Buffett, it was obvious that the combination of fallible human beings and judgment-free computers in a
completely unmonitored, unsupervised environment, meant an almost unlimited potential for things to go
wildly out of control. But as a board member, he lacked authority to make changes and could only try
persuasion. By now he and Munger had wrangled repeatedly—and unsuccessfully—with Salomon’s
management. Munger had taken over the audit committee—which had not formerly been a bastion of zealous
oversight—and put it through six-and seven-hour dissections of the firm and its accountants. Munger
discovered that Salomon’s derivatives business had grown immensely, using trades for which no ready
market existed. The trades would not settle for long periods, sometimes years. With minimal cash changing
hands, the derivatives were valued on Salomon’s books using a model.38 Since the model was created by
those whose bonuses it would determine, not surprisingly the models usually showed the trades were quite
profitable. As much as $20 million of profits had been overstated through such accounting mismarks.39 The
audit committee, however, addressed only trades and deals already approved, and usually completed. The
real oversight took place before the fact.
There, in the one area in which Buffett and Munger unequivocally had more skill than anyone else—making
investments—they weighed in loudest of all—and were ignored. Their protestations only alienated them from
the employees. In one example, Salomon’s Phibro unit had formed a joint venture with a seven-year-old
Houston company, Anglo-Suisse, to build oil fields in West Siberia, south of the Arctic Circle, that would
supposedly revolutionize oil production in Russia. The White Nights venture brought peace offerings to
Russia, among them a recreation center, food, and clothing, all flown over from the United States.
“Anglo-Suisse,” Munger said when the idea was floated. “This is an idiotic idea. There are no Anglos and no
Swiss involved in this company. The name alone is reason not to get involved.”
But Salomon put $116 million into the joint venture anyway, thinking that oil was going to be integral to
Russia’s future and that Western capital was needed to extract the oil. But, while “the country isn’t going to
go away,” as Buffett said, and “the oil isn’t going to go away,” the Russian political system could go away.
No margin of safety could cover that.40
Sure enough, as soon as the White Nights joint venture got going, the Russian government began toying with
a tax on oil exports. The tax nearly wiped out White Nights’s profit. Then the volume of oil production
proved disappointing. Russian nabobs flew to the United States and expected to be entertained with
prostitutes. The Russian government was unpredictable and uncooperative, resulting in setbacks from start to
finish. Somebody was going to make a lot of money from oil in Russia, but it wasn’t going to be Salomon Inc.
