
In the Annual Register for 1760, an instance of the belief in witchcraft is related, which
shows how superstition lingers. A dispute arose in the little village of Glen, in
Leicestershire, between two old women, each of whom vehemently accused the other of
witchcraft. The quarrel at last ran so high that a challenge ensued, and they both agreed to
be tried by the ordeal of swimming. They accordingly stripped to their shifts -- procured
some men, who tied their thumbs and great toes together, cross-wise, and then, with a
cart-rope about their middle, suffered themselves to be thrown into a pool of water. One
of them sank immediately, but the other continued struggling a short time upon the
surface of the water, which the mob deeming an infallible sign of her guilt, pulled her
out, and insisted that she should immediately impeach all her accomplices in the craft.
She accordingly told them that, in the neighbouring village of Burton, there were several
old women as "much witches as she was." Happily for her, this negative information was
deemed sufficient, and a student in astrology, or "white-witch," coming up at the time,
the mob, by his direction, proceeded forthwith to Burton in search of all the delinquents.
After a little consultation on their arrival, they went to the old woman's house on whom
they had fixed the strongest suspicion. The poor old creature on their approach locked the
outer door, and from the window of an upstairs room asked what they wanted. They
informed her that she was charged with being guilty of witchcraft, and that they were
come to duck her; remonstrating with her at the same time upon the necessity of
submission to the ordeal, that, if she were innocent, all the world might know it. Upon her
persisting in a positive refusal to come down, they broke open the door and carried her
out by force, to a deep gravel-pit full of water. They tied her thumbs and toes together
and threw her into the water, where they kept her for several minutes, drawing her out
and in two or three times by the rope round her middle. Not being able to satisfy
themselves whether she were a witch or no, they at last let her go, or, more properly
speaking, they left her on the bank to walk home by herself, if she ever recovered. Next
day, they tried the same experiment upon another woman, and afterwards upon a third;
but, fortunately, neither of the victims lost her life from this brutality. Many of the
ringleaders in the outrage were apprehended during the week, and tried before the justices
at quarter-sessions. Two of them were sentenced to stand in the pillory and to be
imprisoned for a month; and as many as twenty more were fined in small sums for the
assault, and bound over to keep the peace for a twelvemonth.
"So late as the year 1785," says Arnot, in his collection and abridgment of Criminal
Trials in Scotland, "it was the custom among the sect of Seceders to read from the pulpit
an annual confession of sins, national and personal; amongst the former of which was
particularly mentioned the 'Repeal by Parliament of the penal statute against witches,
contrary to the express laws of God.'"
Many houses are still to be found in England with the horse-shoe (the grand preservative
against witchcraft) nailed against the threshold. If any over-wise philosopher should
attempt to remove them, the chances are that he would have more broken bones than
thanks for his interference. Let any man walk into Cross-street, Hatton-Garden, and from
thence into Bleeding-heart Yard, and learn the tales still told and believed of one house in
that neighbourhood, and he will ask himself in astonishment if such things can be in the

nineteenth century. The witchcraft of Lady Hatton, the wife of the famous Sir
Christopher, so renowned for his elegant dancing in the days of Elizabeth, is as devoutly
believed as the Gospels. The room is to be seen where the devil seized her after the
expiration of the contract he had made with her, and bore her away bodily to the pit of
Tophet: the pump against which he dashed her is still pointed out, and the spot where her
heart was found, after he had torn it out of her bosom with his iron claws, has received
the name of Bleeding-heart Yard, in confirmation of the story. Whether the horse-shoe
still remains upon the door of the haunted house, to keep away other witches, is
uncertain; but there it was, twelve or thirteen years ago. The writer resided at that time in
the house alluded to, and well remembers that more than one old woman begged for
admittance repeatedly, to satisfy themselves that it was in its proper place. One poor
creature, apparently insane, and clothed in rags, came to the door with a tremendous
double-knock, as loud as that of a fashionable footman, and walked straight along the
passage to the horse-shoe. Great was the wonderment of the inmates, especially when the
woman spat upon the horse-shoe, and expressed her sorrow that she could do no harm
while it remained there. After spitting upon, and kicking it again and again, she coolly
turned round and left the house, without saying a word to anybody. This poor creature
perhaps intended a joke, but the probability is that she imagined herself a witch. In
Saffron Hill, where she resided, her ignorant neighbours gave her that character, and
looked upon her with no little fear and aversion.
More than one example of the popular belief in witchcraft occurred in the neighbourhood
of Hastings so lately as the year 1830. An aged woman, who resided in the Rope-walk of
that town, was so repulsive in her appearance, that she was invariably accused of being a
witch by all the ignorant people who knew her. She was bent completely double; and
though very old, her eye was unusually bright and malignant. She wore a red cloak, and
supported herself on a crutch: she was, to all outward appearance, the very beau ideal of a
witch. So dear is power to the human heart, that this old woman actually encouraged the
popular superstition: she took no pains to remove the ill impression, but seemed to
delight that she, old and miserable as she was, could keep in awe so many happier and
stronger fellow-creatures. Timid girls crouched with fear when they met her, and many
would go a mile out of their way to avoid her. Like the witches of the olden time, she was
not sparing of her curses against those who offended her. The child of a woman who
resided within two doors of her, was afflicted with lameness, and the mother constantly
asserted that the old woman had bewitched her. All the neighbours credited the tale. It
was believed, too, that she could assume the form of a cat. Many a harmless puss has
been hunted almost to the death by mobs of men and boys, upon the supposition that the
animal would start up before them in the true shape of Mother * * * * *.
In the same town there resided a fisherman, -- who is, probably, still alive, and whose
name, for that reason, we forbear to mention, -- who was the object of unceasing
persecution, because it was said that he had sold himself to the devil. It was currently
reported that he could creep through a keyhole, and that he had made a witch of his
daughter, in order that he might have the more power over his fellows. It was also
believed that he could sit on the points of pins and needles, and feel no pain. His brotherfishermen put him to this test whenever they had an opportunity. In the alehouses which

he frequented, they often placed long needles in the cushions of the chairs, in such a
manner that he could not fail to pierce himself when he sat down. The result of these
experiments tended to confirm their faith in his supernatural powers. It was asserted that
he never flinched. Such was the popular feeling in the fashionable town of Hastings only
seven years ago; very probably it is the same now.
In the north of England, the superstition lingers to an almost inconceivable extent.
Lancashire abounds with witch-doctors, a set of quacks, who pretend to cure diseases
inflicted by the devil. The practices of these worthies may be judged of by the following
case, reported in the "Hertford Reformer," of the 23rd of June, 1838. The witch-doctor
alluded to is better known by the name of the cunning man, and has a large practice in the
counties of Lincoln and Nottingham. According to the writer in "The Reformer," the
dupe, whose name is not mentioned, had been for about two years afflicted with a painful
abscess, and had been prescribed for without relief by more than one medical gentleman.
He was urged by some of his friends, not only in his own village, but in neighbouring
ones, to consult the witch-doctor, as they were convinced he was under some evil
influence. He agreed, and sent his wife to the cunning man, who lived in New Saint
Swithin's, in Lincoln. She was informed by this ignorant impostor that her husband's
disorder was an infliction of the devil, occasioned by his next-door neighbours, who had
made use of certain charms for that purpose. From the description he gave of the process,
it appears to be the same as that employed by Dr. Fian and Gellie Duncan, to work woe
upon King James. He stated that the neighbours, instigated by a witch, whom he pointed
out, took some wax, and moulded it before the fire into the form of her husband, as near
as they could represent him; they then pierced the image with pins on all sides -- repeated
the Lord's Prayer backwards, and offered prayers to the devil that he would fix his stings
into the person whom that figure represented, in like manner as they pierced it with pins.
To counteract the effects of this diabolical process, the witch-doctor prescribed a certain
medicine, and a charm to be worn next the body, on that part where the disease
principally lay. The patient was to repeat the 109th and 119th Psalms every day, or the
cure would not be effectual. The fee which he claimed for this advice was a guinea.
So efficacious is faith in the cure of any malady, that the patient actually felt much better
after a three weeks' course of this prescription. The notable charm which the quack had
given was afterwards opened, and found to be a piece of parchment, covered with some
cabalistic characters and signs of the planets.
The next-door neighbours were in great alarm that the witch-doctor would, on the
solicitation of the recovering patient, employ some means to punish them for their
pretended witchcraft. To escape the infliction, they feed another cunning man, in
Nottinghamshire, who told them of a similar charm, which would preserve them from all
the malice of their enemies. The writer concludes by saying that, "the doctor, not long
after he had been thus consulted, wrote to say that he had discovered that his patient was
not afflicted by Satan, as he had imagined, but by God, and would continue, more or less,
in the same state till his life's end."

An impostor carried on a similar trade in the neighbourhood of Tunbridge Wells, about
the year 1830. He had been in practice for several years, and charged enormous fees for
his advice. This fellow pretended to be the seventh son of a seventh son, and to be
endowed in consequence with miraculous powers for the cure of all diseases, but
especially of those resulting from witchcraft. It was not only the poor who employed him,
but ladies who rode in their carriages. He was often sent for from a distance of sixty or
seventy miles by these people, who paid all his expenses to and fro, besides rewarding
him handsomely. He was about eighty years of age, and his extremely venerable
appearance aided his imposition in no slight degree. His name was Okey, or Oakley.
In France, the superstition at this day is even more prevalent than it is in England.
Garinet, in his history of Magic and Sorcery in that country, cites upwards of twenty
instances which occurred between the years 1805 and 1818. In the latter year, no less
than three tribunals were occupied with trials originating in this humiliating belief: we
shall cite only one of them. Julian Desbourdes, aged fifty-three, a mason, and inhabitant
of the village of Thilouze, near Bordeaux, was taken suddenly ill, in the month of January
1818. As he did not know how to account for his malady, he suspected at last that he was
bewitched. He communicated this suspicion to his son-in-law, Bridier, and they both
went to consult a sort of idiot, named Baudouin, who passed for a conjuror, or whitewitch. This man told them that Desbourdes was certainly bewitched, and offered to
accompany them to the house of an old man, named Renard, who, he said, was
undoubtedly the criminal. On the night of the 23rd of January all three proceeded
stealthily to the dwelling of Renard, and accused him of afflicting persons with diseases,
by the aid of the devil. Desbourdes fell on his knees, and earnestly entreated to be
restored to his former health, promising that he would take no measures against him for
the evil he had done. The old man denied in the strongest terms that he was a wizard; and
when Desbourdes still pressed him to remove the spell from him, he said he knew
nothing about the spell, and refused to remove it. The idiot Baudouin, the white-witch,
now interfered, and told his companions that no relief for the malady could ever be
procured until the old man confessed his guilt. To force him to confession they lighted
some sticks of sulphur, which they had brought with them for the purpose, and placed
them under the old man's nose. In a few moments, he fell down suffocated and apparently
lifeless. They were all greatly alarmed; and thinking that they had killed the. man, they
carried him out and threw him into a neighbouring pond, hoping to make it appear that he
had fallen in accidentally. The pond, however, was not very deep, and the coolness of the
water reviving the old man, he opened his eyes and sat up. Desbourdes and Bridier, who
were still waiting on the bank, were now more alarmed than before, lest he should
recover and inform against them. They, therefore, waded into the pond -- seized their
victim by the hair of the head -- beat him severely, and then held him under water till he
was drowned.
They were all three apprehended on the charge of murder a few days afterwards.
Desbourdes and Bridier were found guilty of aggravated manslaughter only, and
sentenced to be burnt on the back, and to work in the galleys for life. The white-witch
Baudouin was acquitted, on the ground of insanity.

M. Garinet further informs us that France, at the time he wrote (1818), was overrun by a
race of fellows, who made a trade of casting out devils and finding out witches. He adds,
also, that many of the priests in the rural districts encouraged the superstition of their
parishioners, by resorting frequently to exorcisms, whenever any foolish persons took it
into their heads that a spell had been thrown over them. He recommended, as a remedy
for the evil, that all these exorcists, whether lay or clerical, should be sent to the galleys,
and that the number of witches would then very sensibly diminish.
Many other instances of this lingering belief might be cited both in France and Great
Britain, and indeed in every other country in Europe. So deeply rooted are some errors
that ages cannot remove them. The poisonous tree that once overshadowed the land, may
be cut down by the sturdy efforts of sages and philosophers -- the sun may shine clearly
upon spots where venemous things once nestled in security and shade; but still the
entangled roots are stretched beneath the surface, and may be found by those who dig.
Another king, like James I, might make them vegetate again; and, more mischievous still,
another pope, like Innocent VIII, might raise the decaying roots to strength and verdure.
Still, it is consoling to think, that the delirium has passed away; that the raging madness
has given place to a milder folly; and that we may now count by units the votaries of a
superstition which, in former ages, numbered its victims by tens of thousands, and its
votaries by millions.

THE SLOW POISONERS.
Pescara. -- The like was never read of.
Stephano. -- In my judgment,
To all that shall but hear it, 't will appear
A most impossible fable.
Pescara. -- Troth, I'll tell you,
And briefly as I can, by what degrees
They fell into this madness.
-- Duke of Milan.
The atrocious system of poisoning, by poisons so slow in their operation, as to make the
victim appear, to ordinary observers, as if dying from a gradual decay of nature, has been
practised in all ages. Those who are curious in the matter may refer to Beckmann on
Secret Poisons, in his "History of Inventions," in which he has collected several instances
of it from the Greek and Roman writers. Early in the sixteenth century the crime seems to
have gradually increased, till, in the seventeenth, it spread over Europe like a pestilence.
It was often exercised by pretended witches and sorcerers, and finally became a branch of
education amongst all who laid any claim to magical and supernatural arts. In the twentyfirst year of Henry VIII. an act was passed, rendering it high-treason: those found guilty
of it, were to be boiled to death.
One of the first in point of date, and hardly second to any in point of atrocity, is the
murder by this means of Sir Thomas Overbury, which disgraced the court of James I, in
the year 1613. A slight sketch of it will be a fitting introduction to the history of the
poisoning mania, which was so prevalent in France and Italy fifty years later.
Robert Kerr, a Scottish youth, was early taken notice of by James I, and loaded with
honours, for no other reason that the world could ever discover than the beauty of his
person. James, even in his own day, was suspected of being addicted to the most
abominable of all offences, and the more we examine his history now, the stronger the
suspicion becomes. However that may be, the handsome Kerr, lending his smooth cheek,
even in public, to the disgusting kisses of his royal master, rose rapidly in favour. In the
year 1613, he was made Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, and created an English peer,
by the style and title of Viscount Rochester. Still further honours were in store for him.
In this rapid promotion he had not been without a friend. Sir Thomas Overbury, the
King's secretary-who appears, from some threats in his own letters, to have been no better
than a pander to the vices of the King, and privy to his dangerous secrets -- exerted all his
backstair influence to forward the promotion of Kerr, by whom he was, doubtless, repaid
in some way or other. Overbury did not confine his friendship to this, if friendship ever
could exist between two such men, but acted the part of an entremetteur, and assisted
Rochester to carry on an adulterous intrigue with the Lady Frances Howard, the wife of
the Earl of Essex. This woman was a person of violent passions, and lost to all sense of

shame. Her husband was in her way, and to be freed from him, she instituted proceedings
for a divorce, on grounds which a woman of any modesty or delicacy of feeling would
die rather than avow. Her scandalous suit was successful, and was no sooner decided than
preparations, on a scale of the greatest magnificence, were made for her marriage with
Lord Rochester.
Sir Thomas Overbury, who had willingly assisted his patron to intrigue with the Countess
of Essex, seems to have imagined that his marriage with so vile a woman might retard his
advancement; he accordingly employed all his influence to dissuade him from it. But
Rochester was bent on the match, and his passions were as violent as those of the
Countess. On one occasion, when Overbury and the Viscount were walking in the gallery
of Whitehall, Overbury was overheard to say, "Well, my Lord, if you do marry that base
woman, you will utterly ruin your honour and yourself. You shall never do it with my
advice or consent; and, if you do, you had best look to stand fast." Rochester flung from
him in a rage, exclaiming with an oath, "I will be even with you for this." These words
were the death-warrant of the unfortunate Overbury. He had mortally wounded the pride
of Rochester in insinuating that by his (Overbury's) means he might be lowered in the
King's favour; and he had endeavoured to curb the burning passions of a heartless,
dissolute, and reckless man.
Overbury's imprudent remonstrances were reported to the Countess; and from that
moment, she also vowed the most deadly vengeance against him. With a fiendish
hypocrisy, however, they both concealed their intentions, and Overbury, at the
solicitation of Rochester, was appointed ambassador to the court of Russia. This apparent
favour was but the first step in a deep and deadly plot. Rochester, pretending to be
warmly attached to the interests of Overbury, advised him to refuse the embassy, which,
he said, was but a trick to get him out of the way. He promised, at the same time, to stand
between him and any evil consequences which might result from his refusal. Overbury
fell into the snare, and declined the embassy. James, offended, immediately ordered his
committal to the Tower.
He was now in safe custody, and his enemies had opportunity to commence the work of
vengeance. The first thing Rochester did was to procure, by his influence at court, the
dismissal of the Lieutenant of the Tower, and the appointment of Sir Jervis Elwes, one of
his creatures, to the vacant post. This man was but one instrument, and another being
necessary, was found in Richard Weston, a fellow who had formerly been shopman to a
druggist. He was installed in the office of under-keeper, and as such had the direct
custody of Overbury. So far, all was favourable to the designs of the conspirators.
In the mean time, the insidious Rochester wrote the most friendly letters to Overbury,
requesting him to bear his ill-fortune patiently, and promising that his imprisonment
should not be of long duration; for that his friends were exerting themselves to soften the
King's displeasure. Still pretending the extreme of sympathy for him, he followed up the
letters by presents of pastry and other delicacies, which could not be procured in the
Tower. These articles were all poisoned. Occasionally, presents of a similar description
were sent to Sir Jervis Elwes, with the understanding that these articles were not

poisoned, when they were unaccompanied by letters: of these the unfortunate prisoner
never tasted. A woman, named Turner, who had formerly kept a house of ill fame, and
who had more than once lent it to further the guilty intercourse of Rochester and Lady
Essex, was the agent employed to procure the poisons. They were prepared by Dr.
Forman, a pretended fortune-teller of Lambeth, assisted by an apothecary named
Franklin. Both these persons knew for what purposes the poisons were needed, and
employed their skill in mixing them in the pastry and other edibles, in such small
quantities as gradually to wear out the constitution of their victim. Mrs. Turner regularly
furnished the poisoned articles to the under-keeper, who placed them before Overbury.
Not only his food, but his drink was poisoned. Arsenic was mixed with the salt he ate,
and cantharides with the pepper. All this time, his health declined sensibly. Every day he
grew weaker and weaker; and with a sickly appetite, craved for sweets and jellies.
Rochester continued to condole with him, and anticipated all his wants in this respect,
sending him abundance of pastry, and occasionally partridges and other game, and young
pigs. With the sauce for the game, Mrs. Turner mixed a quantity of cantharides, and
poisoned the pork with lunar-caustic. As stated on the trial, Overbury took in this manner
poison enough to have poisoned twenty men; but his constitution was strong, and he still
lingered. Frank]in, the apothecary, confessed that he prepared with Dr. Forman seven
different sorts of poisons; viz. aquafortis, arsenic, mercury, powder of diamonds, lunarcaustic, great spiders, and cantharides. Overbury held out so long that Rochester became
impatient, and in a letter to Lady Essex, expressed his wonder that things were not sooner
despatched. Orders were immediately sent by Lady Essex to the keeper to finish with the
victim at once. Overbury had not been all this time without suspicion of treachery,
although he appears to have had no idea of poison. He merely suspected that it was
intended to confine him for life, and to set the King still more bitterly against him. In one
of his letters, he threatened Rochester that, unless he were speedily liberated, he would
expose his villany to the world. He says, "You and I, ere it be long, will come to a public
trial of another nature." * * * "Drive me not to extremities, lest I should say something
that both you and I should repent." * * * "Whether I live or die, your shame shall never
die, but ever remain to the world, to make you the most odious man living." * * * "I
wonder much you should neglect him to whom such secrets of all kinds have passed." * *
* "Be these the fruits of common secrets, common dangers?"
All these remonstrances, and hints as to the dangerous secrets in his keeping, were illcalculated to serve him with a man so reckless as Lord Rochester: they were more likely
to cause him to be sacrificed than to be saved. Rochester appears to have acted as if he
thought so. He doubtless employed the murderer's reasoning that "dead men tell no tales,"
when, after receiving letters of this description, he complained to his paramour of the
delay. Weston was spurred on to consummate the atrocity; and the patience of all parties
being exhausted, a dose of corrosive sublimate was administered to him, in October 1613,
which put an end to his sufferings, after he had been for six months in their hands. On the
very day of his death, and before his body was cold, he was wrapped up carelessly in a
sheet, and buried without any funeral ceremony in a pit within the precincts of the Tower.
Sir Anthony Weldon, in his "Court and Character of James I," gives a somewhat different
account of the closing scene of this tragedy. He says, "Franklin and Weston came into
