
99

100

ANSWERS

Answer 2-4: B
The profits you’re trying to make can come from only one source—from other
traders’ accounts. The mirror image of that is that any losses you take will give your
money to other traders. Trade defensively because other traders will try to pick
your pockets before you can pick theirs. Brokers and exchanges will also take their
cut, whether you win, lose, or draw.
Answer 2-5: B (I and III)
When we join crowds, our independence dissolves, and the capacity for critical
thinking goes out the window. Crowds are impulsive, adding to volatility. Crowd
members blindly follow trends, and their psychological dependence makes them
unlikely to leave the crowd, until shaken by a severe loss.
Answer 2-6: D (I, II, III, and IV)
The greater the uncertainty, the more likely we are to turn to others for reassurance
and comfort. This behavior is deeply ingrained in human nature. Groups are held
together by their loyalty to the leader.
Answer 2-7: A (I)
Crowds are bigger and stronger than any of us; don’t argue with the market. Crowds
are strong but primitive, and you can exploit their repetitive behavior—but only if
you can stand apart from them. Market crowds are right during trends but wrong at
turning points. When you let the market make you feel elated or depressed, you give
it power over yourself; professional traders train themselves not to react emotionally
to gains or losses.
Answer 2-8: C
All eyes in the market are glued to prices. The longer a rally lasts, the more people
turn bullish, pushing prices higher and attracting even more bulls. A persistent decline makes more people feel bearish, and their selling helps push the marker even
lower. Price is the trend’s leader. Few financial firms are big enough to dominate a
market for days or even hours. Gurus are to the market like a tail is to a dog, and
few dogs chase their tails for very long. Fundamental changes in the economy set
conditions for bull and bear markets, but only traders can buy and sell, creating selfreinforcing price trends.
Answer 2-9: B (II and III)
Prices are hammered out in the battles between bulls and bears. Prices rally when
confident bulls are paying up, while sellers demand a premium for participating in
the game that’s going against them.There is a buyer and a seller behind every transaction. The number of stocks or futures bought and sold is equal by definition.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

101

Answer 2-10: D (I, II, III, and IV)
In a downtrend, the shorts are making money, and many become willing to sell at a
lower price to increase their positions. At the same time, bulls are losing, and many
want to get out. Those that agree to buy do it only at a discount. They place their
bids below the market, forcing bears to sell cheaper. This process is reversed during
uptrends.
Answer 2-11: B (II and III)
A price shock is a sudden move against the trend. It frightens the dominant group
and makes the opposition bolder. A sudden price break in an uptrend provides a
price shock that frightens the bulls. Even if they manage to take prices to a new high,
their confidence is shaken, and the uptrend may well be ready to reverse.
Answer 2-12: C
A bearish divergence occurs when prices rally to a new high, while an indicator rises
to a lower peak. In a bullish divergence, prices fall to a new low, while an indicator
falls to a more shallow low. Bearish divergences help identify uptrend tops. Bullish
divergences help identify downtrend bottoms. They are among the most useful patterns in technical analysis.
Answer 2-13: B (I and IV)
A trader must stay calm, focus on the reality of the market, identify the current
trend, and get in gear with it. When traders try to forecast exactly what the market
will do, their egos become wedded to their predictions, and it becomes hard for
them to change their trading stance. When the market refuses to follow forecasts,
traders who stick to them get financially hurt.

102

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–4 correct: poor.
You have a very limited understanding of mass psychology of the markets. If you
don’t understand how market crowds influence your behavior, you’ll be swept away
by them and lose money. Please reread the relevant section of the book, and retake
this test in a few days, before proceeding any further.
5–9 correct: fairly good.
You have a working grasp of the essential concepts of mass psychology, but need to
learn more about the balance between bulls and bears, the impact of the trading
crowds on you, and the difference between managing trades and forecasting prices.
Please review the relevant section of the book and retake this test in a few days.
10–13 correct: excellent.
You have mastered the essential concepts of mass psychology. Now review some of
your recent trades in light of these principles. Continue to monitor how the market
impacts you. As you proceed to the chapters on market analysis, keep in mind that
technical analysis is applied social psychology.

■■Recommended Reading
Mackay, Charles, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (1841)
(New York: Crown Publishers, 1980).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

THREE

Classical Chart Analysis

Answer 3-1: I = C; II = D; III = B; IV = A
Amateurs tend to get their information after work and trade in the morning. Professionals respond to changing conditions throughout the day and tend to dominate
the market near closing time. Buying pushes prices up, and the highest price of
the day marks the maximum power of bulls. Selling pushes prices down, and the lowest price of the day marks the maximum power of bears. This reasoning also applies
to weekly and intra-day charts.
Answer 3-2: C (I, II, and III)
Wishful thinking is rampant among analysts, especially those who don’t trade. Keeping basic definitions fuzzy contributes to the confusion. It is quite common for the
markets to be trending higher and lower at the same time in different timeframes.
Good analysts who focus on different timeframes may come to different conclusions,
and all can make profitable trades.
Answer 3-3: C
Slippage tends to be lower on quiet, narrow-range days. That’s when you can get a
better entry, but it doesn’t change your commissions.

103

104

ANSWERS

Answer 3-4: 4 (A, B, C, and D)
MDT is tracing a pattern of rallies and declines. As soon as prices begin to decline
from the latest peak, draw a horizontal line across that peak, marking a resistance
level. As prices rally again, they sometimes slow down at the resistance level. After
they penetrate it, they usually pull back—what used to be resistance becomes a support level.
Answer 3-5: D (I and IV)
Support lines are drawn across the lows, and resistance lines across the highs. They
can change roles with the passage of time, as the market moves away from those
levels. The edges of congestion zones show where masses of traders have traded and
reversed their positions. Extreme prices show only the levels of panic among the
weakest market participants.
Answer 3-6: D (I, II, III, and IV)
Support and resistance exist because traders have memories. The more intense
their memories, the more actively they buy and sell, strengthening support and resistance. High volume reflects a greater degree of financial and emotional commitment, while the greater height of the support and resistance zones shows a higher
level of activity, and consequently, stronger memories. The greater the duration of
a congestion area and the more times it’s been hit, the more traders expect a new
reversal to occur, reinforcing support and resistance.
Answer 3-7: C (I, II, and III)
Waiting for a new low before shorting helps ensure you’re dealing with a downside
breakout. False breakouts are the bane of amateurs, but professional traders love
them. They often wait until a downside breakout stops making new lows and then
trade against it: buy and place a protective stop near the latest low. Since prices made
a new low yesterday, shorting at the opening would mean following the trend, but
buying would be a poor option.
Answer 3-8: A = IV; B = I; C = III; D = II
The lower dashed line, drawn across the edge of a congestion area, marks the level of
support. When prices break out to a new low during bar A, and even slightly lower
during bar B, there is a possibility that the downtrend will resume. Still, the shortness of those bars indicates that the downmove is facing a stiff resistance. As bar C
moves up into the congestion area, it leaves behind a false downside breakout. You
may start buying when it crosses above the previously broken support line, with
a stop near the recent lows. The shortness of the last bar indicates that the rally is
slowing down—tighten your stop and consider moving it up to the breakeven level.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

105

Answer 3-9. Trends = A and C; Trading ranges = B and D
When prices trend, they keep rising or falling over time, reaching higher highs or
lower lows. In trading ranges, most rallies peter out at approximately the same highs,
and declines stop at approximately the same lows. As a trader, when you recognize
a trend, follow it and hang onto positions. If you trade the swings within a trading
range, be extra careful not to overstay your positions.
Answer 3-10. I = G; II = A, B, and F; III = C and D; IV = E
The actions of any trading vehicle as it nears support or resistance provide information about its strength or weakness. When a stock cannot rise up to touch resistance,
it shows weakness. Holding above support indicates strength. False breakouts provide some of the best signals in technical analysis.
Answer 3-11: C (I, II, and III)
The trend is your friend. As long as you see the pattern of higher highs and higher
lows, trade that market from the long side. Make sure to protect your positions with
stops and move them up as the trend progresses. Add to your positions only after
your paper profits have been protected. If the market takes out its previous low, it
throws the uptrend in doubt.
Answer 3-12: A does not apply
Tails show that either a high or a low price level has been rejected by the mass of market participants. Since markets tend to move away from rejected price levels, it pays
to trade in the direction opposite a tail. Some trading vehicles are more likely to have
tails than others—you see three of them on this chart of BA, followed by reversals.
Answer 3-13: D is not permitted
Paying close attention to market action after a kangaroo tail, you may increase your
position size or take profits when the move appears to stall. What you shouldn’t do
is place your stop below the tip of the tail because it would expose a trade to too
much risk.

106

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–4 correct: poor.
Charts tell an important story—and if you can’t read it, you’ll miss the market’s
message. You‘ll run a serious risk of buying at the tops and selling at the bottoms.
Please reread the relevant section of the book, review your mistakes, and then retake
this test. Do not proceed to the next chapter until then—these materials are too
important to skip.
5–9 correct: fairly good.
You have a working knowledge of the key concepts of charting. Now you have to
decide whether “fairly good” is good enough for you. It may be enough if you plan
to focus on computerized technical analysis, but not enough if you plan to work
with charts. All serious investors and traders need to grasp such essential concepts
as trends and trading ranges, support and resistance, continuation and reversal. It
would be a good idea to return to the relevant section, review it, and then retake
this test.
10–13 correct: excellent.
You’ve mastered the essential concepts of charting. They can help you discover the
shifts of power between bulls and bears. Now proceed to the chapters on computerized technical analysis.

■■Recommended Reading
Edwards, Robert D., and John Magee, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (1948).
(New York: New York Institute of Finance, 1992).
Pring, Martin J., Technical Analysis Explained, 5th edition (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2013).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

FOUR

Computerized
Technical Analysis
Answer 4-1: A = (I)
Computerized technical analysis is more objective than classical charting. You may
argue whether support or resistance is present, but there can be no argument about
the direction of an indicator—it’s either up, down, or flat. A good technician aims
to discover the balance of power between bulls and bears and bet on the winning
group—not to forecast the future. A computer doesn’t remove emotions from trading because we still have to place our orders. Anyone who tries to sell you “a sure
thing” should be viewed with utter suspicion.
Answer 4-2: I = B; II = C; III = A
A toolbox is a collection of analytic and charting tools. Black boxes for automatic trading come with excellent historical records but self-destruct when markets
change; gray boxes straddle the boundary between those two groups.
Answer 4-3: I = B; II = C: III = A
It pays to combine indicators from different groups so that their negative features
cancel each other out while their positive features remain undisturbed. We’ll return
to this theme in the chapter on the Triple Screen trading system.
Answer 4-4: B
To calculate a simple moving average, add the closing prices in its time window and
divide their sum by the number of days in that window. Adding prices for the past 5
days produces 110, and dividing 110 by 5 is 22.
107

108

ANSWERS

Answer 4-5: A
Exponential moving averages are harder to calculate by hand than simple MAs. If you
use a computer, both are equally easy.
Answer 4-6: D
A rising EMA confirms that bulls are in control—it’s time to go long. When EMA
declines, it shows that bears are in control—it’s time to go short. The ability of an
EMA to reach a new high shows that bulls are stronger than before, while declining
to a new low shows that bears are stronger than before. These are important signals,
but less frequent or important than the direction of the EMA slope. The width of the
EMA’s time window is set by the trader.
Answer 4-7: 1 = A & C; 2 = B
When the EMA rises, trade the stock only from the long side—place your buy orders slightly below the EMA. When the EMA turns down, trade the stock from the
short side by placing sell orders slightly above the falling EMA. You’re free to stand
aside whenever you’d like.
Answer 4-8: 1 = D, E, F, and G; 2 = A, B, and I; 3 = C, H, and J
When the EMA points up, pullbacks mark buying opportunities. When the EMA
points down, prices are usually below it, and rallies to the EMA mark shorting opportunities.The transitional zones between uptrends and downtrends are the hardest
to trade. When in doubt, stand aside until a clear trend emerges.
Answer 4-9: D (I, II, III, and IV)
Each price is a momentary consensus of value, while a moving average reflects the
average consensus of value. A shorter-term MA tracks short-term consensus, and
a longer-term MA tracks longer-term consensus. MACD lines consist of moving
averages, and when the fast line of MACD is above or below the slow line, it shows
whether bulls or bears currently dominate the market.
Answer 4-10: C isn’t true
MACD-Histogram tracks the spread between the fast and slow MACD Lines. Its
slope is defined by the relationship between the last two bars of MACD-Histogram.
When the slope rises, it shows that bulls are in control, and when it declines, it shows
that bears are in control. It pays to trade in the direction of the dominant market
group. This is not forecasting—it’s reading the market and betting that the inertia of
the market crowd will continue.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

109

Answer 4-11: 1 = D; 2 = A; 3 = B and E; 4 = F; 5 = C
When MACD-Histogram reaches a new high, it tells you that bulls are strong and
prices are likely to retest or exceed their latest peak. When it falls to a new low, it
shows that bears are strong and prices are likely to retest or exceed the latest low.
Afterwards, when MACD-Histogram crosses its zero line, it signals that the power
of the dominant group has been broken.
A bullish divergence gives a strong buy signal; it occurs when prices fall to a new
low, but MACD-Histogram traces a shallower bottom. A bearish divergence gives a
strong sell signal; it occurs when prices rise to a new high, but MACD-Histogram
traces a lower high.
Answer 4-12: C
The bearish divergence has sent prices lower, but they refused to break below their
EMA. At the same time, MACD-Histogram has dropped below zero, showing that
bears are nearing their maximum effort level. With bears having delivered about as
much power as they could and prices holding up, it’s better to take profits and move
to the sidelines.
Answer 4-13: C
The part of today’s bar that protrudes above or below yesterday’s bar represents
today’s directional movement. If today’s bar extends both above and below yesterday’s bar, then only the longer part represents directional movement. If today’s bar
is inside of yesterday’s bar, or if it extends above and below by equal amounts, directional movement is zero.
Answer 4-14: I = B; II = A, C, E; III = D
Trade in the direction of the upper Directional Line as long as ADX rises above
the lower Directional Line. Exit when ADX rises above both Directional Lines and
then ticks down. Another exit signal occurs when ADX sinks below both Directional
Lines. As long as ADX stays below both +DI and –DI, avoid using a trend-following
method.
Answer 4-15: C
When ADX rises above both Directional Lines and then ticks down, it signals the end
of a strongly directional move and suggests the onset of greater volatility.You can still
trade this market, but only using shorter-term indicators rather than the Directional
system.
Answer 4-16: B
Oscillators show whether bulls or bears are currently in control. Their peaks and
bottoms mark the extremes of mass optimism and pessimism. Overbought readings
of oscillators help identify market tops, and oversold readings help catch market bottoms.These signals tend to work well during trading ranges but are less useful during
trends. No indicator can catch all tops and bottoms.

110

ANSWERS

Answer 4-17: D
When an oscillator reaches a new record high, it reflects strength and tells traders
that the rally is likely to continue, even if there is a temporary pause.You may add to
long positions or take partial profits, but it’s better to ignore shorting signals because
under those conditions, prices aren’t likely to drop by a meaningful amount.
Answer 4-18: 1 = A, C, I; 2 = B, E, F; 3 = E–F; 4 = C–D and I–J; 5 = D, G, H,
and J
Stochastic becomes overbought when it rises to or above its upper reference line.
There it gives a signal to sell or at least avoid buying. Stochastic becomes oversold
when it falls to or below its lower reference line. There it gives a signal to buy or at
least avoid shorting.
A failure swing occurs when Stochastic fails to reach its reference line during a
market move. When Stochastic could not reach its upper reference line during the
rally G, it showed that bulls were weak and gave a sell signal. Failure swings D and J
became parts of bearish divergences. In the bullish divergence E–F, the second bottom was shallower than the first, but not a failure swing because it was below the
lower reference line.
Answer 4-19: C
Stochastic is near its neutral midpoint—but it’s falling from a powerful bearish pattern. It has just traced a failure swing and a bearish divergence. In addition, you can
see an upward-pointing kangaroo tail on the price chart, reinforcing Stochastic’s
bearish message.
Answer 4-20: 1 = A, B, F; 2 = D; 3 = D–E; 4 = B–C
RSI becomes overbought when it rises above its upper reference line. There it gives
sell signals, which help traders sell short in downtrends or in flat markets, but are often premature during uptrends. RSI becomes oversold when it falls below its lower
reference line. There it gives buy signals, which help traders go long in uptrends or
flat markets but are often premature during downtrends. Bullish and bearish divergences give the strongest buy and sell signals. All divergences you see on this chart
preceded substantial market moves.
Answer 4-21: B
RSI has just traced a clear bearish divergence, with its first top above and the second
below the upper reference line. This bearish message is reinforced by the fact that
the slight price decline of the past few days took TIF below the top it reached several
months earlier. A false upside breakout is now in place and that, reinforced by the
RSI divergence, gives a signal to sell short.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

111

Answer 4-22: A (I and II)
When the market trend is down and an oscillator rises above its upper reference line,
it identifies a short-term splash of bullishness—a shorting opportunity. Afterward,
you may want to cover shorts when an oscillator falls below its lower reference line,
or you may want to hold shorts. In any case, do not use oscillators to go long in a
well-established downtrend. As Peter Lynch, a noted money manager, once wrote:
“Trying to catch a bottom is like trying to catch a falling knife—you invariably grab
it in the wrong spot.”

112

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–8 correct: poor.
You have a very limited understanding of modern technical analysis. You owe it to
yourself to learn the essential concepts of using indicators. Please reread the relevant
chapter and retake this test before proceeding to the rest of this book.
9–15 correct: fairly good.
It is important to understand the messages of trend-following indicators and oscillators. They offer insights into the balance of power between bulls and bears. You
have a decent grasp of the essential concepts of computerized technical analysis.
Now review your answers to find out your areas of strength and weakness. Are you
more comfortable with trend-following indicators or oscillators? Are you better at
finding signals that identify trends or reversals? Please review the recommended
literature, and retake this test several days later. Think about what these tests reveal
about your preferences. Most successful traders concentrate on just a few types of
trades. Some prefer to follow trends, while others are better off at catching reversals.
Trader, know thyself.
16–22 correct: excellent.
You have a good command of computerized technical analysis. These indicators are
the building blocks of several proven trading systems (see Part 7). Before we work
on a system, let’s review other types of indicators available to market analysts (Parts
5 and 6).
