
chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:41

The Forex Playing Field

Char Count=

221

exactly what you want to hear, run in the other direction as quickly as
possible.

WHAT WE CAN LEARN FROM THE “SMART
MONEY”
Think about the way so-called “smart money” approaches trading in this
market. Do hedge funds and institutional traders chase after 10- or 15-pip
gains? Of course not—they understand the dynamics that are at work here.
Not only are they not interested in 10-pip gains, they’re not chasing after
100-pip gains either. Many of these “big fish” are only satisfied with gains of
thousands of pips—trades that push the odds of success as close to 50–50
as possible.
Not only do the institutional traders understand the value of playing
on a larger field, they set up their trades so that they can collect interest
to boot—thereby increasing their odds to better than 50–50! If this were
a casino, they’d be tossed out immediately. Now you know why they are
called the “smart money”!

NOW GET OUT THERE AND WIN
The good news is that we can trade just like the smart money and avoid
trading, well, the other way. Now that you understand the dynamics of the
forex playing field, you know more about trading than most of the people
who will come, fail, and go without ever understanding the nature of the
game they are playing—not a game in the context of something that is not
to be taken seriously, but a game that is meant to be played to win.
What does playing to win mean to you? Does it mean that you’ll
do things your way, play the game on your own terms, and if everything
works out, that’s fine? Or does it mean you’re willing to do whatever it
takes—including surrendering your preconceived notions about the game
you are playing—in order to make it to the winner’s circle? If you’re serious
about making real money, you’d better be willing to go that extra mile.

chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

222

19:41

Char Count=

chap19

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

June 2, 2007

16:7

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 19

Trading Lessons
from Life

I

f trading were exactly like real life, then it would be much easier. Unfortunately, trading and the real world differ in many ways. Trading is
counter-intuitive because what seems or feels right is often wrong, and
vice versa.
For example, when you’re shopping and you see that an item you want
to buy is available at a low price, that’s usually a good thing. In the world
of trading, when the price or exchange rate seems cheap, it is not always a
bargain—it could mean that there is something wrong.
Although the lessons of life sometimes betray us in the world of trading, there are some aspects of life that can teach us a great deal about
trading.

PANIC AT THE BEACH
One of my best friends in the world is a guy named Marlio, popularly known
as “Mongo” back in high school, who moved west to Los Angeles to pursue
a career as a screenwriter.
One time, after giving a seminar in L.A., I caught up with my old friend,
and we hit the beach for some body surfing in Malibu. We rode some nice
waves, and as the day progressed, they became bigger and rougher.
Eventually, I caught a big wave and sailed toward the beach. Suddenly,
the surf became violent and slammed me against the ocean floor. I could
feel the crush of the wild surf as I was tossed about like laundry on a spin
cycle.
223

chap19

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

June 2, 2007

224

16:7

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

After being thoroughly “Maytaged,” I struggled to reach the surface. As
I finally caught my breath, the reality sank in. I had lost my swim trunks. I
was naked in public, on a crowded beach in sunny California!
Staggered by the giant wave, I lurched around in a futile attempt to
retrieve my trunks, which were slowly drifting out to sea. Mongo was of no
help, as he was doubled over by convulsions of laughter. Hey, if you can’t
laugh at your friend, who is involuntarily committing indecent exposure at
the moment, whom can you laugh at?
By now the people on the beach had noticed the naked man in their
midst, chasing his pants among the waves. When I finally tracked down
and donned the errant trunks, a loud cheer went up from the beach.
Later, at a restaurant overlooking the Pacific, we roared with laughter
as we recounted the events of the day. The drinks flowed as the sun sank
into the ocean.
What does this have to do with trading? Well, let me break it to you
gently: Bad things are going to happen to you—in life and in trading. Things
will go wrong. Trading errors will occur. Your computer system will crash.
Markets will tease, taunt, and humble you. At times, you will feel as though
you are about to lose your mind.
When presented with these challenges, we have a choice—we can hang
our heads in defeat, or we can choose to believe that defeat is only a temporary condition, and that there is no such thing as permanent defeat. We
can choose to play the role of the victim when things go wrong, or we can
choose to laugh at ourselves. We can learn not to take ourselves too seriously.
When things go awry, try to keep this thought in mind:

“It’s not what happens to you, it’s how you react to what happens to you
that determines success or failure.”

THE ENDLESS TOURNAMENT
Joey is another one of my great friends. Joey and I played Little League
baseball together when we were both eight years old, and we are still close
friends to this day.
Joe and I fancy ourselves to be (very) amateur athletes. Despite a total lack of understanding of the rules of the game, we decided to take up
racquetball—and we were awful. But we played racquetball at a similar
level of awfulness, so the games were fun.

chap19

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

Trading Lessons from Life

June 2, 2007

16:7

Char Count=

225

We decided to play a mini-tournament; we just needed to decide on the
duration of the contest. Best of three? Best of seven, perhaps? I came up
with an idea.
“How about first one to win 100 games wins.”
Joey laughed. “Sure, why not?”
So we started to play. The more we played, the better we became at
playing. Joe would come up with a new serve that I couldn’t return, and
he’d beat me for a while. Then I’d find a way to counter him, and I’d pull
back into the lead.
Every time one of us would come up with a better shot, or a better play,
the other would learn it and we were back to even again. We constantly
raised the bar, challenging each other relentlessly.
Then a funny thing happened; I noticed that we were no longer awful
at playing racquetball. Not great, but not awful.
As of this writing, we’ve played a total of 120 games over the past seven
months. Joe has won 60 games so far, and I’ve won 60. We still play at a
similar level, but now we both make ridiculous, gravity-defying plays and
hit seemingly impossible shots on a regular basis.
How does this relate to trading? You can learn faster if you can find a
partner, a friend, or group of friends who share a similar interest and have a
similar level of understanding. You can share information and techniques,
test each other’s knowledge, and bounce ideas off of each other. You can
push each other, and together you can accelerate the journey through the
learning curve.
Support groups such as chat rooms can be extremely helpful. Individuals can also form their own trading groups, or keep in touch through instant messaging. Once you’ve found the right person or persons, you’ll be
amazed at how quickly the pieces of the puzzle can fall into place.

SUMMARY
There are many things in life that traders can use to draw inspiration. Perhaps you’ve heard the story of the farmer who learned to trade futures
in order to hedge his crops. After becoming a proficient trader, John W.
Henry left the farming profession. He is now one of the world’s most successful hedge fund managers, owns a futures company, and is a part owner
of the Boston Red Sox. Mr. Henry considers himself to be a trend-following
trader.
You may have heard of the gentleman whose first trade was made
with $3,000 he borrowed from his credit card. Today, multibillionaire

chap19

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

226

June 2, 2007

16:7

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

Bruce Kovner is a fixture on the annual list of top-earning hedge fund
managers. At one point, before conquering the world of trading, Mr.
Kovner actually drove a taxicab in New York and studied music at
Juilliard.
The point is: with persistence, determination, and the right attitude,
anyone can succeed in the world of trading.

chap20

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:42

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 20

What You
Don’t Know Can
Hurt You

H

ere’s a little section of the book that will ruffle a few feathers. If you
ever hear that I’ve gone missing under mysterious circumstances,
it’ll probably be due to of the contents of this chapter.
These next few pages aren’t intended to scare you, but to educate you
to some of the realities of the trading business. I want you to know about
the pitfalls that are lurking out there, waiting for the unsuspecting and the
uninitiated. If I can keep you on the right path and prevent you from being
drawn into these traps, your chances of success will increase dramatically.
To be forewarned is to be forearmed.
You will often hear of spectacular returns. You will hear salespeople
bragging about 90 percent winning trades, 95 percent winning trades, and
so on. You will hear claims that it is possible to win many consecutive
trades on a consistent basis.
And what could be wrong with winning? It feels good to win, right?
Well, the salesperson who is trying to sell you a product or service that
promises such a high percentage of winning trades (or in some cases
promises a ridiculous number of consecutive winners) is counting on your
desire to win to short-circuit your thought process.
It is easy to obtain 90 percent winning trades and still lose money. Conversely, there are many successful traders who place more losing trades
than winning trades. The percentage of winning trades has nothing to do
with the ultimate success of the trader. Most references to a percentage of
winning trades are merely a sales tactic, which is intended to appeal to the
trader’s desire to “win.”
227

chap20

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

228

19:42

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

SARCASM ALERT!
Do you want to know how to create a high percentage of winning trades?
Why not simply trade without stops (breaking every rule of risk management, which will surely lead to losses) and take profits quickly? That way,
we can hold on to every trade until it either turns profitable or creates a
margin call.
If this sounds ridiculous, that’s because it is, but the point must be
made. It saddens me to tell you that this is exactly how many people try
to trade. They’ll get lucky for a while, putting up some nice returns at first,
and then they will blow a hole in the account with one big loss. Their percentage of winners versus losers will still be impressive, but their account
equity will be severely damaged.
People actually teach so-called trading techniques that promise many
consecutive winning trades. I have heard promises of 20 consecutive winners, 50 consecutive winners, and more.
This would be similar to flipping a coin 50 times with the expectation
that the coin will land with the “head” facing upward every single time. Not
only is this trader almost guaranteed to lose money in the long run, but to
add insult to injury, he or she actually paid someone to learn techniques
that are sure to result in losses.

KNOW WHEN TO RETREAT
Fixation on the percentage of winning trades versus losing trades is like
a sickness, and I’m determined to cure this rampant disease within our
lifetimes.
I want you to think of yourself as a general, fighting a war. Your most
important assets are your soldiers. You want to use them judiciously. When
it is time to attack, you send them off to battle but if the battle is lost,
you must retreat. Otherwise, you will needlessly sacrifice the lives of your
troops and weaken your overall forces. Your goal is not to win every battle,
but to win the war instead.
Trading is much the same way. In order to win the war, you have to
be willing to lose a few battles along the way. Or, more precisely, you have
to be willing to deal with small losses to prevent the creation of a large
loss.
Most major trading disasters have their genesis in the unwillingness to
take a loss, from Nick Leeson’s destruction of Barings Bank to the LongTerm Capital Management hedge fund fiasco. There are countless other

chap20

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:42

What You Don’t Know Can Hurt You

Char Count=

229

examples of major trading disasters that begin with the failure to take a
strategic loss.

THE “95 PERCENT WINNERS STRATEGY”
To bolster my point, I opened a demo account and proceeded to place
trades using a “strategy” of holding on to losses until the trade turned positive, and then taking very small gains (see Figure 20.1).
I placed a total of 20 trades, with 19 “winners” and 1 loss, resulting
in a success rate of 95 percent. One might think that a success rate of 95
percent would certainly lead to a nice profit, but as you can see, this is not
necessarily the case.
Because this trader was too quick to take profits and too willing to hold
losses, this so-called strategy resulted in a loss, despite the lofty winning
percentage. Unfortunately, this scenario is all too common.
Hopefully, this little exercise will cure all of us once and for all of
our tendency to be impressed by sales tactics that present an abnormally
skewed ratio of winners versus losers. If we allow salespeople to cloud our
vision with unrealistic or impossible dreams, it will only delay our ultimate
goal of trading successfully in the real world.

FIGURE 20.1 Many traders overestimate the importance of win versus loss percentage. In this case, 19 winning trades and 1 losing trade = 95 percent winning
trades. Despite the lofty winning percentage, the overall result is a loss.
Source: Forex Capital Markets (FXCM); www.fxcm.com.

chap20

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

230

19:42

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

BEWARE THE BACK TESTER
There is nothing wrong with back testing a strategy per se; in fact, back
testing can be a valuable tool in strategy development when it is used
properly. However, some unscrupulous operators have appropriated this
strategy development tool and turned it into a weapon for use against an
unsuspecting trading public.
Back testing is the process of optimizing a trading strategy using historical data. Traders back test strategies to determine how well they have
worked in the past, with the assumption that what has worked in the past
will continue to work in the future.
Since markets are not static, and are constantly evolving and changing, back testing is not a panacea. The past does not equal the future. As
markets change, good traders adapt, and the best traders are the ones who
adapt quickly.
Because we know what has occurred in the past, it is easy to create
strategies that would have been highly successful in the past. Since we
can’t turn back the clock and trade in the past, these strategies are limited
in their usefulness. This hasn’t stopped some individuals from marketing
these overoptimized, back-tested strategies as current and viable moneymaking opportunities.
One individual allegedly solicited funds from unsuspecting investors
by misrepresenting back tested returns as actual returns. This person is
currently the subject of a Commodity Futures Trading Commission complaint, for allegedly having “engaged in the fraudulent solicitation of customers by misrepresenting his past performance.”

HYPOTHETICALLY SPEAKING
Other unscrupulous individuals attempt to sell back-tested strategies to the
unsuspecting, using impressive-sounding hypothetical returns as a sales
tool.
Whenever someone tries to impress you with the alleged returns of a
strategy, be sure to ask that person if the results are actual or hypothetical.
Too many people assume that hypothetical returns are actual returns, but
this simply is not the case.
Hypothetical returns are not created from actual trading, and are usually the result of back testing. Now that we know how easily one can
create seemingly impressive results from mere back testing, it becomes

chap20

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

What You Don’t Know Can Hurt You

19:42

Char Count=

231

apparent that we should never be overly impressed with hypothetical
results.
One day far in the future, perhaps mankind will finally perfect the time
machine. If that should occur, overoptimized back-tested strategies and hypothetical returns will become valuable indeed. Until then, since we cannot
trade the past, the usefulness of these tools is severely limited.

chap20

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

232

19:42

Char Count=

chap21

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:42

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 21

A Tale of
Two Traders

I

’ve been fortunate enough to trade not only for myself, but also for several hedge funds. Working with hedge funds is terrific—they write big
checks and then they leave you alone. Trading for individuals is hard
work—they write small checks and they never leave you alone. If you want
to trade for others, institutional money is the way to go.
There is a lot of institutional money out there, looking for a home.
Hedge funds have expanded tremendously in the past few years, with assets under management skyrocketing from about $500 billion in the year
2000 to over $1.5 trillion in 2006. These figures will likely continue to grow
in the future. The upshot of this is that some hedge funds literally have
more money to invest than they can reasonably handle, and they might
“farm out” some of these assets to individuals like you and me.
If you can establish a reasonable track record, you might be able to
convince a hedge fund to allow you to trade some of their funds. What
constitutes a good track record? The answer may be different from what
you believe.

INDIVIDUALS VERSUS INSTITUTIONS
If you want to trade for individuals, you’ll often be asked, “How much
money will you make for me?” This is indicative of how most individual
traders think; they are more concerned about reward than they are about

233

chap21

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

234

May 31, 2007

19:42

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

risk. Individuals ask questions like, “How long will it take to double my
money?” and “When will my account reach $1 million?”
Also, if you are getting started in managing money for individuals, be
prepared to answer a lot of questions and do a lot of hand-holding. You may
find yourself so busy explaining your work to your clients that it interferes
with your trading.
Take these words to heart: There is an old saying in this business, “Amateurs are concerned with how much money they can make, and professionals are concerned with how much money they can lose.” Write that
on a sticky pad and put it on your computer monitor.
No hedge fund representative has ever asked me, “Ed, how much
money are you going to earn for us this year?” No, the question you’ll hear
from a hedge fund is more likely to be, “What is your biggest drawdown?”
Professional investors do care about how much you can earn, but they
care more about how much risk you are willing to take in order to earn that
profit. They know from experience that traders who are willing to risk it all
will eventually lose it all.
What is a drawdown? It can be best described as a reduction in account
equity from a trade or series of trades, usually expressed as a percentage
from peak to trough. So, if a trader begins with $50,000, and his account
value falls to $40,000 after a series of trades, we could say that the trader
has suffered a drawdown of 20 percent.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN AMATEURS AND
PROFESSIONALS
When judging your performance record, an institutional investment company will first determine whether your returns are due to your brilliant
decision making or if they are a result of excessive risk.
Imagine two traders, both with starting equity of $50,000. Trader A was
able to double the initial investment to $100,000, a gain of 100 percent,
although along the way he suffered a drawdown of 50 percent.
Trader B’s account rose to $60,000, a gain of just 20 percent, and his
worst drawdown was just 2 percent of the account’s value. Which trader is
the better of the two?
Trader A had the larger return by far, but he is an accident waiting to
happen. Anyone who is willing to lose 50 percent, or half of his account, is a
good candidate to lose it all. This trader probably holds on to losing trades,
or even adds to them, which is the trademark of failure in this business.
Trader B is by far the superior trader, because he was able to achieve
substantial gains with just a minimal drawdown. Typically, at this point the

chap21

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

A Tale of Two Traders

May 31, 2007

19:42

Char Count=

235

hedge fund will want to know how much money Trader B could comfortably trade, and then give him a percentage of that amount. The hedge fund
will monitor his returns and allocate more capital if Trader B can continue
to put up solid, consistent numbers.
Trader A’s gains were two times the size of his worst drawdown, while
Trader B’s gains were 10 times larger than his worst drawdown. Based on
this result, Trader B is an excellent candidate to trade institutional money.
Trader A can look forward to competing in the “King of the Tiny Accounts”
contest, since his affinity for risk means that he probably will not have
a full-sized account for much longer. Hedge funds will not touch Trader
A, because as professional money managers, they have been through this
before and are all too familiar with how the story ends—with a devastating
loss.

chap21

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

236

19:42

Char Count=

chap22

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:53

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 22

Some Final
Thoughts

T

here are so many different aspects to trading, it’s impossible to cover
each and every one in the space allotted here. In this book we’ve attempted to cover the important technical aspects of trading from the
forex point of view, in terms of practical strategies and trading methodologies. At this time, I’d like to touch upon some important points that you
may find useful in your trading.
