
In Exhibit 5.47, a small falling window adds further bearish applications
to the bearish engulfing pattern. Although it’s a small falling window (with
windows, size doesn't matter), this window now represents a potential resis-
tance area.

In Exhibit 5.48, the falling window's resistance level was confirmed with
a long black real body. Although there is a black real body wrapping around
a white real body, this was not a bearish engulfing pattern. The reason is
that a bearish engulfing pattern comes after an ascent, not during a decline,
as was the ease here. Although this was not a bearish engulfing pattern, the

18 Fallin
1 wandew

Fosoan
EXBIBIT 5.47 Answer to Question 5.3


Progressive Charting 149

Frovand
EXBIBIT 3.4% = Answer to Question 5.4

fact that there was an extended black real body does further damage to the
technical picture.

In Exhibit 5.49, for a few sessions after the long black real body, the mar-
ket continued its descent. The small real body white candle shown here, with
its extended lower shadow, does take some bearish steam out of the market
because of the bullish shadow. In addition, tt was a successful retest of the
prior session's low, forming a tweezers bottom. This candle line, although
constructive because of its extended lower shadow, is not a hammer. Why?
Because for a hammer the lower shadow must be at least two times the
height of the real body. This lower shadow did not meet that criterion.

Arally during the next session came by way of asmall rising window and
a high wave candle. The high wave candle, with its extended upper lower
shadows and small real body, lessens the bullish applications of the rally.
However, there was not a major trend to reverse, so we should not view this
as a strong bearish reversal signal since the market was not overbought and
hence not vulnerable. The real body of this candle line in Exhibit 5.50 was so
small that we can also view it as a doji, and so it can also be called a high
wave doji.


—— Nota
hammer

Tweezers
bottom

B 1
Nowwnder

EA\GIBIT 5.49 = Answer to Question 5.5

Pa 1.
Nowwnber

EXBIBIT 5.50) Answer to Question 5.6

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting 151

The rally continues in Exhibit 5.51 with another rising window (rising
window 2) and another high wave candle. This high wave candle has slightly
more ominous implications than the prior high wave candle because the mar-
ket is now at a resistance area, as defined by the falling window from the
prior week. Consequently, we look for support at the rising window at 2 and
resistance at the falling window.

In Exhibit 5.52, a black real body wrapping around the white real body
forms a bearish engulfing pattern (this was a bearish engulfing pattern be-
cause the prior trend was up). While this bearish engulfing pattern is con-
firming the falling window's resistance, the market 1s still holding the support
defined by rising window 2.

The market remains entrenched in a “battle of windows" in Exhibit 5.53
as the falling window remains resistance and the rising window ts confirmed
as support via the white candle. The white candle in the prior black real body
looks like a plercing pattern, but it Is not. This is because a piercing pattern
as a bottom reversal signal must come after a downtrend. Instead, this can-
dle came after an up/lateral market.

Here 1s a rally followed immediately by a black real body that opens
above the prior session's high and closes more than midway into the prior

; i
EXBIBITS.5£ Answer to Question 5.7


152

!

(p) Bearish
1 io
|
]

EXBIBIT 5.52 Answer to Question 5.8

1S Tr
New rter

EXBIBIT 5.53 Answer to Question 5.9

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting 161

Los
EXBIBIT 5.66 Answer to Question 5.22

In Exhibit 5.67 the market was propelled higher via a tall white candle,
shattering the falling window's resistance level. In spite of the tall white real
body, the stock 1s now near a potential resistance area defined by the break-
away gap (which 1s the same as a falling window) from early December. As
such, one should be cautious about buying at this session's close, because
doing so would mean buying at a resistance level.

Now Exhibit 5.68 shows a tug-of-war between the rising support line as a
floor and the breakaway gap as a ceiling. This action shows us a powerful ad-
vantage of the candle charts in that they can help preserve capital. As de-
tailed in question 5.23, although on the prior tall white candle session the
market may have looked healthy, we would likely not have gone long be-
cause this white candle was near a resistance area set by the breakaway gap.
Thus, using candle charting techniques (aka the breakaway gap as resis-
tanee) keeps us from prematurely going long and thus avoid a potentially los-
ing trade. Properly used candles will help you preserve capital.

Onee again this market gapped down under a support area, forming
another breakaway gap, as shown in Exhibit 5.69. This now becomes
resistance.


162

resistance level

support

Pd id a a | J ss we
Nowwrber Deemer a

EX\BIBIT 5.67 Answer to Question 5.23

Pd 1S a. a | a 2 we
Nowwnter Deernter fer

EXGIBIT 5.68 Answer to Question 5.24

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting 163

| | ———

(breakaway 99p)

Ls  e
EXBIBIT 5.69 Answer to Question 5.25

Exhibit 5.70 confirms the resistance area set by the breakaway gap dis-
eussed in question 5.25 This candle line, with its long upper shadow and
small real body near the bottom end of the trading range, has the same con-
figuration as the shooting star. But a shooting star must come after an up-
trend. This candle came after a short-term downtrend and thus would not be
ealled a shooting star. However, its long upper shadow and close near the
lower end of the session does have bearish implications.

A bullish counterattack pattern emerged in Exhibit 5.71 as the market
opened sharply lower than the prior session's close and then bouneed back
to close at the prior session's close. This 1s a strong Implication that the bulls
were starting to grab control of the market from the bears. This bullish coun-
terattack pattern has extra significance because it's helping confirm a sup-
port area defined by the mid-December lows.

The rally after the counterattack pattern is stalling at the falling window’s
resistance level in Exhibit 5.72. Therefore, we would need a close above the
top of the falling window to show that the bulls are in control.

On this session In Exhibit 5.73, the market propelled itself above the
falling window's resistance area and 1s now approaching potential resistance
defined by the most recent high in early January.


164

ye

EXBIBIT 5.70 Answer to Question 5.26

he
ih I

N 16 PS : a
Nowwnter eer arwery

EXGIBIT 5.71 = Answer to Question 5.27

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


| a a |
Newerbes Beenie arm .

EXBIBIT 5.73 Answer to Question 5.29

165


166

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

engulfing

(e 1

Recon uo 2

| ae

EXGEBIT 5.74 Answer to Question 5.30

As we see in Exhibit 5.74, the market retreated from the potential resis-
tance area set in early January. However, since the lows of the past few ses-
sions are nearly the same, we get a sense that the market was trying build a
base for a potential rally. This potential was further enhanced by the com-
pletion of the bullish engulfing pattern when the white real body wrapped
around the black real body. While the market was building a floor, if you
went long, you should remember that a close under this support area set by
the past couple days would be viewed as a bearish signal. Using stops is a
vital element in any trading plan.

The rally from the bullish engulfing pattern discussed In Exhibit 5.74 1s
stalling at a falling resistance line obtained by connecting the highs from late
December and mid-January in Exhibit 5.75. A harami pattern (in which a
small real body—in this case almost a doji—is within a prior long real body)
reinforced the significance of this falling resistance line.

In Exhibit 5.76 the market gapped over the resistance area set by the
falling resistance line detailed in Exhibit 5.75 above. This opened a bullish ris-
ing window. With the action, any of the potential bearish applications of the
haramt in Exhibit 5.75 are negated. With this rising window as potential sup-


Progressive Charting 167

| a i i | ee ar
Nome rbes Beene erway ’

16
Newertes Bremer erm .

EXBIBIT 5.76 Answer to Question 5.32


168

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

port, where do we have potential resistance? For that we turn to the early De-
eember high at the top of the evening star.

The high wave candle stalling near the resistance area from early
December shows us that the market is now confused in Exhibit 5.77. How-
ever, the new high close for the move on that session keeps the trend slightly
positive.

The hint that the high wave candle was signaling a potential reversal
failed to materialize as the rally pushed this market above a resistance area
in Exhibit 5.7& The upper shadow of this white real body slightly offset some
of its bullish impact. This could be a very small sign of the warning that
the market might be having some trouble as it approaches the major resis-
tance set by the dark cloud cover in mid-November.

The black real body in Exhibit 5.79 completed a bearish dark cloud cover.
For potential support we could look to the rising window from early Febru-
ary. Keep in mind that although there is a rising window, that does not nec-
essarily mean the market will be drawn like a magnet to that window's
potential support area.

The black real body shown in Exhibit 5.80 wrapping around the prior
white real body 1s not a bearish engulfing pattern. Although this combination
of candle lines 1s correct for a bearish engulfing pattern, these two lines came

f

| |
t'y
r | i! if (s

a

| a) a | i! | ne a | uo = Fe
| Beewnter dereery fr

EXGIBIT 5.77 = Answer to Question 5.33


Progressive Charting 169

ve ta

1
|

a a a a | a a a ee
Nome rdes ee ” Fee

EXBIBIT 3.7% Answer to Question 5.34

Newwetes Brewer err ’ Feeney

EXBIBIT 5.79 Answer to Question 5.35


170

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

Ay

4

Recor r " ss a
a dereery Femur

EXGIBIT 5.80 Answer to Question 5.36

after a decline. As we know, a bearish engulfing pattern must come after a
rally for it to be a top reversal signal.

A series of white real bodies in the last two sessions and the market’s
mostly higher highs and higher lows over the last week keeps the short-term
trend up in Exhibit 5.81. However, it is now approaching a resistance area set
by the dark cloud cover.

The appearance of the bearish engulfing pattern that was completed on
the black real body in Exhibit 5.82 reinforced the importance of the resis-
tanee at the dark cloud cover.

In Exhibit 5.83, another bearish engulfing pattern adds onto a top built by
the prior bearish engulfing pattern and dark cloud cover. However, a support
area defined by the lows of the lows of the prior five sessions is holding. This
puts the market in a box range.

The black candle on the session shown in Exhibit 5.84 breaks a multi-
week support level. The bears are now in control.

In Exhibit 5.85 a falling window ts now potential resistance. Thus far, the
late January rising window 1s now next potential support. While this candle
line has the same shape as a shooting star, it 1s not classified as such because
it came after a decline rather than a rally.


Progressive Charting ing

white real body, forming a dark cloud cover. This bearish signal in Exhibit
5.54 Is not surprising since the dark cloud cover emerged at the resistance
level set by the bearish engulfing pattern built a few weeks earlier. On the flip
side, we could look for support at rising window 2.

The close under the support at rising window 2 now means that the next
potential support area is at ising window 1 in Exhibit 5.55.

Over the next few sessions the market began stabilizing above the sup-
port set at the rising window. At the last two candle lines shown in Exhibit
5.56, there was a white real body closing into a prior black real body. How-
ever, this was not a classic plercing pattern because the close of the white
real body should be above the middle of the black real body (shown by the
dashed line). Although this is not a classic piercing pattern, because this was
the first white candle in five sessions, and this white candle held the lows of
the prior two sessions, we get a sense that the market is trying to build a base.

In Exhibit 5.57 The market 1s expanding on the base detailed in Exhibit
5.56 above.

In Exhibit 5.58 a tall white candle that penetrates a resistance area set by
the last four sessions puts the bulls back in control. An earlier indication that

bE.
EABIBIT 5.54 Answer to Question 5.10


\ +— Closed under
1 ’ rising window 2
support
=
window 2

+

N Rising
window 4

PJ 16 vrs
Nowwnder

EAGIBIT 5.55 Answer to Question 5.11

~\ suppor

be Rising window

Pa 1 Tr»
Nowwnber

EXBIBIT 5.56 © Answer to Question 5.12

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting

mi Further

conlirmation
of support

PJ 1S ef
Nowe rtes t

EABIBITS.57 Answer to Question 5.13

z a a a |
Nowe rtes Deen

EABIBIT 5.58 Answer to Question 5.14


156

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

the bulls were gaining some momentum came with the series of mostly

higher lows preceding this tall white candle, displayed as a rising support
line. This formed an ascending triangle that showed that the buyers were
more eager to buy on price dips. This ascending triangle brings outs a vital el-
ement about candle charts They can use any technique that can be used on
a bar chart, because the candle chart uses the same open, high, low, and
close data as a bar chart. Indeed, I strongly recommend merging traditional
Western technical analysis with candle charts. Such a combination will fur-
ther enhance the power of your analysis.

While the rising support line ts still in foree in Exhibit 5.59, the high wave
eandle gives us a sense that the upside drive might be losing some momen-
tum. The new high close for this move on the high wave candle session keeps
the shortterm trend mostly positive, in spite of the high wave candle. For
bearish confirmation of this particular high wave candle, there should be a
close under the real body of the candle to confirm that the bears have taken
over.

In Exhibit 5.60 we got the bearish confirmation detailed in question 15.
This session, when combined with the prior two sessions, forms a classic
evening star pattern. Although this is a bearish pattern, selling short here
would not have an attractive risk/reward profile because the market 1s still
holding that rising support line. Therefore, if you sell on the close of the
black real body, you are selling at support. (The critical concepts of risk/
reward and money-management techniques are discussed in detail in my
other products as described in the conelusion section.)

In Exhibit 5.61, the market opened a gap under the rising support line.
For those familiar with classic Western technical tools, a gap under a support
or resistance area 1s called a breakaway gap. (Remember that the terms gap
and window are synonymous.) This breakaway gap, or falling window,
should become resistance since a falling window ts resistance. Although this
breakaway gap 1s now resistance, we still have the rising window from the
prior month as support.

Another gap down (Le., a falling window) and a new low close for the
move puts the bears in control in Exhibit 5.62.

As shown in Exhibit 5.63, after a period of some stabilization in the mid-
dle of December, the market rallied and then stalled at the falling window via
a bearish engulfing pattern. Remember that the whole window 1s potential re-
sistance. As such, the resistance can begin at the bottom of the falling win-
dow, as it did here.

Although the entire space of a falling window is resistance, the most crit-
ical area of resistance for a falling window ts at the top of a falling window.


Progressive Charting

nL) Wet

support
line

PJ 1S ee 2
Nowe rtes Geet

EABIBITS.59 Answer to Question 5.15

z 16 ar a | J
Nowe rtes beet

EXBIBIT 5.60 Answer to Question 5.16

157


152

Pd 1 a a | J
Nowwnder Deemer

EAGIBIT 5.61) Answer to Question 5.17

Pa 16 1 a. a | J
Nowwnber Beewnter

EXBIBIT 5.62 Answer to Question 5.18

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting 159

A | 6
EXBIBIT 5.63 Answer to Question 5.19

Consequently, in spite of the new high close for this move on this candle line
in Exhibit 5.64, its small real body hints that the top of the falling window
would maintain itself as resistance.

With the candle line in Exhibit 5.65, we now have an evening star pattern.
Although this ts a bearish turning signal, especially since it confirmed a
falling window's resistance, we still have to look at the rising support line as
a potential support area. Thus, if you sold at the third session of this evening
star (that 1s, the session that completes this pattern), you'd be selling at a po-
tential support area. Once again we see the overwhelming importance of
thinking about the risk‘reward aspect of a trade based on a candle signal.

Although the market has been ascending along the slope set by the rising
support line in Exhibit 5.66, it is now at a pivotal resistance area defined by
the top of the falling window. Since this is such a tight support/resistance
range over the next day or two, one of these levels should be breached.
Either we will see a break above the top of the falling window, which would
be a bullish signal, or a clase under the ascending support line, which would be
a bearish signal.


1h

z 16 a a | J is H
Nowwnder Deemer

EA\GIBIT 5.64 Answer to Question 5.20

Pa 16 ARP ie | J bb z=
Nowwnber Beewnter

EXGIBIT 5.65 Answer to Question 5.21

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE


Progressive Charting 171

3 i z
Nome tes Geers arene a Freese

EXBIBIT 5.82 Answer to Question 5.38


172 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

3 x ss a 2
Nowwnber Beers Marware Foeuey

EXGIBIT 5.84 = Answer to Question 5.40


Progressive Charting 173

| | oe a ss uo ss bP es
Ceeerder dereery Peery Mew

EXGIBIT 5.85 Answer to Question 5.41

The black candle broke the rising window's support level in Exhibit 5.36.
A point to remember is that once a window's support level Is breached, that
window ts voided. In other words, if the market rallies after the break of the
window's support and comes back to the broken window's support, that win-
dow should no longer be viewed as support. With the current candle line, the
market, on the plus side, opens a small rising window. On the negative side,
this candle line stalled at the falling window's resistance. With such tight
support and resistance, the market should break out one way or the other in
a day or two.

The candle in Exhibit 5.87 shows that the break was to the downside as
the prior session's rising window was breached. Notice how the high of this
black candle stopped at the falling window’s resistance.

In Exhibit 5.88, this session's bearish shadow once again highlights the
significance of the falling window’s resistance.


174 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

s—z we
dheowrees Deeorntes Joreery Peevey

EAGIBIT 5.86 Answer to Question 5.42

Sereery

EXGIBIT 5.87 Answer to Question 5.43


Progressive Charting 173

ct Vv eT . Ss ee 2 ee ds ha ls hls
Newnes Deerrter perenne Feeney Mery

EABIBIT 5.88 = Answer to Question 5.45


CHAPTER SIX

Bringing It
All Together:
Real-World Charts

opportunity to take advantage of interactive workshop material, in-

eluding real-world, hands-on practice charts. Through working with
them, you will apply what you've learned in this course book. The goal of
this section is to provide a mechanism to determine your level of comfort
with candle charts, and the detailed answers help to further refine your
knowledge.

The charts show that while candle signals give valuable timing tools for
entering and exiting the markets, they are not 100% accurate. A chart might
show, for example, a bullish harami pattern with the market falling after the
emergence of that bullish signal. This is why stops are so important. My goal
is getting you comfortable with recognizing the patterns—even if they don't
work as forecast.

T his is where we bring it all together. The pages that follow give you an

In this chapter you willlearn .. .

* How to determine support and resistance levels for rising and falling
windows

How to determine the risk/reward aspects of a potential trade

To know when to stand aside and when to initiate a trade

How to tell if a trend 1s gaining or losing force

To name candle patterns on a chart

How to obtain bearish and bullish confirmation for a candle signal

The importance of viewing candle signals within market context

177


1728 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

* The importance of multiple layers of confirmation for support or
resistance
* The importance of trend in determining a candle signal

hey terms to watch for:

Bullish engulfing pattern
Dragonfly
Falling window
Hammer
Haram
Morning star
Northern doji
Resistance
Shooting star
Southern doji
Support

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Questions for Chapter Six: Bringing It All Together:
Real-World Charts

Use Exhibit 6.1 for questions 1 and 2.
1. For areas A, B, and C, which ts arising window? A falling window?
2. What are their respective support and resistance zones?

Use Exhibit 6.2 to answer questions 3 to 7.
3. Highlight the three rising windows before candle line A on March 22.

4. Based on these rising windows, where would support levels be? If the
first support at the top rising window was broken, where would we ex-
pect next support?

5. What is the candle line at X?

6. If one buys at line X, where 1s a potential resistance area? (hint: Connect
highs from A and B.)

7. Based on the question above, would a buy on the close of line X present
an attractive risk/reward profile?

Use Exhibit 6.3 for questions 8 to 10.


sworssiquad Aq pas “saydein usdsy @

79 PUE [’9 SUONSAND 10) WeYD "AJEQ:swiarshs 0251) 4° LEMMING

fac

ou

Evel

#6

were

cual

SWS

ere

ue gud] Bil

82)
“8t:
62
"62
og)
*0€
be
‘be
ze
*ze

detntetatabeteates

179


uo saqued Aq pss “sxydein usdoy @
£902 £9 suonsand 105 weyD “Ayeg ON 7°9 LING
