
simply gins up whatever numbers it likes, for
its own purposes.
Once the finance minister had the number,
he went off to his regularly scheduled
monthly meetings with ministers of finance
from all the European countries. As the new
guy, he was given the floor. “When I told
them the number, there were gasps,” he said.
“How could this happen? I was like, You
guys should have picked up that the number
wasn’t right. But the problem was I sat behind a sign that said GREECE, not a sign that
said THE NEW GREEK GOVERNMENT.”After the
meeting the Dutch guy came up to him and
said, “George, we know it’s not your fault,
but shouldn’t someone go to jail?”
As he finishes his story the finance minister
stresses that this isn’t a simple matter of the
government lying about its expenditures.
“This wasn’t all due to misreporting,” he
says. “In 2009, tax collection disintegrated,
because it was an election year.”

112/396

“What?”
He smiles.
“The first thing a government does in an
election year is to pull the tax collectors off
the streets.”
“You’re kidding.”
Now he’s laughing at me. I’m clearly naïve.
THE COSTS OF running the Greek government

are only half the failed equation: there’s also
the matter of government revenues. The editor of one of Greece’s big newspapers had
mentioned to me in passing that his reporters had cultivated sources inside the country’s revenue service. They’d done this not so
much to expose tax fraud—which was so
common in Greece that it wasn’t worth writing about—but to find drug lords, human
smugglers, and other, darker sorts. A handful of the tax collectors, however, were outraged by the systematic corruption of their
business; it further emerged that two of them
were willing to meet with me. The problem

113/396

was that, for reasons neither wished to discuss, they couldn’t stand the sight of each
other. This, I’d be told many times by other
Greeks, was very Greek.
The evening after I met with the minister of
finance, I had coffee with one tax collector at
one hotel, then walked down the street and
had a beer with another tax collector at another hotel. Both had already suffered demotions, after their attempts to blow the whistle
on colleagues who had accepted big bribes to
sign off on fraudulent tax returns. Both had
been removed from high-status fieldwork to
low-status work in the back office, where
they could no longer witness tax crimes.
Each was a tiny bit uncomfortable; neither
wanted anyone to know he had talked to me,
as they feared losing their jobs in the tax
agency. And so let’s call them Tax Collector
No. 1 and Tax Collector No. 2.
Tax Collector No. 1—early sixties, business
suit, tightly wound but not obviously

114/396

nervous—arrived with a notebook filled with
ideas for fixing the Greek tax-collection
agency. He just took it for granted that I
knew that the only Greeks who paid their
taxes were the ones who could not avoid doing so—the salaried employees of corporations, who had their taxes withheld from
their paychecks. The vast economy of selfemployed workers—everyone from doctors
to the guys who ran the kiosks that sold the
International Herald Tribune—cheated (one
big reason why Greece has the highest percentage of self-employed workers of any
European country). “It’s become a cultural
trait,” he said. “The Greek people never
learned to pay their taxes. And they never
did because no one is punished. No one has
ever been punished. It’s a cavalier offense—like a gentleman not opening a door
for a lady.”
The scale of Greek tax cheating was at least
as incredible as its scope: an estimated two-

115/396

thirds of Greek doctors reported incomes under 12,000 euros a year—which meant, because incomes below that amount weren’t
taxable, that even plastic surgeons making
millions a year paid no tax at all. The problem wasn’t the law—there was a law on the
books that made it a jailable offense to cheat
the government out of more than 150,000
euros—but its enforcement. “If the law was
enforced,” the tax collector said, “every doctor in Greece would be in jail.” I laughed, and
he gave me a stare. “I am completely serious.” One reason no one is ever prosecuted—apart from the fact that prosecution
would seem arbitrary, as everyone is doing
it—is that the Greek courts take up to fifteen
years to resolve tax cases. “The one who does
not want to pay, and who gets caught, just
goes to court,” he says. Somewhere between
30 and 40 percent of the activity in the Greek
economy that might be subject to income tax
goes officially unrecorded, he says, compared

116/396

with an average of about 18 percent in the
rest of Europe.
The easiest way to cheat on one’s taxes was
to insist on being paid in cash, and fail to
provide a receipt for services. The easiest
way to launder cash was to buy real estate.
Conveniently for the black market—and
alone among European countries—Greece
has no working national land registry. “You
have to know where the guy bought the
land—the address—to trace it back to him,”
says the collector. “And even then it’s all
handwritten and hard to decipher.” But, I
say, if some plastic surgeon takes a million in
cash, buys a plot on a Greek island, and
builds himself a villa, there would be other
records—say, building permits. “The people
who give the building permits don’t inform
the Treasury,” says the tax collector. In the
apparently not-so-rare cases where the tax
cheat gets caught, he can simply bribe the tax
collector and be done with it. There are, of

117/396

course, laws against tax collectors accepting
bribes, explained the collector, “but if you get
caught, it can take seven or eight years to get
prosecuted. So in practice no one bothers.”
The systematic lying about one’s income
had led the Greek government to rely increasingly on taxes harder to evade: real estate and sales taxes. Real estate is taxed by
formula—to take the tax collectors out of the
equation—which generates a so-called objective value for each home. The boom in the
Greek economy over the last decade caused
the actual prices at which property changed
hands to far outstrip the computer-driven
appraisals. Given higher actual sales prices,
the formula is meant to ratchet upward. The
typical Greek citizen responded to the problem by not reporting the price at which the
sale took place but instead reporting a phony
price—which usually happened to be the
same low number at which the dated formula had appraised it. If the buyer took out a

118/396

loan to buy the house, he took out a loan for
the objective value and paid the difference in
cash, or with a black-market loan. As a result
the “objective values” grotesquely understate
the actual land values. Astonishingly, it’s
widely believed that all three hundred members of the Greek parliament declare the real
value of their houses to be the computergenerated objective value. Or, as both the tax
collector and a local real estate agent put it to
me, “every single member of the Greek parliament is lying to evade taxes.”
On he went, describing a system that was,
in its way, a thing of beauty. It mimicked the
tax-collecting systems of an advanced economy—and employed a huge number of tax
collectors—while it was in fact rigged to enable an entire society to cheat on their taxes.
As he rose to leave, he pointed out that the
waitress at the swanky tourist hotel failed to
provide us with a receipt for our coffees.

119/396

“There’s a reason for that,” he said. “Even
this hotel doesn’t pay the sales tax it owes.”
I walked down the street and found waiting
for me, in the bar of another swanky tourist
hotel, the second tax collector. Tax Collector
No. 2—casual in manner and dress, beerdrinking, but terrified that others might discover he had spoken to me—also arrived with
a binder full of papers, only his was stuffed
with real-world examples not of Greek
people but Greek companies that had
cheated on their taxes. He then started to
rattle off examples (“only the ones I personally witnessed”). The first was an Athenian
construction company that had built seven
giant apartment buildings and sold off nearly
a thousand condominiums in the heart of the
city. Its corporate tax bill honestly computed
came to 15 million euros, but the company
had paid nothing at all. Zero. To evade taxes
it had done several things. First, it never declared itself a corporation; second, it

120/396

employed one of the dozens of companies
that do nothing but create fraudulent receipts for expenses never incurred and then,
when the tax collector stumbled upon the
situation, offered him a bribe. The tax collector blew the whistle and referred the case
to his bosses—whereupon he found himself
being tailed by a private investigator, and his
phones tapped. In the end the case was resolved, with the construction company paying 2,000 euros. “After that I was taken off
all tax investigations,” said the tax collector,
“because I was good at it.”
He returned to his thick binder full of
cases. He turned the page. Every page in his
binder held a story similar to the one he had
just told me, and he intended to tell me all of
them. That’s when I stopped him. I realized
that if I let him go on we’d be there all night.
The extent of the cheating—the amount of
energy that went into it—was breathtaking.
In Athens, I several times had a feeling new

121/396

to me as a journalist: a complete lack of interest in what was obviously shocking material. I’d sit down with someone who knew the
inner workings of the Greek government: a
big-time banker, a tax collector, a deputy finance minister, a former MP. I’d take out my
notepad and start writing down the stories
that spilled out of them. Scandal after scandal poured forth. Twenty minutes into it I’d
lose interest. There were simply too many:
they could fill libraries, never mind a book.
The Greek state was not just corrupt but
also corrupting. Once you saw how it worked
you could understand a phenomenon that
otherwise made no sense at all: the difficulty
Greek people have saying a kind word about
one another. Individual Greeks are delightful: funny, warm, smart, and good company.
I left two dozen interviews saying to myself,
“What great people!” They do not share the
sentiment about one another: the hardest
thing to do in Greece is to get one Greek to

122/396

compliment another behind his back. No
success of any kind is regarded without suspicion. Everyone is pretty sure everyone is
cheating on his taxes, or bribing politicians,
or taking bribes, or lying about the value of
his real estate. And this total absence of faith
in one another is self-reinforcing. The epidemic of lying and cheating and stealing
makes any sort of civic life impossible; the
collapse of civic life only encourages more lying, cheating, and stealing. Lacking faith in
one another, they fall back on themselves
and their families.
The structure of the Greek economy is collectivist, but the country, in spirit, is the opposite of a collective. Its real structure is
every man for himself. Into this system investors had poured hundreds of billions of
dollars. And the credit boom had pushed the
country over the edge, into total moral
collapse.

123/396

KNOWING NOTHING ELSE about the Vatopaidi

monastery except that, in a perfectly corrupt
society, it had somehow been identified as
the soul of corruption, I made my way up to
the north of Greece, in search of a bunch of
monks who had found new, improved ways
to work the Greek economy. The first stage
was fairly easy: the plane to Greece’s second
city of Thessaloníki, the car being driven
along narrow roads at nerve-racking speeds,
and a night with a lot of Bulgarian tourists at
a surprisingly delightful hotel in the middle
of nowhere called the Eagles Palace. There
the single most helpful hotel employee I have
ever met (ask for Olga) handed me a stack of
books and said wistfully how lucky I was to
be able to visit the place. The Vatopaidi monastery, along with nineteen others, was built
in the tenth century on a thirty-seven-milelong-by-six-mile-wide peninsula in northeast
Greece called Mount Athos. Mount Athos
now is severed from the mainland by a long

124/396

fence, and so the only way onto it is by boat,
which gives the peninsula the flavor of an island. Onto this island no women are allowed—no female animals of any kind, in
fact, except for cats. The official history
ascribes the ban to the desire of the church
to honor the Virgin; the unofficial one to the
problem of monks hitting on female visitors.
The ban has stood for one thousand years.
This explains the high-pitched shrieks the
next morning, as the ancient ferry packed
with monks and pilgrims pulls away from the
docks. Dozens of women gather there to
holler at the top of their lungs, but with such
good cheer that it is unclear whether they are
lamenting or celebrating the fact that they
cannot accompany their men. Olga has told
me that she was pretty sure I was going to
need to hike some part of the way to Vatopaidi, and that the people she has seen off to
the holy mountain don’t usually carry with
them anything so redolent of the modern

125/396

material world as a wheelie bag. As a result,
all I have is an Eagles Palace plastic laundry
bag with spare underwear, a toothbrush, and
a bottle of Ambien.
The ferry chugs for three hours along a
rocky, wooded, but otherwise barren coastline, stopping along the way to drop monks
and pilgrims and guest workers at other
monasteries. The sight of the first one just
takes my breath away. It’s not a building but
a spectacle: it’s as if someone had taken Assisi or Todi or one of the other old central
Italian hill towns and plopped it down on the
beach, in the middle of nowhere. Unless you
know what to expect on Mount Athos—it has
been regarded by the Eastern Orthodox
Church for more than a millennium as the
holiest place on earth, and it enjoyed for
much of that time a symbiotic relationship
with Byzantine emperors—these places come
as a shock. There’s nothing modest about
them; they are grand and complicated and

126/396

ornate and obviously in some sort of competition with one another. In the old days, pirates routinely plundered them, and you can
see why: it would be almost shameful not to,
for a pirate.
There are many places in the world where
you can get away with not speaking Greek.
Athens is one of them; the Mount Athos
ferryboat is not. I am saved by an Englishspeaking young man who, to my untrained
eye, looks like any other monk: long dark
robes, long dark shaggy beard, fog of unfriendliness which, once penetrated, evaporates. He spots me using a map with thumbnail sketches of the monasteries and trying
to determine where the hell I am meant to
get off the boat: he introduces himself. His
name is Cesar; he’s Romanian, the son of a
counterespionage secret policeman in the
nightmarish regime of Nicolae Ceaus¸escu.
Somehow he has retained his sense of humor, which counts as some kind of miracle.

127/396

He explains that if I knew anything about
anything I would know that he was no monk,
merely another Romanian priest on holiday.
He’s traveled from Bucharest, with two
enormous trunks on wheelies, to spend his
summer vacation in one of the monasteries.
Three months living on bread and water with
no women in sight is his idea of a vacation.
The world outside Mount Athos he finds
somehow lacking.
Cesar draws me a little map to use to get to
Vatopaidi and gives me a more general lay of
the land. The mere fact that I don’t have a
beard will expose me as a not terribly holy
man, he explains, if my mauve Brooks Brothers shirt doesn’t do it first. “But they are used
to having visitors,” he said, “so it shouldn’t
be a problem.” Then he pauses and asks,
“But what is your religion?”
“I don’t have one.”
“But you believe in God?”
“No.”

128/396

He thinks this over.
“Then I’m pretty sure they can’t let you in.”
He lets the thought sink in. “On the other
hand, how much worse could it get for you?”
he says, and chuckles.
An hour later I’m walking off the ferry
holding nothing but the Eagles Palace hotel
laundry bag and Cesar’s little map, and he’s
still repeating his own punch line—“How
much worse could it get for you?”—and
laughing more loudly each time.
The monk who meets me at Vatopaidi’s
front gate glances at the laundry bag and
hands me a form to fill in. An hour later,
having pretended to settle into my surprisingly comfortable cell, I’m carried by a river
of bearded monks through the church door.
Fearing that I might be tossed out of the
monastery before I got a sense of the place, I
do what I can to fit in. I follow the monks into their church; I light candles and jam them
into a tiny sandpit; I cross myself

129/396

incessantly; I air-kiss the icons. No one
seems to care one way or the other about the
obviously not-Greek guy in the mauve
Brooks Brothers shirt, though right through
the service a fat young monk who looks a bit
like Jack Black glares at me, as if I was neglecting some critical piece of instruction.
Otherwise the experience was sensational,
to be recommended to anyone looking for a
taste of tenth-century life. Beneath titanic
polished golden chandeliers, and surrounded
by freshly cleaned icons, the monks sang; the
monks chanted; the monks vanished behind
screens to utter strange incantations; the
monks shook what sounded like sleigh bells;
the monks floated by waving thuribles, leaving in their wake smoke and the ancient odor
of incense. Every word that was said and
sung and chanted was biblical Greek (it
seemed to have something to do with Jesus
Christ), but I nodded right along anyway. I
stood when they stood, and sat when they

130/396

sat: up and down we went like pogo sticks,
for hours. The effect of the whole thing was
heightened by the monks’ magnificently wild
beards. Even when left to nature, beards do
not all grow in the same way. There are
types: the hopelessly porous mass of fuzz;
the Osama bin Laden/Assyrian-king trowel;
the Karl Marx bird’s nest. A surprising number of the monks resembled the Most Interesting Man in the World from the Dos Equis
commercial. (“His beard alone has experienced more than a lesser man’s entire
body.”)
The Vatopaidi monks have a reputation for
knowing a lot more about you than you imagine they do, and for sensing what they do
not know. A woman who runs one of the big
Greek shipping firms told me over dinner in
Athens that she had found herself seated on
a flight not long ago beside Father Ephraim,
the abbot of Vatopaidi (business class). “It
was a very strange experience,” she said. “He

131/396

knew nothing about me, but he guessed
everything. My marriage. How I felt about
my work. I felt that he completely knew me.”
Inside their church I doubted their
powers—in the middle of a great national
scandal they have allowed a writer, albeit one
who has not formally announced himself, to
show up, bunk down, and poke around their
monastery without asking the first question.
But coming out of the church I finally get
seized: a roundish monk with a salt-andpepper beard and skin the color of a brown
olive corners me. He introduces himself as
Father Arsenios.
For most of the 1980s and 1990s, Greek interest rates had run a full 10 percent higher
than German ones, as Greeks were regarded
as far less likely to repay a loan. There was
no consumer credit in Greece: Greeks didn’t
have credit cards. Greeks didn’t usually have
mortgage loans, either. Of course, Greece
wanted to be treated, by the financial

132/396

markets, like a properly functioning Northern European country. In the late 1990s they
saw their chance: get rid of their own currency and adopt the euro. To do this they
needed to meet certain national targets, to
prove that they were capable of good
European citizenship—that they would not,
in the end, run up debts that other countries
in the euro area would be forced to repay. In
particular they needed to show budget deficits under 3 percent of their gross domestic
product, and inflation running at roughly
German levels. In 2000, after a flurry of statistical manipulation, Greece hit the targets.
To lower the budget deficit the Greek government moved all sorts of expenses (pensions, defense expenditures) off the books.
To lower Greek inflation the government did
things like freeze prices for electricity and
water and other government-supplied goods,
and cut taxes on gas, alcohol, and tobacco.
Greek government statisticians did things

133/396

like remove (high-priced) tomatoes from the
consumer price index on the day inflation
was measured. “We went to see the guy who
created all these numbers,” a former Wall
Street analyst of European economies told
me. “We could not stop laughing. He explained how he took out the lemons and put
in the oranges. There was a lot of massaging
of the index.”
Which is to say that even at the time, some
observers noted that Greek numbers never
seemed to add up. A former IMF official
turned economic adviser to former Greek
prime minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis
turned Salomon Brothers analyst named
Miranda Xafa pointed out in 1998 that if you
added up all the Greek budget deficits over
the previous fifteen years they amounted to
only half the Greek debt. That is, the amount
of money the Greek government had borrowed to fund its operations was twice its declared shortfalls. “At Salomon we used to call

134/396

[the then head of the Greek National Statistical Service] ‘the Magician,’” says Xafa, “because of his ability to magically make inflation, the deficit, and the debt disappear.”
In 2001, Greece entered the European
Monetary Union, swapped the drachma for
the euro, and acquired for its debt an implicit European (read German) guarantee.
Greeks could now borrow long-term funds at
roughly the same rate as Germans—not 18
percent but 5 percent. To remain in the euro
zone, they were meant, in theory, to maintain budget deficits below 3 percent of GDP;
in practice, all they had to do was cook the
books to show that they were hitting the targets. Here, in 2001, entered Goldman Sachs,
which engaged in a series of apparently legal
but nonetheless repellent deals designed to
hide the Greek government’s true level of indebtedness. For these trades Goldman
Sachs—which, in effect, handed Greece a $1
billion loan—carved out a reported $300

135/396

million in fees. The machine that enabled
Greece to borrow and spend at will was analogous to the machine created to launder the
credit of the American subprime borrower—and the role of the American investment
banker in the machine was the same. The investment bankers also taught the Greek government officials how to securitize future receipts from the national lottery, highway
tolls, airport landing fees, and even funds
granted to the country by the European
Union. Any future stream of income that
could be identified was sold for cash up front
and spent. As anyone with a brain must have
known, the Greeks would be able to disguise
their true financial state for only as long as
(a) lenders assumed that a loan to Greece
was as good as guaranteed by the European
Union (read Germany), and (b) no one outside of Greece paid very much attention. Inside Greece there was no market for whistle-
