
400 Chapter 16

TRADING TACTICS

Upon completion of the market analysis, the trader should know
whether he or she wants to buy or sell the market. By this time,
money management considerations should have dictated the
level of involvement. The final step is the actual purchase or sale.
This can be the most difficult part of the process. The final deci-
sion as to how and where to enter the market is based on a com-
bination of technical factors, money management parameters,
and the type of trading order to employ. Let’s consider them in
that order.

Using Technical Analysis in Timing

There’s nothing really new in applying the technical principles
discussed in previous chapters to the timing process. The only
real difference is that timing covers the very short term. The time
frame that concerns us here is measured in days, hours, and min-
utes as opposed to weeks and months. But the technical tools
employed remain the same. Rather than going through all of the
technical methods again, we'll limit our discussion to some gen-
eral concepts.

1. Tactics on breakouts

2. The breaking of trendlines

3. The use of support and resistance
4. The use of percentage retracements
5. The use of gaps

Tactics on Breakouts: Anticipation
or Reaction?

The trader is forever faced with the dilemma of taking a position
in anticipation of a breakout, taking a position on the breakout
itself, or waiting for the pullback or reaction after the breakout
occurs. There are arguments in favor of each approach or all
three combined. If the trader is trading several units, one unit
can be taken in each instance. If the position is taken in antici-


Money Management and Trading Tactics 401

pation of an upside breakout, the payoff is a better (lower) price
if the anticipated breakout takes place. The odds of making a
bad trade, however, are increased. Waiting for the actual break-
out increases the odds of success, but the penalty is a later
(higher) entry price. Waiting for the pullback after the breakout
is a sensible compromise, providing the pullback occurs.
Unfortunately, many dynamic markets (usually the most prof-
itable ones) don’t always give the patient trader a second
chance. The risk involved in waiting for the pullback is the
increased chance of missing the market.

This situation is an example of how trading multiple posi-
tions simplifies the dilemma. The trader could take a small posi-
tion in anticipation of the breakout, buy some more on the break-
out, and add a little more on the corrective dip following the
breakout.

The Breaking of Trendlines

This is one of the most useful early entry or exit signals. If the
trader is looking to enter a new position on a technical sign of a
trend change or a reason to exit an old position, the breaking of
a tight trendline is often an excellent action signal. Other techni-
cal factors must, of course, always be considered. Trendlines can
also be used for entry points when they act as support or resis-
tance. Buying against a major up trendline or selling against a
down trendline can be an effective timing strategy.

Using Support and Resistance

Support and resistance are the most effective chart tools to use for
entry and exit points. The breaking of resistance can be a signal
for a new long position. Protective stops can then be placed under
the nearest support point. A closer protective stop could be placed
just below the actual breakout point, which should now function
as support. Rallies to resistance in a downtrend or declines to sup-
port in an uptrend can be used to initiate new positions or add to
old profitable ones. For purposes of placing protective stops, sup-
port and resistance levels are most valuable.


402 Chapter 16

Using Percentage Retracements

In an uptrend, pullbacks that retrace 40-60% of the prior advance
can be utilized for new or additional long positions. Because we’re
talking primarily about timing, percentage retracements can be
applied to very short term action. A 40% pullback after a bullish
breakout, for example, might provide an excellent buying point.
Bounces of 40-60% usually provide excellent shorting opportuni-
ties in downtrends. Percentage retracements can be used on intra-
day charts also.

Using Price Gaps

Price gaps on bar charts can be used effectively in the timing of
purchases or sales. After an upmove, for example, underlying
gaps usually function as support levels. Buy a dip to the upper
end of the gap or a dip into the gap itself. A protective stop can
be placed below the gap. In a bear move, sell a tally to the lower
end of the gap or into the gap itself. A protective stop can be kept
over the gap.

Combining Technical Concepts

The most effective way to use these technical concepts is to com-
bine them. Remember that when we're discussing timing, the
basic decision to buy or sell has already been made. All we're
doing here is fine tuning the entry or exit point. If a buy signal
has been given, the trader wants to get the best price possible.
Suppose prices dip into the 40-60% buying zone, show a promi-
nent support level in that zone, and/or have a potential support
gap. Suppose further that a significant up trendline is nearby.

All of these factors used together would improve the tim-
ing of the trade. The idea is to buy near support, but to exit
quickly if that support is broken. Violation of a tight down
trendline drawn above the highs of a downside reaction could
also be used as a buying signal. During a bounce in a down-
trend, the breaking of a tight up trendline could be a shorting
opportunity.


Money Management and Trading Tactics 403

COMBINING TECHNICAL FACTORS
AND MONEY MANAGEMENT

Besides using chart points, money management guidelines should
play a role in how protective stops are set. Assuming an account
size of $100,000, and using the 10% criteria for maximum com-
mitment, only $10,000 is available for the trade. The maximum
risk is 5%, or $5,000. Therefore, protective stops on the total posi-
tion must be placed in such a way that no more than $5,000
would be lost if the trade doesn’t work.

A closer protective stop would permit the taking of larger
positions. A looser stop would reduce the size of the position.
Some traders use only money management factors in determin-
ing where to place a protective stop. It’s critically important,
however, that the protective stop be placed over a valid resis-
tance point for a short position or below a valid support point
for a long position. The use of intraday charts can be especially
effective in finding closer support or resistance levels that have
some validity.

TYPES OF TRADING ORDERS

Choosing the right type of trading order is a necessary ingredient
in the tactical process. We'll concern ourselves only with some of
the more common types of orders: market, limit, stop, stop limit,
and market-if-touched (M.LT.).

1. The market order simply instructs your broker to buy or sell
at the current market price. This is usually preferable in fast
market conditions or when the trader wants to ensure that
a position is taken and to protect against missing a poten-
tially dynamic market move.

2. The limit order specifies a price that the trader is willing to
pay or accept. A buy limit order is placed below the current
market price and states the highest price the trader is will-
ing to pay for a purchase. A sell limit order is placed over the
current market price and is the lowest price the seller is


404

Chapter 16

willing to accept. This type of resting order is used, for
example, after a bullish breakout when the buyer wants to
buy a downside reaction closer to support.

. A stop order can be used to establish a new position, limit a

loss on an existing position, or protect a profit. A stop order
specifies a price at which an order is to be executed. A buy
stop is placed over the market and a sell stop under the mar-
ket (which is the opposite of the limit order). Once the stop
price is hit, the order becomes a market order and is exe-
cuted at the best price possible. On a long position, a sell
stop is placed below the market to limit a loss. After the
market moves higher, the stop can be raised to protect the
profit (a trailing stop). A buy stop could be placed above
resistance to initiate a long position on a bullish breakout.
Since the stop order becomes a market order, the actual
“fill” price may be beyond the stop price, especially in a fast
market.

. A stop limit order combines both a stop and a limit order.

This type of order specifies both a stop price where the
trade is activated and a limit price. Once the stop is elected,
the order becomes a limit order. This type of order is useful
when the trader wants to buy or sell a breakout, but wants
to control the price paid or received.

- The market-if-touched (M.LT.) order is similar to a limit

order, except that it becomes a market order when the
limit price is touched. An M.LT. order to buy would be
placed under the market like a limit order. When the limit
price is hit, the trade is made at the market. This type of
trade has one major advantage over the limit order. The
buy limit order placed under the market does not guaran-
tee a fill even if the limit price is touched. Prices may
bounce sharply from the limit price, leaving the order
unfilled. An M.LT. order is most useful when the trader
wants to buy the dip, but doesn’t want to risk missing the
market after the limit price is hit.


Money Management and Trading Tactics 405

Each of these orders is appropriate at certain times. Each
has its own strong and weak points. Market orders guarantee a
position, but may result in “chasing” the market. Limit orders
provide more control and better prices, but risk missing the
market. Stop limit orders also risk missing the market if prices
gap beyond the limit price. Stop prices are strongly recom-
mended to limit losses and protect profits. However, the use of
a buy or sell stop to initiate new positions may result in bad
fills. The market-if-touched order is particularly useful, but is
not allowed on some exchanges. Familiarize yourself with the
different types of orders and learn their strengths and weak-
nesses. Each of them has a place in your trading plan. Be sure
to find out which types of orders are permitted on the various
financial exchanges.

FROM DAILY CHARTS TO
INTRADAY PRICE CHARTS

Because timing deals with very short term market action, intraday
price charts are especially useful. Intraday charts are indispensable
for day trading purposes, although that’s not our focus here. We're
mainly interested in how intraday activity can be used to aid the
trader in the timing of purchases and sales once the basic decision
to enter or exit a market has been made.

It bears repeating that the trading process must begin
with a long range view and then gradually work toward the
shorter term. Analysis begins with monthly and weekly charts
for long term perspective. Then the daily chart is consulted,
which is the basis for the actual trading decision. The intraday
chart is the last one viewed for even greater precision. The long
term chart gives a telescopic view of a market. The intraday
chart allows more microscopic study. The technical principles
already discussed are clearly visible on these very sensitive
charts. (See Figures 16.1-16.3.)


SAP a0 Fars 7 — 7s id
: ‘Ty!

| ( NL phe

| Ma 5 Minute Bar Chart ' I -

Figure 16.1 A 5 minute bar chart of an S&P 500 futures contract showing
a day and a half of trading. The last five stochastic signals (see arrows) worked

pretty well. Intraday charts are used for very short term trading purposes.

f2re4i9e 12:50pm (Us He) 02/27/88 12:00pm

Treasury Bond Futures \ Ih kt 208

. 1 {I fyi) 08
, i Mm 4 [Pugh bhai

y i iy hy rity ‘ws
t ‘Sut T

‘i mon “fy en

10 Minute Bar Chart _

WARS Aaa < °

Figure 16.2. A 10 minute bar chart of a Treasury Bond futures contract
showing three days of trading. The last two stochastic signals show a sell

just after 10:10 on the morning of 2/26 and then a buy signal the following

morning around the same time.



Money Management and Trading Tactics

407

02/13/98 11:20am (DM H8) 03/02/98 10:20am
Deutsche Mark Futures | | 550
| \ | 0
+ | 587
60 Minute Bar Chart I | wa
mM iin ! a Ye
Stochastics (14-Bar) - ‘e
"27 "28 T2A9 "220 "23 2124 TBR an oe ‘27 T

Figure 16.3 A one hour bar chart of a Deutschemark futures contract
showing ten trading days. Three stochastic signals are shown (see arrows). A
buy signal on 2/17 turned to a sell on 2/24 and then another buy on 2/26.

THE USE OF INTRADAY
PIVOT POINTS

In order to achieve earlier entry with even tighter protective stops,
some traders try to anticipate where a market will close by the use
of pivot points. This technique combines seven key price levels
with four time periods. The seven pivot points are the previous
day’s high, low, and close and the current day’s open, high, low,
and close. The four time periods are applied to the current trading
day. They are the open, 30 minutes after the open, midday (about
12:30 New York time), and 35 minutes before the close.

These are average times and can be adjusted to the indi-
vidual markets. The idea is to use pivot points only as a timing
device when the trader believes a market is topping or bottoming.
Buy or sell signals are given as the pivot points are broken during
the day. The later in the day the signal is given, the stronger it is.


408 Chapter 16

As an illustration of a buy signal, if the market opens above the
previous day’s close, but is below the previous day’s high, a buy
stop is placed above the previous day’s high. If the buy stop is
elected, a protective sell stop is placed below the current day’s low.
At 35 minutes before the close, if no position has been taken, a
buy stop is placed above the current day’s high, with a protective
stop under today’s open. No action is generally taken during the
first 30 minutes of trading. As the day progresses, the pivot points
are narrowed as are the protective stops. As a final requirement on
a buy signal, prices must close above both the previous day’s clos-
ing price and today’s opening price.

SUMMARY OF MONEY
MANAGEMENT AND
TRADING GUIDELINES

The following list pulls together most of the more important ele-
ments of money management and trading.

. Trade in the direction of the intermediate trend.

. In uptrends, buy the dips; in downtrends, sell bounces.
Let profits run, cut losses short.

. Use protective stops to limit losses.

. Don’t trade impulsively; have a plan.

Plan your work and work your plan.

. Use money management principles.

. Diversify, but don’t overdo it.

Employ at least a 3 to 1 reward-to-risk ratio.

- When pyramiding (adding positions), follow these guide-
lines.

a. Each successive layer should be smaller than before.
b. Add only to winning positions.

c. Never add to a losing position.

d. Adjust protective stops to the breakeven point.

11. Never meet a margin call; don’t throw good money after
bad.

SPMPNAARWNH

_


Money Management and Trading Tactics 409

12. Close out losing positions before the winning ones.

13. Except for very short term trading, make decisions away
from the market, preferably when the markets are closed.

14. Work from the long term to the short term.

15. Use intraday charts to fine-tune entry and exit.

16. Master interday trading before trying intraday trading.

17. Try to ignore conventional wisdom; don’t take anything
said in the financial media too seriously.

18. Learn to be comfortable being in the minority. If you're
right on the market, most people will disagree with you.

19. Technical analysis is a skill that improves with experience
and study. Always be a student and keep learning.

20. Keep it simple; more complicated isn’t always better.

APPLICATION TO STOCKS

The trading tactics that we’ve covered in this chapter (and the
analytical tools in preceding chapters) also apply to the stock
market, with some minor adjustments. While futures traders
focus on short to intermediate trends, stock investors are more
concerned with intermediate to longer term trends. Stock trad-
ing places less emphasis on the very short term and makes less
use of intraday charts. But the general principles remain the
same for analyzing and trading markets—whether they’re in
the futures pits of Chicago or on the floor of the New York
Stock Exchange.

ASSET ALLOCATION

The money management guidelines presented in this chapter
refer mainly to futures trading. However, many of the princi-
ples included in that discussion relate to the need for proper
diversification in one’s investment portfolio and touches on
the subject of asset allocation. Asset allocation refers to how a
person’s portfolio is divided among stocks, bonds, and cash


410 Chapter 16

(usually in the form of a money market fund or Treasury Bills).
It can also refer to how much of one’s portfolio should be allo-
cated to foreign markets. Asset allocation also refers to how
one’s stockholdings are spread among the various market sec-
tors and industry groups. And, more recently, it deals with how
much of one’s portfolio should be allocated to traditional com-
modity markets.

MANAGED ACCOUNTS AND
MUTUAL FUNDS

Managed accounts have been available in the futures markets for
several years and have provided a vehicle for those wishing to put
some money into futures but lacked the expertise to do so them-
selves. Managed accounts have provided a sort of mutual fund
approach to futures. Even though managed futures accounts
invest in all futures markets—including currencies, commodities,
bonds, and stock index futures—they still provide some measure
of diversification from bonds and stocks. Part of the diversifica-
tion is due to their practice of trading from both the long and the
short side. Another part comes from the commodity portion
itself. However, the ability to devote some of one’s assets to com-
modities was made even easier during 1997,

Oppenheimer Real Assets, launched in March 1997, is the
first mutual fund devoted exclusively to commodity investing. By
investing in commodity-linked notes, the fund is able to fashion
a commodity portfolio that tracks the Goldman Sachs
Commodity Index, which includes 22 commodity markets. Since
commodities often trend in opposite directions to bonds and
stocks, they provide an excellent diversification vehicle. Proper
diversification requires spreading one’s assets among market
groups or classes that have a low correlation to each other—in
other words, they don’t always trend in the same direction.
Commodities certainly fit that criteria.

We point these things out for two reasons. One is to show
that the areas of money management and asset allocation are very
much intertwined. The second is to show that the markets them-


Money Management and Trading Tactics 411

selves are very much intertwined. In the next two chapters, you'll
see how closely linked the futures and stock markets really are,
and why it’s important that stock investors keep informed of
what’s going on in the futures markets. Chapter 17 will introduce
you to intermarket technical analysis.

MARKET PROFILE

We couldn’t leave the subject of intraday charts without introduc-
ing one of the most innovative approaches to intraday trading
called Market Profile. This trading technique was developed by J.
Peter Steidlmayer, a former floor trader on the Chicago Board of
Trade. Mr. Steidlmayer’s approach has gained an enthusiastic fol-
lowing over the past decade, especially in the futures markets.
Market Profile can, however, be applied to common stocks as well.
It’s not an easy approach to grasp. But those traders that have done
so give it very high marks. Dennis Hynes, an expert in Market
Profile trading, explains the approach in Appendix B.




The Link Be ween
Stocks and Futures:

Intermarket Analysis

ae

When the first edition of this book was published in 1986 the sep-
aration of the commodity futures world from the more tradition-
al world of stocks and bonds was already starting to break down.
Twenty years ago, commodities referred to such things as corn,
soybeans, porkbellies, gold, and oil. These were traditional com-
modities that could be grown, mined, or refined. Dramatic
changes took place from 1972 to 1982 with the introduction of
futures contracts on currencies, Treasury Bonds, and stock index
futures. The term “commodities” gave way to “futures” since
bonds and stocks were hardly commodities. But they were futures
contracts. Since then, the world of futures trading has blended
with that of traditional stocks and bonds to the point that they
can hardly be separated. As a result, the technical analysis meth-
ods used to analyze the different financial markets have become
more universally applied.

413


414 Chapter 17

On any given day, quotes are readily available for dollar
futures, bond futures, and stock index futures—and they often
move in sync with one another. The direction those three markets
move is often affected by what happens in the commodity pits.
Program trading, which occurs when the price of the S&P 500
futures contract is out of line with the S&P 500 cash index, is a
day-to-day reality. For those reasons, it seems clear that the more
understanding you have about the world of futures trading, the
more insight you will gain into the entire financial marketplace.

It has become clear that action in the futures markets can
have an important influence on the stock market itself. Early warn-
ings signs of inflation and interest rate trends are usually spotted
in the futures pits first, which often determine the direction stock
prices will take at any given time. Trends in the dollar tell us a lot
about the strength or weakness of the American economy, which
also has a major impact on corporate earnings and the valuation
of stock prices. But the linkage goes even deeper than that. The
stock market is divided into sectors and industry groups. Rotation
into and out of those groups is often dictated by action in futures.
With the tremendous growth in mutual funds, and sector funds in
particular, the ability to capitalize on sector rotation into winning
groups and out of losing ones has become much simpler.

In this chapter, we’ll deal with the broader subject of inter-
market analysis as it deals with the interplay between currencies,
commodities, bonds, and stocks. Our primary message is how
closely the four markets are linked. We'll show how to use the
futures markets in the process of sector and industry group rota-
tion within the stock market itself.
