
103

P3T Signals

Top dashed line represents
pivot point calculation for
R-1, which was 949

Candles inside
box shows
high-low-close
from 8/20/02,
which was
949.5-931.5-939.8.

Bullish harami
Bottom dashed line
represents pivot point
calculation of S-1, 931.
60-minute chart

FIGURE 6.3

S&P pivoting off points. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

One other coincidence that should be pointed out is that on August 20,
the high was 949.5 and the low was 931.5, almost the same as the calculations
for R1 and S1 and the actual highs and lows for the next day, showing the
tendency for prices to remain in a range. Also, note that the market traded
at the pivot point resistance level several times. I’ve noticed markets bounce
off support or resistance target levels two, three, and even four times. As a
general rule, I usually will only take a trade based off the first test of the S1
or R1 pivot number. The reason, as an old saying goes, is that if you go to
the well one too many times, then the well will run dry on you. By the time
a trader gets used to or identifies a particular pattern, the pattern can change,
resulting in a loss.

P3T SIGNALS
Now let me introduce you to what I call the trading method for P3T signals—
Person’s Pivot Point Trade signal. P3T combines techniques of pivot point

104

PIVOT POINT ANALYSIS: A Powerful Weapon

analysis, candle charting, and technical indicators such as stochastics to
help confirm trade setups or turning points to capture and profit from a
price move.
Following are some examples of different markets and different time
frames to help illustrate the powerful signals that develop using this
combination.
On a daily chart for silver (Figure 6.4), I identified that the market had
formed a shooting star followed by a potential doji after about a seven-week
runup. This pattern indicated that the market was due for a correction. That
formation indicated a tug-of-war between the bulls and the bears and that a
top had formed, based on those combined candles.
I had a second-opinion indicator using pivot point analysis on a monthly
time frame to determine the potential price range or support and resistance
point for the next month. Most traders who are familiar with pivot point
analysis associate it with day-trading and do calculations only on a daily
basis, but this example shows you why daily, weekly, and monthly calculations can be extremely successful and offer a more powerful method of analyzing price objectives.

Shooting star

FIGURE 6.4

Setup in silver. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

105

P3T Signals

The high for March silver in December was $4.635, the low was $4.125,
and the close was $4.58. The pivot point calculations made $4.7737 (rounded
off to $4.775) the first resistance and $4.2637 the first support. The exact high
was $4.775!
Now look at the after picture shown in Figure 6.5, which shows a powerful selling wave that took command of the price in silver following the
bearish candle pattern. Not only did the pivot point calculation numbers
alert me to the potential high almost two weeks in advance, but the candle
pattern also confirmed it.
The January slide took prices close to the $4.2637 pivot point calculation for the S1 support target. The actual low in January was $4.205—not
exact but darn close. Combining pivot point analysis with candle charting
techniques and then including a Western market indicator such as the stochastic oscillator may give you better trading signals and verification so you
can have more confidence in your own trading abilities.
Figure 6.6, the weekly chart for U.S. Dollar Index futures, with exponential moving averages for three time periods added, provides another
great before-after example, illustrating that candle chart patterns and pivot

Shooting star and monthly R1 was 477.

Actual low 420.5;
monthly S1 was 426.

Bullish convergence

FIGURE 6.5

Afterglow in silver. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

106

PIVOT POINT ANALYSIS: A Powerful Weapon

Shooting star

FIGURE 6.6

Bearish harami cross
Weekly R1 is 120.98;
actual high, 120.88.

P3T trade in U.S. dollar. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

point analysis work together with other indicators not only on daily charts
but for other time periods as well. Look at the shooting star formation that
exposed the turning point for the market during the first week in July. The
next candle was a hanging man, which certainly warned that the trend was
changing. The result was a complete market reversal that resulted in a 950point decline within 21 ⁄2 months.
After another rally that recovered most of the gains following the midSeptember low, look at the bearish harami that formed at the end of January.
The characteristics were that the market had had a long advance (nearly four
months), and a long white candle had formed (meaning the market closed
above the open and there were little or no shadows). The next candle was a
doji where the market had a wide range but closed at or quite close to the
open. Another observation is that the market was forming a major double top
from the prior high.
A plan of attack would be to sell short and place the initial stop as a stop
close only order above the January high. The reason I would have selected

107

P3T Signals

that as my risk target was, if the market retests the high, I would not want to
be stopped out and then have to watch the market price fail off the high. I
would want to be out only if prices made a new all-time high close above that
level, which would signal the market’s acceptance of a new higher price
plateau and would probably spark an advance to newer highs.
But it gets better. The week of the long white candle (January 25, 2002)
has a high of 120.30, a low of 118.02, and a close of 120.18. By using the pivot
point calculations, the key target resistance (R1) is 120.98. Combining that
target number with the bearish harami cross gave a powerful one-two punch
of confidence to sell short. As you can see, the high that next week (February 1, 2002) was 120.88 as the doji candle formed.
Yes, I know it was not exactly on the number, but again it was close
enough. With confirmation from the candle pattern and the prior high back
in July 2001, this classified as a picture-perfect P3T sell signal!
Take a look in Figure 6.7 at what happened to the U.S. Dollar Index
after the bearish signals at the double top. In addition to those signals, the

Double top confirmed
with a bearish harami
cross and weekly R1
pivot point

Exponential moving
averages (3, 9, 18 periods)
cross over.

FIGURE 6.7
permission.)

U.S. dollar follows the script. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

108

PIVOT POINT ANALYSIS: A Powerful Weapon

three exponential moving averages (4-, 9-, and 18-week periods) made a
dead crossover in April (when the short-term moving averages cross below
the longer-term moving averages, a sell signal is indicated). The dollar’s
value continued the trend lower for many months.
Now let’s confirm the amazing discovery that pivot point analysis might
combine with candle chart patterns to offer traders a powerful and consistent method for verifying trade signals. Figure 6.8, the 60-minute chart of
crude oil futures, was printed out on August 1, 2002. Based on price action
from the previous week (July 26, 2002, high of $27.75, low of $25.95, and
close of $26.54), the R1 price target for the week was $27.54.
By doing your homework on Friday or by downloading the numbers
from the National Futures advisory service web site, you would have been
armed with the potential price range for that week. It would have alerted
you to watch the price action if crude oil got to $27.54. When it did, the ensuing bearish engulfing pattern combined with the bearish divergence on the
stochastics confirmed and generated another textbook P3T sell signal. The
actual high was $27.69, a difference of only 15 cents from the target number.

Weekly pivot point R1 27.54

Bearish engulfing

Bearish
divergence

FIGURE 6.8

Alert in crude oil. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

P3T Signals

109

This move might not seem to be significant or dramatic at first glance,
but if you look closely at this chart, you will notice that this was a decline
of nearly $1.25 per barrel in less than 24 hours. That figure equates to $1,250
on a single futures contract.
This next example is from a specific trade recommendation made in the
Weekly Bottom Line Newsletter for the week ending May 10, 2002. In that
recommendation, I explained fully how to examine and develop an exact
P3T trade signal for the July cotton futures contract. Looking at the data
from the prior week ending May 3, 2002, the high was 35.70 cents, the low
was 32.85 cents, and the close was 33.52 cents. Using the pivot point calculations, the projected weekly target low for S1 was 32.35 cents, and the calculation for the R1 target high was 35.20 cents.
Because I always do the monthly analysis, let me include that also. During the month of April the high was 40.71 cents, the low was 34.30, and the
month ended at 34.71. Doing the pivot point calculations again to project
the monthly targets for May, the S1 key support figure was 32.61 cents, and
the monthly target for R1 resistance was 39.02 cents. Using figures from
both the previous week and the previous month, you now have the potential projected price ranges for those time periods.
I cannot stress enough why using the pivot point calculations to project
two different time frames is important. If you think about it, in any given
month there normally are four full weeks and 22 business days. Every week
and every month will have an established price range. The high for the month
will usually be made on one day, and it also will be the high for that week.
The low for the month will usually be made on one day, and it also will be the
low for that week. At the end of the month prices will usually settle somewhere in between.
If you have a target level to alert you to focus on that market if and when
prices trade near that level, it gives you an edge in the market, allowing you
to act rather than react to the market. More specifically, if both the weekly
and monthly numbers are close to each other, then more close examination
to find an opportunity to place a trade and to develop a game plan in either
futures or options is warranted.
Figure 6.9 is the cotton chart and following are my comments and the
exact trade recommendation as they appeared in the Weekly Bottom Line
Newsletter for the week ending May 10, 2002:
The monthly support is 32.61 and Friday’s low was 32.85, which is
close enough for me, especially after a continuous price decline from
being at nearly 41.00 cents four weeks ago. Bullish divergence and a
hammer formation on the candlestick improve the odds that a shortterm bottom is in place and a bounce is due. Look to buy near 33.25
to 32.65 and use 32.20 stop close only.

110

PIVOT POINT ANALYSIS: A Powerful Weapon

Monthly pivot point S1 32.61
Hammer

Stochastics
bullish
convergence

FIGURE 6.9

Hammering in a bottom in cotton. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

with permission.)

By having both the monthly and the weekly pivot point calculations in
addition to a bullish stochastic divergence, a hammer formation on the candle chart, and the fact that the market had plunged nearly 800 points in about
17 days, I was willing to map out a specific trade for the following week. If
you do your calculations at the end of trading on Friday, collecting the data
for all the markets you have an interest in tracking, then you have Saturday
and Sunday to develop your trading plans. That analysis is what I provide in
my advisory service.
Now let’s look at Figure 6.10 for the results. During the next trading session on Monday, May 6, the low was 33.05 cents. In the next trading session
on Tuesday, the low was also 33.05 cents. If you missed the trade recommendation even after those two days, you still had an opportunity to enter the
position near 33.25 cents on Wednesday, May 8. Let’s say you established a
game plan and placed an order to buy. With your target risk factor set, the
hardest part of this trade would be to decide where to take a profit.
The monthly projected R1 resistance targeted the high at 39.02. The actual high was 39.65 on the last day of the month. The market came within 24

111

P3T Signals

Prior month’s high 40.71, low 34.30, close 34.97
used to calculate monthly R1 of 39.02 and S1 of 32.61.

Monthly target R1 was 39.02.
Notice the high here is 39.65.

Weekly low 33.05 both Monday
and Tuesday, giving an
opportunity to enter market.

FIGURE 6.10

Prices take off! (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

points of the targeted monthly S1 low number and 63 points of the monthly
R1 high target—really not a bad margin of error, wouldn’t you agree?
These are facts—hard-core black and white indisputable facts—of how
these numbers work. Again, not all the numbers work this well, but it is impressive to even an analyst such as myself to see how they still work for different time frames and on different investment vehicles and products as in
this cotton example.
The initial performance bond requirement for cotton futures at the time
was $1,000. If you had bought at the high end of the recommendation, which
was 33.25 cents, and rode it to only, say, 38.50 cents or just shy of the 39.02
monthly target number, you would have captured a 550-point move in fewer
than 20 trading days or $2,750 per contract!
Keep in mind the stop or risk factor that was targeted was about $500.
This particular loss factor was on a stop close only basis, which is different
than a regular stop. To get stopped out, the market would need to close
below 32.20 cents. However, you should know there are significant increases
in risk and loss amounts associated with stop close only orders. For instance,

112

PIVOT POINT ANALYSIS: A Powerful Weapon

the market could trade limit down and not fill you at all, or it could close
significantly below 32.20 and give you a greater amount of loss than you
wanted.
The bottom line is that even ordinary stops do not guarantee a specific
loss amount. Stop close only orders are used so that I know the market
proved me wrong by trading lower and staying at that low price on the close.
A regular stop could be triggered on an intraday move, and then the market
could snap right back up and take me out of the trade. In essence, I could be
right in my analysis and still lose money using regular stops. This method of
order entry is discussed in further detail in Chapter 10.
Other trading tactics such as liquidating half of your positions at a target
price and then moving stops up as the market moves in your favor (known
as trailing stops) could have been employed. Or maybe you would have ridden the market for the entire 1,400-point move, which would have equaled
about $7,000.
Taking the devil’s advocate point of view, you may be wondering why,
if this method is so good, would anyone in their right mind want to share
this information with others? Simple. You can use many methods to trade.
Most methods have a solid foundation of followers and credibility. So does
this method. I believe the act of teaching and sharing ideas only helps me to
become a better trader by instilling a higher degree of confidence and reinforcing sound trading methods. The key for success for any method to work
is not only believing in it but also acting on that information and executing
or following through with the necessary action.
If you are a novice or inexperienced in futures trading, or even if you
are an experienced trader looking to expand your knowledge in technical
analysis, it might pay you to learn this trading method and incorporate it
into your trading style so you can survive this business and, more important,
profit from it.

CHAPTER 7

Day-Trading,
Swing Trading
Acting on Analysis

Anytime there is change, there is opportunity.
So it is paramount that an organization get
energized rather than paralyzed.
—Jack Welch, CEO, General Electric

love Jack Welch’s statement! It is so true and applies so well to the trading industry. A trader needs to adapt and change with the ebb and flow
of the markets. Sitting on a position, cutting out of a trade early, or not
taking action on a well-thought-out trading plan all lead to emotional paralysis. Understanding the potential opportunities and then having the confidence to act on a belief in them will no doubt result in positive energy and,
thus, build your trading skills.
With that admonishment in mind, I want to introduce you to another
valuable lesson using the pivot point method of price forecasting. By taking
the daily, weekly, or monthly numbers, you can target a price level and then
wait for confirmation from a recognized chart pattern. This combination of
techniques can help you take advantage of the price swings from market reactions off those numbers. By having the calculations based on different
time frames, you can use them whether you are day-trading or swing trading.
When the market trades near these pivot numbers, the reaction can be
a significant bounce from a support number or the market can simply stall
before blowing through the support number and then continuing the trend
lower. In my experience there is usually a reaction from the numbers; the
longer term the calculation, the bigger the reaction. The only thing you really
need to do as a trader is to get in the market, capture a significant price
move, and then get out with a profit.

I

113

114

DAY-TRADING, SWING TRADING: Acting on Analysis

Figure 7.1 is a 60-minute chart from July 16 to July 30, 2002. Pivot point
analysis, based on the weekly numbers in one of the biggest down months
in S&P 500 index history, targeted the support level for the low within 9
points. The week ending July 19, 2002, had a high of 929.5, a low of 840, and
a close at 844. The fundamental backdrop was extremely pessimistic with
all the corporate accounting scandals, doubts that the economy could sustain growth, Middle East tensions flaring, and earnings coming in weaker
than expected. Not many indicators were calling for a low or a turnaround
in the equity markets.
However, there were a few positive indicators, and pivot point analysis
targeted 781.67 for the S2 low number for the week ending July 26, 2002.
The hourly candle chart not only showed a version of a morning star formation but the actual low on the morning of July 24, 2002, was 771.30. The
market stayed at that level for less than two hours. So why is this important? If you only had access to the daily or monthly numbers, then you
missed out on the weekly projection for what turned out to be an important
and powerful turnaround in stock index futures history.

Neckline

Right shoulder
Left shoulder

Weekly pivot point 781
Head

FIGURE 7.1

Morning star formation

Performing in volatility. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

Day-Trading, Swing Trading: Acting on Analysis

115

As you look carefully at Figure 7.1, it also may reveal what I call a
“trade signal rich environment.” Notice the inverted head-and-shoulders
formation that developed? This formation may have helped to add conviction that a bottom was in place and that higher prices were coming.
Using the data from other markets also may help to give you more confidence in the strength or credibility than the target numbers for the S&P
alone may have. For the week ending July 19, 2002, the Dow futures had a
high of 8720, a low of 7945, and a close at 7998. Working out the pivot point
calculations, the S2 number was 7446. The June Dow futures were projected
to have support about 552 points lower on the week because they had closed
at 7998 on Friday, July 19 (chart not shown). Another thing to keep in mind
is that the Dow had closed at 9392 on July 5, so that would mean a decline
of 1,946 Dow points in 10 to 15 trading days to test the S2 target area of support. The actual low: 7450!
Now I know most investors were panicking, and I am sure some went
short, thinking the stock market was going to zero. Being armed with this
information may not have prompted you to go long, but I am sure that, if you
had the numbers in front of you and were trading, you would not have sold
short at the low.
Figure 7.2, the hourly chart for Nasdaq 100 index futures, is not as exact
as the previous example, but it helps to illustrate the point of alerting you
to a selling opportunity or at least not getting trapped into buying highs. Remember, most successful traders do not get into the habit of buying highs.
Taking the range for the previous week (August 26, 2002), the high was 985,
the low was 873, and the close was 912.5. The weekly price target for the R1
number was 974, using the pivot point formula.
On the first test of the 974 R1 number, the actual high was 973 so, in
essence, the RI target did stop the market’s advance initially. The next formation was a variation of a dark cloud cover. On the third try to advance
beyond the 974 R1 resistance number, a variation of an evening star formation developed. It was not a textbook pattern—the star looked more like a
spinning top formation than a shooting star—but it did warn of an impending top.
It was with that second formation that stochastics generated a bearish
divergence. At this point you might consider a short position. A sell signal
was confirmed by the continuation of the bearish divergence from the stochastic oscillator, and the market was unable to maintain momentum above
the 974 R1 level for any substantial period of time.
The next example (Figure 7.3) again comes from July 2002, one of the
most volatile time periods ever for the stock market. To have a reliable tool
to help discover a target price or forecast a high for the range in this period
was invaluable.

116

DAY-TRADING, SWING TRADING: Acting on Analysis

Variation of a
dark cloud cover

Evening star formation

Weekly pivot point
resistance 974
Evening star
formation

A

B

C

Stochastic cross
over sell signals
(A, B, C)

FIGURE 7.2

Nasdaq signals. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

Taking the numbers from the prior week ending on July 26, 2002, the
high was 856, the low was 771.30, and the close was 853.70. Those numbers
produced the projected price range for the next weekly trading session
(week ending August 2, 2002)—882.7 for the R1 first target resistance number and 911.70 for the R2 second target resistance. A bearish harami cross
formed on Monday, thus generating a critical early alert that the market’s
price advance was slowing or coming to an end.
That pattern, combined with the weekly pivot point calculations, would
have prevented you from buying at that level. Why would anyone even be
thinking about buying there? Well, the market was bouncing off a major fiveyear low, it was significantly oversold, and many investors were convinced
that the lows were in. After all, S&P 500 futures had experienced their single biggest monthly price decline in July, dating back to the inception of the
futures contract. The actual high was 916.
Let’s examine one more chart of the S&P 500 index, using the data from
the week ending May 3, 2002 (Figure 7.4). The high was 1091.8, the low was
1063.5, and the week closed at 1073. Applying the pivot point formula to
