Currency Trading For Dummies®, 2nd Edition
by Brian Dolan

Currency Trading For Dummies®, 2nd Edition
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River St.
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2011 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken,
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A
Reference for the Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun and Easy Way,
Dummies.com, Making Everything Easier!, and related trade dress are trademarks or registered
trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries,
and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their
respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The contents of this work are intended to further
general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and should
not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by
physicians for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and

specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of
fitness for a particular purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in
governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines,
equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in
the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other
things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and
precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of
further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the
organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should
be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between
when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any
promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any
damages arising herefrom.
For general information on our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-5724002.
For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011930128
ISBN: 978-1-118-01851-4
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Author
Brian Dolan is the chief currency strategist at GAIN Capital Group, and a 20-plus year veteran of
the interbank currency market. Brian provides research and market analysis to trading clients of
GAIN Capital and FOREX.com, the retail division of GAIN Capital Group.
Brian analyzes the G10 currency markets with a blend of fundamental and technical analysis to
provide actionable trading strategies.

A frequent commentator on currency-market developments and outlooks for major news media
including the Wall Street Journal, Reuters, Bloomberg, Dow Jones, CNN Money, and
MarketWatch.com, Brian has also appeared regularly as a currency analyst on financial TV
networks CNBC, Bloomberg Television, Fox Business News and BNN in Canada.
In addition, he has written numerous articles on currency trading, risk management, and technical
analysis for trading and investment journals such as Currency Trader, Active Trader, SFO
Magazine, Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities, and Futures.
Prior to joining GAIN Capital, Brian was a vice president at Bank Julius Bär, where he advised
hedge funds and high-net-worth individuals on currencies. He spent the first 12 years of his FX
career trading major currency pairs in the interbank market in New York at some of the world’s
largest banks, including Credit Suisse, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, and American Express Bank, as
well as two years in Bermuda as a proprietary trader at Butterfield Bank. Brian is a graduate of
Dartmouth College.

Dedication
To Brigid, for her love and for hanging in there through the ups and downs; and to Frank and
Catherine, for inspiring me to create a work for the future, just as you are. In memoriam to my
mother Peg, father Chuck, and sadly missed brother Tim, who taught me that life is not a dress
rehearsal.

Author’s Acknowledgments
My efforts to translate a career’s worth of currency trading experience into a book would be
extremely thin were it not for the many lessons I garnered from colleagues in the market over the
years. Readers of this book will benefit from the experience I’ve gained from many of you. Thanks
to Mark Galant, for founding GAIN Capital and offering me the opportunity to write this book. To
the trading team at GAIN: Tim O’Sullivan, Anthony Piccolo, Paul Spirgel, Rob Voorhees, Mike
Goret, Damon Gallo, and Alan Viola — it’s an honor and pleasure to work with some of the best
in the business. To Glenn Stevens and Samantha Roady, for setting the whole process in motion
and encouraging me to go the full distance. To Christa Conte and Henry Feintuch of Feintuch
Communications, for getting the word out to the media and then some. To my research team for
picking up the slack while I wrote: Eric Viloria, CMT; Chris Tevere, CMT; Kathleen Brooks; and
Dan Hwang. To Susan Hobbs for her fine editing assistance that made me get to the point, clearly.
To McLean D. Giles for his technical review. And to the editors and staff at Wiley Publishing,
especially Stacy Kennedy, for organizing the book in the first place.

Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments through our online registration form
located at http://dummies.custhelp.com. For other comments, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-5724002.
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the following:
Acquisitions, Editorial, and Media Development
Project Editor: Susan Hobbs
Acquisitions Editor: Stacy Kennedy
Copy Editor: Susan Hobbs
Assistant Editor: Erin Calligan Mooney
Editorial Program Coordinator: Joe Niesen
Technical Editor: McLean D. Giles
Editorial Manager: Jennifer Ehrlich
Editorial Supervisor and Reprint Editor: Carmen Krikorian
Editorial Assistants: David Lutton, Jennette ElNaggar
Art Coordinator: Alicia B. South
Cartoons: Rich Tennant (www.the5thwave.com)
Composition Services
Project Coordinator: Patrick Redmond
Layout and Graphics: Corrie Socolovitch
Proofreaders: Cara L. Buitron, Melissa Cossell
Indexer: Steve Rath
Publishing and Editorial for Consumer Dummies
Diane Graves Steele, Vice President and Publisher, Consumer Dummies

Kristin Ferguson-Wagstaffe, Product Development Director, Consumer Dummies
Ensley Eikenburg, Associate Publisher, Travel
Kelly Regan, Editorial Director, Travel
Publishing for Technology Dummies
Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher, Dummies Technology/General User
Composition Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services

Introduction
The forex market was forever the private domain of hedge funds, global banks, multinational
corporations, and wealthy private investors the world over. But this all changed a few years ago
when the Internet-based technological revolution of online trading spread over to the forex
markets. Today, tens of thousands of individual traders and investors all over the world are
discovering the excitement and challenges of trading in the forex market.
No question about it, forex markets can be one of the fastest and most volatile financial markets to
trade. Money can be made or lost in a matter of seconds or minutes. At the same time, currencies
can display significant trends lasting several days to weeks and even years. Most importantly,
forex markets are always moving, providing an accessible and target-rich trading environment.
In contrast to stock markets, which are more familiar and relatively intuitive to most investors, the
forex market somehow remains more elusive and seemingly complicated to newcomers.
I’ve spent my career in the forex market as a trader at some of the world’s largest financial
institutions. I’ve written Currency Trading For Dummies to pull back the curtain and strip away
the mystique of the currency market.
In this book, I show you how the forex market really works, what moves it, and how you can
actively trade it. I also provide you with the tools to develop a structured game plan you need to
trade in the forex market and not lose your shirt. I cover
Getting a handle on the forces that drive currency movements
Understanding forex market trading conventions and strategies
Interpreting economic data and official statements
Finding sources of data and market intelligence
Gauging market psychology, sentiment, and positioning
Identifying key traits of individual currency pairs
Utilizing technical analysis to spot trade opportunities
The secrets behind Copy Trading - how to make top traders work for you
Focusing on risk management to minimize losses and keep more of your gains

About This Book

If you’re an active trader looking for alternatives to trading stocks or futures, the forex market is
hard to beat. Online trading innovations over the past decade have made it accessible, both
technologically and financially.
But as an individual trader, gaining access to the forex market is only the beginning. Just because
you’ve got the keys to a Formula One race car doesn’t mean you’re ready to compete in a Grand
Prix. First, you have to understand how the car works. Then you have to figure out some of the
tactics and strategies the pros use. And then you have to get behind the wheel and practice,
developing your skills, instincts, and tactics as you go.
To succeed in the forex market, you’re going to have to do the same. This book gives you the nononsense information you need, with the perspective, experience, and insight of two forex market
veterans.
Whether you’re an experienced trader in other markets looking to expand into currencies, or a total
newcomer to trading looking to start out in currencies, this book has what you need. Best of all,
it’s presented in the easy to use For Dummies format. Divided into easy-to-follow parts, this book
can serve as both your reference and troubleshooting guide.
Note: Trading foreign currencies is a challenging and potentially profitable opportunity for
educated and experienced investors. However, before deciding to participate in the forex market,
you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite.
Most important, don’t invest money you can’t afford to lose. The leveraged nature of forex trading
means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds;
this may work against you as well as for you. (To manage exposure, employ risk-reducing
strategies such as stop-loss or limit orders.) Any off-exchange foreign exchange transaction
involves considerable exposure to risk, including, but not limited to, leverage, creditworthiness,
limited regulatory protection, and market volatility that may substantially affect the price or
liquidity of a currency or currency pair. Using an Internet-based trading system also involves
risks, including, but not limited to, the failure of hardware, software, and Internet connection.

Conventions Used in This Book
I keep the conventions to a minimum in this book. Here are the ones I use:
Italics are used for emphasis or to highlight new words or phrases.
Boldfaced text indicates key words in bulleted lists or the key steps of action lists.
Monotype font is used to refer to Web addresses and e-mail addresses.

Also, when you see references to eastern time (ET), that means whatever time it is in New York
City. Part of the year, that’s eastern standard time (EST) and part of the year it’s eastern daylight

time (EDT).

What You’re Not to Read
This book is designed to be an easy-access reference guide to currency trading. I cover each
subject in its entirety in individual chapters, and the information doesn’t depend on what comes
before or after. That means you’re able to jump around to the subjects you want to focus on and
skip those you feel comfortable with already or just aren’t interested in.
I highly recommend that complete beginners to trading in financial markets peruse the whole book
to get a solid idea of all that’s involved. Experienced traders from other markets will probably
want to focus more on the specific conventions and traits of the forex market — but you may also
find the technical and fundamental insights as applied to currencies enlightening for your forays
into trading this market.
No matter your background, you can skip paragraphs marked with the Technical Stuff icon without
giving up an understanding of the primary subject. Also, sidebars supplement the primary text —
you can skip them without missing the main point.

Foolish Assumptions
Making assumptions is always a risky business, but knowing where I’m coming from may help put
you at ease. Obviously, not all these assumptions will apply to you, but at least I’ll have it all out
in the open. In writing this book, I assume that:
You’ve heard about currency trading and you’re looking to find out more about what’s
involved before you try it.
You’re intrigued by the international dimensions of the forex markets and you want to find
out how to profit from currency movements.
You’re seeking to diversify your trading activities or hedge your investments.
You want to discover more about technical analysis and how it can be used to improve
trading results.
You understand that trading currencies carries the risk of losses.
You’re prepared to devote the time and resources necessary to understand what’s
involved in currency trading.
You have the financial resources to pursue margin trading, meaning that you’ll never risk

more than you can afford to lose without affecting your lifestyle.
You aren’t gullible enough to believe the infomercials that promise easy money by trading
currencies.
You understand that there is a big difference between gambling and speculating.
These assumptions should serve as a healthy reality check for you before you decide to jump in to
currency trading actively. A lot of it is similar to being a weekend golfer and being disappointed
when your play doesn’t reach pro-level scores. But when you think about it, why should it? The
pros are out there practicing and playing all day, every day — it’s their full-time job. Most people
can only hope to get a round in on the weekend or get to the driving range for a few hours a week.
Keep your perspective about what’s realistic for you, and you’ll be in a much better position to
profit from actively trading.

How This Book is Organized
I’ve divided Currency Trading For Dummies into five parts. In this section, I lay them all out for
you.

Part I: Trading the World’s Largest Financial Market
This part introduces you to the global forex market and gives you an idea of its size and scope.
You find out who the players are and what their styles and motivations are. I also look at the
impact of other financial markets on currencies. This part is also where I cover the nitty-gritty of
currency trading conventions and tools so you know exactly how and what you’re trading.

Part II: Driving Forces behind Currencies
In this part I look at the major fundamental and economic drivers that influence currency values.
Also, whether it’s economic data out of the United Kingdom or a political spat in the land down
under (that’s Australia, mate!), the forex market moves in response to developments from around
the world. I show you how to interpret the data and events like a pro, factoring in market
psychology and positioning. I also draw on my years of experience to offer insights that clue you in
to how major currencies typically trade so you can know what to expect before you take the
plunge.

Part III: Developing a Trading Plan
The military has an old saying: “Proper planning prevents piss-poor performance.” The forex

market is pretty much always open and constantly moving. To swim in this ocean and avoid the
sharks requires an organized and disciplined approach to trading. In this part, I detail different
trading styles, highlight concrete strategies, and provide a game plan for spotting trade
opportunities and being prepared to act on them. I introduce you to my preferred technical analysis
tools and my approach to using them. I also explore risk-management considerations and rules in
depth, because what you don’t know can cost you.

Part IV: Executing a Plan
In this part, I walk you through the various ways of establishing a position in the market, how to
manage the trade while it’s open, and how to close out the position on the most advantageous
terms. I also look at the learning curve of a trader and suggest techniques to move you up your
curve faster.

Part V: The Part of Tens
Here I offer a series of lists of key characteristics of successful traders, trading pitfalls to avoid,
risk management rules to live by, and resources to continue your trading education.

Icons Used in This Book
Throughout this book, you see icons in the margins, highlighting certain paragraphs. Here are the
icons I use and what they mean:

Theories are fine, but anything marked with a Tip icon tells you what currency traders
really think and respond to. These are the tricks of the trade.

Paragraphs marked with the Remember icon contain the key takeaways from this book and
the essence of each subject’s coverage.

Achtung, baby! The Warning icon highlights potential errors and misconceptions that can
cost you money, your sanity, or both.

You can skip anything marked by the Technical Stuff icon without missing out on the main
message, but you may find the information useful for a deeper understanding of the subject.

Where to Go from Here
This book is set up so you can jump right in to the topics that are of greatest interest to you. If
you’re an absolute newcomer to trading in general and currencies in particular, I recommend
reading Parts I and II to build a foundation for the other topics. If you have more experience with
trading, use the table of contents and index to find the subject you have questions about right now.
This book is a reference — keep it by your computer, and turn to it whenever you have a question
about currency trading.

Part I

Trading the World’s Largest Financial
Market

In this part . . .
I introduce you to the global currency market with an eye to demystifying it. I begin with an
overview of the currency market and how it’s the ultimate traders’ market. Next, I run you through
a global currency trading day, so you know what to expect. I also examine how currencies and
other financial markets are interconnected. Then I show you who the major players are and look at
their strategies and motivations for trading in the currency market.

Chapter 1

Currency Trading 101
In This Chapter
Looking at currency trading as a business
Getting a sense of what moves currencies
Developing trading strategies to exploit opportunities
Implementing the trading plan
The foreign exchange, or forex, market has exploded onto the scene and is the hot new financial
market. It’s been around for years, but advances in electronic trading have now made it available
to individual traders on a scale unimaginable just a few years ago. But just because currency
trading is more accessible doesn’t mean it’s widely understood.
I’ve spent my professional career in the forex market and I can’t think of a better traders’ market.
In my opinion, nothing quite compares to the speed and exhilaration of the forex market or the
intellectual and psychological challenges of trading in it. I’ve always looked at my work as
essentially doing the same thing every day, but no two days are ever the same. Not many people
can say that about their day jobs, and I wouldn’t trade it for the world, no pun intended.

Defining Currency Trading
At its heart, currency trading is speculation about the value of one currency versus another. The
key words in that last sentence are speculation and currency. I think that looking at currency
trading from those two angles is essential.
On the one hand, currency trading is speculation, pure and simple, just like buying an individual
stock or any other financial security in the hope that it will make a profitable return. On the other
hand, the securities on which you’re speculating are the currencies of various countries. Viewed
separately, that means currency trading is both about the dynamics of market speculation, or
trading, and the factors that affect the value of currencies. Put them together and you’ve got the
largest, most dynamic and exciting financial market in the world.
Throughout this book, I approach currency trading from those two perspectives, looking at them
separately and blending them together to give you the information you need to trade in the forex
market.

Speculating as an enterprise
Let me first tell you what speculating isn’t; speculating is not gambling, and it’s not investing.
Gambling is about playing with money, even when you know the odds are stacked against you.
Investing is about minimizing risk and maximizing return, usually over a long time period (months
or years). Speculating, or active trading (I use the terms interchangeably from here out), is about
taking calculated financial risks to seek a profitable return, usually over a very short time horizon
(minutes, hours, or days). You may be more familiar with speculating or active trading as day
trading, but in the 24-hour-a-day forex market it can very easily turn into overnight trading, too.
Speculating as an enterprise refers to treating your trading as a serious business venture. In my
experience, many newcomers to the forex market enter it too lightly and don’t appreciate the
patience and diligence required to be successful. I hope you’ll take to heart the following
attributes I think define a successful trader in any market:
Dedication (time and energy)
Resources (technological and financial)
Discipline (emotional and financial)
Decisiveness (intellectual and psychological)
Perseverance (risk management and opportunism)
Knowledge (economic, political, and market dynamics)
