traditional business with all of its problems, trading is far more attractive.
The only drawback is that you still have to have capital to start your
business. In trading, you can actually open a micro-forex account with as
161

162

EPILOGUE

little as $250! Of course you won’t make much money by starting with only
$250 but you can ensure that you are a good trader before investing more
capital. You will be able to learn while risking very little.
Perhaps one of the best aspects of trading is that you can do it just
about anywhere in the world. All you need is a decent Internet connection. I’ve written parts of this book in Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Los
Angeles, and Belize! Only in the remote island in Belize did I really have
a problem with my Internet connection that made it slightly difficult.
Everywhere else was easy!
To me, the greatest attribute of trading forex as a professional is that
I can do it anywhere and anytime in the world. I am not constrained by
the normal bounds of a business. This means that my trading supports my
life, not my life supporting my trading. Never forget why you are trading.
Yes, trading can be enjoyable in itself, though many find it stressful and not
enjoyable. But we are usually trading to achieve a goal other than trading
for trading’s sake. We are probably looking for freedom in our life. Perhaps
it is the freedom to live in different parts of the world. Perhaps it is the
freedom from financial worry. Perhaps you want to help your kids through
school or boost your retirement.
Whatever it is, trading should be a big part in helping you to achieve. It
should not be a job or a big stress or a problem in your life. It should be a
servant that is there to create a better life for you.

ALWAYS REMEMBER THAT TRADING
IS A BUSINESS
I have heard for many years about traders who will spend weeks analyzing the decision to buy a $100 power tool but only five minutes on risking
$10,000 trading forex. To me this is an amazing fact. Why will people be so
cavalier about trading? Why don’t they spend the time and energy that it
demands?
Starting a business is hard. Many if not most fail. But the failure rate
on forex trading is much higher. Credible estimates put the failure rate at
about 90 percent. One reason is that people, deep down, do not take trading
seriously. You can buy and sell so easily that it doesn’t have the appearance
of being hard to do. Every book and guru out there talks about how easy it
is to make money if you just follow their easy steps.
I have seen many successful people founder on the shoals of trading.
Doctors are a classic example of highly educated people with tremendous
discipline who are typically terrible traders. For whatever reason, they do
not bring the skills they have in medicine to trading. I don’t mean to pick

Epilogue

163

on doctors because I see it in just about everyone. Successful businessmen
turn into drunken sailors when they sit down in front of a trading screen.
Do not fall into this trap.
Do all the normal things you should do if you run a business. You
should be disciplined. You should be very risk averse. You should be conservative. You should think deeply before committing capital. You should
look before you leap. You know the drill. Check out books about running
businesses and follow their advice. I suggest that you even write a business plan about your new business. Writing such a plan could help you
focus your mind. You should have an idea of where you are going before
you set off into the unknown.
There is an old trading expression: “The market will do what it has to
do to screw you.” A plan will go a long way to negating that.

KEEP GOOD RECORDS
One key way that you can run your new trading business more professionally is to keep good records. One of the main psychological problems that I
see all the time is that traders lie to themselves. I’ve seen many traders
who cannot remember their losing trades and think that they are more
profitable than they really are. I’ve also seen the complete opposite, where
traders cannot remember their winning trades and think they are more unprofitable than they really are!
It doesn’t really matter why this is but it is a rather perplexing factor. People apparently want to deceive themselves in their trading. But we
must be very realistic if we are to be a profitable trader. We cannot lie to
ourselves. Good record keeping is a good start for this.
There are two main reasons for keeping good records of our trading:
1. Accountability and analysis
2. Constant improvement

I advocate using at least several systems. We need to keep track of
their results. We need to know the total profitability, the number of winners, the number of losers, the average size of the winning trades, and the
average size of the losers as a bare minimum of information. This information can be easily keyed into a spreadsheet for analysis. I also strongly
suggest keeping track of the reason why you entered and exited the trade
as well as adding a column of notes.
You can now start to do some serious analysis armed with this
information.

164

EPILOGUE

A shoe store would keep track of sales of the various models that it
sells. You need to keep track of the stats for each of the methods you are
using. This allows you to monitor their performance. You will want to be
able to see what the profitability is compared with your expectations. Let
at least six months or thirty trades go by before you start your evaluation. You want to get a very good and extensive sample before you start
your analysis.
It is beyond the scope of this book to really go into the analysis of the
records you are keeping on your methods. I recommend Bob Pardo’s book
The Evaluation and Optimization of Trading Strategies (John Wiley &
Sons, 2008). Let me just highlight and expand on his excellent book.
Of course, the most important thing to look at is the net profitability.
You want to make sure that the profitability of the method is within your
expectations. In fact, you want to make sure that all parameters of the
method are within your expectations. If they are, then continue to trade
even if unprofitable. If they are not, then it is time to look further.
If the method is unprofitable but within your expectations, then the unprofitability is probably simply a matter of bad luck rather than bad trading.
Keep trading the method for another six months and then reexamine. If a
method is unprofitable for a year, it is certainly time to put it on the shelf
and stop trading it until you have looked under the hood and made sure
that it is still a good method.
One of the main reasons for keeping good records is to make your
methods accountable. I want you to keep track of the profitability of
the methods I’ve taught you in this book. It is important that you understand how profitable they are and how they operate. For example, 20-Day
Momentum is a method that has few winning trades but they are usually
very large. On the other hand, the inside days method has far more winning trades but the winning trades are much smaller.
It is useful to understand the profile of each method. For example, perhaps the lack of winning trades in 20-Day Momentum is difficult for you to
handle emotionally. You should probably not trade it then because you will
likely not have very high discipline. You are probably better off sticking to
methods with higher win percentages.
In addition, you will want to keep good records so that you can execute
the Kelly Method well. That powerful method requires a good deal of solid
information before you can really implement it. Keeping good records is
necessary to really make money there.
An extension of this idea is the idea of constant improvement. In this
case, you are using the information from the record keeping to constantly
enhance your profits.
What I recommend is this. Let’s say you are using five methods. Add
a sixth to the mix and trade the six methods for a year. At the end of the

Epilogue

165

year, drop the worst-performing method and add a new method as the sixth
method. What will happen is that you will be constantly improving your
trading performance by relentlessly throwing out the worst-performing
method and keeping the top five. The changes to your performance over
years will be dramatic. You should not be surprised to see your performance increase by 10 percent per year for many years. That means that
you could earn 40 percent this year and 44 percent next year. In ten years,
you will be making vastly more money than you were at the beginning.
This is a unique concept that is rarely spoken about in trading but it is
key to making massive amounts of money.

DON’T PAPER TRADE
I know, I know. This is a very controversial stand. Virtually everybody tells
you to paper trade for six months to a year before you actually put money
into the market.
I’m completely the opposite. I give seminars around the world. They
are usually given over the weekend. I tell my students that I really want
them to start trading on Monday! Naturally they are shocked. They expect
to paper trade for a long time first.
I don’t like paper trading because it doesn’t address the real issues
of trading, which are psychology and risk management. Everybody can
trade reasonably well with paper money. But few can trade well in the
real world.
Proponents of paper trading suggest that it allows the trader to practice the techniques before making a mistake in the real world that could
cause real financial loss. True. But I recommend back-testing instead. In
this case, you go back a year or more on a chart and manually go through
day after day as if you were trading that time period in a real-time manner.
You record your trades, thus building up a track record. Most important,
you can get a year’s worth of practice on five pairs in about an hour instead of a year! Back-testing provides all the value of paper trading but in
a microscopic amount of time. You will also gain a lot of confidence in the
methods in a very quick time. You will see the missed profits you would
have made in the prior year and want to start trading right away. You can
easily back-test a method on five pairs in about an hour. That means you
will have five years of trading experience crammed into an hour.
After back-testing, you will have practice and confidence in a short
period of time. Now you should start trading in the real world. However,
I recommend that you start out trading with miniscule risk, perhaps only
0.25 percent. Trade with this incredibly low risk for several months.

166

EPILOGUE

Get your psychological feet wet without taking much risk. You will have
to confront your psychology when you trade money, even if it is minor.
Will you make mistakes trading that will cost you money? Probably.
But the amount of money will be hardly worth mentioning. At the same
time, you will be gaining valuable insights and experience as a trader
rather than a poseur trader. Use back-testing instead. You will make much
faster progress and more money sooner than waiting for months while you
paper trade.

MODEL WINNERS, NOT LOSERS
Try to find winning traders and watch and learn from them. Find out what
makes them a winner and model that. Don’t talk to your loser friends! Don’t
listen to everybody who is going to tell you that you can’t make money in
the markets.
Take a lot of time and try to find someone who has been making money
in the markets for some time and see what they do and don’t do. Most forex
traders are losers so this is going to be difficult. Most gurus are losers as
well. Most people who sell systems and books are losers. Don’t take the
fact that they wrote a book as proof that they know anything about trading.
(In fact, don’t take my word for it either! Go and back test all the ideas in
this book to prove to yourself that they work! I challenge you!)

AVOID BOREDOM
I was interviewed in Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities magazine a number of years ago. One answer that I gave surprised them. They
asked me what my biggest problem as a trader was.
I told them boredom!
They were shocked; nobody had ever suggested that. Everybody else
thought that trading was exciting.
In the mid-1990s I had the opportunity to train some traders from a
Korean bank. I had six traders for six months, then a second group of six
traders for six months, and a final group of six traders for six months. For
the first group, I brought in guest lecturers to give the students a strong
grounding in all aspects of trading. One guest lecturer was a very experienced trader using Elliott Wave analysis. For those of you who are not
familiar with Elliott Wave, the basic concept is that the market moves in a
five-wave pattern with, in a bullish configuration, the first, third, and fifth
waves going up and the second and fourth waves declining. The third wave
is the biggest and most powerful wave of them all. So the Holy Grail for

Epilogue

167

Elliotticians is to try to buy the bottom of the second wave looking to ride
the huge third wave up.
I let my guest lecturer do his lecture with my students and came back
into the room after his lecture. I asked a series of pointed questions to make
sure that the students had gotten a good idea of Elliott Wave. At one point,
I asked him if he was a profitable trader. Imagine my surprise and shock
when he said that he wasn’t. Further, he said that he was never really a
profitable trader. I was partially shocked because I thought that he had
been profitable all these years that I had known him.
But then he burst out, “Well, at least what I’m doing isn’t boring like
the way Courtney trades!”
Turns out that he loved the feeling of catching that Wave Two dip and
watching the Wave Three bull move. Problem was that he couldn’t do that
very often and was a losing trader.
I plead guilty to the fact that following the ideas in this book is not
exciting. I’ll go farther and say that most of you will find my way of trading boring. I make no excuses. I want trading to be boring, but profitable.
I want trading to be something you do for 15 minutes a day and then go on
with your life.
If trading is exciting, then you are likely to get excited, and getting
excited is usually a recipe for losing money. Think of the casino owner.
Does he get excited when you sit down at the blackjack table? No, he is
bored. He already knows the outcome of the exercise. Contrast this with
the gambler. The gambler is there to get excited. Gamblers know that they
are likely to lose money but they are there to get excited. They have a
chance of winning and the process of gambling is exciting. But who wins?
The guy who is bored or the guy who is excited?
Boredom is one of my personal issues with trading. Here is how I have
overcome it.
One advantage that I have is that I am a scientific person. So what
I have done is created a structure that turns my boredom into increasing
profits. What I do is to take a technique that I am using and then try to
create an enhancement to it. Let’s say that I take channel breakouts and
then come up with an enhancement that says that I will only take trades
in months with blue moons. I then turn on my scientific brain. I now have
a control method, channel breakouts, and an experimental method, Blue
Moon Channel Breakouts.
I now put on both trades from both methods. I flawlessly execute both
methods. I am excited every day to see which method is “winning” the
battle. Which method will be more profitable and/or has less risk. I keep
this comparison up until I have a fair sample of trades. I will look for at
least 30 trades. This might take six months or more to get a good sample of
trades of both methods. I find this comparison trading to be very interesting. It is certainly not boring to me.

168

EPILOGUE

And guess what? I actually constantly find improvements in my
methods using this technique. I beat my boredom and make more
money!
Look, boredom is a problem. But it is a problem for only 15 minutes a
day or you can even use it as the impetus to make more money like I do!
I think boredom comes partially as a result of discipline. It takes discipline to execute flawlessly. It is boring to be disciplined. I’ve had students
tell me that they wanted to be creative traders. Great! Unfortunately, it is
almost impossible to be profitable and creative at the same time.

MAKE SURE TRADING FITS
YOUR LIFESTYLE
One of the critical reasons for being a forex trader is the lifestyle that you
can lead. All it takes to be a pro forex trader is some capital, an Internet
connection, and 15 minutes a day. What you do the rest of the day is up
to you.
Trading can be enjoyable. Certainly. And that can be a great reason for
you to want to be a trader.
But most people are not interested in trading by itself. They want the
results of trading. They want to create a better retirement for themselves.
They want to help their parents, friends, and/or their children. They want
to pay for their children’s education. They want great vacations. They want
to travel around the world. They want to do what they want whenever they
want!
Stop. Take a few minutes. What lifestyle is your dream? Can you
achieve that dream doing what you are doing now? Can you achieve it
through forex trading? Few businesses or jobs have the flexibility or ability
to create such lifestyle power.
We all have the desire to change our lives. We want to live the life we
dream about. We have needs and desires. Forex trading is one of the few
ways that you can achieve all this with such little commitment.
I am fortunate enough to live this lifestyle. I wrote this book in the
United States, Belize, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Malaysia. I traveled to
other countries for pleasure. I traded in all of these countries. I never spent
over 15 minutes a day trading forex. That gave me the time to truly live my
life. I read a ton of books. I lost 20 pounds recently. I got a great tan. I had
a lot of amazing experiences. I saw a lot of unbelievable things. But the key
to that lifestyle is that I am a pro forex trader. I can be anywhere and still
make money.
You must trade to live, not live to trade. Trading is your tool. Use it.

Epilogue

169

KEEP YOUR TRADING TO
15 MINUTES A DAY
I recommend trading only 15 minutes a day. This is heretical in the trading community. They usually believe that you should chain yourself to a
computer and stare at it all day. Apparently, staring at a screen creates
profits. I say it creates a headache.
Sure, day trading can be fun. It can even be profitable. But the big
money is made on the big moves. There has never been a day trader
who made $100 million. But there are quite a few position traders who
have made that much.
I discovered this key to profitable trading through an epiphany I had
in the late 1980s. I was trading more than 40 different systems. I was
spending all day long feeding my systems. Part of the reasons for using
computer-generated systems was to cut down the amount of time trading.
Yet here I was spending 12 hours a day making sure that the data were
getting entered right, the systems were calculating right, and so on.
I realized that I was spending way too much time trading these systems.
I was really getting into the 80/20 Principle, also called the Pareto Principle, at the time. That Principle essentially says that 80 percent of the
results of something will come from just 20 percent of the actions. For example, 80 percent of the sales of a company will come from 20 percent of
the customers. In this case, 80 percent of the profits were from 20 percent
of the systems. Actually, about 90 percent was coming from 10 percent of
the systems!
So I cut out 90 percent of my systems and found myself with very
little work to do. A little while later, I extended my analysis of my trading and split my trading into two parts: day trading and position trading.
Day trading is trading anything under a day and position trading is holding
the position over night and usually for a number of days.
What I found shocked me. I found that position trading accounted for
over 80 percent of my profits over the year while day trading was less than
20 percent. At the same time, I was spending all day and much of the night
day trading, yet it was accounting for only a small percent of my profits!
This analysis forced me to confront the fact that I was really making money on just a few methods that took very little time. I could drop
everything and spend just a few minutes a day and yet make almost as
much money as I did working all day and most of the night.
Yet something didn’t feel right. I was down to trading less than an hour
a day, if that. I realized that I felt guilty making so much money but working so little. That damn Puritan work ethic was creeping into my brain! I’ve
worked hard for almost 20 years after this epiphany to overcome this Puritan work ethic feeling but it is still there and I feel a little guilty every time I

170

EPILOGUE

make money, particularly if it is a lot of money, without doing a lot of work.
I know this is irrational, but there you have it.
A few years later, I was speaking to Bruce Babcock about his trading.
Bruce was a best-selling futures author, founder of Commodity Traders
Consumer Research, and systems designer. In addition, he made a living
trading futures, including currency futures. He was one of the smartest
traders around. Sadly, he died some time ago.
One of the things that made him so smart was that he spent zero time
trading! That’s right, zero, nix, nada. What he did was give a copy of his
systems to his broker and gave his broker permission to enter the generated signals in the market. Bruce would simply look at his monthly statement to see how he was doing. He never looked at his trading screen. I’m
not sure he even had one! My understanding was that he made between
30 percent and 65 percent per year while he was alive “trading” his own
account!
Bruce hired a couple of guys to run his business, which left him a lot
of time to do only what he really wanted to do, which meant playing golf
and tennis every day. He was a pioneer in creating a trading lifestyle. His
inspiration helped me to conquer my Puritan work ethic, though not completely.
I did another analysis of my trading and found that my position trading was more profitable when I spend less time than if I spent more time.
Imagine my shock at this! The difference was not dramatic but it was clear.
I went through another period of soul searching to try to figure out
what was going on. I realized that I was creating several problems by spending a lot of time trading.
One problem was that I was overthinking my trades. I was doing the
original correct thinking but then I was double guessing myself. I was doing deeper research that was just confusing me. I was looking at everything from every angle. You’d think that would be better but for me it was
worse. I have a strong model for analyzing the forex markets. It works.
But double guessing myself was creating doubt in my mind without creating any gains in profits or reducing risk. Unfortunately, I was missing a lot
of trades and/or getting out too early. I was often suffering from analysis
paralysis.
I was raising the trivial to a level of importance. As well as the opposite.
I realized that I was making more money by spending only 15 minutes
a day because the time limit forced me to focus only on what was important and kept me from being distracted by sideshows. Limiting the time to
only 15 minutes forces me to execute, not think. My focus is to execute
flawlessly not to think about what is going on. Execute, don’t think! Think
some other time. Trading is an act, not a thought. Your thinking should
come at another time, without pressure. It should be reflective and focused
