
Options
The taxation of options is more complicated than the taxation of other derivatives. The basic information is the same: A gain on an option held for less
than a year is a short-term capital gain, and a gain on one held for more than
a year is a long-term capital gain. There are two problems, though. The first is
that some options strategies offer a combination of short-term and long-term

245

246 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
gains and losses. The second is that options trades fall under the wash-sale
rule (explained later in this chapter), which limits your ability to make trades
of fewer than 30 days in the same securities.
Options have one other wrinkle: You can’t use options to manage taxable sales
and gains in stocks. An option on a stock is considered to be substantially
identical to the stock. That’s why the tax treatment is pretty much the same —
and why professional tax advice is really important if you’re trading options.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange publishes a detailed guide to stock
and stock-options taxation. You can download it at www.cboe.com/
LearnCenter/pdf/TaxesandInvesting.pdf.

Stock trading
In Chapter 4, I cover the differences between investing, trading, and gambling.
Day traders aren’t investing; they’re looking to take advantage of short-term
price movements, not to take a stake in a business for the long term. Unless, of
course, you’re asking the IRS about it. The IRS defines trading much differently
than people in financial circles do. To the taxmen, you are a trader only if all of
the following apply to you:
✓ You seek to profit from daily market movements in the prices of
securities, not from dividends, interest, or capital appreciation.
✓ Your activity is substantial; the IRS code does not spell out what substantial
means, but it probably means you’re making at least 3,000 trades per year.
✓ You carry on the activity with continuity and regularity. In other words,
day trading is more or less your full-time job, you’ve stuck with it for at
least six months already, and you plan to keep trading into the next year.
The 2013 Tax Court case Endicott v. Commissioner addressed the issue of
substantial when deciding whether a person is a trader. The plaintiff made
1,543 trades in 2008, which the IRS said was substantial. The 303 trades
made in 2007 did not meet the definition. The taxpayer traded on 75 days in
2006, 99 days in 2007, and 112 days in 2008, and the court ruled that none of
those met the requirement for frequent, continuous, or regular trading. This
ruling is the clearest guidance issued in a long time.
IRS Tax Topic 429 covers the matter in more detail. If you trade part-time, have
other employment, or are new to the day-trading game, the IRS probably won’t
let you define yourself as a trader. Don’t care what an IRS agent calls you,
as long she doesn’t call you for an audit? Well, understanding the difference
between trader and investor in IRS lingo is important to avoid that audit.

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
Those who qualify as traders enjoy deductions that regular investors don’t.
You may quality as a trader for some of your activities and as an investor for
others. If you think this scenario applies to you, you need to keep detailed
records to separate your trades, and you should use different brokerage
accounts to make the difference clear from the day you open the position.
In political economics, taxation serves two purposes. The first is to raise
money for the government. The second is to encourage people to do things
that the elected officials who amend the tax code want them to do. Much of
the investing tax code is intended to promote the formation and growth of
businesses. Short-term day trading doesn’t do that, so the tax law doesn’t
offer short-term investors the same benefits that it gives to long-term
investors and business owners.

Hiring a Tax Adviser
You don’t have to hire someone to do your taxes, but you probably should.
Day trading generates a lot of separate transactions to track, and the tax laws
are tricky. Mistakes can end up costing you your entire trading profit.
Do yourself a favor and find yourself a tax expert. You can talk to other
traders, get references from the attorneys and accountants you work with
now, or even do Internet searches to find people who understand both IRS
regulations and the unique needs of people who frequently buy and sell
securities, whether or not the IRS calls them traders.

The many flavors of tax experts
Okay, you’re waiting for me to say there’s only one flavor of accountant, and
it’s plain vanilla, right? Wrong. Tax experts fall into several different categories,
and knowing which is which can help you determine who is best for you:
✓ Certified public accountants: Certified public accountants studied
accounting in college and passed exams testing their knowledge of a
wide range of accounting subjects. Because much of accounting involves
income-tax preparation, many CPAs specialize in this. CPAs generally have
the best combined knowledge of tax laws and tax preparation techniques,
but not all of them specialize in or even understand day trading.
✓ Enrolled agents: Enrolled agents specialize in tax preparation. They
receive registration from the IRS after passing a two-day, eight-hour
exam covering only tax topics, which is what they know best. They may
not be so good at helping you with other accounting needs, such as
preparing payroll for your office assistants.

247

248 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
✓ Tax attorneys: Tax attorneys usually work with CPAs; they are called in
to study the legality of proposed strategies or represent a client in tax
litigation. They aren’t appropriate for most traders, but you may have
situations that call for one.
✓ Storefronts and volunteers (probably not a good idea): Every winter,
vacant buildings are turned into tax-preparation centers, and the IRS
promotes its cadre of volunteers who help people with their taxes. These
services can be a boon to the average person who lacks the time or
patience to deal with the tax forms. But if you are trader, you’re going to
run into complex problems that most of these services are not prepared
to handle, such as the many considerations that go with taxes on currency trading discussed previously.
Only CPAs, enrolled agents, and tax attorneys are allowed to represent clients
before the IRS in audits, collections, or appeals. Other paid preparers can
represent clients in an audit, but they can’t handle more complex matters.

Questions to ask a prospective adviser
After you identify a few prospective candidates to prepare your taxes, talk
to them and ask them questions about their experience. You want someone who understands things such as the wash-sale rule (which can limit the
deductibility of your losses and is covered in more detail in the later section
“Understanding the wash-sale rule”) and the mark-to-market election (which
can allow you to deduct more losses; see the section “Mark-to-market
accounting”) and who can help you determine what you owe in taxes and
not one penny more.
Here some things you should ask a potential tax preparer:
✓ What investors and traders have you worked with? For how long?
✓ Have you worked with traders or investors in my state? Can you prepare
my state return?
✓ Have you helped traders make the mark-to-market election?
✓ What is your experience with the wash-sale rule? How will my trading
style be affected by it?
✓ Who will be preparing my return? How involved will you be?
✓ Do you offer tax analysis of trading strategies?

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
✓ What’s your audit record? Why have your clients been audited? What
happened on the audit?
✓ What are your fees?
By law, tax preparers cannot base their fees on the size of your tax refund, and
they cannot guarantee you a refund. Any preparer who does these things
either does not know the law or is willfully breaking it.
You’ll feel more comfortable with your tax preparer if you have an understanding
of the issues at stake. Even if you are hiring someone — and you should —
keep reading this chapter and check the appendix for references on taxes and
trading.

Doing Your Taxes Yourself
Traders can do their own taxes. If you are comfortable with tax forms, if you
are only day trading a little bit, and if I haven’t deterred you yet, you may be
able to handle your own taxes. Here’s what you need: the proper IRS forms
and tax preparation software that can handle investment income.

Finding out everything you want to know
The IRS website, www.irs.gov, is a treasure trove of tax information. All the
regulations, publications, forms, and explanations are there, and some of it
is even in plain English. The site is so vast and detailed that you’ll probably
be overwhelmed (I’m not sure there is any page in any IRS publication that
doesn’t mention dividends received under the State of Alaska Permanent
Fund).
Curious to know about this State of Alaska Permanent Fund? It’s an annual
payment made to all residents of Alaska every year, based on the profits of oil
pumped in that state. To put this amount into context, Alaska had 731,449
residents in 2012, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. I think there are two
pages of IRS publications mentioning the fund for every person who gets a
check from it.
The primary publication that covers the tax implications of trading and other
investing activities is Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses. It’s
available at www.irs.gov/publications/p550/.

249

250 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Making it easier with tax-preparation
software
The brave people who do their own taxes know that tax-prep software is a
godsend, and it’s even more valuable for those do-it-yourselfers who trade
a lot. The software fills out the forms, automatically adds and subtracts,
and even catches typographical errors. In many cases, it can download data
straight from your brokerage account, making data entry really simple.
Most of the big brands, such as TaxCut and TurboTax, publish several
editions each year — not all of which are set up to import and manage lots
of trading data. Among those that have services for investors are TurboTax
Premier Investments (www.turbotax.com), H&R Block at Home Premium
(www.hrblock.com), and CompleteTax (www.completetax.com).

Income Categories You Need to Know
Income seems like a straightforward concept, but not much about taxation is
straightforward. To the IRS, income falls into different categories, with different
tax rates, different allowed deductions, and different forms to fill out. In this
section, I cover income definitions you’ll run into as a day trader.

Earned income
Earned income includes wages, salaries, bonuses, and tips. It’s money that
you make on the job. But even if day trading is your only occupation, your
earnings are not considered to be earned income. Therefore day traders,
whether classified for tax purposes as investors or traders, don’t have to pay
the self-employment tax on their trading income. Isn’t that great?
Well, maybe, maybe not. The self-employment tax, the bane of many an
independent business person, is a contribution to the Social Security fund.
(Employees pay half of the contribution, and the employer pays the other
half. The self-employed have to pay the whole thing.)
The problem is that if you don’t have earned income, you are not paying
into Social Security. If you are not paying into Social Security, you may not be
eligible for retirement benefits. To collect benefits, you have to have paid in 40
credits, and you can earn a maximum of four credits per year. Most employees
do this easily, but if you’ve taken time off work or have a long history of work
as an independent investor, you may not have paid enough in.

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
Any Social Security benefits you do collect are based on the 35 years of highest
earned income over your work history. Your years of independent trading show
up as years with zero earned income, which may hurt your ultimate benefit.
The Social Security Administration has a handy online calculator, www.social
security.gov/planners/calculators.htm, which can help you determine
whether day trading makes sense for you right now, given the possible effect on
your Social Security benefits.

Investment income
Investment income is your total income from property held for investment
before any deductions. It includes interest, dividends, annuities, and royalties.
Investment income does not include net capital gains, unless you choose to
include them. Do you want to include them? Well, read the next section.
Other than net capital gains, which you may or may not decide to include,
most day traders have very little investment income for tax purposes.

Capital gains and losses
A capital gain is the profit you make when you buy low and sell high — the
aim of day trading. The opposite of a capital gain is a capital loss, which
happens when you sell an asset for less than you paid for it. Investors can
offset some of their capital gains with some of their capital losses to reduce
their tax burden.
Frequent traders have many capital gains and losses, though, and they may
very well run afoul of complicated IRS rules about capital gains taxation. Day
traders get tripped up by capital gain and loss problems all the time. When
designing your trading strategy, think long and hard about how much pain
taxes may cause. The financial world is filled with horror stories of people
who thought they found a clever angle on making big profits, only to discover
at tax time that their tax liability was greater than their profit. In the real
world, taxes matter.
Capital gains come in two flavors: short term and long term. You’re charged
a low rate (the current rate is 15 percent) on long-term capital gains, which
right now is defined as the gain on assets held for more than one year. Shortterm capital gains, which are those made on any asset held for one year or
less, are taxed at the ordinary income rate, probably 28 percent or more.

251

252 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Calculating capital gains and losses: Covering all your basis
Capital gains and losses are calculated using a security’s basis, which may
or may not be the same as the price that you paid for it or sold it at. Some
expenses, such as commissions or disallowed wash-sale losses (both of
which are discussed later in this chapter), are added to the cost of the
security, and that can reduce the amount of your taxable gain or increase
the amount of your deductible loss.
For example, if you bought 100 shares of stock at $50 per share and a $0.03
per share commission, your basis would be $5,003 — the $5,000 you paid for
the stock and the $3 you paid in commission.

Understanding the wash-sale rule
Suppose you love LMNO Company, but the price of the shares is down from
what it was when you purchased them. You’d like to get that loss on your
taxes, so you sell the stock, and then you buy it back at the lower price. You
get your tax deduction and still keep the stock. How excellent is that?
It’s too excellent to be true. This trick is called a wash sale, and the IRS does
not count the loss. The wash-sale rule was designed to keep long-term investors from playing cute with their taxes, but it has the effect of creating a ruinous tax situation for naïve day traders.

Seeing the rule in action
Under the wash-sale rule, you cannot deduct a loss if you have both a gain and
a loss in the same security within a 61-day period. (That’s calendar days, not
trading days, so weekends and holidays count.) However, you can add the disallowed loss to the basis of your security.
Here’s an example to illustrate. On Tuesday, you bought 100 shares of LMNO
at $34.60. LMNO announced terrible earnings, and the stock promptly
dropped to $29.32, and you sold all 100 shares for a loss of $528. Later in the
afternoon, you noticed that the stock had bottomed and looked like it might
trend up, so you bought another 100 shares at $28.75 and resold them an
hour later at $29.25, closing out your position for the day. The second trade
had a profit of $50. You had a net loss of $478 (the $528 loss plus the $50
profit). Here’s how this works out tax-wise: The IRS disallows the $528 loss
and lets you show only a profit of $50. But it lets you add the $528 loss to the
basis of your replacement shares, so instead of spending $2,875 (100 shares
times $28.75), for tax purposes, you spent $3,403 ($2,875 plus $528), which
means that the second trade caused you to lose the $478 that you added
back. On a net basis, you get to record your loss. The basis addition lets you
work off your wash-sale losses eventually, assuming that you keep careful
records and have more winning trades than losing ones in any one security.

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
To make the calculations easier, several different tax-software packages can
download trade data from your brokerage account to keep track of your tax
situation. One to check out is TradeLog, www.armencomp.com/tradelog.
Even if you hire someone to do your taxes, tracking your potential liabilities
as you trade can help you avoid costly mistakes.
The wash-sale rule applies to substantially similar securities. LMNO stock
and LMNO options are considered to be substantially similar, so you can’t
get around the rule by varying securities on the same underlying asset.
LMNO shares and shares of its closest competitor, PQRS, would probably
not be considered substantially similar, so you can trade within a given
industry to help avoid wash-sale problems.

Getting around the wash-sale rule
At an extreme, the wash-sale rule can mean that traders who are in and out of
the same securities over and over may be taxed on all their winning trades,
without being able to subtract their losing trades for tax purposes. If your
winning trades gained $300,000, and your losing trades cost you $200,000, you
cleared $100,000 — but the IRS may tax you on the $300,000. Ouch!
There are ways around the wash-sale rule. The obvious solution is to qualify
as a trader for IRS purposes and then take the mark-to-market accounting election (covered in the section “Mark-to-market accounting”). Other methods for
avoiding the wash-sale rule include trading a given security only once every 60
calendar days and doing all your trading within a qualified retirement account
such as an IRA (also discussed later in this chapter). Some securities are handled differently. Futures contracts are considered to generate investment
income and losses, not capital gains, and so they are not covered by the washsale rule, which makes them a popular alternative for day traders. Profits on
options contracts are 60 percent long-term capital gains and 40 percent shortterm capital gains, which reduce the wash-sale rule effect.
If you have any more clever ideas about how you can make money without
taking a tax hit, be sure to run them through an experienced tax pro first.

Miscellaneous income
Miscellaneous income is money that you received that wasn’t earning income,
investment income, or capital gains. This kind of income is often payment
received in the course of a business or trade. As a freelancer, most of my
income is reported to the IRS in the miscellaneous category. Anyone who
pays me for my services has to send me Form 1099-MISC at the end of the
year, with a copy going to the IRS, to help the agency track my earnings.

253

254 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Some proprietary traders that provide services for day traders (covered in
Chapter 11) report your profits and losses on Form1099-MISC. Miscellaneous
income is handled as self-employment income and must be reported.

Tracking Your Investment Expenses
Day traders have expenses. They buy computer equipment, subscribe to
research services, pay trading commissions, and hire accountants to prepare
their taxes. It adds up, and the tax code recognizes that. That’s why day
traders can deduct many of their costs from their income taxes. In this
section, I go through some of what you can deduct.
You can make your life much easier by keeping track of your expenses as you
incur them. You can keep these records in a notebook, in a spreadsheet, or
through personal finance software such as Quicken or Microsoft Money.

Qualified and deductible expenses
You can deduct investment expenses as miscellaneous itemized deductions
on Schedule A of Form 1040 as long as these expenses are ordinary, necessary, directly related to the taxable income produced, and used to produce or
collect income or manage property held for producing income.

Clerical, legal, and accounting fees
You may use the services of a lawyer to help you get set up, and you will
almost definitely want to use an accountant who understands investment
expenses to help you evaluate your trading strategy and prepare your state
and federal income tax returns each year. There’s good news here: You can
deduct attorney and accounting fees related to your investment income. If
your trading operation gets big enough that you hire clerical help to keep
track of all those trade confirmations, you can deduct that cost, too.

Office expenses
If you do your day trading from an outside office, you can deduct the rent and
related expenses. You can deduct the expenses of a home office, too, as long
as you use it regularly and exclusively for business. If your trading room is
also the guest room, it doesn’t count.
Whether or not you deduct your office, you can deduct certain office
expenses for equipment and supplies used in your business. You can usually
write off roughly $100,000 in computers, desks, chairs, and the like if you use
them for trading more than half of the time. (The limits change every year.)

Chapter 15: Taxes for Traders
To get the deduction, you have to spend the money first, and your expenses
don’t reduce your taxes dollar-for-dollar. If you are in the 28 percent tax
bracket, then each dollar you spend on qualified expenses reduces your taxes
by $0.28. In other words, don’t go crazy at the office-supply store just because
you get a tax deduction. It may be helpful to think of deductible expenses as
discounts, because in the end that’s more or less what they are.

Investment counsel and advice
The IRS allows you to deduct fees paid for counsel and advice about investments that produce taxable income. This advice includes books, magazines,
newspapers, and research services that help you refine your trading strategy.
It also includes anything you may pay for investment advisory services, such
as trade coaching or analysis.
By the way, you can probably deduct what you paid for Day Trading For
Dummies. Did you save the receipt?
