
157

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

c
Price

Time
FIGURE 3.11

Poor vertical symmetry-neckline slope too steep.

one shoulder should not be greater than 2.5 times the distance of the head
to the other shoulder. There is nothing magical about the value 2.5 other
than it seemed reasonable. See Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.13 is an example of a pattern that fails the test for horizontal
symmetry. Note the right shoulder is stretched too far to the right. A pattern with excessive leftward stretch would also be disqualified.

Price

Horizontal
Symmetry
Rule
FIG RE 3.12 Good horizontal symmetry.

Time

158 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

Price

FIGURE 3. J 3

Poor horizontal symmetry.

Pattern Completion Rule: Maximum Time
to Neckline Penetration
C&O also specified a rule that excludes patterns that take too long to penetrate the neckline once the right shoulder, point E, has been formed. As
with other features, this criterion is defined in terms of the pattern's internal proportions rather than some fixed number of time units. This allows
the rule to be applied to all patterns irrespective of their time frame or
scale.
The maximum time allowed for the movement from the right shoulder, point E, until the penetration of the neckline is the temporal distance
separating the two shoulders, points A and E. The pattern in Figure 3.14
meets the time to completion criterion because the temporal distance
from the right shoulder until neckline penetration (D4) is less than the
temporal separation of the shoulders (D3). The pattern in Figure 3.15 does
not qualify because D4 exceeds D3.
Future Information Leakage: Look-Ahead Bias
In their simulation of head-and-shoulders patterns, C&O took precautions
against the future information leakage or look-ahead bias problem. This
problem afflicts back tests that assume the possession of knowledge that
was not truly available when a trading decision was made. In the context
of back testing, this can make results appear more profitable than would
be possible in actual trading. An extreme example would be assuming access to the Wall Street Journal the day before its publication.

:159

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

Price

Completion
Rule

c

:

:

Time
FIGUR"'~ 3.14

Pattern completion rule satisfied.

In the context of back testing the head-and-shoulders pattern, future
information leakage can occur if the zigzag threshold percentage is larger
than the percentage distance between the right shoulder peak and the
neckline. It would not be legitimate to assume a short-sale signal due to a
neckline penetration until the right shoulder (point E) has been detected.
However, it is possible for prices to cross the neckline before the right
shoulder is identified by the zigzag filter. To clarify, suppose the right
shoulder, point E, lies only 4 percent above the neckline, but the threshold

Price

,4

•. 4

Time
FIGURE 3.15

Pattern completion rule not satisfied.

.60 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
for the zigzag filter is 10 percent. It would not be legitimate to assume that
a trader lrnew about the neckline penetration because a 10 percent decline from the right shoulder would have been required to identify the
right shoulder of the head-and-shoulders pattern. In this example, assuming an entry price only 4 percent below the right shoulder would be more
favorable than waiting for a price 10 percent below the right shoulder, the
price movement required to have a fully formed head-and-shoulders pattern. To avoid this problem, C&O assumed an entry after the right shoulder had been objectively identified by the zigzag filter. Though this was a
less favorable entry price in some instances, the back test was unencumbered by look-ahead bias. I mention this because it shows C&O's attention
to detail.
C&O's pattern definition also deals with numerous other issues regarding entry and exit of positions, stop-loss levels, and so forth, but the
point has been made that it is possible to transform subjective chart patterns into objective testable patterns. Readers may take exception to arbitrary aspects of C&O's pattern. All well and good if the reader has a better
objective definition to offer.
As a final sanity check, C&O showed patterns that had been identified
by their automated head-and-shoulders algorithm to a number of
chartists. C&O claim that the chartists agreed that the patterns identified
by the objective head-and-shoulders algorithm did indeed conform to subjective head-and-shoulders criteria.
Head-and-Shoulders Back Test Results

Does the head-and-shoulders pattern carry predictive information with respect to stocks or currencies? In a word, the pattern hailed as a cornerstone of charting is a bust. Tests by C&O show that it is worthless on
stocks and only modestly profitable on currencies. The pattern was profitable in two out of six currencies tested, but the relatively complicated
head-and-shoulders algorithm was far outperformed by a much simpler
objective signal based on zigzag filters. Moreover, when C&O tested the
occurrence of a head-and-shoulders in conjunction with the zigzag rule either as a confirming or disconfirming signal, the head-and-shoulders pattern added no value. In other words, zigzag signals did no better when the
head-and-shoulders signal was in the same direction as the zigzag signal
and the zigzag did no worse when the head-and-shoulders signal was in
the opposite direction.The bottom line for currency traders: the value of
head-and-shoulders is doubtful. 47
The head-and-shoulders perforn1ed worse on stocks. C&O evaluated
the head-and-shoulders on 100 randomly selected equities48 over the pe-

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

161

riod from July 1962 until December 1993. On average, each stock gave one
head-and-shoulders signal per year, counting both long and short signals,
giving a sample of over 3,100 signals. To test the pattern's profitability on
actual stock prices, C&O established a benchmark based on the pattern's
performance on pseudo-price histories. These simulated price histories
were generated from actual historical price changes strung together in a
random fashion. By using actual price changes, the pseudo-price histories
had the same statistical characteristics as real stocks, but any predictability due to authentic temporal structure-the structure TA patterns are intended to exploit-was eliminated Despite the fact that the pseudo-price
histories were randomly generated, head-and-shoulders patterns that fit
C&O's definition still emerged. This confirms the results of Harry Roberts
referred to earlier.
If the head-and-shoulders patterns appearing in real stock data are
useful, they should generate profits superior to those achieved by trading
the patterns appearing in the fake stock price histories. C&O found that
head-and-shoulders patterns in actual stock prices lost slightly more
money than the signals on pseudo-price histories. According to the study
"the results uniformly suggest that head-and-shoulders trading are not
profitable." The signals lose on average about 0.25 percent over a lO-day
holding period. This compares with an average loss of 0.03 percent for
head-and-shoulders patterns in the pseudo-stock data. C&O referred to
traders using the pattern as "noise traders," speculators who mistake a
random signal for an informative one.
Confirming C&O's findings is the work of Lo et a1. 49 Lo used an alternative method of objectifying the H&S pattern based on kernel regression,
a sophisticated 10ca1 50 smoothing technique. Their study was unable to unseat the null hypothesis that the head-and-shoulders pattern is useless. 51
Bulkowski52 found the head-and-shoulders was profitable, but his research falls short. He does not provide an objective pattern definition that
back-testable pattern or entry and exit rules. In other words, his study is
subjective TA. In addition, his results fail to adjust for the trend of the general stock market over the time period in which he tested the patterns.

SUBSETS OF 11\
Given the preceding discussion, TA can be seen as comprised of four subsets: (1) subjective TA, (2) objective TA with unknown statistical significance, (3) objective TA that is not statistically significant, and (4)
objective TA that is statistically significant.

162 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

The first subset, subjective TA, has already been defined as methods
that cannot be reduced to a back-testable algorithm. Subsets two, three,
and four refer to objective methods.
The second subset is comprised of objective methods of unknown
value. Though these methods are objective and may have been back
tested, their results have not been evaluated for statistical significance.
Here, it is simply a matter of applying the methods discussed in Chapters
4, 5, and 6. This is not meant to suggest that applying statistical methods
to back test results is simple, but rather that the decision to do so is.
The third subset, which I refer to as useless TA, consists of objective
TA rules for which results have been comprehensively back tested and
evaluated with statistical methods, but have been reveled to add no value
either on a stand-alone basis or when used in combination with other
methods. In all likelihood, the majority of objective TA methods will fall
into this subset. This is to be expected because financial markets are extremely difficult to predict due to their inherent complexity and randomness. In fact, in all fields of science, most proposed ideas do not work.
Important discoveries are rare. This is not obvious because the numerous
failures are typically not reported in the lay press or even in scientific
journals. What is most important is having a procedure in place for getting
rid of methods that do not work.
The fourth subset, useful TA, consists of objective methods that produce statistically significant or, better yet, economically significant results. Though some rules will be useful on a stand-alone basis, the
complexity and randomness of financial markets make it likely that most

~ NO---+ Subjective
YES

RIGOROUS
EVALUATION

................................. EBTA

Objective
NO---+

EBTA
YES

NO---+

FIGURE 3.16 Subsets of Technical Analysis.

Value
Unknown

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

163

rules will add value when used in combination with other rules to form
complex rules.
Evidence-based technical analysis (EBTA) refers to subsets (3) and
(4)-objective TA that has been back tested and subjected to statistical
analysis. Given the preceding discussion, the categorization of TA is illustrated in Figure 3.16.
The next three chapters discuss the application of statistical analysis
to back-test results.

Statistical
Analysis

tatistics is the science of data. 1 In the late nineteenth century,
renowned British scientist and author H.G. Wells (1866-1946) said
that an intelligent citizen in a twentieth-century free society would
need to understand statistical methods. It can be said that an intelligent
twenty-fIrst-century practitioner or consumer of TA has the same need.
This chapter and the next two address aspects of statistics that are particularly relevant to TA.
Statistical methods are not needed when a body of data conveys a
message loudly and clearly. If all people drinking from a certain well die
of cholera but all those drinking from a different well remain healthy,
there is no uncertainty about which well is infected and no need for statistical analysis. However, when the implications of data are uncertain,
statistical analysis is the best, perhaps the only, way to draw reasonable
conclusions.
Identifying which TA methods have genuine predictive power is
highly uncertain. Even the most potent rules display highly variable performance from one data set to the next. Therefore, statistical analysis is
the only practical way to distinguish methods that are useful from those
that are not.
Whether or not its practitioners acknowledge it, the essence of TA is
statistical inference. It attempts to discover generalizations from historical data in the form of patterns, rules, and so forth and then extrapolate
them to the future. Extrapolation is inherently uncertain. Uncertainty is
uncomfortable.
The discomfort can be dealt with in two ways. One way is to pretend

S

165

166 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

it does not exist. The other is the way of statistics, which meets uncertainty head on by acknowledging it, quantifying it, and then making the
best decision possible in the face of it. Bertrand Russell, the renowned
British mathematician and philosopher said, "Uncertainty, in the presence
of vivid hopes and fears, is painful, but must be endured if we wish to live
without the support of comforting fairy tales."2
Many people are distrustful or disdainful of statistical analysis and
statisticians are often portrayed as nerdy number-crunching geeks divorced from reality. This shows up in jokes. We deride what we do not understand. There is the story about the six-foot-tall man who drowns in a
pond with an average depth of only two feet. There's the tale about three
statisticians who go duck hunting. They spot a bird flying overhead. The
first shoots a foot too far to the left. The second shoots a foot too far to
the right. The third jumps up and exclaims, "We got it!!" Even though the
average error was zero, there was no duck for dinner.
Powerful tools can be put to bad purpose. Critics often charge that
statistics are used to distort and deceive. Of course, similar ends can be
achieved with words, although language is not held liable. A more rational
stance is needed. Rather than viewing all claims based on statistics with
suspicion or taking them all at face value, "a more mature response would
be to learn enough about statistics to distinguish honest, useful conclusions from skullduggery or foolishness."3 "He who accepts statistics indiscriminately will often be duped unnecessarily. But, he who distrusts
statistics indiscriminately will often be ignorant unnecessarily. The middle
ground we seek between blind distrust and blind gullibility is an openminded skepticism. That takes an ability to interpret data skillfully."4

A PREVIEW OF S'IJ\TISTICAL REf\SONING
Statistical reasoning is new terrain for many practitioners and consumers
of TA. Trips to strange places are easier when you know what to expect.
The following is a preview of the next three chapters
For reasons discussed in Chapter 3, it is wise to start with the assumption that all TA rules are without predictive power and that a profitable back test was due to luck. This assumption is called the null
hypothesis. Luck, in this case, means a favorable but accidental correspondence between the rule's signals and subsequent market trends in the
historical data sample in which the rule was tested. Although this hypothesis is a reasonable starting point, it is open to refutation with empirical
evidence. In other words, if observations contradict predictions made by
the null hypothesis, it is abandoned and the alternative hypothesis, that

167

Statistical Analysis

the rule has predictive power, would be adopted. In the context of rule
testing, evidence that would refute the null hypothesis is a back-tested
rate of return that is too high to be reasonably attributed to mere luck.
If a TA rule has no predictive power, its expected rate of return will be
zero on detrended 5 data. However, over any small sample of data, the profitability of a rule with no predictive power can deviate considerably from
zero. These deviations are manifestations of chance-good or bad luck.
This phenomenon can be seen in a coin-toss experiment. Over a small
number of tosses, the proportion of heads can deviate considerably from
0.50, which is the expected proportion of heads in a very large number of
tosses.
Generally, the chance deviations of a useless rule from a zero return
are small. Sometimes, however, a useless rule will generate significant
profits by sheer luck. These rare instances can fool us into believing a useless rule has predictive power.
The best protection against being fooled is to understand the degree
to which profits can result from luck. This is best accomplished with a
mathematical function that specifies the deviations from zero profits that
can occur by chance. That is what statistics can do for us.
This function, called a probability density function, gives the probability of every possible positive or negative deviation from zero. In other
words, it shows the degree to which chance can cause a useless rule to
generate profits. Figure 4.1 shows a probability density function. 6 The fact
that the density curve is centered at a value of zero reflects the null hypothesis assertion that the rule has an expected return of zero.

Probability
Density

Negative Returns

o

Positive Returns

Back-Tested Rate of Return
FIGURE 4.1

Probability density of chance performance-range of possible performance for a useless TA rule.

168 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

In Figure 4.2, the arrow indicates the positive rate of return earned by
a rule when it was back tested. This raises the question: Is the observed
rate of return sufficiently positive to warrant a rejection of the null hypothesis that the rule's true rate of return is zero? If the observed performance
falls well within the range of the deviations that are probably attributable
to chance, the evidence is considered to be insufficient to reject the null
hypothesis. In such a case, the null hypothesis has withstood the empirical
challenge of the back-test evidence, and a conservative interpretation of
the evidence would suggest that the rule has no predictive power.
The strength of the back-test evidence is quantified by the fractional
area7 of the probability density function that lies at values equal to or
greater than the rule's observed performance. This portion of the density
function is depicted by the darkened area to the right of the vertical arrow
in Figure 4.2. The size of this area can be interpreted as the probability
that a rate of return this high or higher could have occurred by chance under the condition that the rule has no predictive power (expected return =
0, or the null hypothesis is true). When this area occupies a relatively large
fraction of the density curve, it means that there is an equivalently large
probability that the positive performance was due to chance. When this is
the case, there is no justification for concluding that the null hypothesis is
false. In other words, there is no justification for concluding that the rule
does have predictive power.
However, if the observed performance is far above zero, the portion
of the probability density function lying at even more extreme values is

Rate of return
this low falls well
within the range of
chance performance

Probability
Density

Negative Returns

o

Positive Returns

Back-Tested Rate of Return
FIGURE 4.2

Probability of chance performance for a useless rule.

169

Statistical Analysis

small. Performance this positive would be inconsistent with the assertion
that the rule has no predictive power. In other words, the evidence would
be sufficient to refute the null hypothesis. Another way to think of this is
as follows: If the null hypothesis were true, a level of performance this
positive would have a low probability of occurrence. This probability is
quantified by the proportion of the density function that lies at values
equal to or greater than the observed performance. This is illustrated in
Figure 4.3. Note that the observed performance lies in the extreme right
tail of the density curve that would pertain if the rule were devoid of predictive power.
It is important to understand what this evidence does not tell us. It
tells us nothing about the probability that either the null hypothesis or the
alternative hypothesis is true. It only speaks to the probability that the evidence could have occurred under the assumption that the null hypothesis
is, in fact, true. Thus, the probability speaks to the likelihood of the evidence, not the likelihood of the truth of the hypothesis. Observed evidence that would be highly improbable, under the condition that the null
hypothesis is true, permits an inference that the null hypothesis is false.
Recall that, in Chapter 3, it was shown that evidence that a creature
has four legs cannot conclusively establish the truth of the hypothesis:
The creature is a dog. Although evidence of four legs would be consistent
with the hypothesis that the creature is a dog, it is not sufficient to prove,
deductively, that the creature is a dog. Similarly, while the observation of
positive performance would be consistent with the hypothesis that a rule
has predictive power, it is not sufficient to prove that it does. An argument
that attempts to prove the truth of a hypothesis with observed evidence

Probability
Density

Rate of return
this high
unlikely to
be due to chance

Negative Returns

o

Positive Returns

Back-Tested Rate of Return
FIGURE 4.3

Probability of chance performance for a good rule.

.70 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

that is consistent with the hypothesis commits the logical fallacy of affirming the consequent.

If the creature is a dog, then it has four legs.
The creature has four legs.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, the creature is a dog.

If a rule has predictive power, then it will have a profitable back test.
Back test was profitable.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, rule has predictive power.
However, the absence of four legs is sufficient to prove that the hypothesis, the creature is a dog, is false. s In other words, observed evidence
can be used to conclusively prove that a hypothesis is false. Such an argument uses the valid deductive form, denial of the consequent. The general
form of an argument, in which the consequent is denied, is as shown:
If P is true, then Q is true.
Q is not true.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, P is not true (i.e., P is false).

If the creature is a dog, then it has four legs.
Creature does not have four legs.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, it is false that the creature is a dog.
The argument just given uses the evidence, the absence of four legs,
to conclusively falsify the notion that the creature is a dog. However, this
level of certitude is not possible in matters of science and statistics. One
can never conclusively falsify a hypothesis. Nevertheless, a similar logic
can be used to show that certain evidence is highly unlikely if the hypothesis were true. In other words, the evidence gives us grounds to challenge
the hypothesis. Thus, a highly profitable back test can be used to challenge the hypothesis that the rule has no predictive power (i.e., that it has
an expected return of zero).
