
Investment Counsel and Trust Services of Banks
The truly professional investment advisers—that is, the wellestablished investment counsel firms, who charge substantial
annual fees—are quite modest in their promises and pretentions.
For the most part they place their clients’ funds in standard interest- and dividend-paying securities, and they rely mainly on normal investment experience for their overall results. In the typical
case it is doubtful whether more than 10% of the total fund is ever
invested in securities other than those of leading companies, plus

* The list of sources for investment advice remains as “miscellaneous” as it
was when Graham wrote. A survey of investors conducted in late 2002 for
the Securities Industry Association, a Wall Street trade group, found that
17% of investors depended most heavily for investment advice on a spouse
or friend; 2% on a banker; 16% on a broker; 10% on financial periodicals;
and 24% on a financial planner. The only difference from Graham’s day is
that 8% of investors now rely heavily on the Internet and 3% on financial
television. (See www.sia.com.)

The Investor and His Advisers

259

government bonds (including state and municipal issues); nor do
they make a serious effort to take advantage of swings in the general market.
The leading investment-counsel firms make no claim to being
brilliant; they do pride themselves on being careful, conservative,
and competent. Their primary aim is to conserve the principal
value over the years and produce a conservatively acceptable rate
of income. Any accomplishment beyond that—and they do strive
to better the goal—they regard in the nature of extra service rendered. Perhaps their chief value to their clients lies in shielding
them from costly mistakes. They offer as much as the defensive
investor has the right to expect from any counselor serving the
general public.
What we have said about the well-established investmentcounsel firms applies generally to the trust and advisory services of
the larger banks.*

Financial Services
The so-called financial services are organizations that send out
uniform bulletins (sometimes in the form of telegrams) to their
subscribers. The subjects covered may include the state and
prospects of business, the behavior and prospect of the securities
markets, and information and advice regarding individual issues.
There is often an “inquiry department” which will answer questons affecting an individual subscriber. The cost of the service
averages much less than the fee that investment counselors charge
their individual clients. Some organizations—notably Babson’s
and Standard & Poor’s—operate on separate levels as a financial
service and as investment counsel. (Incidentally, other organiza-

* The character of investment counseling firms and trust banks has not
changed, but today they generally do not offer their services to investors
with less than $1 million in financial assets; in some cases, $5 million or
more is required. Today thousands of independent financial-planning firms
perform very similar functions, although (as analyst Robert Veres puts it) the
mutual fund has replaced blue-chip stocks as the investment of choice and
diversification has replaced “quality” as the standard of safety.

260

The Intelligent Investor

tions—such as Scudder, Stevens & Clark—operate separately as
investment counsel and as one or more investment funds.)
The financial services direct themselves, on the whole, to a quite
different segment of the public than do the investment-counsel
firms. The latters’ clients generally wish to be relieved of bother
and the need for making decisions. The financial services offer
information and guidance to those who are directing their own
financial affairs or are themselves advising others. Many of these
services confine themselves exclusively, or nearly so, to forecasting
market movements by various “technical” methods. We shall dismiss these with the observation that their work does not concern
“investors” as the term is used in this book.
On the other hand, some of the best known—such as Moody’s
Investment Service and Standard & Poor’s—are identified with
statistical organizations that compile the voluminous statistical
data that form the basis for all serious security analysis. These services have a varied clientele, ranging from the most conservativeminded investor to the rankest speculator. As a result they must
find it difficult to adhere to any clear-cut or fundamental philosophy in arriving at their opinions and recommendations.
An old-established service of the type of Moody’s and the others
must obviously provide something worthwhile to a broad class of
investors. What is it? Basically they address themselves to the matters in which the average active investor-speculator is interested,
and their views on these either command some measure of authority or at least appear more reliable than those of the unaided client.
For years the financial services have been making stock-market
forecasts without anyone taking this activity very seriously. Like
everyone else in the field they are sometimes right and sometimes
wrong. Wherever possible they hedge their opinions so as to avoid
the risk of being proved completely wrong. (There is a welldeveloped art of Delphic phrasing that adjusts itself successfully to
whatever the future brings.) In our view—perhaps a prejudiced
one—this segment of their work has no real significance except for
the light it throws on human nature in the securities markets.
Nearly everyone interested in common stocks wants to be told by
someone else what he thinks the market is going to do. The
demand being there, it must be supplied.
Their interpretations and forecasts of business conditions, of

The Investor and His Advisers

261

course, are much more authoritative and informing. These are an
important part of the great body of economic intelligence which is
spread continuously among buyers and sellers of securities and
tends to create fairly rational prices for stocks and bonds under
most circumstances. Undoubtedly the material published by the
financial services adds to the store of information available and fortifies the investment judgment of their clients.
It is difficult to evaluate their recommendations of individual
securities. Each service is entitled to be judged separately, and the
verdict could properly be based only on an elaborate and inclusive
study covering many years. In our own experience we have noted
among them a pervasive attitude which we think tends to impair
what could otherwise be more useful advisory work. This is their
general view that a stock should be bought if the near-term
prospects of the business are favorable and should be sold if these
are unfavorable—regardless of the current price. Such a superficial
principle often prevents the services from doing the sound analytical job of which their staffs are capable—namely, to ascertain
whether a given stock appears over- or undervalued at the current
price in the light of its indicated long-term future earning power.
The intelligent investor will not do his buying and selling solely on
the basis of recommendations received from a financial service. Once
this point is established, the role of the financial service then becomes
the useful one of supplying information and offering suggestions.

Advice from Brokerage Houses
Probably the largest volume of information and advice to the
security-owning public comes from stockbrokers. These are members of the New York Stock Exchange, and of other exchanges,
who execute buying and selling orders for a standard commission.
Practically all the houses that deal with the public maintain a
“statistical” or analytical department, which answers inquiries
and makes recommendations. A great deal of analytical literature,
some of it elaborate and expensive, is distributed gratis to the
firms’ customers—more impressively referred to as clients.
A great deal is at stake in the innocent-appearing question
whether “customers” or “clients” is the more appropriate name. A
business has customers; a professional person or organization has

262

The Intelligent Investor

clients. The Wall Street brokerage fraternity has probably the highest ethical standards of any business, but it is still feeling its way
toward the standards and standing of a true profession.*
In the past Wall Street has thrived mainly on speculation, and
stock-market speculators as a class were almost certain to lose
money. Hence it has been logically impossible for brokerage
houses to operate on a thoroughly professional basis. To do that
would have required them to direct their efforts toward reducing
rather than increasing their business.
The farthest that certain brokerage houses have gone in that
direction—and could have been expected to go—is to refrain from
inducing or encouraging anyone to speculate. Such houses have
confined themselves to executing orders given them, to supplying
financial information and analyses, and to rendering opinions on
the investment merits of securities. Thus, in theory at least, they are
devoid of all responsibility for either the profits or the losses of
their speculative customers.†
Most stock-exchange houses, however, still adhere to the oldtime slogans that they are in business to make commissions and
that the way to succeed in business is to give the customers what
they want. Since the most profitable customers want speculative
advice and suggestions, the thinking and activities of the typical
firm are pretty closely geared to day-to-day trading in the market.
Thus it tries hard to help its customers make money in a field
where they are condemned almost by mathematical law to lose in
the end.‡ By this we mean that the speculative part of their operations cannot be profitable over the long run for most brokerage-

* Overall, Graham was as tough and cynical an observer as Wall Street has
ever seen. In this rare case, however, he was not nearly cynical enough. Wall
Street may have higher ethical standards than some businesses (smuggling, prostitution, Congressional lobbying, and journalism come to mind)
but the investment world nevertheless has enough liars, cheaters, and
thieves to keep Satan’s check-in clerks frantically busy for decades to come.
† The thousands of people who bought stocks in the late 1990s in the belief
that Wall Street analysts were providing unbiased and valuable advice have
learned, in a painful way, how right Graham is on this point.
‡ Interestingly, this stinging criticism, which in his day Graham was directing
at full-service brokers, ended up applying to discount Internet brokers in the

The Investor and His Advisers

263

house customers. But to the extent that their operations resemble
true investing they may produce investment gains that more than
offset the speculative losses.
The investor obtains advice and information from stockexchange houses through two types of employees, now known
officially as “customers’ brokers” (or “account executives”) and
financial analysts.
The customer’s broker, also called a “registered representative,”
formerly bore the less dignified title of “customer’s man.” Today
he is for the most part an individual of good character and considerable knowledge of securities, who operates under a rigid code of
right conduct. Nevertheless, since his business is to earn commissions, he can hardly avoid being speculation-minded. Thus the
security buyer who wants to avoid being influenced by speculative
considerations will ordinarily have to be careful and explicit in his
dealing with his customer’s broker; he will have to show clearly, by
word and deed, that he is not interested in anything faintly resembling a stock-market “tip.” Once the customer’s broker understands clearly that he has a real investor on his hands, he will
respect this point of view and cooperate with it.
The financial analyst, formerly known chiefly as security analyst, is a person of particular concern to the author, who has been
one himself for more than five decades and has helped educate
countless others. At this stage we refer only to the financial analysts employed by brokerage houses. The function of the security
analyst is clear enough from his title. It is he who works up the
detailed studies of individual securities, develops careful comparisons of various issues in the same field, and forms an expert opinion of the safety or attractiveness or intrinsic value of all the
different kinds of stocks and bonds.

late 1990s. These firms spent millions of dollars on flashy advertising that
goaded their customers into trading more and trading faster. Most of those
customers ended up picking their own pockets, instead of paying someone
else to do it for them—and the cheap commissions on that kind of transaction are a poor consolation for the result. More traditional brokerage firms,
meanwhile, began emphasizing financial planning and “integrated asset
management,” instead of compensating their brokers only on the basis of
how many commissions they could generate.

264

The Intelligent Investor

By what must seem a quirk to the outsider there are no formal
requirements for being a security analyst. Contrast with this the
facts that a customer’s broker must pass an examination, meet the
required character tests, and be duly accepted and registered by
the New York Stock Exchange. As a practical matter, nearly all the
younger analysts have had extensive business-school training, and
the oldsters have acquired at least the equivalent in the school of
long experience. In the great majority of cases, the employing brokerage house can be counted on to assure itself of the qualifications
and competence of its analysts.*
The customer of the brokerage firm may deal with the security
analysts directly, or his contact may be an indirect one via the customer’s broker. In either case the analyst is available to the client
for a considerable amount of information and advice. Let us make
an emphatic statement here. The value of the security analyst to the
investor depends largely on the investor’s own attitude. If the
investor asks the analyst the right questions, he is likely to get
the right—or at least valuable—answers. The analysts hired by
brokerage houses, we are convinced, are greatly handicapped by
the general feeling that they are supposed to be market analysts as
well. When they are asked whether a given common stock is
“sound,” the question often means, “Is this stock likely to advance
during the next few months?” As a result many of them are com-

* This remains true, although many of Wall Street’s best analysts hold the
title of chartered financial analyst. The CFA certification is awarded by the
Association of Investment Management & Research (formerly the Financial
Analysts Federation) only after the candidate has completed years of rigorous study and passed a series of difficult exams. More than 50,000 analysts
worldwide have been certified as CFAs. Sadly, a recent survey by Professor
Stanley Block found that most CFAs ignore Graham’s teachings: Growth
potential ranks higher than quality of earnings, risks, and dividend policy in
determining P/E ratios, while far more analysts base their buy ratings on
recent price than on the long-term outlook for the company. See Stanley
Block, “A Study of Financial Analysts: Practice and Theory,” Financial Analysts Journal, July/August, 1999, at www.aimrpubs.org. As Graham was
fond of saying, his own books have been read by—and ignored by—more
people than any other books in finance.

The Investor and His Advisers

265

pelled to analyze with one eye on the stock ticker—a pose not conducive to sound thinking or worthwhile conclusions.*
In the next section of this book we shall deal with some of the concepts and possible achievements of security analysis. A great many
analysts working for stock exchange firms could be of prime assistance to the bona fide investor who wants to be sure that he gets full
value for his money, and possibly a little more. As in the case of the
customers’ brokers, what is needed at the beginning is a clear understanding by the analyst of the investor’s attitude and objectives. Once
the analyst is convinced that he is dealing with a man who is valueminded rather than quotation-minded, there is an excellent chance
that his recommendations will prove of real overall benefit.

The CFA Certificate for Financial Analysts
An important step was taken in 1963 toward giving professional
standing and responsibility to financial analysts. The official title of
chartered financial analyst (CFA) is now awarded to those senior
practitioners who pass required examinations and meet other tests
of fitness.1 The subjects covered include security analysis and portfolio management. The analogy with the long-established professional title of certified public accountant (CPA) is evident and
intentional. This relatively new apparatus of recognition and control should serve to elevate the standards of financial analysts and
eventually to place their work on a truly professional basis.†

* It is highly unusual today for a security analyst to allow mere commoners to
contact him directly. For the most part, only the nobility of institutional investors
are permitted to approach the throne of the almighty Wall Street analyst. An individual investor might, perhaps, have some luck calling analysts who work at
“regional” brokerage firms headquartered outside of New York City. The investor
relations area at the websites of most publicly traded companies will provide a
list of analysts who follow the stock. Websites like www.zacks.com and
www.multex.com offer access to analysts’ research reports—but the intelligent
investor should remember that most analysts do not analyze businesses.
Instead, they engage in guesswork about future stock prices.
† Benjamin Graham was the prime force behind the establishment of the CFA
program, which he advocated for nearly two decades before it became a reality.

266

The Intelligent Investor

Dealings with Brokerage Houses
One of the most disquieting developments of the period in
which we write this revision has been the financial embarrassment—in plain words, bankruptcy or near-bankruptcy—of quite a
few New York Stock Exchange firms, including at least two of considerable size.* This is the first time in half a century or more that
such a thing has happened, and it is startling for more than one
reason. For many decades the New York Stock Exchange has been
moving in the direction of closer and stricter controls over the
operations and financial condition of its members—including minimum capital requirements, surprise audits, and the like. Besides
this, we have had 37 years of control over the exchanges and their
members by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Finally,
the stock-brokerage industry itself has operated under favorable
conditions—namely, a huge increase in volume, fixed minimum
commission rates (largely eliminating competitive fees), and a limited number of member firms.
The first financial troubles of the brokerage houses (in 1969)
were attributed to the increase in volume itself. This, it was
claimed, overtaxed their facilities, increased their overhead, and
produced many troubles in making financial settlements. It should
be pointed out this was probably the first time in history that
important enterprises have gone broke because they had more
business than they could handle. In 1970, as brokerage failures
increased, they were blamed chiefly on “the falling off in volume.”
A strange complaint when one reflects that the turnover of the

* The two firms Graham had in mind were probably Du Pont, Glore, Forgan
& Co. and Goodbody & Co. Du Pont (founded by the heirs to the chemical
fortune) was saved from insolvency in 1970 only after Texas entrepreneur
H. Ross Perot lent more than $50 million to the firm; Goodbody, the fifthlargest brokerage firm in the United States, would have failed in late 1970
had Merrill Lynch not acquired it. Hayden, Stone & Co. would also have
gone under if it had not been acquired. In 1970, no fewer than seven brokerage firms went bust. The farcical story of Wall Street’s frenzied overexpansion in the late 1960s is beautifully told in John Brooks’s The Go-Go
Years (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1999).

The Investor and His Advisers

267

NYSE in 1970 totaled 2,937 million shares, the largest volume in its
history and well over twice as large as in any year before 1965.
During the 15 years of the bull market ending in 1964 the annual
volume had averaged “only” 712 million shares—one quarter of
the 1970 figure—but the brokerage business had enjoyed the greatest prosperity in its history. If, as it appears, the member firms as a
whole had allowed their overhead and other expenses to increase
at a rate that could not sustain even a mild reduction in volume
during part of a year, this does not speak well for either their business acumen or their financial conservatism.
A third explanation of the financial trouble finally emerged out
of a mist of concealment, and we suspect that it is the most plausible and significant of the three. It seems that a good part of the capital of certain brokerage houses was held in the form of common
stocks owned by the individual partners. Some of these seem to
have been highly speculative and carried at inflated values. When
the market declined in 1969 the quotations of such securities fell
drastically and a substantial part of the capital of the firms vanished with them.2 In effect the partners were speculating with the
capital that was supposed to protect the customers against the
ordinary financial hazards of the brokerage business, in order to
make a double profit thereon. This was inexcusable; we refrain
from saying more.
The investor should use his intelligence not only in formulating
his financial policies but also in the associated details. These
include the choice of a reputable broker to execute his orders. Up to
now it was sufficient to counsel our readers to deal only with a
member of the New York Stock Exchange, unless he had compelling reasons to use a nonmember firm. Reluctantly, we must
add some further advice in this area. We think that people who do
not carry margin accounts—and in our vocabulary this means all
nonprofessional investors—should have the delivery and receipt of
their securities handled by their bank. When giving a buying order
to your brokers you can instruct them to deliver the securities
bought to your bank against payment therefor by the bank; conversely, when selling you can instruct your bank to deliver the
securities to the broker against payment of the proceeds. These services will cost a little extra but they should be well worth the
expense in terms of safety and peace of mind. This advice may be
