
FIGURE 12.3 GBP/USD Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

238

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

r Interest rate differentials between gilts and foreign bonds are
closely followed.
Interest rate differentials between U.K. gilts/U.S. Treasuries and
U.K. gilts/German bunds are widely watched by FX market participants. Gilts versus Treasuries can be a barometer of GBP/USD flows,
while gilts versus bunds can be used as a barometer for EUR/GBP
flows. More specifically, these interest rate differentials indicate how
much premium yield U.K. fixed income assets are offering over U.S.
and European fixed income assets (the German bund is usually used
as a barometer for European yield), or vice versa. This differential
provides traders with indications of potential capital flow or currency
movements, as global investors are always shifting their capital in
search for the assets with the highest yields. The United Kingdom currently provides these yields, while also providing the safety of having
the same credit stability as the United States.
r Eurosterling futures can give indications for interest
rate movements.
Since the U.K. interest rate or bank repo rate is the primary tool
used in monetary policy, it is important to keep abreast of potential
changes to the interest rate. Comments from government officials is
one way to gauge biases for potential rate changes, but the Bank of
England is one of the few central banks that require members of the
Monetary Policy Committee to publish their voting records. This personal accountability indicates that comments by individual committee
members represent their own opinions and not that of the BOE. Therefore, it is necessary to look for other indications of potential BOE rate
movements. Three-month eurosterling futures reflect market expectations on eurosterling interest rates three months into the future. These
contracts are also useful in predicting U.K. interest rate changes, which
will ultimately affect the fluctuations of the GBP/USD.
r Comments on euro by U.K. politicians will impact the euro.
Any speeches, remarks (especially from the prime minister or
Treasury chancellor), or polls in regard to the euro will impact the currency markets. Indication for adoption of the euro tends to put downward pressure on the GBP, while further opposition to euro entry will
typically boost the GBP, the reason being that in order for the GBP to
come in line with the euro, interest rates would have to decrease significantly (at the time of this writing, the United Kingdom interest rate
is 5.00 percent, versus euro interest rate of 4.00 percent). A decrease
in the interest rate would induce carry trade investors to close their
positions, or sell pounds. The GBP/USD would also decline because
of the uncertainties involved with euro adoption. The U.K. economy
is performing very well under the direction of its current monetary

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

239

authority. The EMU is currently encountering many difficulties with
member countries breaching EMU criteria. With one monetary authority dictating 12 countries (plus the United Kingdom would be 13), the
EMU has yet to prove that it has developed a monetary policy suitable
for all member states.
r GBP has positive correlation with energy prices.
The United Kingdom houses some of the largest energy companies
in the world, including British Petroleum. Energy production represents 10 percent of GDP. As a result, the British pound tends to have a
positive correlation with energy prices. Specifically, since many members of the EU import oil from the United Kingdom, as oil prices increase, they will in turn have to buy more pounds to fund their energy
purchases. In addition, higher oil prices will also benefit the earnings
of the nation’s energy exporters.
r GBP crosses.
Although the GBP/USD is a more liquid currency than EUR/GBP,
EUR/GBP is typically the leading gauge for GBP strength. The
GBP/USD currency pair tends to be more sensitive to U.S. developments, while EUR/GBP is a more pure fundamental pound trade since
EUR is Britain’s primary trade and investment partner. However, both
currencies are naturally interdependent, which means that movements
in the EUR/GBP cross can filter into movements in the GBP/USD. The
reverse is also true; that is, movements in GBP/USD will also affect
trading in EUR/GBP. Therefore it is important for pound traders to be
consciously aware of the trading behavior of both currency pairs. The
EUR/GBP rate should be exactly equal to the EUR/USD divided by the
GBP/USD rate. Small differences in these rates are often exploited by
market participants and quickly eliminated.

Important Economic Indicators for the
United Kingdom
All of the following indicators are important for the United Kingdom. However, since the United Kingdom is primarily a service-oriented economy,
it is particularly important to pay attention to numbers from the service
sector.
Employment Situation A monthly survey is conducted by the Office of National Statistics. The objectives of the survey are to divide the
working-age population into three separate classifications—employed, unemployed, and not in the labor force—and to provide descriptive and explanatory data on each of these categories. Data from the survey provides
market participants with information on major labor market trends such as

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

240

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

shifts in employment across industrial sectors, hours worked, labor force
participation, and unemployment rates. The timeliness of the survey makes
it a closely watched statistic by the currency markets as it is a good barometer of the strength of the U.K. economy.
Retail Price Index The RPI is a measure of the change in prices of a
basket of consumer goods. The markets, however, focus on the underlying
RPI or RPI-X, which excludes mortgage interest payments. The RPI-X is
closely watched as the Treasury sets inflation targets for the BOE, currently
defined as 2.5 percent annual growth in RPI-X.
Gross Domestic Product A quarterly report is conducted by the Bureau of Statistics. GDP is a measure of the total production and consumption of goods and services in the United Kingdom. GDP is measured by
adding expenditures by households, businesses, government, and net foreign purchases. The GDP price deflator is used to convert output measured
at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. This data is used to gauge where
in the business cycle the United Kingdom finds itself. Fast growth often is
perceived as inflationary while low (or negative) growth indicates a recessionary or weak economy.
Industrial Production The industrial production (IP) index measures
the change in output in U.K. manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and
electricity, gas, and water supply. Output refers to the physical quantity
of items produced, unlike sales value, which combines quantity and price.
The index covers the production of goods and power for domestic sales
in the United Kingdom and for export. Because IP is responsible for close
to a quarter of gross domestic product, IP is widely watched as it provides
good insight into the current state of the economy.
Purchasing Managers Index The purchasing managers index (PMI)
is a monthly survey conducted by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing
and Supply. The index is based on a weighted average of seasonally adjusted measures of output, new orders, inventory, and employment. Index
values above 50 indicate an expanding economy, while values below 50 are
indicative of contraction.
U.K. Housing Starts Housing starts measure the number of residential building construction projects that have begun during any
particular month. This is important data for the United Kingdom as the
housing market is the primary industry that is sustaining the economy’s
performance.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

241

CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS
FRANC (CHF)
Broad Economic Overview
Switzerland is the nineteenth largest economy in the world, with a GDP
valued at over US$255 billion in 2006. Although the economy is relatively
small, it is one of the wealthiest in the world on a GDP per capita basis. It
is prosperous and technologically advanced with stability that rivals that
of many larger economies. The country’s prosperity stems primarily from
technological expertise in manufacturing, tourism, and banking. More
specifically, Switzerland is known for its chemicals and pharmaceuticals
industries, machinery, precision instruments, watches, and a financial system historically known for protecting the confidentiality of its investors.
This coupled with the country’s lengthy history of political neutrality has
created a safe haven reputation for the country and its currency. As a
result, Switzerland is the world’s largest destination for offshore capital.
The country holds over US$2 trillion in offshore assets and is estimated
to attract more than 35 percent of the world’s private wealth management
business. This has created a large and highly advanced banking and
insurance industry that employs over 50 percent of the population and
comprises more than 70 percent of total GDP. Since Switzerland’s financial
industry thrives on its safe haven status and renowned confidentiality, capital flows tend to drive the economy during times of global risk aversion,
while trade flows drive the economy during a risk-seeking environment.
Therefore trade flows are important, with nearly two-thirds of all trade
conducted with Europe. Switzerland’s most important trading partners are:
Leading Export Markets
1. Germany
2. United States
3. Italy
4. France
5. United Kingdom
6. Japan

Leading Import Sources
1. Germany
2. Italy
3. France

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

242

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

4. Netherlands
5. United States
6. United Kingdom

In recent years, merchandise trade flow has fluctuated between deficit
and surplus. The current account, on the other hand, has reflected a surplus
since 1966. In 2006, the current account surplus reached a high at 14.5 percent of GDP. This is the highest current account surplus among all of the
industrialized countries (aside from Norway, Singapore, and Hong Kong).
Most of the surplus can be attributed to the large amount of foreign direct
investment into the country in search of safety of capital, despite the low
yields offered by Switzerland.

Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Swiss
National Bank
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is the central bank of Switzerland. It is
a completely independent central bank with a three-person committee responsible for determining monetary policy. This committee consists of a
chairman, a vice chairman, and one other member who constitute the Governing Board of the SNB. Due to the small size of the committee, all decisions are based on a consensus vote. The board reviews monetary policy
at least once a quarter, but decisions on monetary policy can be made and
announced at any point in time. Unlike most other central banks, the SNB
does not set one official interest rate target, but instead sets a target range
for the three-month Swiss LIBOR rate.
Central Bank’s Goals In December 1999, the SNB shifted from focusing on monetary targets (M3) to an inflation target of less than 2 percent inflation per year. This measure is taken based on the national consumer price index. Monetary targets still remain important indicators and
are closely watched by the central bank, because they provide information on the long-term inflation. This new inflation focus also increases the
central bank’s transparency. The bank has clearly stated that “should inflation exceed 2 percent in the medium term, the SNB will tend to tighten
its monetary stance.” If there is a danger of deflation, the National Bank
would loosen monetary policy. The SNB also closely monitors exchange
rates, as excessive strength in the Swiss franc can cause inflationary conditions. This is especially true in environments of global risk aversion, as
capital flows into Switzerland increase significantly during those times. As
a result, the SNB typically favors a weak franc, and is not hesitant to use
intervention as a liquidity tool. SNB officials intervene in the franc using

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

243

a variety of methods including verbal remarks on liquidity, money supply,
and the currency.
Central Bank’s Tools The most commonly used tools by the SNB to
implement monetary policy include:

Target Interest Rate Range The SNB implements monetary policy
by setting a target range for their three-month interest rate (the Swiss
LIBOR rate). This range typically has a 100-basis-point spread, and is revised at least once every quarter. This rate is used as the target because
it is the most important money market rate for Swiss franc investments.
Changes to this target are accompanied with a clear explanation in regard
to the changes in the economic environment.
Open Market Operations Repo transactions are the SNB’s major
monetary policy instrument. A repo transaction involves a cash taker (borrower) selling securities to a cash provider (lender), while agreeing to repurchase the securities of the same type and quantity at a later date. This
structure is similar to a secured loan, whereby the cash taker must pay
the cash provider interest. These repo transactions tend to have very short
maturities ranging from one day to a few weeks. The SNB uses these repo
transactions to manipulate undesirable moves in the three-month LIBOR
rate. To prevent increases in the three-month LIBOR rate above the SNB’s
target, the bank would supply the commercial banks with additional liquidity through repo transactions at lower repo rates, and in essence create
additional liquidity. Conversely, the SNB can reduce liquidity or induce increases in the three-month LIBOR rate by increasing repo rates.
The SNB publishes a Quarterly Bulletin with a detailed assessment
of the current state of the economy and a review of monetary policy. A
Monthly Bulletin is also published containing a short review of economic
developments. These reports are important to watch, as they may contain
information on changes in the SNB’s assessment of the current domestic
situation.

Important Characteristics of the Swiss Franc
r Safe haven status.
This is perhaps the most unique characteristic of the Swiss franc.
Switzerland’s safe haven status is continually stressed because this and
the secrecy of the banking system are the key advantages of Switzerland. The Swiss franc moves primarily on external events rather than
domestic economic conditions. That is, as mentioned earlier, due to
its political neutrality, the franc is considered the world’s premier

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

244

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

safe haven currency. Therefore, in times of global instability and/or
uncertainty, investors tend to be more concerned with capital retention than appreciation. At such times, funds will flow into Switzerland,
which would cause the Swiss franc to appreciate regardless of whether
growth conditions are favorable.
r Swiss franc is closely correlated with gold.
Switzerland is the world’s fourth largest official holder of gold.
The Swiss constitution used to have a mandate requiring the currency to be backed 40 percent with gold reserves. Since then, despite the removal of the mandate, the link between gold and the Swiss
franc has remained ingrained in the minds of Swiss investors. As a
result, the Swiss franc has close to an 80 percent positive correlation with gold. If the gold price appreciates, the Swiss franc has a
high likelihood of appreciating as well. In addition, since gold is also
viewed as the ultimate safe haven form of money, both gold and the
Swiss franc benefit during periods of global economic and geopolitical
uncertainty.
r Carry trades effects.
With one of the lowest interest rates in the industrialized world
over the past few years, the Swiss franc is one of the most popular currencies used by traders in carry trades. As mentioned throughout this
book, the popularity of carry trades has increased significantly over
recent years, as investors are actively seeking high-yielding assets. A
carry trade involves buying or lending a currency with a high interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency with a low interest rate.
With CHF having one of the lowest interest rates of all industrialized
countries, it is one of the primary currencies sold or borrowed in carry
trades. This results in the need to sell CHF against a higher-yielding
currency. Carry trades are typically done in cross-currencies such as
GBP/CHF or AUD/CHF, but these trades will impact both EUR/CHF
and USD/CHF. Unwinding of carry trades will involve the need for investors to purchase CHF.
r Interest rate differentials between Euro Swiss futures and foreign interest rate futures are closely followed.
Interest rate differentials between three-month Euro Swiss futures and Eurodollar futures are widely watched by professional Swiss
traders. These differentials are good indicators of potential money
flows as they indicate how much premium yield U.S. fixed income
assets are offering over Swiss fixed income assets, or vice versa. This
differential provides traders with indications of potential currency
movements, as investors are always looking for assets with the highest yields. This is particularly important to carry traders who enter and

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

245

exit their positions based on the positive interest rate differentials between global fixed income assets.
r Potential changes in banking regulations.
Over the past few years members of the European Union have
been exerting significant pressure on Switzerland to relax the confidentiality of its banking system and to increase transparency of customers’ accounts. The EU is pressing this issue because of its active
measures to prosecute EU tax evaders. This should be a concern for
many years to come. However, this is a difficult decision for Switzerland to make because the confidentiality of customers’ accounts represents the core strength of its banking system. The EU has threatened
to impose severe sanctions on Switzerland if it does not comply with
the proposed measures. Both political entities are currently working to
negotiate an equitable resolution. Any news or talk of changing banking regulations will impact both Switzerland’s economy and the Swiss
franc.
r Merger and acquisition activity.
Switzerland’s primary industry is banking and finance. In this industry, merger and acquisition (M&A) activities are very common, especially as consolidation continues in the overall industry. As a result,
these M&A activities can have significant impact on the Swiss franc. If
foreign firms purchase Swiss banks or insurance companies, they will
need to buy Swiss francs and in turn sell their local currencies. If Swiss
banks purchase foreign firms, on the other hand, they would need to
sell Swiss francs and buy the foreign currencies. Either way, it is important for Swiss franc traders to frequently watch for notices on M&A
activity involving Swiss firms.
r Trading behavior, cross-currency characteristics.
The EUR/CHF is the most commonly traded currency for traders
who want to participate in CHF movements. (See Figure 12.4.) The
USD/CHF is less frequently traded because of its higher illiquidity
and volatility. However, day traders may tend to favor USD/CHF
over EUR/CHF because of its volatile movements. In actuality, the
USD/CHF is only a synthetic currency derived from EUR/USD and
EUR/CHF. Market makers or professional traders tend to use those
pairs as leading indicators for trading USD/CHF or to price the current USD/CHF level when the currency pair is illiquid. Theoretically,
the USD/CHF rate should be exactly equal to EUR/CHF divided by
EUR/USD. Only during times of severe global risk aversion, such as
the Iraq War or September 11, will USD/CHF develop a market of its
own. Any small differences in these rates are quickly exploited by market participants.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

246

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

FIGURE 12.4 USD/CHF Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

Important Economic Indicators for Switzerland
KoF (Konjunkturforschungsstelle der eth, Zurich) Leading
Indicators The KoF leading indicators report is released by the Swiss
Institute for Business Cycle Research. This index is generally used to
gauge the future health of the Swiss economy. It contains six components:
(1) change in manufacturers’ orders, (2) expected purchase plans of manufacturers over the next three months, (3) judgment of stocks in wholesale
business, (4) consumer perception of their financial conditions, (5) backlog
in the construction sector, and (6) orders backlog for manufacturers.
Consumer Price Index The consumer price index is calculated
monthly on the basis of retail prices paid in Switzerland. In accordance
with prevalent international practice, the commodities covered are distinguished according to the consumption concept, which includes in the
calculation of the index those goods and services that are part of the private consumption aggregate according to the National Accounts. The basket of goods does not include so-called transfer expenditure such as direct
taxation, social insurance contributions, and health insurance premiums.
The index is a key measure of inflation.
Gross Domestic Product GDP is a measure of the total production
and consumption of goods and services in Switzerland. GDP is measured
by adding expenditures by households, businesses, government, and net
foreign purchases. The GDP price deflator is used to convert output measured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. This data is used to gauge
