and small.
2. The magic formula was extensively tested. The
great returns do not appear to be a matter of luck.
3. The magic formula ranks stocks in order. As a
result, there should always be plenty of highly
ranked stocks to choose from. The magic formula
has been an incredibly accurate indicator of how a
group of stocks will perform in the future!
4. Next chapter, we’ll have to discuss whether the
magic formula can continue to get such great
results. (That would be nice!)

Chapter Eight

I ADMIT IT. My knowledge of history is a little fuzzy.* I
guess I should have listened better in class. But there’s
one part of our history that has always baffled me. I never
really understood how we won the Revolutionary War.
Here we were, these 13 little colonies, up against the
strongest country in the world. England had the best navy,
the mightiest army, the most money, and yet our scrappy
little ragtag group of soldiers pulled out a victory! How’d
that happen? Well, I have a theory. Given my limited
knowledge, I don’t know whether my theory has been
*Though my knowledge of Bob Newhart’s old comedy routines is quite
good.

[68]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

extensively studied. But the way I see it, we won because
we were fighting a bunch of complete idiots!
After all, the British strategy left a lot to be desired.
On one side, you had British soldiers standing in plain
sight, perfectly lined up, wearing, of all things, bright red
coats, while shooting in unison! I’m sure it looked quite
nice. On the other side, you had our guys, a messy, disorganized hodgepodge of soldiers, hiding behind rocks and
trees, shooting back at a bunch of conveniently arranged
bright red targets! No wonder we won!
But here’s the part I don’t get. I can’t imagine this
was the first time the British fought like that. In other
words, despite what I think, the British way of fighting
must have actually worked in the past. My only question
is—how? For all I know, they’d been doing it that way for
hundreds of years and apparently—whether it makes sense
to me or not—with a great deal of success. Yet following
the same game plan that had worked so well in the past
clearly wasn’t a good strategy going forward. The British
found that out the hard way.
So what about us? We’re about to march off, armed
with what looks like a great game plan. We have a magic
formula that makes sense and has produced phenomenal
results in the past. We expect to have a lot of success with
it in the future. But before we all line up to collect our
money, we better stop and think about one obvious

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[69]

problem: How can our strategy keep working after everyone knows about it? If we can’t find a good answer, like
the British, we may end up as just another easy target.
Well, first, here’s some really good news. As it turns
out, there are plenty of times when the magic formula
doesn’t work at all! Isn’t that great? In fact, on average,
in five months out of each year, the magic formula portfolio does worse than the overall market. But forget months.
Often, the magic formula doesn’t work for a full year or
even more. That’s even better!
Imagine buying a book that tells you to invest real
money in a group of stocks whose names were spit out by
a computer. Imagine diligently watching those stocks each
day as they do worse than the market averages over the
course of many months or even years. Now imagine
deciding enough is enough. No more trusting that stupid
book or that mindless computer. You’re going to roll up
your sleeves and investigate the companies you purchased
and the outlook for the businesses you actually own. As
we’ll find out later, imagine the horror when you realize
that if you had only investigated these companies for a few
minutes before buying your shares, there is no way you
would have touched many of them. Finally, despite awful
performance and the disagreeable prospects of the stocks
that you own, imagine vowing to continue following the
advice of that stupid book and that mindless computer!

[70]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

But why even worry about all this? After all, the
magic formula works. We proved it last chapter! We’re
going to do really well, so there’s no need to worry about
months or years of poor performance. And though that
sounds right, unfortunately, looking at the statistics for
only our very successful 17-year test period, it turns out
there’s actually plenty to worry about.
The magic formula portfolio fared poorly relative to
the market averages in 5 out of every 12 months tested.
For full-year periods, the magic formula failed to beat the
market averages once every four years.* For one out of
every six periods tested, the magic formula did poorly for
more than two years in a row. During those wonderful 17
years for the magic formula, there were even some periods
when the formula did worse than the overall market for
three years in a row!
Think it’s easy to stick with a formula that hasn’t
worked for several years? Do you think the typical reaction goes something like “I know this hasn’t worked for
a long time,” or “I know I just lost a lot of money,” but
“Let’s keep doing what we’re doing!”? I assure you, it
is not.
*Annual returns were calculated from January 1988 to January 1989, February 1988 to February 1989, and so on, through the end of 2004. In all,
193 separate one-year periods were examined.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[71]

Take, for example, the case of the author with the
best-selling investment book. For his book, the author
tested dozens of stock-picking formulas over a period of
many decades to determine which of those strategies had
beaten the market over the long run. The book was excellent and well-reasoned. The author then opened a mutual
fund based on buying only those stocks picked by the most
successful formula of the dozens he had tested.
The fund then proceeded to perform worse than the
major market averages for two of its first three years. For
one of those years, the fund underperformed the market
average by 25 percent! After three years, the fund was
performing poorly relative to competing funds and the
best-selling author—the guy who did the tests, the guy
who wrote the book—decided to sell his fund management
company to somebody else! In fairness, I don’t think the
author gave up on his formula, but clearly he saw better
opportunities elsewhere! Had he known that that same
fund, the one managed strictly according to his formula,
would come back over the next three years to be one of
the top-performing mutual funds since the time of its
inception (even including the tough first few years), perhaps he would have stuck with it longer!
But that’s not unusual. The unpredictability of Mr.
Market’s moods and the pressures of competing with
other money managers can make it really hard to stick

[72]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

with a strategy that hasn’t worked for years. That goes for
any strategy, no matter how sensible and regardless of
how good the long-term track record is. Let’s take a look
at the experience of a good friend of mine who happens to
be the “smartest money manager I know.” Though he
doesn’t automatically buy stocks that his computer-based
formula spits out, he does follow a disciplined strategy of
choosing companies to buy only from the list of companies his formula ranks the highest.
He used this strategy very successfully for 10 years at
his previous investment firm, and nine years ago he set out
to form his own money management firm using the same
basic principles. Business wasn’t too good for the first
three or four years, as the same strategy that had been so
successful in the past drastically underperformed the returns of competing money management firms and the major market averages. Nevertheless, the “smartest money
manager I know” strongly believed that his strategy still
made tremendous sense in the long run and that he should
continue following the same course as always. Unfortunately, his clients disagreed. The vast majority of them
ran for the exits, pulling their money away in large numbers, most likely to give it to a manager who, unlike my
friend, “knew what he was doing.”
As you guessed, they should have stuck around. The
last five or six years have been so good for my friend and

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[73]

his strategy that now the investment record of his firm
since its inception (once again, including those tough first
few years) has trounced the returns of the major market
averages over the comparable time frame. Today it stands
among the top of only a small handful of firms with
extraordinary investment records out of the thousands of
investment firms on Wall Street. To prove that sometimes
good things do come to those who wait, my friend’s firm
now manages over $10 billion for hundreds of clients. Too
bad that, in the face of several years of underperformance,
most choose not to wait. Only four original clients
remain.*
So what’s the point? The point is that if the magic
formula worked all the time, everyone would probably use
it. If everyone used it, it would probably stop working. So
many people would be buying the shares of the bargainpriced stocks selected by the magic formula that the
prices of those shares would be pushed higher almost
immediately. In other words, if everyone used the formula, the bargains would disappear and the magic formula would be ruined!
That’s why we’re so lucky the magic formula isn’t
that great. It doesn’t work all the time. In fact, it might
*Luckily, I’m one of them! (Though, as his friend, I probably had to stick
around.)

[74]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

not work for years. Most people just won’t wait that long.
Their investment time horizon is too short. If a strategy
works in the long run (meaning it sometimes takes three,
four, or even five years to show its stuff), most people
won’t stick with it. After a year or two of performing
worse than the market averages (or earning lower returns
than their friends), most people look for a new strategy—
usually one that has done well over the past few years.
Even professional money managers who believe their
strategy will work over the long term have a hard time
sticking with it. After a few years of poor performance
relative to the market or to their competitors, the vast
majority of clients and investors just leave! That’s why it’s
hard to stay with a strategy that doesn’t follow along with
everyone else’s. As a professional manager, if you do
poorly while everyone else is doing well, you run the risk
of losing all your clients and possibly your job!
Many managers feel the only way to avoid that risk is
to invest pretty much the way everyone else does. Often
this means owning the most popular companies, usually
the ones whose prospects look most promising over the
next few quarters or the next year or two.
Perhaps now you’re beginning to see why most
everyone else won’t be using the magic formula. Though
some may take it out for a spin, most won’t last past the
first few months or years of poor performance. As we

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[75]

discussed back in Chapter 1, you’re also beginning to
see why all that having to believe stuff is so important. If
you don’t believe that the magic formula will work for
you, you’ll most likely quit before it has a chance to
work! At least, that’s where the statistics over the last
17 years seem to point. The magic formula works—
long-term annual returns of double, or in some cases
almost triple, the returns of the market averages—only
those good returns can get pretty lumpy. Over shorter
periods, it may work or it may not. When it comes to the
magic formula, “shorter” periods can often mean years,
not days or months. In a strange but logical way, that’s
the good news.
Good news, that is, if you believe enough in the magic
formula to stick with it over the long term. But to truly
stick with a strategy that hasn’t worked in years and years,
you’re going to have to really believe in it deep down in
your bones. Sure, the spectacular track record of the
magic formula will help, but let’s see what your bones
think of the next chapter.

Quick Summary

1. The magic formula appears to work very well over
the long term.

[76]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

2. The magic formula often doesn’t work for several
years in a row.
3. Most investors won’t (or can’t) stick with a strategy
that hasn’t worked for several years in a row.
4. For the magic formula to work for you, you must
believe that it will work and maintain a long-term
investment horizon.
5. If it wasn’t for this chapter, the next chapter would
be the most important chapter in the book.

Chapter Nine

“VOMIT UNDER THE 3EM-SPACES AND RUN!”
Now there’s a saying you don’t hear every day. The
main reason you don’t hear it much is pretty straightforward. Over time, the phrase has lost all of its meaning. In
fact, I really only needed it to pass my eighth-grade course
in print shop.
You see, old-time printers used to set type by hand
and actually picked letters individually out of a box. To
pass the course, my fellow middle schoolers and I were
forced to memorize the location of these letters. The letters in the bottom row were V-U-T, then something called
a 3em-space, followed by the letters A-R. We remembered

[78]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

the order by the catchy phrase “Vomit under the 3emspaces and run!”
With the advent of computers, my little memory
device—and print shop, for that matter—is now useless.
Of course, the world has changed a lot since I was in middle school. No one teaches print shop anymore. Thankfully, though, some subjects haven’t changed. Math class,
for one, is still pretty much the same. As investors, that’s
really important to know.
That’s because, in order for the magic formula to
make us money in the long run, the principles behind it
must appear not only sensible and logical, but timeless.
Otherwise, there is no way we’ll be able to “hang on”
when our short-term results turn against us. As simple as
it may seem, knowing that two plus two always equals four
can be a pretty powerful concept. No matter how many
people tell us differently, no matter how long they tell us,
and no matter how smart all those people appear to be, we
are unlikely to waver in our conviction. In a similar way,
our level of confidence in the magic formula will determine whether we can hang on to a strategy that may be
both unpopular and unsuccessful for seemingly long periods of time.
So what is it about the magic formula that makes
sense—so much sense, in fact, that we won’t waver when
things turn against us? Well, let’s take another look.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[79]

The magic formula chooses companies through a
ranking system. Those companies that have both a high
return on capital and a high earnings yield are the ones
that the formula ranks as best. Put more simply, the formula is systematically helping us find above-average companies that we can buy at below-average prices.
That certainly sounds logical and sensible. If, indeed,
that’s what we’re really doing, it also sounds like a strategy we can truly believe in. So, let’s go step-by-step and
see whether that’s true.
First, why are companies that earn a high return on
capital so special? What kind of companies is our formula
telling us to buy? What makes them above average? To
understand the answers to those questions, let’s go back
and check in with our old friend Jason.
Last year, as you may remember, was a pretty good
year for Jason’s business. Each of his gum shops earned
$200,000. Since he only had to invest $400,000 to build
each store (including inventory, store displays, etc.), that
meant that his return on capital for opening a gum shop
was a pretty impressive 50 percent ($200,000 divided by
$400,000). So what does that mean?
Most people and most businesses can’t find an investment
that will earn a 50 percent annual return. If the past year is a
good guideline and Jason’s company can really earn 50
percent a year on its money by simply opening another

[80]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

store, that makes Jason’s Gum Shops a pretty special
business. Think about that. Having the opportunity to
invest your money and earn 50 percent per year is pretty
rare. While it’s true that there is no guarantee that
Jason’s new stores (or his old stores) will continue to earn
50 percent returns each year on their original cost, last
year’s high returns may be a good indicator of the opportunity to earn high returns from investing in that same
business going forward.
If that’s true and Jason’s Gum Shops can continue
to earn high returns from its investments in old and new
stores, that’s really good news for Jason. First, that may
mean that the profits from Jason’s business don’t have to
just sit there. While Jason’s Gum Shops could take
those earnings and invest in a government bond paying 6
percent per year, they have a much better option. The
company can take those earnings and invest them in a
new store. So not only will the original investment in the
first store continue to earn 50 percent per year, but
Jason’s Gum Shops has the chance to invest the profits
from the first store in a new store that may also earn 50
percent a year!
This opportunity to invest profits at high rates of return is
very valuable. For example, if Jason’s Gum Shops earned
$200,000 last year, Jason has a few options. He can distribute that money to the shareholders of the business (the

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[81]

shareholders can then invest that money however they
choose). If the business doesn’t change much this coming
year, Jason’s Gum Shops will earn $200,000 again. That
may be a fine outcome.
But if, instead, Jason’s Gum Shops takes its $200,000
in profits and invests them in government bonds paying 6
percent (3.6 percent after taxes at a 40 percent rate), Jason’s
business will earn $207,200 this coming year ($200,000
from the store and $7,200 in after-tax profits from interest
on the bond). Though earnings would be higher than last
year, the growth rate in earnings would not be very high.
But here’s where the big bucks roll in. If Jason takes
that same $200,000 in profits and can invest it in a new
store that earns a 50 percent annual return,* the earnings
for Jason’s Gum Shops will grow to $300,000 in the coming year ($200,000 from the original store and an additional $100,000 from the investment in the new store).
Going from $200,000 in earnings last year to $300,000 in
the coming year would represent a 50 percent earnings
growth rate in one year!
In other words, owning a business that has the opportunity
to invest some or all of its profits at a very high rate of return can
contribute to a very high rate of earnings growth!
*Assume for this example that we can invest in half a store (though a new
store costs $400,000).

[82]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

So now we know two important things about businesses that can earn a high return on capital. First, businesses that can earn a high return on capital may also have
the opportunity to invest their profits at very high rates of
return. Since most people and businesses can invest their
money at only average rates of return, this opportunity is
something special. Second, as we just learned, the ability
to earn a high return on capital may also contribute to a
high rate of earnings growth. Certainly, that’s good news
for the companies chosen by the magic formula.
But that still leaves us with one obvious question. If a
business like Jason’s really can make 50 percent a year by
opening a gum shop, why won’t other people see that and
start opening their own gum shops?
That would mean more competition for Jason’s Gum
Shops. More competition could mean that Jason will sell
less gum in each of his stores. More competition could
mean that Jason must lower his prices to attract business.
More competition could mean that someone builds a better gum shop. In short, more competition could mean
lower profits going forward for Jason’s Gum Shops.
In fact, that’s how our system of capitalism works.
Good businesses attract competition. Even if competing
gum shops open up and the return on capital from opening a new Jason’s gum store drops to 40 percent, the
threat to future profits might not end there. Earning 40

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[83]

percent annual returns from opening a gum shop is still
quite good. People might see those 40 percent annual
returns from opening a gum shop as very attractive and
decide to open their own gum shops. Then, due to the
increased competition, returns may fall all the way to 30
percent per year from building a new gum shop.
But even there it might not stop! Earning 30 percent
a year on an investment is also good. More competition
could continue to drive down future returns on capital
from new stores and from old stores that are already built.
This whole capitalism thing could result in profits continuing to spiral downward until the annual returns on capital from owning gum stores isn’t so great anymore. Some
system!
But here’s the thing. If capitalism is such a tough system, how does the magic formula find us companies that
are able to earn a high return on capital in the first place?
To earn a high return on capital even for one year, it’s
likely that, at least temporarily, there’s something special
about that company’s business. Otherwise, competition
would already have driven down returns on capital to
lower levels.
It could be that the company has a relatively new
business concept (perhaps a candy store that sells only
gum), or a new product (like a hot video game), or a better product (such as an iPod that’s smaller and easier to

[84]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

use than competitors’ products), a good brand name
(people will happily pay more for Coke than for Joe’s
Cola, so Coke can charge more than Joe’s and continue
to earn a high return on capital despite having competition), or a company could have a very strong competitive
position (eBay was one of the first auction web sites and
has more buyers and sellers than anyone else, so it’s
hard for new auction sites to offer the same benefits to
customers).
In short, companies that achieve a high return on capital
are likely to have a special advantage of some kind. That special advantage keeps competitors from destroying the ability to
earn above-average profits.
Businesses that don’t have anything special going for
them (such as new or better products, well-known brand
names, or strong competitive positions) are likely to earn
only average or below-average returns on capital. If there’s
nothing special about a company’s business, then it’s
easy for someone to come in and start a competing business. If a business is earning a high return on capital and
it’s easy to compete, eventually someone will! They’ll
keep competing until returns on capital are driven down
to average levels.
But the magic formula doesn’t choose companies with
average returns on capital. It doesn’t choose companies
