counts in the press. I performed such a count on ABI/INFORM, a database
of business periodicals, and found no more than one reference to portfolio
insurance in each of the years 1980–83, four in 1984, six in 1985, forty-one in
1986, and seventy-five in 1987. References to portfolio insurance were growing
along the type of steady growth path that characterizes simple word‑of‑mouth
epidemic models, which will be discussed in Chapter 10.24
So the development of portfolio insurance changed the way some investors reacted to past price changes just before the crash of 1987. There were
probably other changes in the nature of the feedback loop that, because they
were not so concretely programmed as portfolio insurance, we could not
observe directly. But the important point is that it was the changed nature of the
feedback loop, not the news stories that broke around the time of the crash, that was
the essential cause of the crash.
Feedback can be modified by many factors, and the news media themselves
can certainly have an impact on it. The Wall Street Journal, on the morning of
the 1987 crash, ran a plot showing the Dow in the 1980s and, just below it, a
plot showing the Dow in the 1920s up to and for a month after the crash of

T HE N E W S M E D I A

119

1929.25 The two plots were aligned so that the current date lined up with the
date of the 1929 crash, and so the plot suggested that the crash of 1929 might be
about to repeat itself. Investors had the opportunity to see this plot at breakfast
a matter of minutes before the crash of 1987 actually started. The Journal was
openly suggesting the possibility of a crash starting that day. True, this was
not a front‑page story, and no one story by itself is decisive in causing a crash.
But this little story and the accompanying plot, appearing as they did on the
morning of the crash, probably did help prime investors to be more alert to
suggestions of a crash.
When the big price declines on the morning of October 19, 1987, began,
the archetype that was the 1929 crash encouraged many people to question whether “it” was happening again—the “it” being the Great Crash as
illustrated in the Journal, not the crash of 1907, nor the up-crash of 1932, nor
any of the numerous other historical stock market events that by then had
been almost completely forgotten. The mental image of the biggest crash in
history possibly happening on that very day had the potential to enhance
the feedback from initial price declines to later price declines. The image
also provided a suggestion of how far the market would decline before it
rebounded, a crucial factor in determining how far the market actually did
fall. In fact, in the crash of October 19, 1987, the Dow actually fell in one day
almost the same amount as it did on October 28–29, 1929—22.6% in 1987
versus 23.1% in 1929. That it fell roughly the same amount on both occasions
might be regarded as just a coincidence, especially since the 1987 crash took
two days rather than one, and few investors in 1987 even knew exactly how
far the market fell in 1929. However, many did have a rough impression of
the extent of the 1929 plunge, and there was little other concrete information available to investors on October 19, 1987, to suggest when the market
should stop falling.
The changed feedback that occurred at the time of the 1987 crash should
be thought of as just one example of continually changing price‑to‑price
feedback, as investors’ theories and methods change over time. It would be
a mistake to describe the changed feedback as the result solely of the technological innovation represented by portfolio insurance. Despite the use of
computers in executing portfolio insurance strategies, it is still people who
decide to deploy the tool and who decide how quickly it will take effect in a
declining market. And there are of course many other people who, aware that
portfolio insurance is being used, adjust their own informal responses to past
price changes depending on their perceptions of other investors’ use of the
strategy. Portfolio insurance is of interest to us in this context only because
it shows us concretely how people’s thinking can change in ways that alter
the manner in which feedback from stock price changes affects further stock
price changes, thereby creating possible price instabilities.

120

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

A Global Media Culture
We noted in Chapter 1 that there is a striking similarity in the behavior of
stock markets over many countries, and in Chapter 3 that there is also a striking similarity in the behavior of the markets for homes in many cities around
the world. This similarity stands as a sort of puzzle, since the usual economic
variables do not suggest strong reasons for such similarity. It would not seem
plausible that the similarity occurs directly as a result of cross feedback from
the prices in one country to the prices in another. Most people rarely, if ever,
look directly at data from another country. One of the reasons for this similarity must be the presence of the news media as a supporter of a global culture,
and as a supporter of a speculative global culture worried that certain prices
will soar or crash.
People in Paris do not watch British television and rarely read British
newspapers, and people in London do not watch French television and rarely
read French newspapers. And yet the people who write for these media outlets certainly do keep an eye on each others’ stories. That is one of the tricks
that they learn as professionals. Of course, reporters of the news, especially
the serious news, feel an obligation to read the news from other countries, so
as not to miss an important piece of news. But, beyond this, reporters learn
from experience that an excellent way to produce good copy is to piggyback
on others’ successes. A sequence of stories in foreign news media is a sign
of a successful story, and such a success can probably easily be replicated at
home if the story is copied with only a few tweaks and adjustments for local
tastes and associations.
Economists rarely talk of the news media as a force of similarity across
countries; the public’s expectations of economists is that they should be calculating the effects of such things as interest rates and exchange rates, not
that they should be interpreting the stories that appear in newspapers around
the world. We have noted that the general public does not generally think
that culture and psychology are important influences on the markets, and so
economists, particularly business economists who largely have to present their
case to the broad public rather than to other professional economists, naturally
find it to their advantage to try to live up to the public’s expectations of them.
The economists’ behavior then only reinforces the public’s impressions about
the sources of market fluctuations.
One of the reasons the U.S. stock market appears to have a disproportionate
effect on markets of other countries is that the United States uses the English
language, which has emerged as a world language. It is much easier for foreign reporters, who invariably know English, to respond to stories from the
United States or the United Kingdom than to stories from Germany or Brazil.
Producing news stories is a business with tight deadlines, and it requires

T HE N E W S M E D I A

121

fast action. A lot of reporters have the ability to pick up a story from another
country in English and turn it into a local story in a pinch. It’s a sure-fire
strategy. Even though the original story was in English, practically no viewers
or readers will ever know that the reporters took the story from abroad. But
trying this in a less commonly studied language would entail a significant
challenge for most reporters.
One of the reasons that a housing boom in Boston in the mid-1980s moved to
London and then to Paris and then to Sydney (as Figure 3.3 shows) is that the
story that appeared in the earlier booms was market tested in the first countries
to experience a boom and was just copied in the other countries. The story did
not spread to Berlin, or to Tokyo, perhaps because the story did not have the
same credibility in those countries, which have been undergoing some soul
searching about the weakness of their economies. The story associated with
the housing booms was one of spectacular economic success, and that kind
of story just does not fly everywhere. Media professionals know instinctively
when a story is ripe for copying in their country and when it is not.
Stories of foreign provenance may be especially resonant in media outlets
(such as intellectual newspapers) favored by people who live in glamorous
international cities. The sociologist Robert K. Merton argued that there are
really two kinds of people in the world: cosmopolitans (who orient themselves
to the whole world) and locals (who orient themselves to their village or
town).26 The cosmopolitans have a culture shared over the whole world. The
people who inhabit the glamorous international cities of the world may, aided
by the news media, become culturally closer to others in such distant cities
(despite language barriers) than to rural people in their own country. It is not
so surprising then that the home prices in these cities often move together.

The Role of News Media in Propagating Speculative Bubbles
The role of the news media in the stock market is not, as commonly believed,
simply as a convenient tool for investors who are reacting directly to the
economically significant news itself. The media actively shape public attention and categories of thought, and they create the environment in which the
speculative market events we see are played out.
The examples given in this chapter illustrate that the news media are fundamental propagators of speculative price movements through their efforts
to make news interesting to their audience. They sometimes strive to enhance
such interest by attaching news stories to price movements that the public has
already observed, thereby enhancing the salience of these movements and
focusing greater attention on them. Or they may remind the public of past
market episodes, or of the likely trading strategies of others. Thus, the media

122

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

can sometimes foster stronger feedback from past price changes to further
price changes, and they can also foster another sequence of events, referred
to here as an attention cascade. This is not to say that the news media are a
monolithic force pushing ideas onto a purely passive audience. The media
represent a channel for mass communication and the interpretation of popular
culture, but popular culture has an inherent logic and process of its own. We
turn next to a study of some of the basic ideas in our culture, whose transformation over time bears a relation to the changing speculative situation in
speculative markets.

Seven

New Era Economic Thinking

S

peculative market expansions have often
been associated with popular perceptions
that the future is brighter or less uncertain than it was in the past. The term
new era has periodically been used to describe these times.
Of course, there is some obvious validity to the new era notion. The general
trend over the past century was a rise in the standard of living and a decline
in the impact of economic risks on individuals. By many measures the world
has indeed been gradually growing into a new and better era. But the most
salient characteristic of popular new era thinking is that it is not continuously
in evidence; rather, it occurs in pulses.
In contrast to the irregular references to a new era in popular culture,
economists or other influential commentators who have proclaimed a new
era at various times in history have usually been quite cautious in their
choice of words. Often, they merely seem to be betting on the continuation
of long‑term trends.
Sometimes the economists may be missing things by focusing too much on
the data and not on what is uniquely new about the latest changes in technology or institutions many people see as heralding a new era. But, more often, it
is the general public that is missing something by overreacting to the new era
stories that become suddenly popular—missing the basic similarity between
the latest stories and similar stories that appeared many times in the past.
For example, the arrival of the Internet in the mid-1990s was interpreted by
many casual observers as a fundamental change that would boost the productivity of the economy, since the Internet is a communications and distribution
123

124

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

system of fundamental importance. But, if we wish to consider whether the
Internet is a communications and distribution system that will produce faster
economic growth than in the past, we have to compare it with similar systems
of the past, such as those represented by postal services, railroads, telegraph,
telephones, automobiles, aircraft, radio, and express highways. All of these
networks had profound effects on the economies of their days, helping transform their economies from a much more primitive state. It is difficult to argue
that the Internet is more important to the growth of our economy today than
these were to the growth of economies of the past, and so there is no reason
to expect faster growth than in the past. But the general public is not usually
thinking of these past historical episodes for the purpose of comparison.
Impressions that the public is affected in different ways at different times
by new era thinking—or, for that matter, by any other popular economic
theory—are hard to pin down. For example, it is difficult to trace the evolution of ideas through questionnaire survey work, because one only knows
to question the public about specific ideas after those ideas have attracted a
good deal of attention.
We can do word counts of publications using computerized databases, and
thereby get some idea of the changing frequency with which certain economic
terms are used, but such searches are crude and miss the often subtle ways in
which the use of the terms changes over time. When I tried to establish how
often the phrase new era was used in the years leading up to the 2000 peak in
the stock market, I found that the term was used in so many different contexts that a search on this phrase alone is not meaningful for our purposes. In
contrast, I have established from the Lexis-Nexis database that in the English
language the term new era economy did not have any currency until a Business
Week cover story in July 1997 attributed this term to Alan Greenspan, marking an alleged turning point in his thinking since the “irrational exuberance”
speech some months earlier.1 The term new era economy remained in regular
use on the way to the peak of the stock market in 2000. (The association of
this term with one powerful figure provides yet another striking example of
how individual actors or media events can change public thinking.)
The use of the term new era in this context actually preceded the Business
Week article; in June 1997 the Boston Globe published a pair of articles that used
the terms new era thesis, new era theorists, and new era school and identified Ralph
Acampora, technical research director at Prudential Securities, as a member
of the so‑called school. In August 1997, a much‑talked‑about article by Paul
Krugman in the Harvard Business Review attacked the newly prominent new
era theory, and this of course gave the term even greater currency.2 In the
decade before 1997, the Nexis search reveals that the term new era was used
only rarely to denote optimistic economic outlooks; in those years, the term
apparently had little currency.

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

125

It is a curious fact that the development of the “new era” stories around
1997 corresponds to the approximate date when the real estate boom began
in the United States and other countries. The beginning of this boom (visi­
ble in Figure 3.3) started quite sharply around 1997 in Boston, Los Angeles,
Paris, and Sydney; it appears that London’s increases had begun more than
a year earlier.
The popularity of the term new era to describe the economy took hold after
the 1990s stock market had advanced far enough that it was beginning to
amaze people, and all the new era stories featured the stock market.3 It was not
as if some economists proclaimed a new era after looking at national income
data or other data relevant to the real economic outlook. The new era theory
emerged principally as an after‑the‑fact interpretation of a stock market boom.
This is surely no surprise. A stock market boom is a dramatic event that calls
for an equally dramatic interpretation. In contrast, an increase in the growth
rate of the gross domestic product—from, say, 2% to 3%—although perhaps
exciting to economists, does not make the same impression on the general
public. It is insubstantial, esoteric, and simply cannot hold its own against the
flashier news offerings bombarding the public.
Whenever the market reaches a new high, public speakers, writers, and
other prominent people suddenly appear, armed with explanations for the
apparent optimism seen in the market. Reporters may not always get the timing right, and they may suggest that it was the words spoken by these great
men and women that caused the market shifts. Although prominent people
can certainly move markets, often their wisdom merely tags along with market
moves. Nevertheless, the new era thinking they promote is part of the process
by which a boom may be sustained and amplified—part of the feedback mechanism that, as we have seen, can create speculative bubbles.
A defender of markets’ rationality might point out that even if discussions
of a new era really are the cause of the boom, it does not follow that news
accounts of these discussions must precede the boom. Technically, of course,
it is possible—in spite of the fact that most media discussions of new era
theories seem to coincide with or come after stock market booms—that the
word‑of‑mouth discussions did in fact precede and cause the booms. The news
media might have been late to recognize the discussions.
But that defense of markets’ rationality is not very plausible if we consider
the nature of the thought patterns observed among the general investing public. There is such a lack of interest among the public in reasoned arguments
about the future course of the corporate sector that it is highly unlikely that
the public could have been harboring secret thoughts of a new era in corporate
profits unrelated to past stock price increases.
It appears that most people are not interested in long‑run economic growth
forecasts for the aggregate economy. Economic theory would suggest that they

126

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

should be interested, if they are behaving rationally. But in fact the topic is too
abstract, boring, or technical. The public is interested in expansive descriptions of future technology—for example, in what amazing new capabilities
computers will soon have—not in gauging the level of U.S. corporate earnings
in coming years. In fact, it is doubtful that more than a small percentage of
the populace today could give an estimate of aggregate U.S. corporate earnings accurate to within an order of magnitude. They are hardly likely to be
interested in predicting changes in those same earnings.
History does show that there are at times strong unseen forces acting on
public opinion that are not revealed in the media or in public discussions until
some key event brings them out of the woodwork. But such currents in public
opinion typically relate to naive theories based on personal observations or
ill‑founded prejudices against minority groups or foreign countries. The public
simply does not harbor secret opinions about the economic growth rate.4
Conventional wisdom interprets the stock market as reacting to new era
theories. In fact, it appears that the stock market often creates new era theories,
as reporters scramble to justify stock market price moves. The situation
reminds one of the Ouija board, where players are encouraged to interpret
the meaning of movements in their trembling hands and to distill forecasts
from them. Or the stock market is seen as an oracle, issuing mysterious and
meaningless pronouncements, which we then ask our leaders to interpret,
mistakenly investing their interpretations with authority.
In this chapter, I analyze the “new era” thinking that accompanied previous stock market and real estate market booms in the United States. I also
offer some indications of the public’s thinking in the times when the “new
eras” had run their course. I make liberal use of contemporary quotations,
since these provide the most direct evidence of people’s thoughts and
concerns.

The 1901 Optimism: The Twentieth‑Century Peak
As noted in Chapter 1, the first of the three major peaks in the price‑earnings
ratio since 1881 occurred in June 1901, right at the dawn of the twentieth
century. Prices had achieved spectacular increases over the preceding twelve
months, and in mid‑1901, observers reported real speculative fervor: “The
outburst of speculation during April, 1901, was something rarely paralleled
in the history of speculative manias. . . . The newspapers were full of stories
of hotel waiters, clerks in business offices, even doorkeepers and dressmakers,
who had won considerable fortunes in their speculations. The effect on the
public mind may be imagined.”5
With the beginning of the century in January 1901, there was much talk
of the future and of technological progress to come: “trains [will be] running

NEW E R A E C O N O M IC TH IN KIN G

127

at 150 miles per hour, . . . newspaper publishers will press the buttons and
automotive machinery will do the rest, . . . phonographs as salesmen will sell
goods in the big stores while automatic hands will make change.”6 Guglielmo
Marconi made the first transatlantic radio transmission in 1901, and there
were predictions that we would soon be in radio communication with the
planet Mars.
The Pan‑American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, from May 1 to
November 1, 1901, emphasized high technology. It had as its centerpiece
the 375‑foot Electric Tower, illuminated by 44,000 light bulbs powered by
faraway generators at Niagara Falls. The tower was “indescribably brilliant”
and held visitors “spellbound.”7 The exposition’s Electricity Building featured exhibits about the wonders of electricity. There was an electrograph, a
machine that transmitted pictures by wire (forerunner of the fax machine),
and a tel‑autograph, a machine that enabled one to transmit one’s signature
over long distances (forerunner of credit card signature‑verification devices).
The exposition even offered a simulated trip to the moon on the airship Luna:
the visitor could take a stroll through the streets and shops of the moon before
returning to earth.
In a sense, the high‑tech age, the computer age, and the space age seemed
just around the corner in 1901, though the concepts were expressed in different
words than we would use today. People were upbeat, and in later years the
first decade of the twentieth century came to be called the Age of Optimism,
the Age of Confidence, or the Cocksure Era. The mood was perhaps similar
to that of a century later, just past the dawn of the twenty‑first century. Given
the modern media’s exploitation of anniversary or threshold events, and
the human tendency to consider such events as symbolic new beginnings,
investing them with exaggerated hopes and expectations, the transitions to
new centuries may tend to be optimistic times. The 1901 example suggests
that today our new‑century optimism might in fact extend for years into the
new millennium, at least in some forms and assuming it is not too impacted
by unfavorable world events. Whether the events of 9/11, the global financial
crisis of 2008, wars and revolutions in the Middle East, and political tensions
elsewhere in the world will be enough to shake our confidence in a lasting
way remains to be seen.
But there was another reason people in 1901 thought that the stock market
ought to be highly valued. The most prominent business news in the papers in
recent years had been about the formation of numerous combinations, trusts,
and mergers in a wide variety of businesses, stories such as the formation
of U.S. Steel out of a number of smaller steel companies. Many stock market
forecasters in 1901 saw these developments as momentous, and the term com‑
munity of interest was commonly used to describe the new economy dominated
by them. An April 1901 editorial in the New York Daily Tribune explained:
