
CHAFER 5

E”RDDE”TSCHEMbRK9,96 99,96-Daily

93,22,96

EURODEUrsCHEHARK09/97-Daihl 03/22/96

c=9Ed, H=96.65

C=95.30

H=95.33

L=96.61

L=95.28

Selecting a Concept That Works

101

r96.65
~95.60

Spread 1.31

Mar
kb
96
Dee
Figure 5-5 Nearby- (bottom) and distant-calendar spreads. (Graph done by Kevin
Thomas with SuperCharts by Omega Research, Inc.)

spread. A spread between June and September of the same year is

likely to be less volatile than a spread between September this year
and September next year. The example in Figure 5-5 illustrates this.
Figure 5-5 shows the movement of the spread between
September 1996 Euromarks and September 1997 Euromarks. I have
drawn trendlines and included a 14-day RSI on the spread. Notice
that there was a divergence at point A and a breakout at point B.
This was a signal that short-term interest rates were about to rise.
By being long the spread, you could have participated in the down
move in the market that was coming. Notice that the spread then
moved 76 ticks from the low to the high of the move.
The charts in Figure 5-6 show how the individual months
moved over the same period. ~Notice thnt the movement of the spread
was in fact a good leading indicator of what wm about to happen in the
individual months, In addition, the move in the spread was more
than the down move in September 1996 and about 75 percent of the
down move in September 1997. The margin for the spread is 600
deutschemarks per unity compared with 1,500 deutschemarks for a
straight

futures

position.

DCC

96

Feb

I hY

Mar

Figure 5-6 Movement in individual months. (Graph done by Kevin Thomas with
Sup&harts
by Omega Research, Inc.)

Such spread trading is a concept that is popular among floor
Faders because they are able to participate in a position that has a
lower risk profile than an outright futures position and has a good
potential for profit. Once a spread position has been taken, then it
can be treated like any other position you would have. Trend-following and position-sizing models can be applied.
By using spreads, you can create
relationships that may not be available
otherwise. Currency cross rates, for
example, are spreads that can be created using IMM currencies such as the
deutschemark versus the yen. This creates one of the most actively traded
relationships in the world, but one you
wouldn’t think about if you just
thought in terms of dollars or pounds, Another widely traded
example would be trading cash bonds against bond futures, which
is called “basis trading.”
Another common strategy used in these markets is a butterfly

CHAF’TER

spread, which is the difference between two spreads that share a
common month (e.g., long 1 Sep 1996, short 2 Dee 1996, and long 1
Mar 1997). Butterfly spreads are very expensive to trade because of
the commission costs for an off-floor trader. However, a floor trader
in such a market as Eurodollars or Euromarks can utilize this strategy because of the lower commissions and his or her market-maker
edge. The strategy usually has a very low risk with a very high
expectation of making a profit. The floor trader, because he or she
is trading two spreads, is often able to scratch one spread and make
a tick on the other or, in the worst case, may scratch the whole butterfly spread.
Commodities also lend themselves to intercontract spreading.
Let’s assume that you predict that copper prices are going to rise
because of a supply shortage. If that is the case, then you would
buy the nearby contract and sell the forward. This occurs because
in times of shortages nearby prices will rise above forward, creating a phenomenon called “backwardation.”
Always bear in mind when trading commodities that physical
delivery is part of the contract specifications. “Cash and carry” is a
strategy that can be used in trading metals-both base and precious-when they are in good supply. The idea is to take delivery
of the metal in a warehouse and redeliver at a future date if the
return (the increase in price) will exceed the interest rate for that
period of time. If the interest rate is more than the return or the
return ends up being negative, then the strategy is not worth doing.
Intermarket spreading is another spread trading idea worth
doing. Here you are simply trading different markets against each
other, such as the S&P versus the T bonds, Eurodollars versus
Euromarks, currency cross rates, gold versus silver, etc. John
Murphy has devoted a whole book to the topic (Infermnukrf
Technical Analysis)? but the basic idea behind such spreads would
be because you believe that the relative move of the two markets is
probably your best trading idea.
There are numerous forms of other spreads that you can look
at, including (1) spreading option contracts~ and (2) arbitrage. Both
of these are complete trading art forms by themselves. Spread trading can be as simple or as complex as you like, but it is definitely
worth investigating.

5

Selecting a Concept That Wurki

103

Editor’s Comments

All the previous concepts can be used with
spreading. The advantage of spreading is simply that you can trade
a relationship that was not tradable before. When you buy gold, for
example, you are really buying the relationship between gold and
the dollar. The relationship will go up if either the dollar goes down
in value with respect to gold or gold goes up in value with respect
to the dollar. A spread simply sets up another relationship that you
can trade.

ARBITRAGE
Ray Kelly is a close personal friend and one of my earliest clients.
He’s also become a great teacher and one of the best traders I know.
From the time I finished working with him in 1987 until early 1994,
Ray averaged returns of 40 to 60 percent each year. He accomplished that partially by having only one losing month, a mere 2
percent loss, during that entire period. 1994 was not a great year for
Ray, because he backed some futures traders who proceeded to lose
money for him, but Ray still made money with his method of trading-arbitrage. Ray served as the model trader in our Peak
Performance Trading Seminars for several years. He also is our
third graduate. He currently trades for himself, has started a new
arbitrage fund, and runs a retreat center for traders in Southern
California.‘o
Ray Kelly: Arbitrage--What It Is and How It’s Implemented
When people ask me what I do for a living and I say “arbitrage,” I
see the same blank stare that I often use myself when I lift the hood
of my car engine or someone utters the word “calculus.” Mothers
gather their children to them and men eye me with suspicion.
If you can overcome your fear of the “A” word for about 10
minutes, I guarantee that you will understand not only the essence
of arbitrage, but also the way it affects your everyday life. If you
begin to “arb-think,” you will see opportunities in every facet of
your life that you previously had ignored. Your knowledge will
secure you from having to excuse yourself for the punch bowl at
the next cocktail party when someone says “those arb guys.” You

104

PART 2 Conceptualization of Your System

will be considered one of the intellectuals at the party and people
will stare at you in admiration-all because you invested 10 minutes in reading this section of the book.
Arbitrage is done by entrepreneurs in almost every business,
The dictionary defines “arbitrage” as “the buying of bills of
exchange in one market and selling them in another.” It also
describes a woman as a “female human being.” Both of these definitions are true, but they don’t capture
the essence of the word in total.
Arbitrage is the magic of discovery. It is
the art and science of delving into
minute detail to the point of being
obnoxious. It is the process of looking at
every part of a situation as if it were a
diamond slowly turning on a pedestal
so you can observe all its facets and see
them as unique rather than the same. It
belongs to those of you who love to
solve the impossible riddle.
Edwin LeFerve, in the book

Reminiscence of a Stock Operntor,”

describes what happened in the early
twenties with the advent of the telephone. All stock quotes from the New
York Stock Exchange were sent out by
Teletyping houses that we now know as
bucket shops. It was very similar to offtrack betting. The shops allowed a person to know a quote and then place an
order to buy or sell. The difference was that the shop owner was the
bookie or regional specialist, and rather than call the exchange, he
booked the trade himself. For example, the ticker would say
Eastman Kodak trades for 66%. The customer would say “Buy 500
shares” and the shop owner would confirm the purchase and take
the other side of this transaction.
A smart fellow with a phone finally figures out that the phone
was faster than the Teletype operator on the floor of the New York
Stock Exchange. He would transact some small trades to establish

CHAPTER 5 Selectining

a Concept That Works

105

a presence with the shop but always keep in contact with a cohort
by phone in times of volatility. If bad news came out, he may find
that Eastman Kodak, while on the tape at 66’/,, was actually 65 at
the post in New York. Consequently, he would sell to the shop
owner as much as he could at 66’4 and buy it back through his
friend on the floor in New York at 65. Over time, this clever fellow
hired others to trade at the bucket shops and put many of them out
of business. Eventually, the remaining bucket shops got their own
phones.
Is this action unscrupulous, or is it a way to more efficiently
price a marketplace? Is it unscrupulous for the shop owner to book
the trades? The important thing to remember is that economics p e r
se does not have a moral code. It simply
is. People ascribe “good” and “bad” or
“right” and “wrong” to various practices. The shop owner feels that the
actions of the arb player are wrong. The
New York broker loves the increased
commission business and loves the arb
player.
Arb players themselves feel that
since the phone is open to everyone,
they are only implementing something
that any clever person could figure out.
They do not feel an obligation to negate
their cleverness by spelling everything
out to those who could eventually figure
it out for themselves. Over time, there are always actions of others to
stop the arbs or to join in and make the opportunity less profitable.
Economics is neutral to the emotions of the players. It says, “If there
is money on the table, it belongs to the person who picks it up.”
When I was a teenager, I did my first arb. I lived in a wealthy
neighborhood, although I was broke. My dad kept getting “free”
credit cards in the mail. One day in the 1960s we had a blizzard as
we do now and then in the Midwest. I lived across from a hardware
store, and I knew that it had a snow blower for sale for $265. It was
a beast of a blower! I could see that even the snowplows couldn’t
get to the rich folks’ houses.

106

C H A P T E R 5 Selecting a Concept That Works

I also noticed an unopened letter with a Towne and Country
Credit Card on my father’s desk. My name and my father’s are the
same, so I took it. (This is what is called risk arbitrage.) I bought the
snowblower with the credit card when the store opened at 7 a.m. I
did 11 long driveways by 8 p.m. that night and made $550. The next
morning at 7 a.m. I sold the snowblower back to the guy in the store
for $200. He gave me back the credit card slip and I gave him the
slightly used snowblower, which was still in great demand. I netted $485 and felt like the cat that ate the canary!
A few years ago I was approached for advice by a man who
had 3,000 shares of stock. He had an opportunity to buy more
shares through the company at a discount. This was a chance to
buy a $25 stock for $19. Even though the amount of stock he could
buy was small, it still seemed like a good opportunity.
I had been on the Chicago Board of Options Exchange (CBOE)
for 25 years and could not find any comparable investments. As a
result, I told him it was a good deal and called the company to find
out more about its dividend reinvestment plan. I also found out
that other companies had similar plans and that the brokerage
community was starting to participate in these plans.
I wondered, “How are they doing this? If they bought a million shares, they would only be able to reinvest the amount of the
dividend, and the interest on the purchase would wipe out the
profit.” They also would have huge market risk. However, I saw
others doing the trade and I became obsessed with how it was
done. Some people were obviously making money. I dug through
records, talked to margin clerks, and watched the trades that took
place before the dividend payout dates. Slowly, the picture became
clearer. I eventually solved the problem of what looked like a mathematical loser. However, I didn’t have enough capital to do it
myself, so I went through the painful and agonizing steps to find a
company in the securities business that was not doing it and would
not steal it from me once I expIained it to the people there. That was
a long process.
An arbitrager must find a company that is willing to look
beyond the obvious-that’s where the opportunity lies. Lawyers
are usually a formidable wall of resistance. Lawyers for institutions
are paid to investigate, and the status quo is normally hard to

change. If something goes wrong, they are blamed. But if things
drag out, the attorneys get paid anyway. If there is a little twist in
the path, they are not paid to find another way, but just to tell you
that the one you are on won’t work. They do not like being pressed
for specifics, nor do they like quick answers. That is their charm.
On the other hand, once you get through the process, you become
part of the status quo (at least, for a little while).
Arbitrage is usually time-sensitive. Once certain opportunities are discovered, competition usually lowers the profits, and regulators eventually plug the once overlooked loophole. This time
frame is usually referred to as “the window.” A company that has
a dividend reinvestment plan, for example, may say, “We only
meant this plan for small investors.” The arbitrager may respond
that the intentions of the company are not part of the legal text of
its plan. The company, in turn, will usually seek remedy through
legislation or by changing its plan. In either case, the arbitrage
opportunity pointed to a flaw in the economics of the company’s
“intent.” The arb player is paid by that flaw.
The institutions I have presented ideas to over the years have
a problem called “infrastructure.” Large companies are broken into
divisions that manage specific parts of their business. In the securities area, one group may handle customer accounts, another will
handle stock lending, another will handle proprietary trading, etc.
Each division has its own profit goals and what is called a “hurdle
rate.” The hurdle rate is a computation of the minimum return the
division head will accept to entertain a business proposal.
The CEO will usually turn management over to the division
head. The problem here is that the economy (and the opportunity)
doesn’t care about the corporation’s structure. What is perhaps efficient from a corporate viewpoint may leave inefficiencies that are
accepted as a cost of doing business. Since it is anathema for one
corporate division head to peek into another manager’s area, these
inefficiencies are rarely addressed quickly, if at all.
In a specific and actual situation, I presented one major brokerage firm with a strategy that returned 67 percent on capital net
after my percentages were taken out. Unfortunately, I needed three
divisions of the company to accomplish this. Each of these divisions had a 30 percent hurdle rate. None of them would take less

107

108

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

because it weakened the individual division’s overall picture even
though it greatly enhanced the overall return to the company,
During almost 2 years of negotiation the return went from 67 percent down to 35 percent. There were literally tens of millions of dollars of potential profit at stake. The company never did a trade, and
to my knowledge all the same managers still work there.
Once you get through the infrastructure and gain credibility
with a firm, there are other problems. The troops in the trenches get
irritated because nothing you do is normal. They are always asked
to do things somewhat differently for me than they do for their regular customers. We insist on minute-to-minute concentration on little, seemingly innocuous procedures.
For example, if a trade is executed on the New York Stock
Exchange, I can negotiate a fixed ticket charge of say $150 regardless of the size of the trade. I cannot help my client negotiate with
the Securities and Exchange Commission on its 0.003 percent
charge on the sale of the stock. This seems to be a small amount of
money. But on a $100 million trade, the amount is $3,333.33. To me,
that is a lot of money.
A brokerage firm cannot change the U.S. government. It simply passes the charge on to the customer, and such charges go
unchallenged. Yet if my client were to do 1,000 of these $100 million
trades each year, the government charge would be over $3 million.
Once again the economy of the opportunity does not concern itself
with the intransigence of policy-even from the U.S. government.
Yet if I suggest to my client that should she transact her trade in
Toronto rather than the United States, she would save this fee, be
reasonably free from questioning by governmental authorities, and
not get any notoriety domestically, the client loves me. The clerk
who has to process these trades, however, doesn’t love me at ail. I
have upset his day with what he sees as trivia. If I were to cut him
in on 10 percent of the saved fee, the light would dawn quickly. But
the more I disclose information to people, the quicker the advantage goes away.
Eventually, others will figure out what I am doing and find a
way to cut themselves in on the profit. This is called reverse engineering. Some firms have whole divisions that dedicate themselves
to watching the street and uncovering strategies. It’s my belief that
this process is a critical part of price discovery in the economic sys-

tem. The arbitrager points out in a way that can’t be ignored or
pushed back by bureaucracy some miscalculation or misperception. In many cases, it forces institutions to look at situations they
would otherwise ignore.
I am still dumbfounded by all the precautions that securities
firms and banks seem to take-yet they still come up with billion
dollar snafus. The process of strategy approval is so rigorous that
the arbitrage players who do the trading have no incentive to help
their own corporations in risk evaluation. The arbitragers almost
invariablv wind UD in an adversarial role by the nature of their
business.‘The intlgrity of the trader
should be heavily considered in all
aspects of the trader’s life. Integrity
seems to be the last line of defense of
most trading companies.
In conclusion, the case could be
made that there is no stability to a career
in arbitrage since everything always
changes-the loopholes close and the
profits become smaller. On the other
hand, you can realize that everything in
life changes constantly and accepting
that change is to live a grand adventure.
You can realize that errors and miscalculations are part of the human condition. They are how we learn and grow.
Your mission, through arbitrage, is to
correct inefficiencies whether people
want you to or not. You get paid to correct errors. Your job is to pick apart the
strategy or concept of someone else piece by piece. If you don’t find
anything, which is usually the case, you simply move on to another
strategy or concept. The way you view things, your frame of reference, determines your view of arbitrage.
The arbitrager’s success is determined by his or her commitment to go the extra distance. Arbitrage is the cleanser of inefficiency. It keeps me from being a spectator. After all, there are only
two places you can be in lifeon the playing field or in the stands.
I prefer to be on the playing field.

CHAPTER 5 Selecting a Concept That Works

Editor’s Comments In essence, most trading and investing is a form
of arbitrage-looking for inefficiencies in the market. Ray Kelly’s
form of arbitrage, however, is the purest application of arbitrage.
It’s almost a license to print money, but for a limited period of time.
If you are really serious about being a professional trader, then I
strongly agree that you continually look for such opportunities.
NEURAL NETWORKS
I looked all over for an expert to write about neural networks for
this book. One of the problems with neural networks is that they
are complex, they tend to border on curve fitting, and you can
spend a lot of effort simply trying to predict whether one market
will be higher or lower tomorrow, with about 55 percent accuracy.
It’s quite frustrating, especially when my gut feeling was that more
could be done with neural networks.
Finally, I happened upon Louis Mendelsohn through his web
site and was quite impressed with what I saw there. Most of the
articles he has written (over 50 of them) are presented in their
entirety. Mendelsohn has gone way beyond predicting tomorrow’s
price and actually uses neural networks in some very useful ways.
As a result, I was delighted when he agreed to write this section of
the concepts chapter.~He’s
an internationally acclaimed technical
analyst, investment software developer, and financial author.”
Louis Mendelsohn: Introduction to Neural Networks
The integration of intermarket analysis with traditional single-market technical analysis is necessary for profitable trading in the 1990s
and beyond. Today’s limited single-market focus must yield to a
broader analytic framework that addresses the nonlinear interdependence of today’s financial markets. In 1991 I first wrote about
this framework, referring to it as “synergistic market analysis.”
This approach allows traders to quantify complex intermarket relationships, assess the simultaneous impact of multiple related markets on a given market, and measure the leads and lags that exist
within these relationships.
Neural networks are an excellent tool to implement synergistic analysis. They can be used to synthesize disparate data and find

111

hidden patterns and complex relationships between markets.
Neural networks are real, and they do work! In fact, they perform
an outstanding job at processing extensive amounts of intermarket
data. It is their ability to quantify subtle relationships and detect
hidden patterns between numerous related markets that makes
neural networks an important mathematical tool in the financial
arena. How else could a trader examine the past 10 years of price
data on 5, 10, or 15 related markets simultaneously to discern the
effects that these markets have on a specific market?
Additionally, through the use of neural networks, financial
forecasting becomes possible, so that traders can gain an nnticipntory, not just a retrospective, vantage point on the financial markets.
Anyone can tell you where a market has been in the past by simply
looking at its price chart, but the real money is in correctly anticipating the future direction of that market! Through the use of
neural networks applied to intermarket analysis, traders can actually forecast the financial markets, similar to the way meteorologists forecast the path that a hurricane is expected to take.
Forecasting is never 100 percent accurate. It never will be. But from
a decision-making standpoint under conditions of uncertainty, it’s
a major step in the right direction.
To incorporate intermarket analysis into your trading plan, it
isn’t necessary to change your trading style or stop using singlemarket indicators that work reasonably well. Intermarket analysis
can be used to augment existing single-market approaches.
In order to appreciate the difference between single-market
analysis and intermarket analysis, put one hand over one of your
eyes. All of a sudden your peripheral vision is sharply restricted
and your ability to grasp the entire environment is greatly reduced.
That’s what single-market analysis is like in today’s financial environment. Now remove your hand and instantly your peripheral
vision is restored. That’s what intermarket analysis is all aboutbroadening your perspective.
Neural Networks Primer
I would like to present a cursory overview of what neural networks
are and how they can be applied to the financial markets. Attention
here will focus on neural network paradigms, architectures, and
training and testing regimens for a financial forecasting application,
