
Getting In Tune with Fundamental
Information from the Media
There’s no question you get a bulk of your nutrients from your breakfast,
lunch, and dinner. Those three core meals deliver most of what your body
needs to get through the day. Even so, there’s a chance that your diet might
be lacking in some nutrient, which is why some people choose to supplement
their meals with vitamins.
You can think of media reports as vitamins that some fundamental analysts
take. Certainly, the regulatory filings and financial reports filed by companies
provide most of the data a fundamental analyst need. But still, there might be
some details that aren’t fleshed out or are buried in the massive documents.
That’s how financial media can supplement and potentially enhance your
knowledge about a company.

19 506455-ch13.indd 216

9/24/09 10:36:44 PM

Chapter 13: Analyzing a Company’s Public Comments and Statements

217

The fundamental investor’s friend: Reg FD
For decades, analyst conference calls were
almost completely closed off to individual
investors. Wall Street analysts got top access
to the executives of companies, and therefore
had the best information. Analysts could often,
for instance, get superior information about a
company and its stock by being tipped off early
on earnings guidance.
But in the 1990s, individual investors and fundamental analysts began to grouse about the
one-sided nature of analyst conference calls.
After all, if it was possible for individuals to
execute trades electronically over the Internet,
why were these important calls with management off-limits?
All that changed after the Securities and
Exchange Commission passed Regulation Full

Disclosure, more commonly called Reg FD, in
2000. This rule clearly stated if a company gives
out material, or important information to analysts, it must be given to the public, too.
All of a sudden, those one-on-one calls between
the CEO and his pet analyst at a Wall Street firm
were essentially over. One important caveat,
though, to remember is that company executives are still permitted to share nonpublic information with the media, since the press’ mission
is to distribute information widely to the public.
And that’s one reason why fundamental analysts should make it their business to monitor
media reports, as described below, since there
can be nuggets in the press you might not get
elsewhere.

Bolstering your fundamental
analysis with media reports
As you’ve probably noticed reading this book, there’s not really one source
of information that gives fundamental analysts everything they need to do
their work. Getting a complete understanding of a company and its stock’s
valuation requires digging through many documents, looking for trends, discrepancies, and other anomalies. Media reports, available on financial Web
sites, in newspapers, magazines and on TV and radio can help flesh out your
fundamental analysis of a company. Some of the things media reports can
assist you with include:
✓ Breaking news: Since financial wire services and newspapers are vigorously competing with each other, there are hordes of reporters covering
companies and looking to get any bit of information first. Sometimes, these
pieces of breaking news can have a significant impact on a company and
its stock price.
✓ Interpretation: Since many reporters are either assigned to a specific
company or trained to study financial statements, they may notice
something about a company announcement that you missed. Many media
outlets also have access to professional-level fundamental analysis tools,

19 506455-ch13.indd 217

9/24/09 10:36:45 PM

218 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
so they might be able to put numbers into context using data you might
not have.
Media reports, too, might make it easier for you to quickly assess
whether a company’s quarter was considered to be better or worse then
expected. Reporters who follow a company generally know ahead of
time what analysts were forecasting for the company.
✓ Deeper understanding of companies and the people who run them:
Some executives, hoping to get their messages out, might sit down with
a reporter and more clearly spell out their companies’ objectives or
goals. Executive profiles might also give you more of an insight into the
personalities of the people running the company you’ve invested in.
Some publications routinely provide profiles of company executives. It’s
important to recognize when these profiles are just CEO adulation, and
when they’re analysis.
✓ Industry insight: Just reading the financial statements doesn’t really
give you the buzz about a company or its products. Financial media,
dedicated to specific industries, might give you a good early indication
on how a company’s new product, for instance, might be perceived.
Some large companies, too, might have a Web site that’s dedicated just
to them. Reading these, and comments from other readers, might give
you things to look for when analyzing a company.
Technology media can be especially helpful to fundamental analysts looking
at tech companies. For instance, following the video-game industry’s main
conference in 2005, media were gushing over Nintendo’s Wii game console.
At the time, the concept of a game console operated with a motion-sensitive
controller seemed odd. But the video-game press glowed over the device, and
ultimately the console proved to be a big success and helped push Nintendo’s
profits higher.

What fundamental analysts
look for in the media
Given the barrage of information available to fundamental analysts, it might be
overwhelming to think that you need to read every financial Web site, newspaper and magazine in addition to studying a company’s regulatory filings.
But savvy fundamental analysts know how to put the media to work for them.
Rather than reading everything, much of which is duplicative, fundamental
analysts use the media to zero in on developments such as:
✓ New products: One of the most difficult factors for fundamental analysts
to deal with is a company’s new products. With little financial track
record to guide them, fundamental analysts may find it tough to figure

19 506455-ch13.indd 218

9/24/09 10:36:45 PM

Chapter 13: Analyzing a Company’s Public Comments and Statements

219

out which new products are potential blockbusters and which ones are
money-sucking duds. Media reports can help by offering comments from
industry experts who can put the new products into perspective.
✓ Bad news: One thing that amazes me as a financial reporter is just how
deft company executives are at spinning bad news. I’ve interviewed
executives of companies at death’s door, and the CEOs try to tell you
how everything is fine. Good financial journalism, though, will help you
look past the corporate spin and get a good grip on when a company’s
woes are alarming.
✓ Availability (or over-availability): Ever notice some companies’ CEOs
are constantly in the press while others’ never are? As a fundamental
analyst, it’s important to monitor this kind of thing even through there’s
no way to qualify it. When you notice CEOs seem to be on TV a couple
times a week, you really need to wonder why they feel so inclined to be
constantly telling their story. But at the same time, you might wonder if
an executive is being overly secretive, too.

When to be skeptical of executives’
claims in the media
Just because an executive makes a claim in the media, don’t assume it’s true.
Sometimes the media outlet, or reporter, isn’t qualified or prepared to call
out or correct an executive who makes a false or exaggerated statement.
This point was made clear when the CEO of Amplidyne, Devendar Bains,
made a series of claims about the Internet company’s products on financial TV in 1999. Bains said the company tested a new product to speed up
Internet transmission over a 50-mile distance and the company was ready to
sell it, a complaint from the SEC says. But the SEC alleges Amplidyne never
field-tested the products and the company, in fact, didn’t even have finished
products ready to sell.
Fundamental analysts should be especially cautious of companies that seem
to be in the business of issuing press releases. Some companies, especially
those that trade on the largely unregulated Pink Sheets market, attempt to
stoke interest in their stocks by constantly putting out promising-sounding
press releases. If trading is light in the stock, meaning there aren’t many buyers
and sellers, a stock’s price can be fairly easily manipulated by seemingly
positive press releases.
If you’re afraid of missing when a company or its executives appear in the media,
you can set up electronic alerts so you will be e-mailed notifications. Go to
news.live.com, for instance, and click on the “News alerts” link located to the

19 506455-ch13.indd 219

9/24/09 10:36:45 PM

220 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
right of the search blank. You can then enter the name of a company or executive you want to track, and you’ll be e-mailed when any news breaks that mention those keywords. If you’re interested in learning more on how to efficiently
scan online news for information about a company, you can get some pointers
in my book, “Investing Online for Dummies.” How’s that for a shameless plug?

Knowing When to Pay Attention
at Shareholders’ Meetings
If you’re a U2 fan, you probably swear by the live show put on by the band’s
four members: Bono, The Edge, Larry Mullen Jr., and Adam Clayton. Or perhaps
you’ve seen endless photos of Germany’s Neuschwanstein Castle, but there’s
nothing quite like seeing the towering spires in person.
For some fundamental analysts, the annual shareholder meeting is the faceto-face chance to interact with a company’s management team.
Getting tickets to a U2 concert may practically require you to hock your wife’s
wedding ring. Luckily, getting into an annual shareholders’ meeting is much
easier. As long as you own at least one share of a company’s stock, you get a
ticket to attend a company’s annual shareholder meeting.

What to expect during a company’s
annual meeting
The annual shareholder meeting is kind of like a corporate version of showand-tell. Nearly all these meetings are held in large conference halls or auditoriums, and not on the companies’ premises. The companies often use these
meetings as a chance to showcase all the products they offer. You can find
out when and where a company’s shareholder meeting is held usually in the
proxy statement, which is discussed at length in Chapter 9.
While companies generally don’t conduct their annual meetings at their headquarters, you might be a little concerned if a company seems to go out of its
way to hold it somewhere it knows might be difficult to visit.
Annual shareholder meetings often follow a script like this:
✓ Flashy introduction: Many meetings kick off with a flashy slideshow or
video presentation showcasing just how cool the company’s products are.
There’s very little value to these shamelessly promotional presentations.

19 506455-ch13.indd 220

9/24/09 10:36:45 PM

Chapter 13: Analyzing a Company’s Public Comments and Statements

221

✓ Presentations from company management: The CEO and perhaps chief
financial officer and chief operation officer might give a speech outlining
their goals for the company in the year ahead.
There’s rarely any new information released at the annual shareholder
meetings. Anything of material interest has already been disclosed in the
proxy statement or the 10-K, which is explored in Chapter 12.
✓ Shareholder question-and-answer period: Some companies allow shareholders to stand up and ask the management team questions. Other
companies require questions to be submitted ahead of time and will
only be posed to management if they are selected. In some cases, investors who have put proposals for a vote on the proxy are permitted to
give a presentation of their views.

Putting the “Fun” in fundamental analysis
Typically lacking substantive information, the annual shareholders meetings are generally designed to make investors get a warm fuzzy feeling about
being investors. Generally speaking, that’s the kind of feeling you, as a fundamental analyst, don’t want to have.
It’s dangerous to get so attached to a stock that you lose your objectivity.
Falling in love with a stock, as it’s called, may cause you to stop asking the
tough questions when owning a stock. Remember, stocks don’t love you back.
A few companies are especially famous for their annual shareholder meetings.
Shareholder meetings of Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway are especially
legendary. Scores of Berkshire investors descend on Omaha (the Qwest Center
was the location of the 2009 meeting) to try to get close to the Oracle of Omaha.
The Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting is such a big deal it’s almost like a
weekend getaway. At the meeting in 2009, events included Warren’s Western
Cookout, dinner at a steakhouse, and tours of corporate planes sold by a
Berkshire company called NetJets. There are also plenty of opportunities
to buy and try products sold by Berkshire companies ranging from See’s
Candies to Borsheim’s Fine Jewelry. Buffett usually refers to the event as the
“Woodstock for Capitalists.”
Don’t feel like you need to attend an annual shareholders’ meeting or you’ll
be out of the loop. You can vote on all the important items by mailing in your
proxy statement form or by voting online. Also, most companies provide the
presentations from the shareholders’ meeting on their Web site after the event.

19 506455-ch13.indd 221

9/24/09 10:36:45 PM

222 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis

19 506455-ch13.indd 222

9/24/09 10:36:45 PM

Chapter 14

Gleaning from the Fundamental
Analysis Done by Others
In This Chapter
▶ Digging into analyst research reports for clues on whether a stock is attractive or not
▶ Finding out which other investors own a stock and guessing what they might see in it
▶ Using reports from credit-rating agencies to bolster your own fundamental analysis
▶ Discovering social networking and how to use knowledge of others to help you

F

undamental analysts generally don’t travel in packs or flocks.
Fundamental analysts, almost by nature, approach investing as a solitary
pursuit. Some fundamental analysts even fear getting the input of too many
people, as biases might distract them from financial ratios and numbers and
cause personal opinions to taint pure objectivity.
With that said, though, part of the job of fundamental analysts is to survey
the financial landscape for any information that might affect the value of a
company or change its future prospects. And that’s where it can be worthwhile to look into the fundamental research done by others. Fundamental
analysis from Wall Street brokerage firms and credit-rating agencies can provide details that you might have missed in your own work. Similarly it can be
helpful to find out which other investors are buying a stock you’re interested
in and what they’re saying about it.
Certainly, as a fundamental analyst, you shouldn’t let the moves of others
dictate what you do. But the findings of others can provide fresh information
for you or act as a check against yourself to make sure you don’t miss anything
critical in your analysis.

20 506455-ch14.indd 223

9/25/09 12:21:46 AM

224 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Reading Analysts’ Reports for
Fundamental Analysis Clues
It might seem strange to suggest you take a look at research reports from
others in a book about doing fundamental research on your own. After all,
perhaps you’re interested in learning how to analyze stocks because you’ve
gotten bad investing advice from a broker or analyst in the past.
You’re wise to be skeptical of research coming from anyone else, including
Wall Street brokerage firms. Often times analysts get paid by companies, either
directly or indirectly, to generate research to convince others to buy a stock.
In 2003, for instance, the nation’s biggest brokerage firms were ordered to pay
$1.4 billion to settle charges that they misled investors with biased research.
With all that said, research from professional analysts can provide you with
very helpful information to accompany your own fundamental analysis. You
just need to know how to read analyst research reports and how to extract
genuinely helpful information from them. And that’s precisely what I’ll show
you how to do in this chapter.

Why reading analysts’ reports
can be worth your time
Sadly, most investors fixate on the wrong thing when reading analyst reports.
Nearly all the time, investors will look at the top of an analyst report for the
stock rating and see if the stock is deemed buy, hold, or sell. The simplicity
of those ratings makes them irresistible, and investors may feel tempted to
follow them. Unfortunately, many investors get themselves into trouble and
risk losing a large sum of money when they blindly follow the ratings they
read in analyst reports.
The stock ratings from analysts are infamously poor. During 2008, for instance,
just 49% of the stocks with buy ratings from the top five analysts rose, according
to analyst tracking service Investars.com. That means even if you buy a stock
recommended by a top analyst, you still have a coin-flip chance of losing money.
Despite their problems, though, analyst research reports can contain some
solid information. Some of the reasons why you might want to take a look at
analyst reports include:
✓ A way to double-check your own analysis: Most of the analysts who
write these reports are highly trained financial professionals who know
how to do everything from discounted cash flow, or DCF, analysis (as
covered in Chapter 11) to) to advanced valuation measurement. You

20 506455-ch14.indd 224

9/25/09 12:21:46 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

225

might want to compare the results of your DCF model with those created
by professional analysts to see if they’re in the same ballpark.
✓ Industry insight: Many times the analysts assigned to cover an industry
either have studied that field for a long time or even worked at a company in the business. This in-depth industry experience can help you
improve your analysis of an industry, as discussed in Chapter 16.
✓ Dissenting point of view: If you’re convinced a stock is a screaming buy,
it might make sense to seek out analyst reports that are less bullish on
that stock. Perhaps the bearish analyst will point out things you didn’t
notice in your own analysis.
Analysts’ reports are infamously overly bullish. For a variety of reasons,
research reports from Wall Street brokerage firms tend to rarely slap a
dreaded sell rating on a stock, as you can see in Table 14-1. The table, though,
shows how analysts have been getting more skeptical in recent years. Even
so, the fact so few companies get a sell rating underscores why you need to
remember that when a Wall Street firm rates a stock a hold, that’s actually a
fairly negative recommendation you might consider to be a sell.

Table 14-1
Year

Analysts Rarely Give Stocks a Sell Rating
% of stocks rated
buy

% of stocks
rated hold

% of stocks
rated sell

2008

39%

47%

14%

2007

42%

47%

11%

2006

38%

49%

13%

2005

37%

50%

13%

2004

36%

49%

15%

2003

44%

42%

14%

2002

47%

41%

12%

2001

62%

35%

3%

2000

73%

25%

2%

Source: Investars.com, using data from the major brokerage firms

Understanding the types of firms
that put out stock research
Not all analyst research reports are created equal. While the term analyst
report is a catch-all used to describe nearly all investment research generated
by professional analysts, there are many flavors of research to be aware of.

20 506455-ch14.indd 225

9/25/09 12:21:47 AM

226 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Giving analyst reports a bad rap
It’s long been understood by those familiar with
investing that the ratings given to stocks by
Wall Street analysts are to be ignored at best
due to the conflict mentioned above.
But the potential for significant conflicts of
interest became very clear in the early 2000s,
when 10 investment banks agreed to a sweeping $1.4 billion settlement with regulators for
allegedly putting out misleading research
reports to investors. Some individual analysts
were also penalized. Henry Blodget, a former
managing director at Merrill Lynch who made
a name for himself publishing glowing reports
on Internet companies, was barred from the

industry and hit with a $4 million monetary
punishment by the Securities and Exchange
Commission in 2003. The SEC concluded that
these firms and analysts routinely published
reports that encouraged investors to buy stocks,
giving them “buy” or “strong buy” recommendations, despite knowing the companies being
recommended had fundamentals that were not
sound. Investors who trusted the research and
followed the recommendations, in many cases,
lost large amounts of money. These charges are
more reason why you want to know how to do
your own fundamental research, rather than
rely on the work of others.

The first way you should differentiate research in your mind is based on the
source. Knowing where research is coming from, and how the person or firm
generating the report gets paid, is vital to understanding what the potential
biases and shortfalls in the research might be. Typically, research reports are
put into one of two categories based on their source, including:

Broker research
Research generated by the analysts at large brokerage firms, such as Bank of
America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, and UBS, is usually what investors think
of first when its comes to analyst research. These large firms hire armies of
analysts who have a coverage universe, or set group of stocks, to constantly
monitor.
Never overlook the potential conflict of interest when it comes to broker
research. Many of the same Wall Street firms that put out research on companies also have large investment banking arms. The investment banking
portions of these Wall Street firms get lucrative fees performing services for
companies, such as selling stock or bonds to investors. If a brokerage firm
were to put out negative research on a company, it could risk upsetting management and jeopardize the future investment banking business.
Luckily, if you pay attention you can spot signs of potential conflict in broker
research. At the bottom of broker research reports, you’ll find a number of
key disclosures. In one section, the brokerage firm must tell you whether or
not the firm receives investment banking business from the company covered
in the report. Analysts, too, must tell you if they personally own shares of the
