
book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Looks Can Be Deceiving

Page 107

107

GEORGE: The accumulation of wealth. We want to earn the most amount
of money with the least amount of risk, while spending the least amount
of money on overhead.
ME: Sounds okay with me. But why can’t you also accumulate some
desks? Normal chairs? Don’t your clients expect to see someone who
appears, well . . .
GEORGE: More successful?
ME: Right. I didn’t mean for it to sound bad.
GEORGE: It doesn’t sound bad at all. You see, my clients expect to make
the most amount of money possible. So I don’t charge them a management fee. Most hedge funds will charge a fee of 2 percent of total assets
under management, plus about 20 percent per year of the profits. What’s
2 percent of three billion dollars?
ME: Um . . .
HARVEY: He is a math genius.
ME: Um . . .
GEORGE: It’s sixty million dollars.
ME: [silence]
HARVEY: [silence]
GEORGE: This year we’ll walk away from 60 million dollars in possible
management fees that we could just pay out to ourselves in this office.
Instead of putting that sixty million dollars in our own pockets, we’ll
reinvest it, we’ll put it to work. That sixty million by the end of next year
might be worth eighty million. And guess what? We get a cut of the profits. So if we do well, we get paid well. Do you see how charging a management fee like 2 percent would reward us even if we were not
performing well?
ME: [silence]
HARVEY: George, I think he’s still thinking about the sixty million
dollars.
GEORGE: Ha! I don’t blame him. My wife thinks about it all the time. But,
think, Harry. Think about it for a moment. If you invest your money with
me, do you want me to be rewarded if we succeed, or if we fail?
ME: If you succeed. If you fail, I want to take my money elsewhere.
GEORGE: Right! And if we fail and still take 2 percent of your money every
year, that seems ridiculous. Completely at odds with what is obviously a
true principle: A money manager should only be compensated if he
earns money for his clients.
ME: That does make sense. So how much money do you earn when you
succeed?
GEORGE: We charge the standard 20 percent of profits. This year, we’ve
made a billion dollars. We had a big win when we bought a chain of supermarkets in the Midwest, and then sold them to a larger chain. Right

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

108

2:23 PM

Page 108

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

there that deal was five hundred million dollars. If we stopped trading
right now, we’d take in an incentive fee, at the end of the year, of about
two hundred million dollars.
ME: Do you mostly buy companies? Then sell them?
GEORGE: No. The supermarket deal was dropped in our lap—we have
a guy here who trades for us, and he was a grocery analyst at a major
Wall Street firm. He liked what he saw in this Midwestern chain.
We manage some money for the CEO of a major U.S. chain, and
we told him that we were going to bid for the business. We had no intention of keeping it for a long time, but we realized we could get a
great deal on it and then resell it later after we trimmed it up a bit.
First he told us that he wasn’t interested, and six months after
we bought it, he told us that he was, and we sold it to him at a major
markup.
ME: And this was a one-time-only type of deal?
GEORGE: Yes, that’s a good way to put it. A deal too good to pass up. We
generally trade a lot of currency and foreign stocks and bonds. We don’t
do much in the United States, really. We see the growth overseas and
that’s where we are focused.
ME: There aren’t very many traders here.
GEORGE: Right. I hate managing people. These people manage themselves. We hardly ever hire. When we do, I offer a million dollars as
a signing bonus and we don’t have a lot of trouble getting the people
we want. This is totally and completely a performance-based business. Each of these traders manages as much of the capital as
they can justify to the rest of the team. Each one is an expert in
one area—Mickey Cochrane over there borrows money in Japan
and buys British, Brazilian, Australian, and New Zealand bonds. He’s
making a killing for us right now and it looks like it’s going to keep
on moving.
ME: He borrows money in Japan?
GEORGE: Right. This is what is called the carry trade. Ever heard of it?
ME: No. I don’t think so.
GEORGE: I’ll describe it to you. I hope that it blows your mind like it did
mine the first time I heard about it—and keep in mind, I was a year out
of Goldman Sachs and should have already known about it. Are you
ready?
ME: Ready.
GEORGE: How can a person or a company borrow at low interest rates?
ME: Good credit.
GEORGE: What else?
ME: From a bank offering a competitive rate.

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Looks Can Be Deceiving

Page 109

109

GEORGE: Excellent. Perfect. What would you say if I told you that right
now, I can borrow a hundred million dollars from a Japanese bank at 1
percent interest?
ME: I would say you should buy yourself a new television and some
couches.
GEORGE: Very good! Probably true. But what else?
ME: I would say that you should look for a way to earn more than 1 percent on your money, since you are going to have to pay back the principal and the interest.
GEORGE: Brilliant! That is correct. Well, guess what? We can go to our brokerage firms—Bear Sterns, Goldman Sachs, for example—and deposit
the money. They will let us leverage that money a few times over. So we
can invest with three hundred million dollars. That’s called investing
with leverage.
ME: Sounds even better now.
GEORGE: And if we go out and buy a basket—or a collection—of foreign
bonds that earn a combined average of 7 percent, then we are earning 7
percent on three hundred million.
ME: But you only have to pay interest on one hundred million!
GEORGE: Bingo! Give the man a banana. You’re right on target. We borrow,
and then we invest with leverage.
ME: So you are, in essence, earning 21 percent on that money annually,
minus the 1 percent interest on the loan.
GEORGE: Right. That is exactly right. Now it gets more complicated, of
course. Mickey has to move money around, and has to open and close
trades to get into the best collection of bonds and so forth. And we
pay fees and commissions on the trades we take. But that’s the basic
strategy.
ME: Very cool. I want to do that. Can I borrow from a Japanese bank?
GEORGE: Theoretically, yes. But practically, probably not. You probably
can’t get the trade going right, unless you have a few million dollars. Do
you?
ME: Very no. Definitely no. I wish.
GEORGE: Well, if you’re working with Harvey, you’re going to have that
much. Eventually. Don’t rush it. Let it come to you. And I’m sure that
if you think about it long enough, you’ll find a way to do a trade like
this. It’s got to be possible in the retail forex world, by playing the
swap rates off each other or something. In fact, we should talk about
that again. Right now I have to go, but tell Harvey—he’s over there
talking to Mindy Swanson—that you should stop by in a couple of
weeks and that you’re going to tell me about how to do the carry trade
on a retail platform.

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Page 110

110

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

ME: But—
GEORGE: I gotta take this call.
And with that, the discussion was over. George had a phone appointment that he had to take, and he just stood up and gripped my hand like he
was going to fling me out the window.

MINDY TEACHES ME HER ONE-PIP WAYS
Harvey had been chatting it up with a young woman on the other side of
the room, and he called me over.
“Harry, this is Mindy. She only trades currency.”
“Great! I was just talking to George about the carry trade.”
Mindy smiled. “That’s long term. I’m all short term. I am in and out all
day long.”
“In what way?” I asked.
“Look at my screen,” she said, pointing to the quotes in front of her.
She had at least seven currency pairs open at once, and they were flashing
quickly enough to make it very confusing if I stared at it for long. I was
used to seeing the currency pairs quoted like this:
1.8500/1.8504
But on her screen, the quotes appeared with just the last two digits,
leaving out the “1.85” part.
With only the last two digits below the rest of the quote, I had a hard
time telling where the currency pair was really trading.
“Notice anything different between my screen and your screen at
home?”
“Yeah, like how the quotes are displayed.”
She winked at me. “Not quite. Look again. What’s the spread?”
I looked again. The EUR/USD was trading at 1.2103 bid, 1.2104 ask.
The spread was just 1 pip! On my retail platform at home, the spread was 4
pips on the same pair. I told her that.
“Right. That’s why most short-term bank traders think that trading
currency from home is a fool’s game. Because the spreads are so high. It’s
why Harvey is probably going to teach you to look at the longer term
charts.”
Harvey nodded. “Exactly.”
“But why can’t I trade short term even with a 4-pip spread? It seems
that I can build a system to still make money.”

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Looks Can Be Deceiving

Page 111

111

She nodded. “I’m not saying that it’s impossible. I am just saying that
the fees would be outrageous. Let’s do an example.” She found a piece of
paper and started doing some math. “Let’s say that you are going for 20
pips on every trade, when you trade from home. And that you trade twice a
day, and that you trade two hundred times per year. To make it simple.”
“All right.”
“And every time you trade, you are trading with one standard size lot.
How much is that?”
“A standard lot is one hundred thousand dollars in currency.”
“Right. And that’s ten dollars every time it moves 1 pip. So how much
are you paying the dealer every time you trade?”
“Forty bucks.”
“Now multiply that times two trades every day, two hundred times per
year. That’s four hundred trades. Times forty dollars.”
“That’s sixteen thousand dollars. I pay the spread on the winners and
losers. So I’m going to pay that much no matter what.”
She nodded, satisfied that I was getting the picture. “That’s your
money. If you reduce the spread, you make more money. Consider it another way: 4 pips, your spread, is 25 percent of 20 pips. If you are going for
20 pips on your trades, you are losing 25 percent of your gains to the
dealer. You could be getting 3 more pips on every trade if you traded here.
Get it? It’s not just the dollar amounts we’re talking about. We’re talking
about losing 25 percent of your gains. If you lower the spread by just 2
pips—you make 10 percent more every year.”
“I never considered any of this.”
She was happy to hear that. “I’m glad I could teach you something. We
belong to the church of frugality here at Sisler and Company. We spend our
time not only getting the best return but also cutting costs. It’s about accumulation of wealth—we build it a bit at a time.”
“So how do you trade? You mentioned that you were in and out all day
long.”
“Well, Harry,” she started. “Now imagine that you have a 1-pip spread
on the EUR/USD. You already know that the pair can move up and down all
day long. Or just up. Or just down.”
“Right.”
“Its average daily range is 130. This means that it is going to move that
many pips on average. But in between, it’s going to move a bit up, a bit
down, and so forth. I just grab 1 pip at a time out of the market, all day
long.”
“How many pips can you get?”
“My daily goal is 40. I can do that three or four days every week.”
“Do you trade a standard lot?”
She laughed. “No. I trade Tens.”

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

112

2:23 PM

Page 112

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“Tens?”
“As in ten million. Ten-million-dollar positions. On the EUR, that’s one
thousand dollars per pip.”
She was making forty thousand dollars a day. Two hundred thousand
dollars every week. Ten million dollars a year. Holy crap.
I realized that she was glancing at her screen and setting up another
trade, so I decided that I would give her some space. Harvey and I thanked
her for her time and we left.
Out on the street below, we found some hot dogs. Harvey paid even
though I insisted that I owed it to him.
“You’ve done so much already,” I protested.
“Well, you’re going to pay me back,” he replied. “Don’t you worry about
that. You’ll pay me back. Not now, but later. And we’re not going to talk
about that right now. For now, you just have to follow some simple instructions, and we’ll go from there.”
“Okay, I agree. But I do have some questions.”
He ordered another hot dog. He was eating like a machine. Two bites,
and the next dog was gone.
I started: “I didn’t want to mention this upstairs, but Mindy is only making ten million dollars a year for the firm. Now I don’t want to seem unimpressed, but when they are managing three billion dollars, doesn’t she have
to contribute more to the firm?”
“That’s a good question, Harry. And I suspect that George is going to be
talking to Mindy about that very soon. She’s been there six months, and I
am sure she’s already made at least half her yearly goal, or more. But
you’re correct in thinking that it’s just not enough. When she was trading at
a bank on the West Coast, that amount of money was brilliant. It made her
a superstar. But she is going to have to step up a notch if she wants to work
with George.”
“So why did he hire her?”
“Because she is a brilliant goal setter. She goes for 40 pips and she gets
it, day in and day out. Over and over again. George likes consistency. He
would rather have her making ten million per year almost automatically,
than have some guy there that has a 50 percent chance of either making or
losing one hundred million.”
“That does make sense. Predictability in the returns.”
“And a lack of volatility in the performance. He wants to show his
clients that he can return year in and year out. Mindy’s trading style doesn’t
have to change for any reason, ever. As volume and liquidity grows, she
can increase the size of her positions and even make more. At the bank,
she was trading one- and five-million-dollar positions. She is already trading about the most she can with the system she is using.”

book_c12.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Looks Can Be Deceiving

Page 113

113

“And she is probably hoping that she can increase the size of her trades
to the point where she is returning something more substantial.”
“Right. And George will give her the chance to prove it. What’s your
next question?”
“Where were the accountants? They are managing three billion dollars
but they don’t have any accountants. Or other staff.”
“It’s all outsourced. All the reporting, the reconciliation, all of it, he
signs off on it but it is done by a third party. He doesn’t even pay his own
bills there. They just trade. That is all they do. Nothing to put them off
focus.”
“That makes sense. Can you tell me again what they are doing with an
office here on the border of Chinatown, with a bunch of old furniture? I am
sorry, but to me it still leaves a bad impression.”
He nodded. “I can’t disagree completely. I wouldn’t want to work there.
But there is a story behind this. Let’s take a walk and look for an Italian
soda. And I will tell you the story of George Sisler.”

book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

Page 114

CHAPTER 13

The Story of
George Sisler

arvey knew his way around the SoHo/Chinatown border, and led me
through some alleys and backstreets until we emerged on Mulberry
Street, which was just about all that was left of a neighborhood that
once had been home to tens of thousands of Italians. From Mulberry, we
turned left onto Grand Street, where we found Di Palo Fine Foods. This is
where, he said, we could find the very best soft drink in the world.
Harvey bought us a half-pound of mixed olives, some prosciutto
(Italian ham), and two cans of Aranciata, which he believed to be
the nectar of the gods and that was essentially a lightly sweetened orange soda. And yes, it was the very best soft drink in the world. As we
ate the olives and the ham, Harvey told me the story of George Sisler’s
hedge fund.
“George managed a group of traders for a major European bank about
10 years ago. He had been a rising star in the commodities trading desk,
and they promoted him to run a separate, outside-the-office proprietary
trading operation in New York. It was a team of currency traders, just
seven or eight, and they were essentially running a little hedge fund inside
the bank, with the bank’s money. It wasn’t really a hedge fund, but it operated like one. They made their own trading decisions, the traders were
paid a portion of their gains, and their entire mission was to produce spectacular returns on the bank’s own money.”
“How much money did they have?”
“At least five hundred million. It was a good deal of money at the time
and George was young. He knew how to trade but he really didn’t know

H

114

book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

The Story of George Sisler

Page 115

115

how to manage traders. You’ll find that out in a moment. But first I want to
tell you about the office they had.”
“Was it a dump, just like George’s office now?” I asked.
“Definitely not. This office was the height of technology at the time.
They had satellite dishes bringing in news from foreign countries. They
had direct data connections all over the world that were costing tens of
thousands of dollars per month. They had a famous decorator set up the
office—it was amazing—the furniture and art in the office alone were
worth millions. They were perched in three thousand square feet near the
top of a forty-story tower in downtown Wall Street, with a floor-to-ceiling
view of the Statue of Liberty.”
I could picture it in my head. This seemed the ideal hedge fund office
layout. “So they were set up with a perfect environment.”
“Perfect for a fund with a track record of 30 years, maybe. But not a
bunch of hotshot kids just out of Harvard. They demanded all this stuff and
they got it. And George led the charge for all of these toys—and had written into his contract that he would only work in that particular office building with that specific view of Lady Liberty.”
“Why?”
“He was positive that the European bank would do it, first of all. They
were late to the currency prop trading idea, and wanted to play catch-up.
They feared they would miss out on huge profits if they delayed any longer.
So they gave in. On top of all of this, they guaranteed George a half-million
dollars per year in salary and each of his traders a quarter of a million. So
they were making giant money from the very start.”
“I can see where this is going,” I replied.
Harvey was eating olives so fast that I could hardly grab one out of the
plastic dish in front of us. They were good and I determined that if I could
keep putting olives in front of Harvey, he’d keep teaching me. And the
faster I learned, the sooner I could be trading and making money. I still
wanted to know more about the sell trade on the EUR/USD at 1.2200, especially now that I’d seen the pair rising upward in George’s office. He
continued.
“They were doing well for the first six months. Really well. Probably
up 20 percent for the year. So good that they started to get a bit cocky
about their trading. They were all young, and although they’d had some
great success early in their careers, they really hadn’t had enough failure to
teach them to protect their gains.”
“Wouldn’t they have some sort of system at a bank for making sure
they couldn’t trade too much?”
“Most banks have automated systems for that now, yes. But at that
time, George’s bank had what they called a daylight limit, or a maximum
drawdown for the day. So if a trader lost, say, two hundred thousand

book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

116

2:23 PM

Page 116

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

dollars for the day, he’d be asked to close his open positions and shut down
until the next day.”
“I remember Craig Taylor talking about this. How was the Daylight
Limit determined?”
“Usually, as some percentage of capital lost,” he continued, looking a
bit sad at the empty dish in front of him. “No more olives. I think we need
to correct that.” He stood up, and this time, he ordered a full pound of them
and returned smiling. Then he started again: “The team bought and sold as
individuals usually. But as they worked on during their first year, they
started to take on a lot of similar positions. Meaning, one guy would buy
Sterling—the British Pound—then the next guy would do the same thing,
on down the line, until they were all pretty deep into the same currency—
against the U.S. Dollar, against the Swiss Franc, the German Mark, and so
on. Long Sterling against everyone in a big way didn’t leave them much
room for a correction.”
“But they had their risk limits.”
“Individually, yes. But remember, they were earning money—big
money—for just making trades. Imagine going from a base salary of sixty
or seventy thousand, to a base of four times that amount. Just for coming
into work every day, they were minting money. They were hungry for
more—but their financial comfort sort of lulled them into believing that
any profit they made on top of the salary was just gravy. Something that
was not as important to protect.”
“I get it,” I told him. “Because they were taken care of already, it didn’t
seem like a big deal if they didn’t make any extra.”
“Right. That’s exactly right. I think George fell into this as well. He
bought a bigger house, enrolled his young daughter in a superexclusive
nursery school that cost something like twenty thousand bucks a year. He
bought a Porsche for himself and a Mercedes for his wife. It got to the
point that he was going to need the end-of-year bonus to make ends meet.”
“You mean, he couldn’t live off the five hundred thousand?”
“Right. He was raising his lifestyle faster than his income.”
“This doesn’t sound like it has a happy ending.”
“Really? This is the part I like the best,” he answered. “I like it because
what happened next drilled a lesson home for him that he never forgot.”
“And what did happen next?”
“Those long Sterling positions—they started to add onto them as the
currency weakened. It did not have to fall very much for the trades to start
losing a lot of money. They had piled position on top of position until they
were losing twenty or thirty thousand dollars for every pip it fell against
them.”
“Did they reach the Daylight Limit?”
