
95

M A R K D. C O O K !

show, there was also substance to it. Even though he has made millions
trading, Cook continues to do some farmwork himself. It is difficult to
justify his manual labor in any economic sense. Cook rationalizes his
part-time farmwork, which is in addition to the fifty to sixty hours per
week he puts in as a trader, by saying that he is a workaholic. This is true
enough, but I also believe that Cook would feel a tinge of guilt if he
worked "only" as a trader while his eighty-one-year-old father continued

to farm full-time.
Cook had brought me to his father's farm as part of a tour of the local
area. As we drove along, Cook pointed out various tracts of land, which
he identified by a year number. "There's 1997," he said, referring to the
farm he had bought with his 1997 trading profits. "There's 1995," he said
a few moments later, and so on. He apparently has had a lot of good
years. Cook is almost zealous about converting his trading profits into
real assets—and for Cook farmland is the ultimate real asset.
The highlight of the tour was linked to another outlet for Cook's trading profits: rare farm tractors. Cook shares his father's enthusiasm for
collecting antique tractors, a mutual hobby that led to the creation of the
Cook Tractor Museum. You won't find this museum, which is situated
next to Cook's farmhouse trading office, in any guidebook. The museum's
exhibits are displayed in a large metal shed structure that was built in
1996 to house the burgeoning rare tractor collection.
Cook picked up his father, Marvin, so that he could accompany us on
the museum visit. Marvin Cook, who is the epitome of the taciturn
farmer, turned into Mr. Tour Guide as soon as we entered the metal
shed. He described the unique characteristics of each tractor model on
display and the history of its manufacturer, who in most instances had
disappeared from the American scene long ago. The museum contains
some real rarities, including two of only five American tractors (only one
other is known to still exist), built by an Ohio company that went out of
business before the line went into full production.
Cook next took me to the farm he had bought with his 1994 trading
profits. Cook currently leases the land for coal mining, and we hiked
across the rolling fields and scrambled down a scree-strewn slope to view
the open-pit mining operation. Buying this land gave Cook particular sat-

H A R V E S T I N G S&P P R O F I T S

isfaction because it was the alternative property his great-grandfather
had considered purchasing before settling on the original family farmstead in 1890.
I had begun my interview with Cook the previous evening at Tozzi's,
an eighty-five-year-old, family-owned establishment that is the best
restaurant in Magnolia, Ohio. It is also the only restaurant in Magnolia
(population: 1,000). The lack of competition, however, apparently hasn't
had any adverse influence; the food was very good and the service attentive. After the two-hour dinner. Cook was only getting warmed up in
talking about his career. We continued the interview at Cook's 125-yearold farmhouse office, a dark walnut-paneled room, unadorned except
for a cow painting (Cook's wife, Terri, was the artist). At around 1 A.M.,
we were still not finished. Knowing that Cook wanted to get an early
start the next morning, I decided to leave the remainder for the next
day. We continued the interview the next morning at breakfast and finished it later that day in the airport parking lot, seated in Cook's pickup
truck.
Cook's early attempts at trading were marked by repeated setbacks,
experiences he relates in the interview. Cook, however, never gave up.
Each failure only made him work harder. Finally, after many years of
carefully tracking the stock market, filling volumes of market diaries, and
assiduously recording and analyzing every trade he made, his trading
became consistently profitable.
Once Cook became confident in his trading abilities, he entered
several market contests, registering an 89 percent gain in a four-month
competition in 1989, and 563 percent and 322 percent returns in backto-back annual contests beginning in 1992. His annual returns in the six
years since then have ranged between 30 percent and a stratospheric
1,422 percent. These statistics are based on defining percent return as
annual dollar profits divided by beginning year equity, a conservative definition that understates Cook's true performance, because he frequently
withdraws profits from his account but never adds funds. For example, in
his low-return year (based on our definition of percent return), his withdrawals during the year exceeded his starting capital. Cook provided me
with his account statements for his most recent four years. During this

M A R K D. C O O K J

period, he was profitable on 87 percent of all trading days, with one-third
of the months showing only winning days.

How does a farm boy end up trading the S&P?
I started trading because of a cow.

You'll have to explain that one to me.
In 1975, while attending Ohio State University as an agricultural business major, I was on the national cattle judging team for Ohio. That
experience helped me get a summer job as one of the two cowboys
that took Elsie the Cow around the country as publicity for Borden.
Was this like Lassie? When Elsie died, did they replace her with
another Elsie?
They changed Elsies after the tour was over, which lasted about thirteen weeks.
Where did you go on this tour?
All over. We even received the key to the city from Mayor Daley in
Chicago because the city's mascot was a cow. I was also interviewed
on several TV and radio shows.
What kind of questions would they ask you about a cow?
Oh, how much milk did she produce? What kind of cow was she?
How much crap did she produce in a day? How old was she? What
did she eat? Does she kick? How come she doesn't have any flies?
Whenever I got that last question, I said, "We give her a bath every
day; she's cleaner than you are."
One night we were on a radio show in Chicago. The host was
Eddie Schwartz who had an all-night talk program back in the 1970s
before talk programs became big. We were on for hours. At about 3
A.M. he asked us, "Hey, what would you guys like to do now?"
"We've been on the road constantly," I answered. "We haven't gone
out with any women for a while."
"No problem," he said. "What kind of girls would you like?" he
asked us.
I was a bit of a ham, so I said, "The first two girls who get down
here in bikinis, we'll show them a night on the town."
"Girls out there," he announced, "did you hear that?"

H A R V E S T I N G S&P P R O F I T S

"I wasn't serious," I quickly added.
"No problem," he said. "You heard them out there," he told his
audience. It wasn't fifteen minutes before two girls wearing bikinis
showed up at the studio.
Before we left, he said to us, "I get a lot of obnoxious calls. I'd love
to get a tape of your cow mooing so that I could turn it on whenever I
have an annoying caller." We always kept Elsie on a local farm when
we traveled. We arranged to meet Eddie at the farm the next morning.
Wait, wait, not so fast. What happened to the bikini girls?
Nothing happened, because my wife may read this [he laughs].
The next morning when Schwartz arrived at the farm, he said,
"Are you sure you can get her to moo, Mark?"
"Oh sure, I can get her to do anything." 1 tied her up to a wagon
and placed the tape recorder inside.
"She isn't mooing," he said.
"No problem," I said. "Just move everybody out of the way. I'll
calm her down, and as soon as I walk away, she'll start crying. She'll
cry because she is a celebrity, and celebrities need attention."
"You're just pulling my leg," he said.
"No, I'm serious," I said, "just watch." I walked away, and it wasn't
long before Elsie started bellowing at the top of her lungs. He used
that tape on Chicago radio for years.
Being Elsie's cowboys also helped us get into the Playboy Club.
One night while I was in Chicago, my boss joined us. I said, "We
should go to the Playboy Club."
"Oh sure, Mark," he said. " How are we going to get in?" You could
only get into the Playboy Club by invitation.
"Don't worry," I told him, "I can get us in."
"And how are you going to do that?" he asked.
"Just wait and you'll see," I told him. When we arrived at the club,
I walked up to the imposing guard at the door and said, "You allow
celebrities in, right?"
"Oh yeah," the man said, "we like celebrities. Who are you?"
"It isn't who I am," I answered, "but whom I represent." I pulled
out my Elsie the Cow identification card. This was just after we had
done the Mayor Daley ceremony.

M A R K D. C O O i

"Oh sure," he said skeptically. He no doubt had heard every type
of story by people trying to get in, although this was probably the first
time someone had tried to use his pet cow to gain admittance.
"I have my girlfriend right here with me," I said as I pulled out a
photo of Elsie standing next to me.
"Just a minute," he said as he went behind the padlocked door. He
came back out with a celebrity key and let us in.
This is all very interesting, but what does it have to do with your
becoming a trader?
After graduating college, I wanted to get a job as a stockbroker. I
couldn't get hired. Nothing in my resume seemed to help—not my
grades, nor the fact that I played college basketball. Finally, I rewrote
my resume, prominently mentioning that I had been Elsie's cowboy.
Shortly thereafter, I received a call to interview at a local brokerage
office in Canton, which ultimately led to a job offer. The woman who
screened resumes for the firm later told me, "I get hundreds of
resumes. When I saw yours I said, 'Hey, this is the guy who took care
of Elsie the Cow.'" I had been in Canton when I did the tour, and she
had remembered seeing the picture in the local newspaper. That's
how I got into the business, because of a cow.
Why did you want to become a stockbroker? Were you trading
stocks?
I started trading stocks after I graduated college. By buying and sell-

ing cattle, I was able to build up a $20,000 stake.
Had you done any research? Did you have any methodology?
No, I just plunged right in. I still remember my first two trades: I
bought Columbia and Sambo's. Columbia got bought out; and
Sambo's went bankrupt. Starting out, I experienced the best and the
worst and was hooked.
Do you remember why you bought those two specific stocks?
Yes, a lot of the research went into it. 1 bought Columbia because I
had seen a documentary on the making of Close Encounters of the
Third Kind, which Columbia was going to release, and I thought the
movie was going to be a big hit. Columbia was bought out before
the movie was released, so it didn't end up making any difference.

H A R V E S T I N G S&P P R O F I T S

What about Sambo's?
When I went to the Rose Bowl with my fraternity brothers, we went
out to eat at a Sambo's. I had never heard of the chain before and
thought it was neat, so I bought the stock. That's a summary of my
total research. I didn't know anything more about either of the two
companies. Then the stockbroker I was dealing with said, "Mark, you
like action. Why don't you try stock options?"
"I don't know anything about options," I told him. He gave me a
booklet to read. After reading it from cover the cover, I called my broker and said, "It sounds pretty risky me."
"Oh no, it's just like trading stocks," he said.
In April 1978, I made my first option trade: I bought two Teledyne calls at $9 apiece for a total premium of $1,800. I sold the
options two days later for $13, earning a total profit of $800 on my
$1,800 investment. I said to myself, "Boy, this is a lot easier than
shoveling manure and milking cows." For my next option trade, I
bought Teledyne calls again, and again I made money. I thought I
was going to be a millionaire in no time flat. I was doing so well that
I thought, "Why trade with only a small part of my capital; I might
as well use all of it." I kept trading Teledyne options. Finally, I put
on an option position that went down. I thought I would hold it until
it came back. It went to zero and expired on me. I lost all the money
I had.
The whole $20,000?
That plus the approximate $3,000 I had been ahead before that trade.
I remember filing my income tax for that year. I had made $13,000 in
income and lost $20,000 in stock option trading. The worst thing was
that I was only able to deduct $3,000 of losses against my income. So
I had to pay income tax, even though I had a negative income.
Did you learn anything from that experience?
Yes. I learned that I wanted my money back. I'm not a quitter in any
shape or form. I was determined to learn everything I could about
stocks and options. That was the beginning of my pursuit to become a
stockbroker. The only reason I wanted to become a stockbroker was
to get my money back.

H A R V E S T I N G S&P PROFITS

Did your parents know you had lost all your money?
Oh no, they probably thought I had my money in a CD.
Well, you did have your money in a CD.
Pardon?
A call debacle.
That's exactly right. My goal was to make $100,000 a year. By the
time I was hired as a stockbroker in 1979, I had studied options quite
thoroughly. I started trading options again, but I still kept losing
money steadily. I analyzed my trades and found that I was losing
money because I was holding on to options for several weeks or
longer, and they would end up going to zero. 1 realized that the money
I had lost had been made by the traders who sold the options that I
bought. I decided from that point on, I would only sell options. I
adopted a strategy of simultaneously selling both the calls and puts in
high-volatility stocks.
The margin on short-option positions at that time was sometimes
less than the premium I collected from the sale of the options. In 1979
when gold prices exploded, I sold options on gold stocks. I figured out
that I could sell a combination [the simultaneous sale of a call and
put] on ASA for more money than the margin I had to put up for the
trade. At that time, the margin department hadn't figured this out. As a
result, I could put on any size position and not get a margin call. There
was only one slight problem—the stock took off on me. I made a little
bit on the puts, which expired worthless, but lost a lot on the calls,
which went way in the money. It was back to the drawing board again.
How did you have enough money to cover your losses?
Oh, I was a very good broker. I was the second from the top first-year
broker nationwide for the firm. In 1981 I worked out a system for selling options when their premiums seemed too high and found someone to program the rules for me. Every week, the program would spit
out a list of potential trades. Since I was selling options that were well
out-of- the -money, they almost always expired worthless. Every Friday
after the close, I would run the program, and every Monday morning,
I would put on the trades. I was rolling along making several thousand
dollars a month.

By May 1982, I had built my account up to $115,000. I reached
greater depths of greed. I thought that I'd perfected this and it was
working great. I stepped up the trading in my account and my family's
accounts. That month I made an additional $50,000 using the same
strategy.
In June 1982, I decided to step up my trading even more. One
week that month I ran my program, and the computer printed out a
list of trades involving Cities Service. The stock was trading at $27 at
the time, and the 35, 40, and 45 call options were selling for premiums far above the model-implied prices, with only about a week left
before expiration. [Options with these strike prices would go to zero
unless the stock price rose above these respective levels in the remaining week before their expiration.] I couldn't believe the prices; I felt as
if they were giving me the money. I sold hundreds of these options. I
still remember that on June 16, 1982—one day before the day that
will live in infamy for me—I tried to sell an additional hundred
options at a specific price right before the close, but I didn't get filled.
The next day, they announced that Cities Service was going to be
bought out for $20 more than my highest strike price option. They
shut down trading in the stock and options for the rest of the week
and didn't resume trading until after the option expiration. Of course,
the options got exercised [leaving Cook short one hundred shares for
each option he had sold], and by the time the stock started trading
again, I was down $500,000.
Did that include your family's accounts?
No, that was just my account. I had gone from $165,000 at the start
of June to a deficit of over $350,000. In addition, I had lost over
$100,000 apiece in accounts I had for my mother, father, and aunt. I
still have the trade slips right here in my desk drawer. It wasn't until
last year—seventeen years after this happened—that I was able to
pull them out and look at them. I had a margin call in excess of one
million dollars on my account, which is what I would have had to put
up if I wanted to hold the short stock position instead of buying it
back. Technically, you are supposed to have five days to meet the margin call, but the firm was on me to cover the position right away.

M A R K D. C O O K *

That night I called my mother, which was the hardest phone call I
ever had to make. I felt like a complete failure. I felt like I should be
put in shackles and hauled away. "Mom," I said, "I need to talk to you."
"What is it?" she asked.
"I think you need to come over to the house tomorrow morning to
discuss it."
"It'll have to be pretty early," she said, "because I have to get to the
college." [At the time, Cook's mother, Martha, was chairman of the
education department at Malone College in Canton, Ohio, where she
still teaches a course in English grammar.]
"That's okay Mom, the earlier, the better." The next morning,
around 6:30 A.M., I looked out my window and saw my mom dragging
up the walk at a snail's pace, which was very uncharacteristic for her.
She came in and asked, "Mark, what is the problem?"
"Sit down on the couch, Mom," I said solemnly.
She sat down and asked, "What's wrong, Mark? Is it something
serious?"
"Yes, I'm afraid it is," I answered. "Mom, I lost $100,000 of your
money."
She didn't flinch at all. She looked me straight in the eye and
asked sympathetically "How much did you lose, Mark?"
"1 lost half a million dollars," I said.
"But you don't have half a million dollars."
"1 know, Mom."
"What else?" she asked.
"What do you mean, 'what else'?" I asked.
"Besides losing all this money, what else is wrong?"
"That's it, Mom," I answered.
"Oh, is that all! I thought you had cancer."
Did that ever put things in a different light. Her next sentence to
me was unbelievable: "How long will it be until you make it back?"
she asked.
If she would have said anything else, I would have quit. But she
had said just the right thing, at the right time. 1 straightened myself
up a bit and said, "Five years," picking a number out of the air
because I had no clue how I would make the money back.

H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R Oil III

"If you make the money back in ten years, that's okay," she said.
"Now go ahead and do it."
From that point forward, I never again sold any naked options
[option positions that have an open-ended loss if the market goes up
or down sharply].
What eventually happened to Cities Service after the brokerage
firm liquidated your account?
That's the ironic thing. The deal fell through, [f [ had been able to
meet the margin call, within a month, I would have made back all my
money and even had a profit. The takeover offer was made just before
expiration and then retracted afterward. There should have been an
investigation, but there never was. On the positive side, though, if I
had been filled on the last hundred options 1 was trying to sell the day
before the takeover announcement, I would have been forced into
bankruptcy.
How were you able to cover the $350,000 deficit you had in your
account?
My parents gave me $200,000, and 1 borrowed the remaining
$150,000, using my farm as collateral. There is nothing more debilitating than borrowing money to put into a brokerage account to bring
it up to zero. I was only twenty-eight years old at the time, and I was
determined to claw my way back. I worked fourlecn-hour days. I
would get up at 5:30 A.M., milk cows until 9 A.M., clean up, go into
the office, and work as a broker until 5:30 P.M. When I came home, I
changed clothes, went out into the barn to do the milking, and then
came back in at 9 P.M. to eat dinner and go to bed. In essence, I was
working two full-time jobs. I kept this routine up for five years until I
sold the dairy operation.
Did you maintain this grueling schedule because you were trying
to make your money back as quickly as possible?
I had to keep the farming operation going because 1 had borrowed
against it. Also, remember that this was 1982, which was the virtual
peak in the interest rate cycle. My monthly interest-rate payment
alone was $8,800. My net worth was probably a negative $200,000. A
number of people advised me to declare bankruptcy, but I wouldn't
do it. When I look back at it now, I realize that declaring bankruptcy

M A R K D. C O O K ;

would probably have been the right business decision. But I wouldn't
be the trader I am today if I had done it, because that would have
been admitting defeat.
Did you also feel that this self-imposed servitude was just punishment?
1 really did.
How did your wife respond to this whole situation?
She was actually quite supportive. When I started digging myself
out of it, she said, "I've never seen anyone who can make money like
you can when you're backed into a corner." She's right. Even now,
whenever I have a losing month, I just claw like a tiger to make it
back. That's when I work my hardest. When I work fifteen-hour
days, my wife knows that my trading is not going well. Conversely,
when I'm home early, she'll say, "Your trading must really be floating
along."
Most traders that I've talked to about losing periods say they
ease up or even take a break during those times.
I do just the opposite. Whenever I am down, the frequency of my
trading steps up.
But aren't you afraid that you will aggravate your losses by
doing that?
I increase my activity, not my exposure. In fact, the first thing I do
when I'm losing is to stop the bleeding. That's why I have this sign on
my computer. [He points to a sheet that reads GET SMALLER.] I don't
get out of the trade that is hurting me completely; I just reduce the
position size. Then the next trade that I do, I feel compelled to make
money. It doesn't matter how much. The point is to rebuild my confidence. Even if I only make a few hundred dollars on that trade, it
shows that I can still make money. Once I have a winning trade, I'm
ready to go again.
What advice would you give to other traders about handling losing situations?
Hope should never be in your vocabulary. It is the worst four-letter
word I know. As soon as you say, "Boy, I hope this position comes
back," you should reduce your size.
