
8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 288

• 288 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

was a mob figure. He was directly hooked up with Frank Costello,
a major boss in New York City. When they sold their house on
Long Island, Dorothy called Patricia and Jesse. She asked if it
would be okay if she and Thompson moved into a nearby building. The couple said okay. Soon after they moved into the building, Thompson suffered a heart attack and died.
After only a year of marriage, Jesse’s drinking and carousing
increased. His strange relationship with his mother became more
and more intense. His mother still had control of Jesse’s trust fund
and doled the money out to him as she saw fit.
Before he asked for money, usually at dinner, Jesse would often
first feign pain, grabbing his chest, grimacing, moaning, and
slumping forward in his chair. Jesse made sure that his mother
never forgot that she had shot him. Dorothy never failed to give
him the money. When things got especially tight, she would often
give him some pieces from her still-large jewel collection to hock.
They would never be seen again. Dorothy and Jesse had an intense
love/hate relationship. Jesse often stormed out in a rage after his
mother gave him the money.
It was in their second year of marriage that Jesse took up with
other women. He, Dorothy, and Patricia were also imbibing
plenty of alcohol, which did not help the situation. Their house
on East Seventy-second Street had four floors, with the dining
room, living room, and kitchen on the first floor; a library and
bedroom on the second; two bedrooms on the third floor; and two
bedrooms on the fourth floor.
Dorothy moved into the house. Her bedroom was on the third
floor, directly over the library. Patricia and Jesse’s bedroom was
also on the third floor, and William, the live-in butler, had quarters on the fourth floor. There was a spare bedroom on the fourth
floor that eventually became Jesse’s bedroom for his sexual liaisons.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 289

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 289 •

Things deteriorated fast once Jesse’s affairs came into the picture. Jesse made no effort to conceal his affairs, once telling Patricia, “It’s no fun having an affair if you aren’t married!”
Jesse got involved with all kinds of women: showgirls, socialites,
hookers, and shop clerks. Eventually he started bringing the
women home and taking them to the bedroom on the fourth
floor, which eventually became his permanent bedroom.
“He’s like a cat with his trophy, dragging those women in here,”
Patricia told Dorothy.
One night Jesse brought home one of his favorites, an English
hooker and frequent visitor, whom he introduced before climbing
the stairs to the fourth floor.
He said, “This is my English friend, Pamela. We are going
upstairs to have a visit.”
As he climbed the stairs, his mother screamed: “I curse my son!
I curse my son! Oh my God!” and she broke down crying in the
living room.
Things eventually turned violent, and Jesse started beating
Patricia. One night he beat her up so badly that the neighbors
called the police. Both of them were drunk when the police came
to the door.
Jesse was fast on his feet. He told the police, “We’ve both been
drinking and I was just restraining her from attacking me.”
“Ma’am, do you want to press charges?” the police asked Patricia.
“No, I just want to go to my sister’s house.” The police helped
her get to her sister’s house.
She was warned to leave him by everyone close to her, but she
could not do it. She loved him no matter what.
Jesse resented his mother more and more. He resented the fact
that she had “pissed away” his real inheritance through her foolish
acts, such as not paying the taxes on the properties; letting her

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 290

• 290 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

jewels go for 10 cents on the dollar; converting her $1 million
stock portfolio, handpicked by his father, into railroad bonds that
failed; and generally being whimsical and stupid about money. He
also resented the way she handed out his trust funds to him. His
and his brother’s trust funds had been solidly set up. Every time
Jesse tried to break the trust to get at the principal, he was rebuffed
by his mother and Morgan Guaranty, which administered the trust
strictly according to the dictates of the law and the exacting provisions his father had instructed the attorneys to write into them.
Jesse’s violence increased along with his drinking and carousing.
Patricia gave up drinking in 1967. She believed this saved her life.
One night Jesse came in roaring drunk and found Patricia in the
bathtub. He attacked her, slapping her over and over and then
holding her head underwater with both hands, until she nearly
drowned.
His periods of making up, his self-recriminations when he was
sober, the tears of repentance, his apologies were works of art. He
could be as kind and charming as he was cruel and unfeeling.
Patricia’s love for him was so great that she always forgave him.
When he was sober, they all had plenty of good times. Dinner
parties and meeting in the library every night for cocktails was
often great fun, with lots of laughter and good cheer.
Patricia called her mother-in-law by her nickname, “Mousie.”
She considered her “the funniest woman on the planet, who could
take over any dinner or social occasion. She would light up the
room. And the biggest part of her charm was that she didn’t know
she was being nonstop funny.”
One night Patricia asked Jesse why his father had killed himself.
“Pat, for my father the game was over as he knew it. The players had changed, the SEC rules had changed, and times had
changed.” He paused, “But maybe it was more than that, maybe
his spirit was broken. Like a dog—you know how you can break

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 291

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 291 •

the spirit of a dog, and the dog is no good anymore? Maybe that’s
what happened. He told me once that he only lost money when
he stopped following his own rules.
“I think he had stopped playing the game correctly, and that
bothered him most of all. He was off his form, his mind was fuzzy.
After he divorced Mom and moved out of Evermore, things went
bad for him. It was like she was his good luck, and when she was
gone, his good luck was gone. He had nobody to go to, no friends,
and nowhere to go, no place to get any peace.
“And Nina was a killer bitch. She smothered him, devoured his
spirit with her negativity. I told her to beat it within days of having
to live with her after the shooting. It’s one of the reasons Dad sent
me to Europe and I married Evelyn. I wanted to be on my own.
She hated Paul and me; anything that got between her and Dad, she
hated. She pushed him deeper and deeper into the blackness.”
“What else?” Patricia asked, after a pause.
“Yeah, when Mother shot me I think he began to think his life
was a total failure. How could it be that a mother would shoot her
own son? How the hell could that happen? How could it be his
wife, the beautiful young girl he had married so many years before,
would sink so low as to shoot her own son? A Greek tragedy that
happened to involve him as a principal player.
“And he was with me all the time—by my side through all that
pain and agony when my life was on the line. He must have had
time to think about it. In fact, that was the only time he was really
ever with me for any length of time.
“Finally, I think he just had one of those dark personalities.
There was always something unreachable about him, a kind of
detachment from humanity, from the rest of us. He slipped into
the darkness, and there was nothing to pull him back. His real passion was the market. When he lost his interest in the market, he
lost it all.”

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 292

• 292 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Patricia was interested in astrology. She had never met Livermore, but one day she read his chart. Her conclusions were clear.
He was a very strong Leo, with his planets in Leo. Patricia concluded that he never did it for the money; he did it for the game,
for the sake of winning. And he never wanted to break anyone. He
wanted to best everyone. He wanted world recognition as being
the best there ever was, like a superb athlete who climbs to the
highest level and receives the world’s accolades. Even though he
was not boastful—in fact, he was quiet and secretive—he still
wanted world recognition. He wanted the world to know that he
was the best stock market trader who ever lived. But he wanted the
world to come to this realization on its own. He did not want to
promote it himself.
Near the end of her relationship with Jesse, Patricia’s father, an
Austrian gentleman whom she loved very much, called her to
Cincinnati. He was suffering from the beginning stages of
Alzheimer’s disease. Her parents had been separated for years, but
every Christmas he would show up for dinner.
“Pat,” he said to her, “I don’t ever want your mother to control
my life. It’s something she’s always wanted to do. Promise me you
won’t let her control my life.”
“Daddy, I’ll do everything I can.” Patricia answered.
A month later, her father shot and killed himself. Patricia was
devastated.
Jesse became meaner and meaner. At one time he had two
Dobermans. He and a couple of his neighbors would go for a walk
in Central Park to exercise their dogs. Once in the park, they
would free the dogs to wake up the homeless people who were
sleeping in the park in droves at that time. They would walk down
to the far end of the park and watch as the homeless people
streamed out of the park, screaming, running, and tripping over
each other as they fled, with the dogs in hot pursuit.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 293

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 293 •

By 1975, the violence, drinking, gambling, and womanizing
was out of control.
At 1:15 A.M. on March 23, 1975, Jesse called on one of the three
telephone lines in the house. Unknown to Patricia, Jesse had been
drinking for two days straight.
“Hello, Pat,” he said. “I want you to listen to this.” Jesse went
on to quote Shakespeare for several minutes. Pat could not tell he
was drunk. He spoke clearly. She wondered if he had been smoking pot.
There was a silence on the line, then he said, “Pat I’m going to
kill my dog and then kill myself.”
There was a dead silence on the phone and then a click as the
line went dead. This was not the first time that Pat had heard him
threaten to kill himself. The phone rang a second time. “Pat, you
there?”
“Yes, Jesse. I’m here.”
“I mean it. I’m gonna kill my dog, and then I’m gonna kill
myself.” For the second time there was a click on the phone and
then the buzz of a disconnection.
Two shots rang out in the house. Pat leaped out of bed and put on
a robe. She was tying the robe when Jesse appeared in her doorway,
a smoking chrome-plated .32-caliber Colt revolver in his hand.
“Cesare is dead. It’s your fault that my dog is dead. Come with
me and bring Alexi.”
Patricia stood dumbfounded, locked in fear. She picked up her
standard white poodle, Alexi, and took the dog in her arms. She
was positive that she and her dog would die that night. Jesse staggered slightly, framed in the door jamb, eyes glazed from drink.
There was no question he was as drunk as a person could be and
still stand.
“You follow me. I’ve been in the library,” he said, and he led the
way down the stairs. The library occupied the second floor. There

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 294

• 294 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

was a balcony in front of the library that overlooked the large living room downstairs. When Jesse got to the library door and
entered, Pat ran for her life down the stairs to the floor below. She
ran through the kitchen and out the back door, breathing hard,
clinging to Alexi.
In total panic, she ran to the building next door and shoved
Alexi, the frightened poodle, into the arms of the doorman, who
let her use the phone. She called Robert Cohen, the family
lawyer.
“Bobby, it’s Patricia. Jesse’s killed his dog and he wants to kill
me and kill Alexi,” she blurted.
“Where are you?”
“Next door with the doorman. I’m hiding in the lobby. I’m
afraid he’s gonna shoot me through the windows if he gets a
glimpse of me.”
“Stay there. I’ll call the cops and I’ll be there in minutes. Don’t
move!”
Cohen and the police arrived simultaneously. The police came
from the Sixty-seventh Street station. The station sent an emergency service special response team of 10 officers led by Lieutenant John Weeks. These officers were specialists in dealing with
dangerous hostage and suicide cases.
Attorney Cohen and Patricia asked to go back into the house
with the police. The police led them into the dining room and
told them to keep out of sight, unless called.
Lieutenant Weeks and Officer Charles Brezny took the lead.
The other officers took up strategic shooting positions. Weeks and
Brezny climbed the stairs to the library. When they reached the
top, they positioned themselves on opposite sides of the door to
the library. They saw Jesse sitting casually in an easy chair, his 85pound dog Cesare lying in a pool of blood at his feet. There were
two chrome-plated .32-caliber Colt revolvers in his lap.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 295

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 295 •

Patricia had told the police to be careful, because Jesse was a
deadeye shot. “He must be very drunk to have to use two shots to
kill his dog,” she told them.
Brezny got the nod to try to enter the library. As he passed
through the door, Jesse fired a shot in his direction. The bullet hit
the wall. Brezny darted back outside the doorway.
The officers were well trained, and they did not return fire.
Instead, they talked to him, chit-chatted for an hour, calming him
down. He told them he was going to kill himself. He read to them
from his long suicide note.
After a full hour of chit-chat, Brezny said: “I’m thirsty. I could
use a drink. Could we have a glass of wine?”
“Sure. Sure you can,” Jesse answered.
As he poured the wine, the two police officers rushed him, with
other officers following.
Jesse was able to get one of the guns up from his lap. He
rammed the barrel of the revolver into Lieutenant Weeks’s chest
and pulled the trigger.
The gun only clicked.
The police were instantly on top of him. They subdued him.
Brezny, 29 years old, suffered a broken wrist in the scuffle.
The two guns were confiscated, and Jesse was charged with
attempted murder of a police officer, reckless endangerment, possession of a deadly weapon, resisting arrest, and attempted suicide.
He was in serious trouble. New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller had just signed a law mandating life imprisonment for anyone convicted of attempted murder of a police officer.
The police also explained to Patricia that people who attempt
suicide often want the police to kill them, so they provoke the
police into shooting. It was never explained whether the second
gun, the gun Jesse jammed into Lieutenant Weeks’s ribs, was actually loaded.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 296

• 296 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

There was no question for Patricia. She believed that Jesse really
did not have the courage to kill himself and had intended to provoke the police into doing the job for him. He was very smart.
Dorothy emerged from her room on the third floor above the
library after Jesse had been taken away. “What happened, Pat?” she
asked, having quietly feigned sleep through the entire incident.
She left for Long Boat Key, Florida, the next day, unable to cope
with the events.
Jesse was arraigned and denied bail. He was taken to Rikers
Island, where he was kept in isolation. His jailers were sure that his
unbridled arrogance would get him killed quickly if he was
allowed to enter the general prison population.
The police had a dilemma: If something happened to Jesse while
he was in jail, it would make headlines. So they came up with the
idea of giving him bail on the proviso that he leave New York and
reside in Florida. “Let him kill a Palm Beach cop—get him out of
New York!” was their attitude. He could come up from Florida
for his trial.
After 54 days in prison, they released him. He looked awful. He
had dropped from a trim 155 pounds to 125. When he had been
arrested, more than 200 people called to inquire about him. When
he was released from Rikers, there were only two. He immediately
started drinking on his release.
As a condition of his bail, he had two weeks to pack up and
leave for Florida. Pat, still afraid for her life, left the house and
stayed with a friend in Pleasant Valley, New York, until he left.
He went down to Palm Beach by himself. As a condition of his
bail agreement, he had to get psychiatric help. His mother called
him and told him not to bother, he was fine.
“You don’t need a psychiatrist, son, you just need some rest.”
Patricia always believed Dorothy said this to her son for selfish

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 297

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 297 •

reasons, not wanting him to relive the Santa Barbara shooting as he
got more deeply into therapy.
Therapy was a condition of his bail, however, so he went to a
doctor in Palm Beach. The doctor did all he could, diagnosing
Jesse as a manic-depressive, paranoid, suicidal alcoholic. But he was
dealing with a determined patient.
The trial was postponed each time Jesse came to New York. His
lawyer told him he would beat the rap, but he did not believe it.
On the day before the trial was to begin, Jesse called Patricia from
Palm Beach. “I can’t go to prison, Pat. I just can’t go.”
“Jesse, your lawyer says you can beat it.”
“I don’t believe that moron. I can’t go to jail,” he said, and
hung up.
He went to some friends in Palm Beach, Saint John and Alretta
Terrell, and borrowed a shotgun from them. But he was unable to
use it.
Instead, he opened the oven door and turned on the gas. He took
a handful of pills and collapsed. He was found dead the next day.
Pat flew to Palm Beach immediately, that same afternoon. The
next day, Jesse’s body was quietly taken to a crematorium in Palm
Beach. A minister said a few words, and the body was turned into
ashes. No one was in attendance except Patricia and the minister.
Much later, it dawned on Patricia just how afraid of his mother
Jesse really was. Yet, he stayed so dependent on her for company
and money. His mother knew that he never got over the shooting,
and, no matter what she did, she could never make it up to him.
Somehow they were hooked together, connected by a karmic
umbilical cord that had become inextricably tied when she fired
that shot into his chest.
“What a tragedy! Three lives destroyed in one flash of a gun barrel. What is the matter with us all?” Pat thought to herself.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 298

• 298 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

After Jesse’s death, Dorothy moved back in with Patricia for a
while, but she eventually moved down to Sanibel Island, Florida.
In 1985, Dorothy fell ill, and she called her son Paul and his wife
Ann to come and visit her. Ann and Paul arrived on Sanibel and
found the nurse waiting for them.
“Your mother asked me to come here to the house and wait for
you,” she said.
“Where’s my mother?” Paul asked.
“She went to the hospital two days ago, and I’m sorry to tell you
she passed away that same day,” the nurse said.
“Where is she now?” Ann asked.
“She’s in the mortuary, I’m afraid.” The nurse let a silence fall.
“She left specific instructions to be cremated tomorrow with no
ceremony.”
At that moment, Caesar, Dorothy’s cat, appeared in the living
room and rubbed up against Ann. She picked up the cat, who
was a very old, treasured member of the family. The cat had been
very close to Dorothy. Ann played with the cat as he settled in
her lap.
“Mrs. Livermore, I wouldn’t get too close to the cat if I were
you,” the nurse said.
“Oh?” Ann said.
“Mrs. Livermore left very clear instructions that the cat was to
be placed in the casket and cremated with her.”
Ann gasped and held the cat closer to her. “Paul?” she said,
pleading with her eyes to keep the cat. Paul also wanted to keep
the cat, but he felt obligated to honor his mother’s will.
She had left everything in perfect order—her will, her bankbooks, car keys on the table, written instructions on how to dispose of her estate, and instructions for her funeral. It was unlike
Dorothy to be so organized; in fact, she was famous for being

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 299

FACING THE GRIM REAPER

• 299 •

disorganized and careless. Later, when they moved the dresser,
they found a gold chain and a beautiful watch that had fallen on
the floor.
“She never did keep good track of her jewelry,” Paul said.
“What she had left, you mean,” Ann said.
Over the years, Dorothy had given over $500,000 in jewelry to
her son Jesse, who had hocked it.
The next day, they took the cat to the vet and had him put to
sleep. They drove to the crematorium and placed the cat in the
casket.
Dorothy “Mousie” Livermore entered the flames of eternity
with Caesar the cat to join her husband and son.

8467_Smitten_15_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:33 PM Page 300

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 301

*

appendix

*

Livermore’s Laws and Trading
Secrets Revealed

To know is to do!

Socrates

8467_Smitten_app_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page 302

• 302 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

A SUCCESSFUL SPECULATOR REMAINS A CONSTANT STU-

dent of three things:
• Market timing. You must learn when to enter and when to
exit a market trade—when to hold and when to fold, as Ed
Bradley used to say.
• Money management. Don’t lose money, don’t lose your stake.
A speculator without cash is like a storeowner with no inventory. Cash is a speculator’s inventory, lifeline, and best friend.
Without it you’re out of business. Don’t lose your line!
• Emotional control. Before you can successfully play the market, you must have a clear, concise strategy and stick to it. All
speculators must design intelligent battle plans, customized to
suit their emotional makeup, before speculating in the stock
market. The biggest thing speculators have to control is their
emotions. Remember, reason, logic, and pure economics do
not drive the stock market. It is driven by human nature,
which never changes. How can it change? It’s our nature.
You can not tell if your judgment about the market is right until
you place a bet, purchase a stock.
If you don’t put your money on the table, you can never test
your judgment, because you can never test your emotions. Livermore believed that emotion, not reason, dictates the direction of
the stock market, just as in most important things in life: love, marriage, children, war, sex, crime, passion, religion. It is rarely reason
that drives people.
This is not to say that things like sales, profits, world conditions,
politics, and technology do not play a part in the ultimate price of
a stock. These factors eventually come to bear, and the price of the
stock market and the individual stocks may reflect these factors,
but it is always emotion that carries the extremes.
