make more money?
2. When are sellers likely to come into the market in force?
155

3. Where are old buyers likely to take profits? Where are old sellers likely to
lose faith in their positions and bail out?
4. What would have to happen for buyers to lose faith? What would have to
happen to draw new buyers into the market?
You can answer all these questions by identifying certain significant reference
points where buyers' and or sellers' expectations are likely to be raised and where
they are likely to be disappointed if they don't get their way.
Actually, all this works quite nicely in the typical market behavior patterns and
price formations with which we are all familiar. So, we are going to look at the
psychological makeup of some of these typical patterns. However, before we do,
I want to cover a few more definitions.

MARKET BEHAVIOR
The market's behavior can be defined as the collective action of individuals
acting in their own self-interest to profit from future price movement while
simultaneously creating that movement as an expression of their beliefs about the
future.
Behavior patterns result from the collective actions of individual traders doing
one of three things: initiating positions, holding positions, and liquidating
positions.
What will cause a trader to enter the market? A belief that he can make money
and that the current state of the market offers an opportunity to enter into a
trade at a price level that is higher or lower than the price at which it can be
liquidated.
What will cause a trader to hold a position? A sustained belief that there is still
potential for profit in the trade.
What will cause a trader to liquidate a trade? A belief that the market no
longer provides an opportunity to make money. This would mean in a winning
trade that the market no longer has the potential to move in a direction that will
allow the trader to accumulate additional profits or that the risk of staying in the
trade is too great in relation to the potential for additional profit. In a losing
trade, the trader believes that the market no longer has the potential to move
in a direction that will allow him to recover his losses or the trade was a
calculated risk in which a predetermined loss level was set in advance.
If you look at any price chart, you notice that over a period of time,
prices will form patterns in a very symmetrical fashion. These kinds of
symmetrical-looking price patterns are not an accident. They are a visual
representation of the struggle between two opposing forces—traders
squaring off, so to speak, taking sides and then having to switch sides to
liquidate their trades.

Significant Reference Points
156

Now, what you would be looking for in these charts are significant market
reference points. These are defined as anything that causes traders'
expectations to be raised about the possibility of something happening.
They are points where a large numbers of traders have taken opposing
positions. Based on those expectations, they will continue to hold a
position in the belief that the expectation will be fulfilled, and most
important, they will likely liquidate a position as a result of the expectation
being unfulfilled
Significant reference points are places where the opposing forces (traders
with opposite beliefs about the future) have taken a stand, where they have,
in their minds, prescribed for the market very limited ways for it to
behave, an either/or situation.
The more significant the reference point, the greater the effect traders
will have on prices, as the balance of power will shift dramatically between
the two opposing forces at these points.
These expectations about what the market will do, projected into price
levels, are especially significant because both sides, buyers and sellers, have
decided in advance their degree of importance, where one trader is taking
one position, betting the market can't or won't do something, and the trader
taking the opposite side of the trade is betting that it will.
So, reference points are price levels where many traders on one side of
the market are very likely to give up their beliefs about the future, whereas
the other side will have their beliefs about the future reinforced. It is where
each side expects the market to confirm what they believe to be true. You
could say it is a place where the traders' expectations about the future and
the future actually meet.
This means for one side, in their minds, that "the market" will make
them winners; their beliefs will be validated. All the traders on the other
side, however, will be made losers; they will feel the market took
something away from them and will naturally be disappointed. I want to
point out here that the "objective observer" doesn't care one way or the
other; she would just be looking for signs and opportunities.
The greater the expectation traders have about something happening,
the less tolerance they have for disappointment. On a collective basis, if
you have a whole group of traders who expect something to happen and it
doesn't, they will have to trade from the opposite direction of their
original trade to get out of their position.
On the other hand, the winners had their beliefs validated, consequently
leaving fewer and fewer traders available to let the losers out of their trades.
The losers will have to compete among one another for the limited supply
of traders willing to take the other side of the trade, the side they originally
believed would be successful. For example, if buyers are the losers, they
will need other traders to buy from them to get out of their positions. All this
activity will result in a great deal of movement in one direction.
157

Balance Areas
J. Peter Steidlmayer and Kevin Koy in their book Markets and Market Logic
(Chicago: Porcupine Press, 1987) refer to a "value area," where they
discovered that the majority of trading activity on any given day takes
place in a normal bell curve distribution pattern. This is very easy to see
day after day when you organize trading activity so that you can see how
price corresponds with time.
I don't want to get into a lengthy discussion of their methods of
organizing market data, which I recommend you learn, other than to
distinguish between what they call a "value area" and what I call a "balance
area." Steidlmayer and Koy say that most of the trading volume takes place
within a specific price range because that range is what the market has
established as a fair price representing the value of whatever is being traded.
The distinction I want to make is that the majority of traders don't
specifically relate to a fair price or value; they relate to comfort. What gives
them comfort is doing what everyone else is doing. In a balance area, traders
are basically absorbing each other's orders or energy (their beliefs about the
future expressed in the form of energy). When I say that traders relate to
comfort, I mean some degree less of the fear they normally feel. Most of
the trades take place in a value or balance area because it is where most of
the traders feel the least fear, somewhere in the middle of the trading
range between an established high or low. This is precisely why there are
fewer trades outside the value or balance area and why, as Steidlmayer and
Koy say, these trades represent the best opportunities to make money, "to
buy or sell away from value." And that is why these are the scariest trades
to make because the trader who can make them is all alone; there is no
safety in numbers.
There are traders who relate to value by making comparisons between
various interrelated contracts and the cash markets. There are the
professional commercial or institutional arbitrage traders who will put on
or take off positions based on sophisticated mathematical formulas that
determine the present value of something as it relates to something else.
Otherwise, the majority of traders don't have the slightest concept of
value. The more time the market spends at a certain price or in a price
range, the more balance, agreement, or comfort there is in the market.
Traders are absorbing each other's orders, and nobody is willing to bid the
price higher or offer the price lower.
Eventually someone will enter the market who doesn't agree with
everyone else and believes there is a possibility for the prices to move
much higher or lower. This person or group of traders will basically upset
the balance with their buying or selling activity. If their activity is forceful
enough, it will set off a series of chain reactions as it causes other traders,
who are either holding positions or watching the market for opportunities,
to confront these new conditions.
If the balance is tipped in favor of the buyers, for example, it may attract
158

new buyers into the market, creating more buying force and, hence, more
disequilibrium. This may cause the traders who are holding short positions
to liquidate. To do that they will need to be buyers, leaving fewer and fewer
sellers willing to take the other side of the trades the buyers want to get into
and the old sellers want to get out of. These traders will compete among one
another for the dwindling supply of sellers, bidding the price higher and
higher to make it more attractive for someone to sell.
While these traders are in their own little bidding war, they usually lose
sight of the fact that the rest of the world is watching what is going on.
There could be a trader who is looking to put on a massive hedge to protect
the value of an investment portfolio or crop. He is observing this price
action from a completely different perspective than the traders on the floor.
The floor traders are just concerned with getting their share and not
missing out on the opportunity these rapidly rising or falling prices
represent. The hedger, on the other hand, is looking at the price rise as an
unexpected gift. The rally could have provided much higher prices than he
anticipated for locking in the value of something he already owns.
So the commercial trader decides to put on a hedge. And you can assume
if one commercial thinks the price is good, others will too. Anyway, if the
hedger has an order he perceives to be big enough to stop the rally, he will
give instructions to the floor brokers handling his order to do scale in
selling, the purpose being to get as much of the order sold as possible
without ruining the rally.
However, it won't take long for the other floor traders to figure out what
is going on. They are very aware of which floor brokers fill orders for big
commercial and institutional customers. Once they find out someone "big"
is in the market selling into the rally, few if any of the floor traders will go
against them by continuing to buy. No one wants to get caught at the top.
So as each group of traders finds out who is selling, they will all try to
reverse their positions by selling, and the cycle starts all over again.
Watching this happen from the outside of the pit, it would seem that the
reversal is instantaneous, but it isn't. It occurs in waves, as the information
about who is selling spreads from the source outward, very much like the
waves that result from throwing a stone in a pond.
This leads me to the observation that few traders have any concept of
value. They know that price movement creates an opportunity to make
money, and it can just as easily take the money away if they don't know
what they are doing. If the price trades within a certain range for a period of
time, traders will become comfortable with that balance area, making it easier
for the trader to trade. As prices move out of the balance area, fewer traders will
participate because of what they perceive as more risk than they are comfortable
with.
Highs and Lows
Probably the most prominent of these significant reference points are previous
159

highs and lows. If prices are moving steadily higher, buyers will begin to
anticipate whether or not prices can penetrate the last high, and sellers will be
looking for another top.
In the mind of the seller, that last top, or other tops in the distant past, was a
place where the market met enough resistance to stop the rally. In other words,
enough traders thought the price was expensive the last time it was there, and
they will begin to anticipate whether the same will happen again.
Both buyers and sellers will have raised expectations about the likelihood of
the market doing one of two possible things—making new highs or failing to
make new highs. As the market approaches this high, if some of them are willing
to bid the price past it to some significant level, it could make believers out of
other traders who were on the sidelines. If these new traders come into the
market as buyers, it will add to the upward momentum, possibly causing old
sellers to bail out of their positions. This will also add to the upward momentum
of price movement.
Support and Resistance
In a falling market, support is a price level where buyers entered the market or
old sellers liquidated their shorts with enough force to keep prices from going
any lower. In a rising market, resistance is a price level where sellers entered the
market or old buyers liquidated their longs with enough force to keep prices
from going any higher.
Support and resistance levels are significant reference points because many
traders recognize support and resistance on charts and believe in their
significance.
That statement may seem redundant to some people, but it really illustrates a
very important point about the nature of the markets (traders acting on their
belief in future value). All beliefs eventually become self-fulfilling prophecies.
If enough traders believe in the significance of support and resistance, and
demonstrate their belief by making trades at those levels, they are in effect
fulfilling their own beliefs about the future.
As observers, if we know that each side (in the perpetual tug of war
between buyers and sellers) expects one thing to happen, then we will
know who will be the winner, who will be the loser, what they will likely
do in each case, and how it will affect the balance between the two forces.
For example, if buyers are bidding up a market, causing prices to rise, and
all of a sudden many traders are willing to sell for less than the last price (or
one trader comes into the market with a big order to sell), causing an
immediate price reversal, the price level at which the market stopped is
resistance.
Now, it really doesn't matter why the balance of forces shifted from
buyers to sellers. Everybody will have his own reasons for what caused
prices to reverse. All of them will usually be way beyond the simplest and
most obvious reason—that enough traders were displaying a strong enough
conviction in their belief in future value to stop the upward price
160

momentum and create downward price momentum.
What is really important about this, however, is that many traders will
remember the market reversed at that price level. As a result, that price will
then have a degree of significance in the minds of those traders who
experienced the reversal.
This first reversal is a top. What we don't know is whether it will remain
a top, how long it will take before it is challenged again, or whether it will
ever be challenged again.
If the buyers are dominant enough to bid the market back up to the
previous high, they will consider this second attempt a test and begin to
anticipate whether or not prices can exceed the previous high. The only
way that can happen is if these higher prices actually attract additional
traders into the market on the buy side because they believe it is an
opportunity to buy low relative to the future. Floor traders are especially
aware of whether or not new traders are being attracted into the market
from off the floor and act on this information.
For the sake of this example, if the market reversed very strongly the last
time prices approached this level, there will be many traders who will think
it will probably reverse again. As a result, they may act on their belief about
the low probability of prices trading beyond the last high and thereby
prevent it from happening. If more traders are willing to act on the belief
that it won't in relation to those who act on the belief that it will, then prices
will stop again.
Technically, once the market tests a previous high or low and fails to
penetrate, you then have a defined support and resistance area. Support and
resistance are most easily identified in point-and-figure charts because they
graphically represent price movement in reversals. Once support and
resistance are established and identified, it can be very easy to trade by
putting your orders on either side of the support or resistance line.
For example, if over the last two weeks, every time the bonds rallied to
95-25, then fell back significantly to some support level, like 94-10, what I
have just described is a support and resistance zone, commonly referred to
as a trading range. The significance of either end of the zone would be
determined by how many times prices rallied to 95-25 and failed to
penetrate, and how many times prices fell to 94-10 and failed to
penetrate. Obviously, the more attempts and failures, the more weight
these points will have in the minds of the traders who experience these
tests and subsequent failures.
For an objective observer with no bias toward any particular direction,
trading ranges can be very easy ways to make money. As the market
approaches 95-25, put in an order to sell somewhere around 95-21. Since
we know the markets are not precise, you don't want to put your order
exactly at the upper end of the range, because each time the market makes
an attempt to penetrate there will be many traders who will be anticipating
a failure. As a result, they will start selling early and the price may never
161

get to 95-25 for you to get filled, if you had placed your order there.
Also, put an order in the market to stop and reverse (buy two) possibly
around 95-31. Each circumstance will be different. In this example, the 6
ticks that I have given the market to define itself may not be enough. The
object would be to put your orders in a place where the highest probability
is that it will continue in the direction of your trade. If the market trades to
95-31, it still may not be enough for old sellers to become disappointed
and bail out of their positions en masse, causing prices to rise even further.
This trade will work if the resistance level has a high degree of
significance in the minds of enough traders for them to act and sell against
it in relation to those who are willing buy. Each time the market
approaches this area, traders will expect either one of two possible things
to happen. The market will penetrate, or it will fail again. In any case the
price move that results will be significant because one side of the market
will be disappointed. And if we know what will validate and disappoint each
group, then we can determine how they will likely behave and thereby affect
the balance of the market.
Since the market can display billions of combinations of behaviors from
one point to the next, significant reference points like support and
resistance narrow those behaviors down to two likely possibilities. By
putting your order on both sides, you can take advantage of the situation,
regardless of what happens.

Support Becomes Resistance and
Resistance Becomes Support
Many traders have read or heard that old support becomes resistance and
old resistance becomes support. This bit of market insight is valid for some
very sound psychological reasons.
If resistance has been established at 95-25, it is because there were enough
traders who sold at that price to make it resistance. In fact, it would probably
be the same group of traders who sold at 95-25 each time the market
approached that price. So, every time the market rallied up to 95-25 and
sold off, it made winners out of all those traders who chose to sell at or near
that price. As a result, 95-25 will take on a great deal of significance in the
minds of the traders who were successful. Each subsequent time they are
successful will only strengthen their belief and faith in that price level.
Now, the prices rally up to 95-25 again, maybe for the fourth or fifth
time, and like the last time, you will have a group of traders who believe in
that resistance level and will sell against it. Only this time the buyers are
very strong on the way up and continue to buy right on through the
resistance level.
All the traders who choose to sell at 95-25 are now faced with having to
deal with a losing trade. Some will get out with a small loss, others will hang
on hoping the market will come back. In any case, the market invalidated
162

their beliefs about the future, and they are suffering considerably. They had
faith in 95-25, and in their minds the market betrayed them.
If the market happens to come back to 95-25 after rallying for several
days, how do you think the group of traders who sold at 95-25 the last time—
the ones who believe they were betrayed—are going to behave? First, the
traders who were hanging on in hopes of the market coming back will bail
out as soon as they are close to being made whole. They are so grateful for
getting their money back, there is no way they will stay in that trade
regardless of what the possibilities are for additional profits. They will have
to be buyers to liquidate their shorts and will be all too happy to end their
suffering.
The traders who originally cut their losses when the market blew through
95-25 won't consider selling at that price again because of the emotional
pain of being wrong the last time they sold at that price. I am not saying
they will in turn be buyers at that level, but they are very likely not to sell.
The overall effect this will have on the balance of the market is to take
away from the existing pool of available sellers at 95-25 (old resistance),
thereby causing the balance to be tipped in favor of the buyers. Hence, old
resistance becomes support, and old support becomes resistance for the
same reasons.

Trends and Trendlines
Trends, a series of higher highs and higher lows, or lower highs and lower
lows over a period of time, work because there aren't enough sellers to
absorb the number of buyers competing with each other to get into the
market during that period of time. Adding to this buying force will be old
sellers at lower levels who finally lose faith and bail out of their positions.
They will do this in significant numbers when the prices penetrate what
they believe to be significant reference points.
Keep in mind that trends are a function of time. The next tick up could
be defined as a one-tick trend. How long will the imbalance between buyers
and sellers last?
In an upward-trending market, prices will retrace because buyers are
taking profits. This will create some counteracting pressure, but if the trend
continues after a normal retracement, it just tells you there still aren't
enough sellers around to absorb all the buyers, with enough left over to
create downward momentum. You will know when that has happened
when the trending market breaks its normal ebb and flow pattern. That is
why markets that break trendlines have a tendency to keep on going in the
direction of the break, because it signals a significant shift in the balance of
forces.
After a certain period of time, you can notice how trending markets will
develop a certain rhythm and flow, making the price movement look very
symmetrical on a bar chart. You really don't have to know why this is so,
163
