
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 15.8

CHANNELS

245

FIGURE 15.8 Entering on Limit Orders in Channels

In addition to entering on stops, entering on limit (or market) orders can be an
effective approach whenever the market is in any type of channel, including triangles and trading ranges. In Figure 15.8, the market had eight consecutive bull
trend bars in the strong bull spike up to bar 3, so the market was likely to have
a test of the high after a pullback. Although bears shorted below the bar 3 bear
reversal bar, bulls were scaling in on limit orders below the low of the bar. Some
bought on a limit order at the low of bar 3, but because the next bar was a strong
bear trend bar, there were far more sell orders. Other bulls bought on a limit order
at one tick above the moving average, since the market might have only touched
the moving average and not filled a buy limit order exactly at the moving average.
Some bulls scaled in lower, maybe buying more at one-point intervals. If they did,
they could have then put a limit order to exit both positions at the entry price of
the first order, at or just below the low of bar 3. They would have been filled on
bar 5, would have broken even on the first entry, and would have made a profit on
their second. This profit taking by these bulls contributed to the bear reversal bar
at bar 5.
Traders saw the doji inside bar after the bear trend bar that followed bar 3, and
many thought that this was not a good short setup. Since they believed that shorting
below the bar would likely not yield a profitable scalp, some traders instead bought

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

246

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 15.8

on a limit order at or one or more ticks below its low. This buying contributed to
the tail at the bottom of bar 4. Bar 4 was the fourth consecutive down bar, which
is enough bearish momentum to make traders hesitant to buy above its high, even
though they believed the market would test the bar 3 high. They expected the first
attempt up would likely fail and they preferred to wait for a two-legged pullback
to buy. Bears realized this and thought that the traders who bought above bar 4
would likely lose money. This made shorting on a limit order at or just above the
high of bar 4 a reasonable scalp. They exited with a one-point profit as bar 6 fell
five ticks below the high of bar 4. Why was the low of bar 6 exactly five ticks below
the high of bar 4? In large part because those short scalpers became buyers as they
took their profits down there, and their buying helped create the tail at the bottom
of bar 6.
Since most traders still believed that the market should test the bar 3 high, they
were still looking to buy. Since the market clearly became always-in long in the
spike from bar 1 to bar 3 and there was not yet a clear flip to short, the always-in
position was still long. Therefore, they did not believe that shorting below the low
of bar 5 was a good trade. Given that they thought it would be a losing trade, many
traders did the opposite and bought on a limit order at or below the low of bar 5.
Their buying, in addition to the buying by the shorts who were taking profits from
their scalp down from above bar 4, created the tail at the bottom of bar 6.
Bar 6 was a two-legged sideways correction down from the bar 3 high, and
many traders bought above bar 6 on a stop for the test of the bar 3 high. At the
same time, many of the traders who bought below bar 5 sold out for a profitable
scalp on the rally.
Although the market formed a double top at bar 7, many traders did not expect a trend reversal and instead expected a trading range and then a bull channel
because that is what usually happens after such a strong spike on a day where a
strong case could be made that bar 1 was likely going to remain as the low of the
day. Bar 7 formed a two-bar reversal with the bar before it and the better entry is
below the lower of the two bars. The problem with entering below the low of the
bar 7 bear bar is that the market often has a one-tick bear trap. This means that it
falls one tick below the bear bar but not below the low of both bars of the two-bar
reversal, and then the rally resumes. This risk is less if you enter below the low of
both bars, and that is why the market reversed up six ticks later. The bears bought
back their shorts on a profit-taking limit order located five ticks below the signal bar
low, which usually requires the market to fall six ticks. The bar 8 low was exactly
six ticks below the bottom of the two-bar reversal.
If this was a strong bear trend, traders could short on a stop below the prior
swing low at bar 4. Since most traders thought that the low of the day was in and
that the market would likely form a bull channel, they thought that shorting below

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 15.8

October 11, 2011

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

CHANNELS

247

the bar 4 low was a bad idea. This means that buying below its low might be a good
long, especially if the traders could scale in lower if need be. Also, since the market
was likely to form a channel that could last for hours and the market might not again
come down to this level, these bulls could swing some or all of their positions.
Other bulls saw bar 8 as the second leg down from bar 3 (bar 4 was the first leg
down) and they bought above the high of bar 8 on a stop. The bar after bar 8 was a
doji bar, which indicates that the market is still two-sided. Bar 8 was not a strong
bull reversal bar, and the two-bar spike down from bar 7 made traders wonder if
the market might be reversing. Traders had to decide if they thought that bar 9 was
going to be the lower high pullback that would lead to a bear channel, or if always
in was still long and that the market was in the early stages of a bull channel.
The traders who thought that the bottom was in believed that bar 9 was a bad
short setup and they placed limit orders to buy at and below the low of bar 9. Many
of these bulls would have added on if the market fell below the bar 8 low. The bears
who shorted below bar 9 bought back their shorts when the market reversed above
the bar 10 entry bar. Bulls also bought, believing that this failed short was more
evidence that a bull channel was forming.
Channels have lots of pullbacks along the way, and the bulls would not let
themselves be stopped out by a pullback. Instead, they would buy on a limit order
at or below the low of the prior bar, like below bars 9 and 11. Since channels have
two-sided trading, as long as the channel is not too tight and too steep, bears will
short at or above swing highs. For example, they would have shorted as bar 12
went above the bar 7 high and some would have added on one point higher. This in
part was the reason that the high of bar 13 was exactly five ticks above bar 7. They
would also have shorted on the move up to bar 17 as the market went above the
bar 13 high. Some bears would even have shorted the sharp rally up to bar 30 as it
moved above the bar 17 high and they would have added on one point higher. They
could have bought back both shorts at the original entry price as the market fell to
bar 31. Their original short would have broken even and their add-on would have
made a one-point profit.
The bulls would have looked at the rally up to bar 29 as having trending highs,
lows, and closes, and therefore would have believed that it was strong. Some would
have bought more on a stop at one tick above the bar 17 high. They could have
exited with a profit on bar 30. Whenever a breakout trade results in a profit, it is a
sign that the trend is strong. However, it is not absolute and if the market is mostly
in a trading range, as it was today, there may not be follow-through.
There was two-sided trading throughout the day and both bulls and bears were
entering on limit orders and on stops. For example, once the always-in position
flipped to short at the bar 17 wedge top (wedge reversals are discussed later), bears
began shorting above the high of the prior bars, like above bars 18, 20, and the bar

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c15

248

JWBT576-Brooks

October 11, 2011

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

10:45

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 15.8

after bar 24. Bulls were buying below prior swing lows, like below bars 20 and
bar 23. There were many other setups during this day, as there are on all days, but
the purpose of this chart is not to show every possible trade. Instead, it is to make
the point that when the market is in a bull channel, bulls are buying below the low
of the prior bar and bears are selling above swing highs. In bear channels, they do
the opposite—bulls buy below swing lows and bears short above the high of the
prior bar.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c16

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:26

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 16

Micro Channels

micro trend line is a trend line on any time frame that is drawn across from
2 to about 10 bars where most of the bars touch or are close to the trend line
and the bars usually are relatively small. Typically a trend channel line can
be drawn along the opposite ends of the bars as well, and the result is a very tight
channel called a micro channel. Unlike a conventional channel where pullbacks are
common, a micro channel progresses with no pullbacks, or rare, small pullbacks,
making it an extremely tight channel.
The more bars, the stronger the bars (like bars with big trend bodies in the
direction of the micro channel), and the smaller the tails, the stronger the micro
channel, and the more likely that the first pullback will fail to reverse the trend. A
micro channel can last for 10 or more bars, and other times it will run for about
10 bars, have a small pullback, and then resume for another 10 bars or so. It does
not matter whether you view the entire channel as one big micro channel (a micro
channel is a type of tight channel), two consecutive micro channels separated by a
small pullback, or a large tight channel, because you will trade it the same way. The
trend is very strong and traders will look at reversal attempts to fail and become
pullbacks and for the trend to continue.
Ten years ago, traders saw micro channels as a sign of program trading. Now,
since most trading is done by computers, it adds nothing to say that micro channels
are signs of program trading, because every bar on the chart is due to program
trading. A micro channel is just one particular type of program trade, and it is likely
due to many firms running programs simultaneously. One or more firms will start
it, but once the momentum is underway, momentum programs will detect it and
begin trading in the same direction, adding to the strength of the trend. Once the

A

249

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c16

250

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:26

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

trend begins breaking above resistance levels, breakout programs will start trading.
Some will trade in the direction of the trend and others will begin to scale in against
the trend, or scale out of longs that they bought lower.
Eventually one of the bars penetrates through the trend line or the trend channel line, creating a breakout. Bull and bear micro channels can develop in bull or
bear trends, and in trading ranges. The environment in which they occur determines
how to trade them. Both bull and bear channels can have breakouts to the upside
or the downside. As with all breakouts, three things can then happen: it can be successful and be followed by more trading in that direction, it can fail and become
a small climactic reversal, or the market can just go sideways and the pattern can
evolve into a trading range.
As with any breakout, traders will trade either in the direction of the breakout,
expecting follow-through, or in the opposite direction, if they expect the breakout
to fail. Breakouts, failed breakouts, and breakout pullbacks are closely related and
are discussed in book 2. As a guide, traders compare the strength of the breakout
with that of the reversal attempt. If one is clearly stronger, the market will likely go
in that direction. If they are equally strong, the trader needs to wait for more bars
before deciding where the market is likely to go next.
When a bear micro channel forms in a bull trend, it is usually a bull flag, or the
last leg of a bull flag, and traders will look for a signal bar and then place a buy stop
above its high to enter on the breakout of the bear micro channel and of the bull
flag. When a bull micro channel forms in a bear trend, it is usually a bear flag or the
final leg of a bear flag and traders will short below any signal bar.
If instead of a bear micro channel forming in a bull flag, the micro channel is a
rising micro channel (a bull micro channel) in a bull trend, the first downside breakout (the first pullback) will usually not go far, and it will be bought aggressively. The
more bars in the bull micro channel, the more likely that the bear breakout will not
reverse the bull trend. For example, if there is a five-bar bull micro channel in a bull
trend, there will probably be far more buyers at and below the low of that fifth bar
than sellers. If the market trades below that fifth bar, the bar creates a bear breakout of the bull channel. However, it is unlikely to lead to more than a bar or two of
selling because the bulls will be eager to buy the first pullback from the strong micro channel bull trend. Remember, many traders have been watching the rally for
five bars, waiting for any pullback to buy. They will be eager to buy below the fifth
bar and above the high of the pullback bar, which is a failed breakout buy signal
bar (a high 1 buy setup). If the market triggers the long but creates a bear reversal
bar within a bar or two, this then sets up a micro double top sell signal. It can also
be thought of as a pullback from the breakout below the bull micro channel, even
if its high is above the highest bar in the micro channel. It would then be simply a
higher high reversal, which is a micro version of a major trend reversal (reversals
are discussed in book 3).

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c16

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:26

Printer: Donnelly

MICRO CHANNELS

251

It is important to realize that traders do not have to wait for a pullback to get
long. Many experienced traders understand what is happening after the second or
third bar of the bull micro channel in a bull trend. They think that the market is
in the early stages of a very strong buy program where momentum buy programs
are also buying aggressively. These traders will try to copy what the computers
are doing and will buy every bull close, and place limit orders one or two ticks
below the close of every bar, and one or two ticks above the low of the prior bar. If
the biggest pullback in the micro channel has been five ticks, they will place limit
orders to buy any three- or four-tick pullback. They expect that the first time a bar
falls below the low of the prior bar will attract even more buying, so they know
that their most recent buy will likely be profitable, despite the pullback. Since they
made money all the way up, they are not worried about getting out at breakeven or
with a small loss on their final entry when a pullback finally does come.
As with any channel, a bull micro channel can form in a trading range, or within
a bull or bear trend. When it is in a bull trend, higher prices are more certain, and
traders should look to buy near the middle or bottom of the prior bar. When the
micro channel is especially tight, it can be a spike on a higher time frame chart; a
broader channel may follow, and it might reach a measured move target based on
the height of the tight micro channel. When a bull micro channel is in a bear trend,
it is a bear flag, and traders should look to short the downside breakout or the pullback from a downside breakout. When a bull micro channel forms after a possible
low in a bear trend, it can become the final flag in the bear trend and break out to
the upside instead of to the downside, and the breakout can be the spike that leads
to a bull trend. When a bull breakout occurs, it usually follows a failed low 1, 2, or 3.
A micro channel is a sloping tight trading range, and therefore it has a strong
magnetic pull that tends to prevent breakouts from going very far. It is also often
tight enough to sometimes act as a spike, and it can be followed by a broader channel, creating a spike and channel trend. When there is a breakout from a micro
channel, it is usually just for a bar or two and is mostly due to profit taking. For
example, if there is a bull micro channel (an upwardly sloping micro channel) and
a bar trades below the low of the prior bar, that is a breakout below the micro
channel. This is primarily due to bulls taking profits, although there are some bears
who are shorting. Within a bar or two, other buyers come in, some bears exit, and
the market usually trades above the high of the prior bar. Some traders will see
this as a failed breakout of the micro channel, and they will buy as the market goes
above the high of the prior bar. For them, this is a high 1 buy setup. Others will assume that the trend is reversing down; they will wait for the market to form either
a higher high or lower high breakout pullback over the next couple of bars, and
then they will short below the low of the prior bar. The overall context can give a
clue to which outcome is more likely. For example, if the market is in a strong bear
trend and the bull micro channel is just a pullback, the odds favor that the breakout

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c16

252

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:26

Printer: Donnelly

TREND LINES AND CHANNELS

below the micro channel will be followed by more selling. If the market trades
above the breakout bar, bears will place stop orders to short below the low of the
prior bar. If instead the bull micro channel is forming as a breakout from a trading range in a bull market, the odds favor the breakout below the micro channel
becoming a pullback in the bull trend, and bulls will place buy orders at one tick
above the high of the prior bar.
A breakout of the trend line sets up a with-trend entry. For example, if there
is a bull micro channel and the market is always-in long, and then there is a bar
with a low below the micro bull trend line, then buying the high of that bar can be a
reliable trade. This is a tiny but strong one-bar bull flag (a high 1 buy setup) and it is
a failed breakout buy signal. It might be a two-legged correction on a smaller time
frame chart; however, it is better to not look, because you will find yourself with
too much information to process in a short time and you will likely mismanage or
not take the trade.
If the bull micro channel is within a trading range or in a bear trend instead of in
a strong bull trend, you have other things to consider before buying above the failed
bear breakout. If the channel is at the top of a trading range, it is often better not
to buy the failed breakout and instead to wait to see if the reversal back up stalls
and becomes a higher high pullback from the breakout. If it only goes up for a bar
or two and then forms a bear reversal bar, this can be a reliable short setup when
it is near the top of a trading range (a micro double top, discussed in book 3). If the
bull micro channel is a bear flag just below the moving average, you should only
look to short, since the odds are that the shorting by the bears will overpower the
bulls who bought the pullback. Wait for the breakout below the channel and then
for the failure and one more push up. If that reversal back up forms a bear reversal
bar at the moving average within a bar or two, this is usually a reliable breakout
pullback short setup (a low 2). The market broke out of the downside of the bull
micro channel and then pulled back to a small higher high. Finally, if it reversed
back down, it set up a breakout below what has become a bear flag.
As with any breakout below a bull channel, there might be a pullback and then
a resumption of the selling. That pullback can be a lower high or a higher high (a
higher high means that the high of the bar goes above the high of the most recent
swing high, which is likely the highest bar in the bull channel). Because most attempts at reversing a trend fail, the odds are in favor of the bear breakout failing
and becoming just a pullback in the bull trend, followed by the bull trend resuming.
Traders should place an order to go long at one tick above the high of the breakout
bar, in case the bear breakout fails and the bull trend resumes.
However, they must be aware that their long might be a bull trap, trapping them
into a losing long trade. Remember, although most attempts to reverse a trend fail,
some succeed. Instead of the breakout to the downside failing, the market might be
just briefly pulling back from the bear breakout and forming a small higher high or

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c16

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:26

Printer: Donnelly

MICRO CHANNELS

253

lower high before the selling resumes. This could be followed by a successful trend
reversal into a bear leg or trend. Because of this, the trader has to be prepared to
reverse to short below his long entry bar, if the overall price action makes a reversal
seem appropriate. In this case, this is a breakout pullback short setup. Whenever
a breakout fails, this failure sets up a trade in the direction of the original trend. If
that also fails, then it becomes a breakout pullback from the original bear breakout
(opposite failures create a breakout pullback) and a second attempt to reverse the
trend to down.
If the breakout pullback short triggers (by the bar going one tick below the
low of the prior bar, which is usually the bull breakout bar), look at the size of the
bodies of the recent few bars. If the bars are bull or bear trend bars, then this second
failure has high odds of being a successful second entry short. Remember, the first
failure was when the bears lost on the failed downside breakout, trapping them out
of their short trade. The second failure was when the bulls were trapped into their
losing trade, which was set up by the failed bear breakout below the channel. If
the market now turns down again, you have just had bears trapped out and bulls
trapped in. In general, if both sides get trapped in or out, the odds of success of
the next setup increase. If the bars have more of a doji look, then the market will
likely enter a trading range, but the odds still favor a downside breakout. If you are
not certain, then wait because it is likely that most traders will not be certain and a
trading range will usually follow.
Although the vast majority of micro trend line breakouts are one- and twolegged pullbacks on the 1 minute chart, you should avoid trading off that chart
because you will likely lose money. Most traders are unable to take all of the signals
and invariably pick too many losers and not enough winners. The best trades often
set up fast and trigger quickly and are therefore easy to miss. Many losing trades
are often slow to set up and give traders plenty of time to enter, trapping them in
the wrong direction.
That bull micro channel could instead have a breakout to the upside, above the
trend channel line, in an attempt to form an even steeper bull trend. If it fails and
there is a strong bear reversal bar, this buy climax is a potential short setup.
When a micro trend line extends for about 10 or more bars, the odds increase
substantially that there will soon be a tradable reversal. This type of trend is unsustainable and therefore a type of climax, which is usually followed eventually by a
pullback or a reversal. After such climactic behavior, be ready to take a breakout
pullback entry. This is the second attempt to reverse the trend, with the original
trend line breakout being the first.
A micro trend line break is important not only when the micro trend line is
part of a micro channel, but also whenever there is any strong trend underway. If
there is a strong bear trend with large bear trend bars and little overlap between
consecutive bars and there are no pullback bars for four or five bars, you are likely
