
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

376

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

Figure 22.7

broke below the bull trend line of the rally from the open, so a lower high could lead to
a trend reversal down.
A two-legged lower high ended at bar 7, alerting traders to a possible continued
move down. Bar 7 was a dueling lines pattern. It formed a double top with the top of the
wedge bear channel down to bar 6 (the channel began with the small lower high that
formed after the four-bar bear spike below bar 5), and it was a wedge bear ﬂag (the ﬁrst
push up ended with the bar before bar 6, and bar 7 was the third push up).
The market behaved like a trending trading range bear for the rest of the day. The
strong bull momentum up to bar 1 and again up to bar 5 were spikes up and could be
followed by a bull channel at some point over the next day or two. Bars 6, 8, and 10
created a large wedge bull ﬂag, and a test of the bar 5 high was possible. Bar 4 can also
be considered part of that bear channel. The next day (not shown) in fact gapped up
near the high of bar 7 and became a strong bull trend from the open day.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 22.8

TRENDING TRADING RANGE DAYS

377

FIGURE 22.8 Initial Trading Range Often Presages Another Trading Range

In Figure 22.8, the range for the first couple of hours was about half of an average
daily range and this alerted traders to a possible breakout and the formation of a
higher or lower trading range and the creation of a trending trading range day. The
bull trend was already apparent before the bar 9 breakout. Notice how the bar 5
swing low was above the bar 2 low, the bar 6 low was above the bar 5 low, and the
bar 8 low was above the bar 6 low. The same thing was happening with the swing
highs at bars 3, 4, and 7. Even though the market was in a trading range for the
first two and a half hours, both the swing highs and the swing lows were trending
upward, indicating that there was already a bull trend going on within the trading
range. This alerted traders to watch for a breakout, which occurred at bar 9. This
higher trading range lasted until the breakout that followed the reversal up at bar
13. Both bars 11 and 13 were breakout tests. The double bottom at bar 11 dropped
into the lower trading range, but the bar 13 low tested the bar 7 top of the lower
trading range to the tick. When a pullback cannot drop below the breakout point, it
is a sign of strength by the bulls.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The market broke out below yesterday’s close in Figure 22.8, and the ﬁrst bar had a bear
body, so the day could become a trend from the open bear trend day. However, there

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

378

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

Figure 22.8

were tails above and below bar 1, and this increased the chances of an initial trading
range. Traders should wait. Bar 2 was a micro double bottom, but both bars were dojis
so this was not a setup for a strong trend. Even the bar 4 wedge bear ﬂag at the moving
average was a weak setup because it was part of a six-bar tight trading range and all
of the bars had tails. This means that there is uncertainty, and that is the hallmark of a
trading range. Traders could have bought above the bull inside bar that followed bar 5,
but after that bar 4 wedge bear ﬂag the market should have a second test down. This
occurred at bar 6 and formed a double bottom with bar 5 and a double bottom pullback
for the double bottom at the low of the day (bar 2 and the bar three bars later). It would
be safer to wait to buy until after more evidence of bull strength, like the four-bar bull
spike up to bar 7, but there were a couple of strong bull trend bars just after bar 2, and
this is a good enough sign of strength to start taking long trades on pullbacks. Those
large bull trend bars are a sign of buying pressure, which is cumulative. Once there is a
critical mass of buying, the bulls take control and the market goes up.
After that bull spike to bar 7, there was a breakout pullback buy setup above the
bull inside bar that followed bar 8, and that was also a failed low 2 buy signal. There was
a high 2 long setup four bars later that led to the bar 9 strong bull breakout.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure 22.9

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDING TRADING RANGE DAYS

379

FIGURE 22.9 An Initial Trading Range Can Be Followed by a Trading Range Day

Just because the range of the first couple of hours is about half that of an average
day does not mean there will be a breakout into a trending trading range day. In
about a third of cases, the range increases by a breakout of both the high and low
of the day, as it did in Figure 22.9. The market reversed up from new lows of the day
at bars 4 and 6, and down from new highs of the day at bars 3, 10, 12, 19, and 21. The
opening range probably ended with the reversal down from bar 5, and at that point
the range of the day was about half that of recent days. This alerted traders to the
possibility of a breakout either up or down and then a measured move that would
approximately double the day’s range. However, simply entering on the breakout
of a trading range is a losing strategy since the market always has inertia and most
attempts to change from a trading range to a trend, or from a trend to a trading
range, fail. No good short developed after the bar 6 breakout to a new low of the
day, and in fact the bar 7 higher low after the three pushes down (bars 2, 4, and 6)
and the bar 8 breakout pullback were reasonable buy signals for a test of the high
of the day.
Bar 10 reversed down after breaking to a new high of the day, but the market was in a tight bull channel and therefore this was not a good short setup. The
momentum up was not particularly strong so buying the bar 11 breakout pullback
was a scalp trade at best. The market turned down again with a two-bar reversal at
bar 12. Second-entry reversals on trading range days are usually reliable for at least
a scalp.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

380

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 22.9

The market had a run to a new high of the day after the bar 16 wedge bull flag
and the market again failed at bars 19 and 21. Once it was clear that the upside
breakout would not succeed, the market once again tried for a breakout of the
opposite end of the day. As is often the case on trading range days, the market
closed in the middle of the range.
When there are several possibilities for the top and bottom of the opening
range, it usually does not matter which you choose because there is no agreement.
When looking for a measured move target where you can take profits, initially use
the smallest possibility for the opening range, like bar 2 to bar 3. If the market
does not pause in that area, then look at the next larger possibility, like bar 3 to
bar 4, or bar 3 to bar 6. Since today ended as a trading range day and not a trending
trading range day, the obvious measured move targets were not reached. However,
every reversal is due to computer algorithms based on some measurement, and
there is almost always some type of measured move in the equation, even if it is
not obvious.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

Figure 22.10

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDING TRADING RANGE DAYS

381

FIGURE 22.10 Late Breakout

Sometimes the initial trading range is about half of the size of an average daily range
and the breakout does not come until the final hour. In Figure 22.10, although there
was not enough time left to form much of an upper range, the day was a setup for
a breakout into a trending trading range day all day long. The range prior to the
breakout was only 5.25 points and there were only two days in the past 11 months
that ended with a range of 5.25 points or less. This meant that other days this year
that may have had a 5.25 range for most of the day had a bigger range by the close,
and that made it likely for today to have a late breakout up or down as well. Since
the market had been trending up since the bar 7 triple bottom and triangle, and the
number of bars between bars 9 and 12 with bull bodies was high, buying pressure
was present and an upside breakout was likely. Traders would have bought on the
bar 14 breakout above the bar 4 high of the day and on the close of the strong bar
14 breakout bar and again above its high.
The initial bear spike from bar 3 to bar 4 generated a measured move to the
high of the day. Traders never know which of the possible measured move targets
will be the level where the bulls will take profits, but it is good to be aware of the
possibilities so you, too, can take profits as the market is racing up rather than a
couple of points lower on the sell-off. The market might have also topped out at a
measured move based on the bar 1 low to the bar 2 high or from the bar 5 low to
the bar 4, 6, 10, or 12 high.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c22

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:7

Printer: Donnelly

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c23

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:11

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 23

Trend from the
Open and Small
Pullback Trends

P

rimary characteristics of trend from the open days:

r The low of a bull trend day or the high of a bear trend day is formed within the
first few bars of the day.

r If the opening range of the day is less than 25 percent of the average daily range
of recent days, there may be a double bottom on a bull trend day or a double
top on a bear trend day (if the opening range is about 50 percent of the average
daily range, a breakout is more likely to lead to a trending trading range day).
r The day may begin with a strong spike lasting many bars or it may have a small
opening range.
r If the market trends from the first bar or so and the initial spike lasts three or
more bars, entering on the first pullback is usually good for at least a scalp.
r If there is a strong spike on the open that lasts many bars and covers many
points, the day will usually become a spike and channel trend day.
r A large gap opening often leads to a trend from the open day, and the trend
can go in either direction. When there is a large gap up and a trend from the
open day forms, the day will be a bull trend day about 60 percent of the time
and a bear trend day 40 percent of the time. The opposite is true for gap down
openings. The larger the gap, the more likely the day will be a trend day and the
more likely the trend will be in the direction of the gap.
r Trend from the open days have urgency and conviction from the outset and are
usually the strongest trends and have the smallest pullbacks.
r Twenty gap bar and moving average gap bar setups come late in the trend.
383

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c23

384

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:11

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

r The strongest type of a trend from the open day and the strongest type of trend
is one where the opening range is small, and then the day trends relentlessly
with small pullbacks all day long. This is a small pullback trend day. For example, the pullbacks in the Emini might be just 10 to 12 ticks (10 to 30 percent
of the average daily range). When that is the case, there is usually a pullback
in the final couple of hours that is about 150 to 200 percent of the size of the
earlier pullbacks, followed by a resumption of the trend into the close.
r To an experienced trader, the swing setups are 70 percent or more likely to
work, even though to they never look that certain to a beginner. Many of the
signal bars look bad, as is the case for all strong trends. Most setups appear to
have 50 percent or less probability of success. This makes traders not take the
trades and forces them to chase the market, or miss the trend completely.
r There are often many trend bars in the opposite direction, which is a sign of
countertrend pressure, and it keeps beginning traders looking for reversals instead of with-trend trades. For example, in a bull trend, there will be many bear
trend bars and many two-bar and three-bar bear spikes. Beginners repeatedly
short them and lose. The spikes evolve into bull flags that look weak, which
discourages beginners from buying them. They just got out of a losing short
and are not ready emotionally to risk losing again, especially on a setup that
does not look strong. Each bad-looking bull flag is successful, and is followed
by another good-looking short setup that fails.
r The trend is often in a relatively tight channel, and pullbacks often come back
and hit breakeven stops, trapping traders out. Traders need to trail their stops
below swing lows in a bull trend or above swing highs in a bear trend. If they
are too eager to move their stops to breakeven, they will get trapped out.
Since almost all small pullback days are trend from the open days, they should
be considered to be a strong variant. A trend from the open day is usually the
strongest form of trend pattern, but it develops in only about 20 percent of days.
That means that buying above the first bar or shorting below it, expecting it to be
the start of a strong trend, is a low-probability trade. Reversals are far more common in the first hour, as is discussed in book 3. The chance of the first bar being the
high or low of the day on a day when there is a large gap opening can be 50 percent
or more, if the bar is a strong trend bar in either direction. The high or low of the day
forms within the first five bars or so in about 50 percent of days. However, it forms
within the opening range, which can last a couple of hours, in about 90 percent of
days. Any type of trend day can trend from the open. In a trend from the open day,
the market forms one extreme in the first bar or first few bars and then trends all
day, and often closes at or near the opposite extreme. There may be a small trading
range for the first 30 minutes or so and then a breakout, but the open of the day
will usually be very close to one extreme of the day (the low in a bull trend or the

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c23

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:11

Printer: Donnelly

TREND FROM THE OPEN AND SMALL PULLBACK TRENDS

385

high in a bear trend). These days often open with large gaps and then the market
continues as a trend in either direction. In other words, a large gap down can lead
to either a bull or a bear trend from the open day. The setup is more reliable if it
forms at a strong magnet like a trend channel line (for example, forming a wedge
reversal setup) or if it is part of a reversal pattern, like a reversal from a final flag at
yesterday’s close.
This type of trend can be so strong that there can be follow-through in the
first hour or two of the next day, so traders should be looking to enter with trend
on pullbacks after the open of the next day. The pullback often is strong enough
to make traders wonder if the market is reversing, but it is usually just a higher
time frame, two-legged correction, like a pullback to the 15 minute moving average.
However, most traders would find it easier to simply read only one chart when
trading and there is always a 5 minute setup at the end of the pullback.
As a trend from the open day is evolving, the pullbacks are often very small all
day long. When this happens, this is a small pullback trend day. This is the strongest
type of trend day and it forms only once or twice a month. About two-thirds of these
days have a larger pullback after 11:00 a.m. PST. That pullback is often about twice
the size of the biggest pullback since the trend began in the first hour. It is often
heralded by a relatively large, strong trend bar or two in the direction of the trend,
but representing climactic exhaustion. Take the example of a small pullback bull
trend day when the biggest pullback has been nine ticks and the market has been
channeling up all day. If sometime between 11:00 a.m. PST and noon the market
has two relatively large consecutive bull trend bars breaking out to a new high, the
move is more likely an exhaustive buy climax than the start of a new leg. Climaxes
are discussed more in the third book, but when a trend has gone on for a long time
and then has unusual further strength, it usually signals the end of the move for the
time being and the start of a two-legged pullback that will last about 10 bars or so.
Experienced traders are expecting a three- to five-point pullback and they will exit
their longs. Some will even short the close of that second bull trend bar, or maybe
a tick or two above its high, expecting the pullback. They might wait for the next
bar to close, and if it has a close around the middle, they might short the close. If it
is a bear reversal bar, they might short below its low. If they entered below a bear
reversal bar, their protective stop would be above its high, but if they entered at the
market at the close of the bull spike, they might use a three- or four-point stop and
scale in a point or two higher. Even if they are wrong and the market does not sell
off for a few points, it will likely enter a trading range and they should be able to
get out with a small profit within the final hour.
There might have been a slightly larger pullback in the first hour just before the
trend began, but only the pullbacks after the trend began are important. Look at
their size and if they are all very small and each subsequent one stays around the
same size or smaller than the first, the day is a strong trend day. For example, in

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c23

386

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:11

Printer: Donnelly

COMMON TREND PATTERNS

a bull trend in the Emini where the average daily range has been about 12 points,
the pullbacks might all be just two or three points. The bulls want a bigger pullback
where they can get long, hoping for less risk. After waiting and not getting what
they want, they start taking small positions at the market and on small pullbacks.
This small buying all day long keeps lifting the market. The bears never see a great
short and they decide instead to short smaller positions and weaker setups. There
is no follow-through and they are forced to cover, and this buying adds to the slow
rise in the market. Momentum traders see the trend and they, too, buy all day long.
The trend usually continues all day with only small pullbacks, but because the bulls
have been buying small positions all day long, they never have to chase the market
up in a panic. Also, because the bears are never heavily short, there is not strong
short covering. The result is that even though the day is a trend day, it often does
not cover too many points and the bulls do not make a windfall profit, even though
they were on the right side of a strong trend.
A report at 7:00 a.m. PST can often lead to a reversal bar, a breakout bar, or a
large outside bar that becomes the start of a strong trend, which can last all day.
However, computers have a huge edge on reports. They receive the data instantly
in a format that they can process to make decisions that lead to orders. All of this
happens within a second, and it gives them a significant advantage over traders.
When the computers have a big edge, traders are at a disadvantage and therefore
should rarely enter at the moment a report is released. The computers will usually
show what the always-in trade is within a bar or two, or they will set up a strong
reversal. Traders will then have probability on their side, and can look to enter in
the appropriate direction. The strong bar that leads to the start of the trend does
not always come on a report and can form several bars before or after the report. It
happens on the report often enough for traders to be ready for it and then to enter
as soon as the always-in position becomes clear.
Sometimes, after about 30 minutes of a small range, there is a test of the open
that occurs around 7:00 a.m. PST, usually coinciding with a report. Although this
results in a small trading range, the trend that breaks out is much stronger than
that seen on a trending trading range day; it is identical to a trend from the open
day and should be considered a variant.
Even the best patterns still fail to do what you expect about 40 percent of the
time. If the market does not pause by the third or fourth bar, it might have gone
too far too fast, and this increases the chances that the market will reverse instead
of trend.
Every day begins as a trend from the open day within the first few bars of the
day. As soon as a bar moves above the high of the prior bar, the day is a trend from
the open bull trend day, at least for that moment. If instead it trades below the low
of the first bar, it is a trend from the open bear trend day. On most days, the move
does not have much follow-through and there is a reversal, and the day evolves

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c23

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

19:11

Printer: Donnelly

TREND FROM THE OPEN AND SMALL PULLBACK TRENDS

387

into some other type of day. However, when the breakout of the prior bar grows
into a larger spike, the odds of a strong trend from the open trend day increase
considerably, and traders should begin to trade the day as a strong trend day.
If the market trends for four or more bars without a pullback, or even two large
trend bars, the move should be considered to be a strong spike. The spike is an
area where both bulls and bears agree that very little trading should take place, and
the market therefore needs to quickly move to another price level. When the spike
begins during the first few bars, the day is a trend from the open day. It may remain
so for the rest of the day, but sometimes the market soon reverses and breaks out in
the other direction. This can result in a trend in the opposite direction, like a spike
and channel trend or a trending trading range day, or simply a trading range day.
As with any strong spike, the bulls who bought early on will take partial profits at
some point, creating a small pullback (as discussed earlier in the section on trends).
Other bulls who missed the move will aggressively buy the pullback, as will bulls
who want a larger position. The bulls will buy with limit orders at and below the
low of the prior bar, hoping that the current bar will fall below the prior bar and
allow them to buy a little lower. Other bulls will buy with stop orders above the
high of the pullback bar (a high 1 buy signal).
A spike is usually followed by one of three things. First, the market might have
gone too far too fast and be experiencing exhaustive climactic behavior. For example, if there is then a pause or pullback like an inside bar or a small wedge flag,
this could become a final flag and lead to a reversal after a small breakout, and the
reversal could last for several hours. Alternatively, the market might go sideways
in a tight trading range for several hours, followed by the trend resuming into the
close, resulting in a trend resumption day. This small, sideways movement is very
common following a relentless five- to 10-bar spike. The third and most common
outcome, when the spike is not so large as to be exhaustive, is the formation of a
trend channel, and the day then becomes a spike and channel trend day.
Entering on the first pullback after a strong first leg is simply capitalizing on the
propensity for strong moves to test the extreme. Most strong moves have at least
two legs, so entering on the first pullback has a very good chance of leading to a
profitable trade. This entry is especially important on trend from the open days if
you missed the original entry. In strong trends, what constitutes the first pullback
is not always clear because trends frequently have two or three sideways bars that
don’t break a meaningful trend line and therefore really aren’t significant enough
to constitute a pull “back.” However, even if there is no retracement and no real
pulling back in price, a pause is a sideways correction and is a variant of a pullback.
The single most difficult part of trading these very strong trend days is that
the trends do not look particularly strong as they are forming. There are usually
no impressive spikes or easy, high-probability pullbacks to the moving average. Instead, the market has pullbacks after every few bars and lots of trend bars in the
