
EXHIBIT 4.7. confirming a Trend Reversal, Coffee-December 1991

Candlesand the OoeraIITechnicalPicture

EXHIBIT 4.8. Candle Signals and Trendlines, Five-Year Note-September L993

pattern (the empty spacewas due to a holiday). But looking at the overall
technical picture, including the trendline, it is obvious that a short sale
based on the bearish engulfing pattern would not offer an attractive trade
based on risk/reward levels. This is becausethe target should be the
support defined by the trendline, and a stop should be above the high
of the bearish engulfing pattern. The uptrend was confirmed as broken
when the market closed under the trendline on |uly 19.
Using Exhibits 4.9(A) and (B), I show an examPle of how a bullish
candle signal could be used as a buying opportunity on a pullback in bull
trend. Exhibit 4.9(A) is a chart that shows a nicely defined uptrend support line (the more often a trendline is tested, the more important it
should be). Candle 1 is shown as it looked on the morning of September
15, 1993.Since the sessionwas not yet over, candle l" is not yet formed
for the day (remember that a completed candle needs a closing price).
As shown in Exhibit 4.9(A), at the time the chart was drawn (the morning
of September15), the market had just tested a long-term uptrend support
line. Shifting over to the intra-day 30-minute candle chart in Exhibit 4.9(B\,
note how a bullish engulfing pattern unfolded during the morning of
September 15. The dashed line in Exhibit 4.9(B) represents the same
trendline on the daily chart. We seehow a bullish candle signal appeared
during a selloff to an uptrend support line. This showed the concept that,

139

EXHIBIT 4.9(A). Candlesand Trendlines, Bonds-December 1993,Daily

EXHIBIT 4.9(B). Candles and Trendlines, Bonds-December 1993,Intra_Dav

Candlesand the OaerallTechnicalPicture

141

in a bull trend, we look for corrections on which to buy with a bullish
candle signal.
For those who use moving averageto help define the trend, I illustrate
in Exhibit 4.10 how to use candle signalsto trade within the trend. Based
on the fact that the market is under the moving average, the trend is
down. In such an environment, bearish candle signalscan be used to sell
short and bullish candle signals should be used to cover shorts. For traders who are more risk oriented and may want to buy in a bear market,
use a short-term resistanceareaas a target. In this example,a rally started
with a harami in June. However, as the market got to the S2-weekmoving
averageresistancearea, the candles reflected increasedselling pressure
as shown by the long upper shadow candle at L and the long black real
body candle at 2. For traders who bought at the harami, the resistance
area defined by the moving average should be an area to liquidate. For
those who were looking to go in the same direction as the overall trend
(in this case, sell on bounces), then the aforementioned bearish candle

PAPER_ DAILY
INTERNATIONAL

72.5

n5

If'utl,
'+l

l l - r - - r -

20.0

67.5

'b*ldt
,d.l+

20.0

52 Week Moving Average

I

&.5

?r

I Fatting
Window

55.D

il

*,0"\,[,,,
T

55.0

|1

l+il

Harami

62,5

62,5

r92 ?6

D8

t5

22

t?

2D ?7

MetaStockby EQUISInt'l

EXHIBIT 4.10. Trading with the Trend, International Paper-Daily

t0

t 7 2+

1.42

signals could be used to sell short. The falling window showed that the
bears gave the market an extra pull lower. The long white candles in
mid-|uly was a hint of strength. The rally from these candlesstopped via
a doji that stalled at the moving average resistancearea. This was an
extremely attractiveshort sale since that doji areawas not only at the 52week moving average,but it was also at the falling window's resistance
area. Note how after this sell-off the market bounced back after 9
record sessionlows.

BECOMING A MARKET CHAMETEON
"An ArmyManages
itsvictoryin Accordance
with thesituation
of the

Enemy"

when first placing a trade, you have expectationsabout how the market
should act. However, the market is fluid, ever flowing, and ever changing. As a result, you must continually monitor the mirket,s path to see
if price action performs according to your expectations.If noi, you will
have to take appropriate action. Adapting to changing market conditions
is what I call being a marketchameleon.
Being a market chameleon, that
is, quickly and effectively adapting to a new market environment, is a
vital element to successfultrading. There is an appropriate quote that I
heard years ago. It compares trading to fencing. Ii said thatln trading,
as in fencing, there are the quick and the dead. Being a market chameleon
means that you are quick enough to adapt to the market so as to',live"
to trade another day.
When a trader has a market opinion, there should be a price that tells
him or her that their market forecastis wrong. I will look at this aspect
in Exhibit 4.11. In that chart, there was a dark cloud cover in the latter
part of october. At that point, I turned bearish on this market becausea
confluenceof technical factors hinted that prices would not close above
$36. There were four reasonsto expect any rallies to stall in the $35.50$36.00area.Thesewere:
1. The high of the dark cloud cover at $35.50should becomea resistance
area.
2. A small falling window provides resistancenear g36.
3. The lows of the three sessionprior to the falling window were near
$36. Based on the concept that old support becomesresistance,this
$36 support should be converted to resiitance.
4. A Fibonacci 620/oretracement of the decline from A to B was near
$35.s0.

Candlesand the OaerallTechnicalPicture

EXHIBIT 4.11. Looking for a Price to Adjust a Market Opinion, Crude OilDecember1990

In this case, if the bulls had enough force to close prices above the
top end of my $35.50-$36.00resistance area,I would then have had to
changemy bearish stance.In other words, I would have had to adapt to
new market conditions. We can see that although the bulls tried for a
few weeks after the dark cloud cover to push the market above the top
end of the $35.50-$36.00resistancearea, they failed.
Exhibit 4.12 displays a resistancearea in late Decembernear $20 that
was verffied by a hanging man and bearish engulfing pattern (the space
between these two candles was due to a holiday). The price slide that
began near this $20 area tried to stabilize in early January near the $\9
support areafrom the month before. The long black real body of january
12broke this $19support. Thus, up until that time, all the signalscoming
from the market were negative. However, candle clues that the market
was changing its complexion came with the high-wave candle after the
long black real body. Another warning about having to adjust from a
bearish view to a more constructive view about the market came the
following week with the morning star pattern. Final proof of a turnaround came with a rising window.

143

144

Candles

EXHIBIT 4.12. Being a Chameleon by Adapting to the Market, Crude oil-March
1993

COMPUTERS AND CANDLES
"Euen Beautiful

Things Haoe Disadoantages
and Must be t-Isedwith

Caution"
Many technicalanalystsbasetheir trading strategieson computer testing.
with the widespread use of computers and the popularity of candles,
there may be traders who may want to use computers to find the most
important or reliable candle patterns. For those who may decide to do
such testing, I think it is important that other aspects,besidesjust having
the computer pick out the candle patterns, must be taken into account
with such testing. That is the focus of this section.
The Importance of Where a Candle Pattern Appears
As discussedpreviously, one should never view a candle signal without
seeing the pattern in the context of what happened before the pattern
appeared. This aspect is related to a question frequently asked of mewhich are the most important candle patterns?In answering this, I first

Candlesand the OaeraIITechnicalPicture

suggestthinking about what the pattern is relaying about the market's
action. For example, in comparing a dark cloud cover with a bearish
engulfing pattern, I would normally consider the bearish engulfing pattern as more important. This is based on the fact that the secondsession
of the bearish engulfing pattern has a close under the prior white real
body. The dark cloud cover's secondsession,however, has a closewithin
the prior white real body. As such, the bearish engulfing pattern shows
that the bears had more control of the market as compared to the dark
cloud cover (seeExhibit 4.13).
But candle patterns can never be viewed in isolation. A trader always
has to consider the surrounding technical picture. For example, a dark
cloud cover that arisesat a major resistancearea should be construed as
being more likely a reversal than would a bearish engulfing pattern that
is not at resistance.An instance of the danger of looking at a pattern in
isolation is shown in Exhibit 4.5 on page 135 where, becauseof risk/
reward considerations, a dark cloud cover offered a more attractive trade
than did a bearish engulfing pattern. Thus, looking at a candle pattern
in isolation can be a dangerous procedure. As was nicely expressedto
me by a Japanesetrader, "where you stand is more important than an
individual pattern." As a result, if you decide to test out the reliability
of the candle patterns, remember not to just use a buy or sell signal based
solely on the candle pattern. You must first factor into your analysisjust
where the pattern emerged.

The Question of Determining Specific Criteria for the Pattern
The candle patterns are based on sound psychologicalreasoning. (Think
about what happens with a dark cloud cover. After a strong white session, the market opens higher and then closes well under the white
session'sclose. Doesn't that clearly illustrate how the bears have managed to wrest control from the bulls?) But candles, unlike mathematically

I

Glosefor dark
cloudcover
Closefor Bearlsh
EngutfingPattern

EXHIBIT 4.13. Comparing a
Dark Cloud Cover With a Bearish
Engulfing Pattern

L45

146

Candles

concrete numbers, such as moving averages or oscillators, may not be
easily adaptable to computer testing. A moving averageeither is, or isn,t,
above yesterday's close. This is a yes-no choice for the computer. But
candle signals are not this clear-cut, and subiectivity is required in determining what is or is not a candle pattern.
A classic dark cloud cover should have the close of the black candle
sessionmore than halfway into the prior white's real body. That is a rule
that can be quantified. But what if there were a less than ideal dark cloud
cover in which the close of the black candlestick sessiondid not get more
than halfway into the prior white session's real body? That, based on the
standard definition of a dark cloud cover, would not be a dark cloud
cover pattern and the computer might not pick up such a pattern. The
question then becomes: What happens when a less than ideal dark cloud
cover shows up near a resistance area? Does a computer read that as a
dark cloud cover or does it ignore the pattern? In such a scenario, I would
say that the less than ideal dark cloud cover should be viewed as being
iust as bearish as a more traditional dark cloud cover. This is the scenario
that unfolded in Exhibit 4.14. Note the annotation that has a question

BANKAMERICA- DAILY

55

55

54

54

53

,,,n
,1il1$'+*t*rtt

JI

5I

53
57
t\

5[

50
49

{[oIl'f

19
18

48

47

15
15

17

,g

15

T

45

11
'93 rB 25 t

44

0B l5?7

11 08 15 72 29R

MetaStockby EQUISInt'l

EXHIBIT 4.14. Candles and Subjectivity, Bank America-Daily

1? l9 ?5 fl

&ndles and the OaerallTechnicalPicture

mark after the term "dark cloud cover." This was not an ideal dark cloud
cover becausethe close did not move under the center of the prior white
candle. However, although this was not an ideal dark cloud cover, I still
viewed it as a dark cloud cover for a few reasons.First was the extremely
long upper shadow of the black candle of the pattern. This showed how
quickly prices retreated from the new highs. In addition, by the close of
this black candle, the market was technically damagedbecausethe bears
were able to drag prices back under a prior high (marked H on the chart).
This formed a bearish upthrust. Finally, the lower close after the dark
cloud cover helped confirm the market's inherent weakness.
Thus, even the most basicstep of having the computer find the candle
pattern may causeproblems. So, for those using a computer to pick out
the candle patterns, remember that the candle patterns should be used
as guideposts.While the ideal patterns may be relatively easyto quantify,
the less than ideal patterns are often useful trading signals that should
also be accountedfor. In this context, there is a large degree of subjectivity required. This is no different from standard bar chart pattern recognition.

Placing the Trade
If a candle pattern emerges, does that mean that a buy or sell signal is
automatically given? of course not. As I previously discussed,you should
not basea trade on a candle pattern in isolation. You must firsi determine
the overall technical picture at the time the pattern forms.
As an example of this aspect,let us consider a shooting star. A computer Program that basesa sell signal on the shooting star alone would
have given an improper sell signal if that shooting star also formed a
rising window (this scenariounfolded in Exhibit 3.49 on page 9g). Thus,
having a computer signal a trade just becausea candlu putt".r, emerges,
and ignoring the overall technicalpicture (i.e., the malor trend, the p-rice
action preceding the candle pattern, etc.), courd be a mistake.
Another aspect is the concept of risk/reward discussedearly in this
chapter. |ust becausea pattern appears does not mean that one should
placea trade on the candle signal. For example,what if there is a morning
star in gold, but the risk for the trade is $15 and your objective is also
515?would a long position on that pattern be warranted? In this case,
*re answer is no. \zvhethera trade is warranted or not is dependent on
the risk/reward parametersof the market at the time the pattern is formed.
As an exampleof this, in Exhibit .l.s,lshow two hammers. Hammers
arepotentially bullish signals,but the risk/reward aspectof each of these

L47

148

C-andles

EXHIBIT 4.15. RiskiReward Aspects of a Trade, S & P-Weekly

hammers would not justify a long trade. In both cases,there would have
been a 15-20 point risk (basedon a stop under the hammer's lows) for
a possible 20-25point target (basedon the resistancearea near 425).Thus,
an automatic buy based on a computer trading program would have
worked in this example because the market rallied from both hammers.
Nonetheless, these buy signals would not have been a trade based on
sound money management principles since the risk would have been too
large for the potential reward.
When to Offset a Trade
Placing a stop may be relatively easy with a computer (some testing is
even done without stops-a very dangerous procedure and one that defeats the concept of a risk management approach to trading), but how is
an objective picked? One time, a trader's objective may be last week's
lows, but maybe on the next trade, the objective will be a support line,
or maybe a 50o/oretracement. Every trader has his or her own style, so
be sure to take this into account when merging candles and computers.
Exhibit 4.L6 shows an evening star pattern and a bqllish engulfing

Candlesand the OaeraIITechniul Picture

EXHIBIT 4.16. Candles and Price Targets, British pound-December 1992

pattern. After the bullish engulfing pattern, an up leg could be expected.
However, the price target of such a rally would be based on other technical tools besidescandles since candles do not usually give targets.
Based on the concept that old support becomesresistance,a trader
might have been looking for a move to the ]uly-August support area near
$1.85.For that trader, this trade would not have been successful.However, another trader who uses Fibonacci retracements may have been
more successful since the market made a Fibonacci 38olobounce of the
entire move from the September highs to the September lows. Since the
first trader's $1.85 target was not met, he would say that the bullish
candle signal was not reliable. Yet, for the second trader, whose target
(the 38o/obounce) was reached, the bullish candle signal was successful.
Thus, each trader's style must be taken into account when looking at
testing the candles' reliability.
How you trade with candlesticks will depend on your trading philosophy, your risk adversity, and temperament. These are very individual
aspects.If you decide to test the candle patterns or use computers to
help you trade with candles, it should be based on trading criteria and
rules chosenby you. only by applying the candlesto your markets, with
vour own trading style, can you discover whether the candles will give
vou that extra edge.

149

Candles

Notes
lsakata, Goho, p. 46.
2sakata,Goho, p. 45.
3sakata,Goho, p. 70.
asakata,Goho, p. 70.

a o a o a a o a a a a o a a o

a a a a a a a a o a a o a a

o a a a a a a a a a a a a

PART2

THE DISPARITY INDEX
AND NEW PRICE
CHARTS
a a a a o a a a a a a a a a o a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a o a a a a a a a o a o a

&EtEn(ffiuadn6
"Consider
the Pastand You WiU Know the Future"

a a

a a

a a

a

a

a

a a

a

a

a

a o

a

a

a

a a

a

a

a o

a

a a

a

a a

a

a a

a

a a

a a

a

a

a

INTRODUCTION
a

a

a

.

.

A ;up"t ese book on technical analysis insightfully stated that, "The
market is a fug of war where the strategy is to overrun the enemy territory. In a tug of war, once the balance of power is lost, one side is
pulled and the result is decided. The market often acts this way, and one
should pay attention to the balance of powers."r The new (at ieast in the
West) techniques addressed in Part 2 of this book will help you determine
whether it is the bulls or bears who have the "balance of power.,,
A widely used Japanesetool is the disparity index. It is similar to
Western dual moving averages,but this technique allows for better market timing than do the traditional Western moving average techniques.
The disparity index is addressed in Chapter 5.
The charts detailed in Chapters 6,7, and 8 are called three-line break
charts, renko charts, and kagi charts. of the three, the kagi is probably
the most popular, followed by the three-line break and then the renko
chart. These charts are most closely comparable to the Western point and
figure charts. However, it is not necessaryto understand point and figure
charts to understand any of these Japanesecharts.
fust as candle charts predate bar charts, the threeline break, renko,
and kagi charts predate point and figure charts. These charts are based
on generations of use in the Far East. A member of the Nippon Technical
Analysts Association told me that he had seen a kagi chart of the rice
market dated 1876.However, my research shows that unlike candlestick

153

154

The Dispaity Index and New Pice Charts

charting, which has a rich history, there is very little historical reference
material for the three-line, renko, and kagi charting techniques. This is
probably becausecandles are more colorful, offer more flexibility and are
more widely used. In contrast, the three-line, renko, and kagi charts are
more rigid, offering less room for subjective interpretation, and their use
has mostly been limited to the management level of ]apanesefinancial
firms.
As bar charts differ from point and figure charts, the three-line break,
renko, and kagi charts differ from candle charts. With candle charts, a
new candle line is added to the chart at every session,whether the price
of that sessionmakes a new high, a new low, or is unchanged. With the
charting techniquesto be addressedin the rest of this book, prices must
go to a new high or low before a line on the chart can be added. Since
"The
the market has to go to a new high or low, I have entitled Paft 2
Disparity Index and New Price Charts."
Another difference between candle charts and the three-line break,
renko, and kagi charts is that these new techniques ignore time and are
dependent only on price changes. Since the market is not controlled by
time, but by price movement in these charts, the traditional ]apanese
methodology of drawing them does not include time on the horizontal
axis. However, in the charts in this second half of the book, I have included a rough measure of time on the horizontal axis to help provide
referencepoints for my discussions.
The three-line break, renko, and kagi charts share similarities with
one another, but there are discrete and interesting differences between
each of these charting methods. Each chart and its related techniques
will be described in detail later, in their respective chapters. For some of
these new techniques, a trader will need to choosea pre-specified reversal
amount in order to draw a reversal line. In others, it is the market action
that will provide the signal to draw a new line. While the three-line break,
renko, and kagi charts may be different from one another, they are all
powerful weapons that should be part of a trader's technical arsenal.
Some of the advantagesof these new charts include:
L. Making support, resistance,and congestionareasmore evident
2. Capturing the significant moves by filtering out irregular price fluctuations
3. Making the market's overall trend more apparent
4. Providing a broader view of the market by compressing the price action and offering a longer term perspective
5. Helping to determine the time to offset positions: Becausethe candles
do not, as a general rule, provide a price target, the reversal signals
sent out by these new techniques can be used to exit a market position

lntroduction

6. Providing a means of technical analysis for markets that supply only
closes.This is becausethesetechniquesrequire only the closingprices.
Thus, mutual funds and yields on financial instruments such as Tbonds can be analyzed using a three-line break, renko, or kagi chart.
Becausethree-line break, renko and kagi charts are slower to react
than candle charts, they are frequently used by longer term investors.
However, traders with shorter time frame orientations will find that these
charting tools provide a practical and powerful method to determine
trend direction. Once the trend is determined, candle signalscan be used
to trade in the direction of the prevailing trend.
As will be explained in the upcoming chapters, the sensitivity to the
three-line break, renko, or kagi charts can be adjusted by changing reversal criteria. With each of these charts, I will show you how to adjust
the chart's sensitivity. Short-term traders may want to make the charts
more sensitive to the underlying price action. Those who are more concerned about a broader market perspective may want to use a chart with
larger reversal amounts so as to get more information on a chart. This
should help to obtain a historical perspective. This brings out another
important advantage of these new charts; by changing the reversal criteria for these charts, a trader can adjust the sensitivity of the charts to
his or her trading needs.
Generally, the more sensitive the chart, the greater the number of
trading signals and the greater is the possibility of whipsaws, but the
soonerit may get you into a new trend. A disadvantageof large reversal
amounts is that by the time the trend reversal is made the market will
be more distant from the top or bottom.
Choosing a reversal is subjectiveand dependent upon many aspects,
including the market's volatility, the price of the underlying commodity
or stock, a trader's trading style, and his or her time frame orientation
and risk tolerance. Consequently, I will not attempt to find the optimum
reversal amount, but I will let you know some of the more popular reversal criteria used by fapanesetraders.
These new price charts are usually less flexible than are candle charts.
This is because, with candle charts, there are more graduations of a reversal signal. For example, a small real body after an uptrend could be
viewed as a slowing of upside momentum, but not necessarilyas a price
reversal. For the new techniques in Part 2, prices either do or do not
provide reversal signals.
An important principle about trading with these new charts is that
they are usually based on closing prices, so a reversal signal is not confirmed until the close. By that time, the reversal amount may well be
exceeded.For example, if the reversal amount is $2, the market would
