
May 1996

Volume 33, Issue 5
Running, Trading, and Losing
Winning is easy to handle, but what about when all goes not quite so well?

I know a little bit about losing. More than most, I suspect, because the truth is while I have had some
spectacular wins and gains as a trader, I've also had my "fair" share of drubbings. Fact is, the last month or
so have not been very pleasant around my house. A winning trade has been harder to find than a character
witness for Mike Tyson.
In my case it's even worse than for you ... I'm supposed to be an expert and not have this happen, plus
I have several thousand people looking over my shoulder (at all times) seeing how positively poorly I am
doing. Gads, that's enough to make one want to stop publishing.
So how does one handle these streaks of seemingly doomed failure?
My marathon running experience may have helped the most to answer this question. In every
marathon I have ever run, 17 and counting, there has always been a spot where I ran better and faster than
ever expected. And, by the same token, in every marathon I have run there's always been an "equity dip" a

190
point of seemingly no return, no recovery. I'm not kidding here. At mile 23 in one run, I literally laid down
in the street for about 5 minutes while runners I had passed earlier (my winning streak) sailed by.
What I learned about running was that the only way to snap out of those terrible, terrible letdowns
was ... to slow down ... to walk a bit ... even lie down in the street. In short, by stopping the pace and
collecting myself, I was able to pick the pace back up and resume the race. Guess what, gang? It's the
same with losing streaks. When they hit you, as they surely will, back off a bit, slow down, even stop
trading, but stay in the race.

November 1995

Volume 32, Issue 11
Doing the Wrong Thing ... It's So Easy, Isn't it

This business of trading commodities can get pretty funny.
Pretty rough too. Take for example what I think is the number one fault of all traders, the love of a good
debate.
It seems we are, or like to think we are, pretty smart cookies. Therefore "we know better," we argue
our politics, religion and worst of all our markets. Thus when we can plainly see a market is in a downtrend,
we become bottom pickers, trying to out argue the market itself.
Believing in some omnipotent power, we muster up all we have to argue with cold hard facts.
But that's not the half of it ... the larger problem comes from us wanting to "beat" the system or the
crowd. We attempt to do this by jumping the gun ... by getting in ahead of time as we "know" the market,
indicator or whatever will give a signal tomorrow and we want to be there first to prove we outsmarted
everybody.
How to Prevent Jumping the Gun
We are a darned sight more concerned with showing off than we are with showing our winnings. That's
costly in this business. Jumping the gun, arguing with the market (that means not doing what you know you
should do) is just an immature attempt to prove our superiority. There are better, and far less expensive
ways to establish such points. Trading is not a race, jumping the gun serves up no advantage. Speed without
direction will never win a race.

191
The root problem is that we have probably defined intelligence incorrectly. We "smarty pants"
perceive intelligence as an us versus them game and in that process use our supposed superior intellect to
prove either (1) how big we are or (2) how small they are.
Intelligence is not about that, nor has it anything to do with IQ. Intelligence is the ability to resolve
problems. Successful trading is the resolution of market direction, nothing more nor less. The more you
focus on this, and the less on proving something-anything-the more money you will bank at the end of the
year. Take action because it is correct, not because it might get you in quicker or prove how great of a trader
you are. That's how one builds bank account in this business.

April 1996

Volume 33, Issue 4
Boston Marathon, 1996

Pain and agony are found on the streets of Boston as well as La Salle in Chicago ... and give us an
insight into trading commodities.
I spent all of 1995 trying to qualify for the 100th, and greatest, running of the Boston Marathon. At my age,
53, one must run the 26.2 miles in less than 3 hours and 30 minutes. It took 12 marathons, one a month,
before I squeaked in under the wire on the last day of 1995.
Pain and agony makes one's mind focus as well as wander during all those miles. Mine wanders and
focuses on trading ... what I discovered was the amazing similarities needed to succeed at both these
callings.
No one has ever successfully traded or run these blasted races, on a consistent basis, without training.
Training is the underlying key to running a marathon. For my money, literally anyone-that means
you-could traverse those 26.2 miles. All you need to do is start slow, and keep extending your distances.
Eventually, you catch yourself running 40-50 miles a week and ... you are there ... a marathoner. Ditto with
trading. Spend that much time studying, paper or gingerly trading, and suddenly anyone, even you, are in
the chips.
I've been passed by fat old ladies, little kids, and one guy smoking a cigar. Like I said, anyone can do
it! You just learn to deal with pain and agony. It's there every day, in running or trading. Success comes
from dedication, with a definite obsessive passion. There it is, what brings about success in either of these
endeavors ... passion, dedication, obsessiveness ... it's what gets you through the pain ... what brings you to
the finish line.

192

July 1996

Volume 33, Issue 7
It's Not the Trade, It's the Battle

Notes to myself on winning and losing.
Traders are like gunfighters, we are only as good as our last trade. Or so we tell ourselves, thus
committing one of the major mental errors in the game. The truth is there is little if any relationship to our
current or last trade and how we will do overall. jack Schwager makes the point that the best way to
manage money between funds is to give some money to traders that are in large equity downswings.
It is no different with us.
But, we think the one battle (our current or last trade) is the entire war. In so doing, we get so bummed
out, or elated, that we lose focus on the fact that trading is an ongoing war that never ends. It absolutely
never ends. I will be trading until the day I die, that's a given. So, should I be concerned with the outcome
of my current trade?
Proud Ponies or Broken-Down Nag Syndrome
Well sure, to an extent, but it is not the be-all, end-all trade that will make or break my career. Yet
we act like it is, prancing around like either a proud pony or roll over and play dead like an old nag. Which
is also why I'm not betting the ranch on that one trade ... there's more to my career than just the next spin of
the wheel. The reason I am a short-term trader is that I don't have a long-term perspective (trust?). This then
is my largest enemy; the inability to perceive that this is an ongoing process that will, hopefully, never end.
Because of that we need to carefully marshal out our energies and capital to not scatter our talents across
those multispecked charts.
My battle plan is to wage a war, not a battle.

193
August 7996

Volume 33, Issue 8
The Art of Fly-Fishing Revisited

Fly-fishing and today's commodity traders have much in common that we can all learn from ...
While talking to a subscriber who owns a motel on one of the premier fishing streams back east, I
stumbled onto an interesting analogy I'd like to share with you. My daddy taught me the fine art of catching
trout long before the fly-fishing fad set in. Pops was never much of a fly-casting type, but could do an
adequate double hall, carefully selected his tippets and knew the difference between a front-end weighted
line and a double taper.
But he didn't use that stuff very much ... fact is he looked down his nose on the L.L. Bean "fancy
dancer fishermen" as much as they shook their heads at his beloved worms, grubs and grasshoppers. You'd
never catch my dad at a Trout Unlimited meeting ... but he could be seen after dark chasing night crawlers
around our back yard with a flashlight.
I asked him once why he didn't fly-fish more often, to which he replied, "Son, I came out here to
catch fish to take home to eat. Crawlers and Hoppers are the best thing I know of to catch fish with. Believe
me, if those dainty little nymphs caught lots of fish I'd use them ... but I sure as hell wouldn't get all dressed
up in those fancy vests and pricey waders. This sport is about catching, not dressing."
Maybe that's why I don't have real-time quotes in my office, am pretty computer illiterate, don't read
the Wall Street journal and hobnob at Futures conferences decked out in Brooks Brothers suits. Invariably,
successful traders tell me they became winners after they stopped keeping a jillion indicators, watching 3 or
4 monitors and following 5 hot lines every night. “it's the simple stuff that works" is the most common
comment winning traders make.
Sure, you can get all duded out to trade, but the truth is you'll catch more
fish with worms and hoppers on a bent pin than any fly ever tied.

194

November 1996

Volume 33, Issue 11
Fear and Greed, Looking Them in the Face Again

Since they are the strongest emotions to screw up traders' psyches, I know we can never spend too
much time dealing with these demons ...
There's More to Fear Than Fear Itself
Obviously FDR was not only not a capitalist, he was also never a trader. There is a lot to fear about
fear. But what it all gets down to is that fear is a blocking mechanism, a self-protection device, designed to
keep us out of trouble.
While it's wise for fear to block or stop you from going into dark alleys after midnight, it's not wise to
be afraid of taking trades.
My personal experience, plus that of talking to thousands of traders, is that the very best trades are the
ones we fear the most. The greater your level of fear, the better the chances for a winning trade.
This makes absolute sense when you look at the opposite side of the coin, the trades we fear the least
are the most dangerous. Why is this? Because in the world of speculation, the rules of investment profits are
turned upside down; what looks good is bad, what looks bad is good. Trades that look like "sure things"
seldom are, which is why trading is so difficult.
The point trades that make you tremble late at night are the ones you must take. But you can't. Wrong!
You can take them once you have the realization that the risk on all trades is the same-the amount of your
stop loss. A trade that looks like it's designed by Stephen King has no more risk than one from Mr. Rogers.
AS LONG AS YOU USE AN ABSOLUTE DOLLAR STOP YOU WILL BLAST AWAY THE
POTENTIAL RISK OF WHAT APPEARS TO BE A RISKY TRADE. In short, stops allow smart traders
to take the trades everyone else passes by.
Getting a Grip on Greed
Greed is a different breed of cat. The purpose of greed is to motivate, to cause us to excel, to strive for
perfection ... but since this never has been and never will be a perfect game or business ... greed causes us to
hold our losers, and winners, too long.

195
Plus, as I've learned the hard way, greed is the strongest of these two emotions. More money is lost due
to overstaying positions (greed) than exiting due to the fear of losing money. Greed kills just as speed kills
as we get out of control. The solution?
Systematic exit points.
The purpose of a system is to control your emotions of fear and greed, that's really why we have
systems ... to make it easy. So if you know where to take profits, you eliminate the power greed has over
you ... as long as you follow the system's rules. By getting a handle on fear (with stops) and greed (with
known exit points or rules), we can trade free of emotional baggage.

February 7997

Volume 34, Issue 2
Pepsi Proves the Point

Last year we wrote about the importance of focus using Pepsi Cola as an example, this year the
market proves our point ...
It's All About Focus
Last year we pointed out that Pepsi Cola was too broadly diversified ... too unfocused ... hence their market
valuation on sales was far less than Coca-Cola.
Last week Pepsi announced they were getting rid of their restaurant business, Kentucky Fried
Chicken, Taco Bell, and Pizza Hut and, lo and behold, the stock jumped up!
This is an all important life-lesson; You cannot do anything well without being totally focused.
Focus means you must first get rid of distractions, and annoyances to your goal or lifestyle. Then you
need to continually define and redefine your purpose so that you can work on focus to and for that purpose.
As traders this means we need to identify what our personal market focus is. For some it means just
short-term trading, for others it may mean just taking trades set up by Commercials and the Public, for
others it may mean just following cycles, trendlines of W.D. Gann.... but it can never mean following all
this stuff ... which is exactly what most traders do. Defining your time frame of trading, one day, 3-6 days,
10-20 days, or longer, will give you trading perspective, plus enable you to use the indicators that work
best for that time frame.

196
Most people seem to think they can affirm their way to market success with positive thinking, talking
with their inner child or perhaps scheme with goals. That's devastatingly wrong. Success in this business
comes only from focus. The more focused you are, the better of a trader you will be.

April 1997

Volume 34, Issue 4

Why Most Traders Lose Most of the Time
I've spent years pondering why we are not more successful in our trading and think I may have
the answer ..
It really gets down to this ... markets can spin on
a dime and most traders cannot.
That's why so many people fail at what looks like an easy game.
The scenario is that you get a signal to buy long. While you do that, your mind, being only human,
affixes itself to the idea the markets will, should, and must go up. Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!
But a funny thing happens along the way; the market, being as fickle as it is, decides to head South. In that
process, your technical bag of tricks clearly issues a warning if not an out and out sell signal. See ... technical
analysis "works."
Problem is, your reactive greed filled mind does not. It still wants that buy signal to be correct so it
tells you to hang on; that what was, may yet become reality. Meanwhile reality is telling you that what was,
was. Was, as in past tense. To compound the error, you have taken a few self-images or positive thinking
classes or had a high school coach teach you the value of "hanging in there." So you do ... to the chagrin of
your real self-image.
We want to be right so badly that once our mind establishes a viewpoint (the market will rally), it takes
hell and high water (that translates into a margin call) to get us to face up to reality.
Let me drive the point home. There's a bank robber (they've got about as much larceny in their hearts
as traders) whose stakeout man tells him there's plenty of time to raid the vaults so he begins the chicanery,
gleefully picking up the cash he's been hoping for. But, then the lookout beeps to say "the cops are
coming." A bank robber would split, he'd change his plans. That's the difference between traders and bank
robbers ... traders would stay in the bank hoping the cop alert was a false signal!

197
The last signal, or indication in your work, is what you should be following, not the one before last
that you are still hoping will work. Hope does not work in this business. Following the market does, that's
reality. The instant you learn to trade reality, not wishes, you will break through the wall of fire to become a
successful trader. Go for it!

May 1997

Volume 34, Issue 5
A Review of Losing Trades Showed That

Subscribers sent me their trade recaps and I found that they are all doing pretty much the some
thing.
What Beginning Traders Have in Common
I'm spending a lot of time on losing this year, not because we are so
inexperienced with it but because I figure that if you don't lose trading
you should do pretty well in this game.
After a scrutiny of several subs' trades, a couple of things popped out, I'd like to share with you this
month.
In Trading, the Weight of Evidence Does Not Prove the Point
The first thing I noticed is that these guys (which means all of us) were almost always buying at the
end of a move. Why would that be? I suspect that's because novice traders wait and wait until it looks or
feels like all the evidence is in ... then they take action ... buying at the high or selling the low.
This got me to thinking our problems are buying too soon-we are afraid of missing the move-or
buying too late-we want proof the move is really underway.
The balance point to this, I think, is that we cannot buy until price has stopped going down, nor
can we buy during the emotions of a strong rally. You need some indication from the market it will
rally, but not too much, you can't wait until all the lights are green. The market will always try to scare
you out/in or wear you out/in. It is these two extremes, you must stay away from. If you are getting in
because of emotions, afraid the move has gotten away without you, pass on the trade ... it's already too
late.

198
Plus, once in a position we must give the market some room to move in our favor. That was the
second most glaring error. These traders noticed many of their trades would have been correct if they
used no stop. Well we do need stops, the problem was their stops were too close. Since they didn't want
to lose much, they used close stops ... and just lost more often! No one I know really has pinpoint
precision timing, UNTIL SOMEONE DOES, stops need to be a good distance away from the market if
we are to find success in trading.

June 1997

Volume 34, Issue 6
If You're Supposed to Quit When You Are Ahead,
Shouldn't You Start When You Are Behind?

At the risk of breaking the Zurich Axiom to not seek order where there is none, I've been trying to
determine if in fact it makes sense to start trading a system-or increase the number of contracts you are
trading-when the system bangs out losers, not winners.
This viewpoint has long been debated by mathematicians and those who profess to understand money
management. They are squarely of the opinion that YOU CANNOT AND MUST NOT increase or start
trading when a system begins to falter. They are afraid it's just rain before a downpour.
Their point is that you may well be boarding a sinking ship, so it's best to stay ashore until you see the
ship right herself with a few winning trades.
Traders, on the other hand, or at least this trader, have seen countless drawdowns turned around. Every
year. For years. So we are inclined to think that even the worse storm is followed by brilliant sunshine.
Always.
An Expert Speaks
In an attempt to get to the bottom of this, I first checked with the leading proponent of money
management schemes, and long-time friend, Ralph Vince. His comments were illuminating; "First," he
said, "The worse case is that all trades, winners or losers, are random. If that's the case, there is no
difference between starting after a positive or negative streak. You will be doing yourself no service, or
disservice by such an approach.
"The big question is if the system will continue working. I've done tons of research on that and have
not found anything that predicts if a system or approach will continue to make money."

199
We agreed on this point. Even the fact a system has made money hand over fist-in real trading-for
years-does not mean it will in the future. All we know about the future is that it will get here and that it will
not be what we expected it to be. A system is based on some thing, if that thing or condition changes, out
the window goes the system. To that extent, the past is meaningless to prove a point, of even a
nonoptimized approach, to trading.
if the future is at all close to the past," Ralph added, "Then, starting after losses will be to your
advantage for the simple reason that you buy dips in bull markets-price goes higher. Like price, your equity
curve will make a new high as well."
The bottom line then is that IF YOU EXPECT A SYSTEM TO HOLD UP you want a strategy for
starting up or increasing contracts after losses. If you don't expect it to hold up, why are you trading it? The
real bottom line bet is, "Will the system continue working?" That's unanswerable, but a choice we must
make.
Simple Math
If you flip a fair coin 100 times, it should come up heads 50 times, tails 50, 25 times there will be two
wins in a row, 12.5 times 3 in a row, and 4 in a row 6.25 times. Get it? A 50/50 system should always give
50 percent chance of next decision being repeated.
Or will it? In a Bond system I trade there has been 68 percent accuracy on 283 trades. In theory,
if there has been a losing trade, there is a 68 percent chance of the next trade being a winner, two
losers in a row, still a 68 percent win rate for the next trade.
But, that's not the reality of systems I use! In checking the systems I trade I found something truly
amazing. In most of the systems the accuracy rate persisted after one losing trade, and in some for two
losses in a row. But, after three losses in a row most of the systems (which were about 65 percent
accurate) jumped up to over 80 percent winners.
Best yet, the average winning trade was about 130 percent greater than all average winning trades!
Wow, we are on to something here ... proof of what I have always done, increase my positions following
enough losses that I got angry with myself!
I know ... I know ... you want some hard rules of how to implement such a strategy; I'II continue
working on that, and hopefully guys like Ralph, Ryan Jones, and Mark Thorn will have some insight into
all this. For now, my rule will be to increase one unit following three losing trades.

200
July 1997

Volume 34, Issue 7
Don't "Show Me the Money"

Tom Cruise had it all wrong in Jerry McCuire, but what would you expect from Hollywood,
brilliance?
It's Not About the Money
I've spent most of the last 30 days in hospitals with my mother's massive heart attack. Trust me,
having all the money in the world could not offset being deprived of health. I have been broke and down
and out in my life ... and I'll take that to hospital living any day of the week.
You probably know that. But I'd like to think I picked up some wisdom while there. After all, you know
me, the constant researcher, I was asking questions, checking out statistics and all to figure out how to
prevent ending up there.
This quest really began years ago when Dr. Barney Meltzer told me I had two choices, to either be a
fabulously wealthy commodity trader with all sorts of physical ailments or settle for making a lot of
money, but living more fully and more functional than I was. Thanks to Barney, I got off the adrenaline
lifestyle, changed a few things, and here I am a pretty happy person. Which I wasn't then even though it
was not unusual to make $350,000 to $900,000 a month back then!
In a Nutshell-How to Stay Healthy (The Wealth Will Follow)
I spent several nights with the emergency center crew. They said about 20 percent of their patients
just let something go too long, a cold, sore throat, infection, so at 2 AM decided they "had" to do
something about it. They estimated that 60 percent of their "customers" were there because of drugs or
alcohol. Sure, the trauma may have been a car wreck, knife or gun fight (both such popular sports in
Montana that there's a sign on the hospital door requesting all guns be checked in at the main desk), but the
cause of the problem was rooted in too many and too much chemicals of one form or another.
So, that's 80 percent of the problems. Of the remaining 20 percent, I was told 10 percent were work
related, and the remaining 10 percent were genuine accidents! There's a lesson here ... don't do drugs, drink
too much, or go to work!
