
Major Types and Families of ETFs

17

know when the contracts are set to expire (the expiration dates are set each month),
this generally exposes the commodity ETF to a guaranteed loss.
Therefore, if a fund can’t easily take physical delivery as is the case with gas or
oil then contango presents a constant problem. Why? In most cases it is not practical
or not permitted per the prospectus for an ETF to take delivery of the physical asset.
Therefore, the fund manager must roll the expiring contract over immediately and
pay the temporarily higher price. Again, this results in a guaranteed loss for the fund.
To illustrate the hazards of contango, take a look at the percentage-change chart in
Figure 2.1, which compares the prices of the E-mini Crude Oil Continuous Contract
and the United States Oil Fund ETF (USO) over a period of several years.
From its inception in 2006 through mid-2011, USO has fallen almost 48 percent,
but the E-mini futures Crude Oil Continuous Contract is down only 30.1 percent.
USO has underperformed crude oil futures by nearly 18 percent over a ﬁve-year period.
A similar example of substantial underperformance can be found by comparing the price movements of E-mini Natural Gas Continuous Contract versus U.S.
Natural Gas Fund (UNG), shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.3 is a graphic that summarizes the dangers of contango.
Contango is the reason why long-term investing in commodity ETFs is an illadvised venture, with the possible exception of commodities for which it is easy to

FIGURE 2.1 Relative Performance of E-mini Crude Oil Continuous Contract versus

U.S. Oil Fund (USO)

Source: TradeStation

18

ETF Overview and Selection

FIGURE 2.2 Relative Performance of E-mini Natural Gas Continuous Contract versus U.S. Natural

Gas Fund (UNG)

Source: TradeStation

FIGURE 2.3 The Dangers of Contango
Contango occurs when the forward
month’s contract costs more than
the expiring contract.

Hypothetical Price Action
Close:
$33.00

Open:
$34.00

Open:
$31.00

Close:
$30.00
July
Open:
Close: $21.00
$20.00
June contract costs
$1.00 more than
June
May contract resulting
in a 5% increase to
roll the contract over.
Close ⫽ closing price for month per contract
Open ⫽ opening price for month per contract

August
Fore each month in this example, if the was trading
one million units, the losses incurred due to Contango
would be $1,000,000 per month ($1 ⫻ 1 million units).

Major Types and Families of ETFs

19

FIGURE 2.4 Relative Performance of SPDR Gold Trust ETF (GLD) versus the E-mini Spot Gold

Continuous Contract

Source: TradeStation

take physical delivery. Gold and silver are good examples of commodities for which
it is easy to take delivery because they are inexpensive to store, require minimal storage space, and don’t suffer from wastage or have a limited shelf life. Consequently,
precious-metal ETFs have performed well compared to their commodity cousins. The
charts in Figure 2.4 and Figure 2.5 show how much better these types of commodity
ETFs have performed, compared to those in which taking physical delivery is not easy.
The relative ease of taking delivery of silver and gold neutralizes the effects of
front running and contango. Precious metals require limited and inexpensive storage
space and do not suffer from spoilage or wastage. On the other hand, commodities
such as corn, cattle, and oil require huge storage facilities and constant upkeep, and
they suffer from wastage and/or a limited shelf life.
Unless the fund is able to take delivery of the physical commodity, the ETF is
virtually guaranteed to underperform its index due to the effects of rollover, contango,
fees, and front running.
A New Generation of Commodity ETNs—The
Fight against Contango

A new generation of ETNs (exchange-traded notes; more on the difference between
ETNs and ETFs in the next section) seeks to exploit and signiﬁcantly reduce the
negative effects of contango. There are two basic strategies being employed. The ﬁrst

20

ETF Overview and Selection

FIGURE 2.5 Relative Performance of iShares Silver Trust (SLV) versus the E-mini Spot Silver
Continuous Contract

Source: TradeStation

involves the same practices used by commodity speculators: Go short the front-month
contract and long intermediate-term forward-month contracts. The ﬁrst of this type
product was unveiled in June 2010 by UBS. The concept is reasonably simple and
is described in the UBS ETRACS Natural Gas Futures Contango ETN as follows:
“Exchange Traded Access Securities (ETRACS) are innovative investment products
offering easy access to markets and strategies that may not be readily available in
the existing marketplace. The ETRACS Natural Gas Futures Contango ETN is
designed to capitalize on natural gas markets in a state of contango, as evidenced by
an upward sloping futures curve, while minimizing the exposure to absolute changes
in futures prices. The ETRACS Natural Gas Futures Contango ETN is linked to the
performance of the ISE Natural Gas Futures Spread™ Index (the Index)—Ticker:
GYY.” Here’s more about the index, and what it seeks to provide (from the web site
of UBS):
The ISE Natural Gas Futures Spread™ Index, through a series of investments in
natural gas sub-indices, effectively provides short exposure in front month natural gas
futures contracts and long exposure in mid-term natural gas futures contracts. This is
achieved by taking a 100% long position in the components of the ISE Short Front
Month Natural Gas Futures™ Index, which provides short (or inverse) exposure to
the ISE Long Front Month Natural Gas Futures™ Index and an aggregate 100%
long position in the components of the ISE Twelfth Month Natural Gas Futures™
Index, ISE Thirteenth Month Natural Gas Futures™ Index and ISE Fourteenth

Major Types and Families of ETFs

21

Natural Gas Futures™ Index (33.33% per index), which provides long exposure to
the mid-term Henry Hub Natural Gas Futures (NG) futures contracts. The index
is rebalanced monthly before the Sub-Indices’ roll process to maintain the 1:1 ratio.
The performance of the Index is reduced by the Fee Amount of 0.85% per annum,
and increased by the Financing Payment. The Index was created in June 2011 and
has no performance history prior to that date.

Currency ETFs

Launched in the U.S. markets in 2007, currency ETFs enable investors to proﬁt
from changes in various currencies around the world. Like the trading of commodities futures contracts, the actual currency markets formerly required investors to take
large amounts of leverage to proﬁt from a small movement in the price of a currency.
Currency ETFs simplify the process and keep leverage more in line with that of traditional stock investing.
Dominated by the Rydex Investments fund family, the CurrencyShares family of ETFs
consists of eight products: Australian Dollar Trust (FXA), British Pound Sterling Trust (FXB),
Canadian Dollar Trust (FXC), Euro Trust (FXE), Japanese Yen Trust (FXY), Mexican Peso
Trust (FXM), Swedish Krona Trust (FXS), and Swiss Franc Trust (FXF). Combined assets
in these funds surpassed $1 billion in their ﬁrst year of trading. The FXE, which tracks the
price of the euro relative to the U.S. dollar, is the most popular of the family.
Figuring the prices of these ETFs is relatively easy. Aside from a small percentage
of operating expenses, one share of FXE, for example, is equivalent to the price of
1 euro times 100.
As a whole, currency ETFs are popular with investors who like to take advantage of changes in international interest rates, as well as geopolitical situations. Their
liquidity and simplicity is also a bonus for those who don’t want to invest the necessary time in learning entirely new markets. Most important, currency ETFs tend to
maintain their trends (either up or down) for years at a time. This makes them ideal
for technical traders who look to proﬁt from steady trends.
Currency ETFs often realize most of their gains in the form of overnight gaps—
a potentially confusing situation. Since the actual currency markets trade 24 hours per
day but the ETFs trade only during stock market hours, their opening prices reﬂect
changes that occurred overseas, when most investors in the United States were sleeping. If you’re aware of this, it’s not a big deal because you can simply adjust your stoploss orders to compensate for opening prices that vary signiﬁcantly from the previous
day’s closing prices (gaps).

Inversely Correlated and Leveraged ETFs

The inversely correlated ETF is a rather innovative product and perhaps the most
revolutionary development in the world of exchange-traded funds since S&P’s launch
of the SPDR in 1993. This type of ETF, dominated by the ProShares fund family,

22

ETF Overview and Selection

enables investors and traders to take a bearish stance on the markets by simply buying
an ETF. Inversely correlated ETFs are tied to broad-based indexes such as the S&P
500 and Nasdaq, as well as industry sectors such as semiconductors or utilities, but are
constructed in such a way that they move in the opposite direction of the underlying
index. As the markets go down, the price of these ETFs goes up (and vice versa). This
is similar to selling short, but is done through buying instead.
So why not just sell short an ETF instead? The biggest reason is that cash retirement accounts such as IRAs or 401(k) plans cannot use margin (leverage beyond the
actual cash value of the account); therefore, short positions cannot be established in
them. Nevertheless, with inversely correlated ETFs, investors and traders can essentially sell short the broad market and speciﬁc industry sectors without having a marginable account.
Although most investors would never allow the situation to occur, actual short
selling can theoretically result in losses greater than the original amount risked. But
with the ProShares Short family of funds, one’s maximum risk is limited to the initial
amount of the purchase.
In addition to inversely correlated ETFs, the ProShares Ultra family of ETFs also
offers funds that are designed to move at double the percentage price change of the underlying index. These are known as “leveraged ETFs.” If the Dow gains 1 percent, the leveraged Ultra Dow30 ProShares (DDM) gains approximately 2 percent. The UltraShort
Dow30 ProShares (DXD) will gain approximately 4 percent if the Dow drops 2 percent.
Since most of the broad-based market indexes are less volatile than individual stocks, the
leveraged ETFs enable investors and traders to get a potentially higher return on investment. Just remember that leverage also works against you more when you’re wrong. The
Direxion family of ETFs also has a new suite of inverse and leveraged ETFs, but are
intended to be leveraged to 3 times, rather than 2 times, the underlying index.
At the time of publication of the ﬁrst edition of this book, leveraged and inversely
correlated (short) ETFs were in their infancy, and many of the subtleties and potential
pitfalls were not well understood by those selling or buying these products. However,
now that leveraged ETFs have been trading for several years and ample performance
data is available, many investors have learned the hard way that both leverage and
short selling (via inverse ETFs) are a bit more complex and carry more risk than what
may have been initially assumed.
To a large extent, both legislators and the media have viliﬁed leveraged and inverse
ETFs with little understanding of how they work or their stated purpose. Further, very
little clear and concise information seems to be available to the investor that explains
the appropriate use and potential pitfalls of leveraged and inverse ETFs. In reality,
these types of ETFs are neither bad nor all that difﬁcult to understand. Further, if used
properly, they can be of great beneﬁt to a trader and protect or enhance the value of
any portfolio. But the most important concept to grasp when trading leveraged ETFs
is that these funds reset their exposure to the market on a daily basis in proportion
to the asset value of the fund at the close. Because they are reset daily, leveraged ETFs
are intended to be used only as very-short-term trading vehicles (typically one, or possibly
two days).

23

Major Types and Families of ETFs

Unraveling the Leveraged ETF Mystery

In the ﬁnancial markets, leverage is deﬁned as the use of debt or exotic ﬁnancial
instruments such as options or futures contracts, to control more of a particular
asset than funds available would otherwise allow. Leveraged ETFs seek to provide a
multiple (typically 2x or 3x) of the return of a given index, currency, or asset but only
for a single day. At the end of each day these funds reset to reﬂect the value for that
particular day. In other words, the value of the ETF is adjusted (reset) daily in order
to maintain the proportional exposure to the index, currency, stock sector, or commodity. As the name implies, “inverse” ETFs are designed to go up in value when
the index, commodity, currency, or underlying stocks decline in value. Conversely,
if the underlying asset rallies, the inverse ETF will fall in value resulting in a loss for
the investor.
To understand leveraged ETFs, one must ﬁrst understand the concept of daily
resets. The diagram below provides a very-easy-to-understand picture of how resetting works. The concept is actually quite simple. On the day the ETF opens for
trading, an initial allocation of funds and the exposure of those funds are established based on the daily performance objectives of the fund. Remember, the reset
occurs daily and therefore the fund’s performance objectives are intended to mirror
only the performance of the index by a magnitude of two or three times the movement of the index for that day only (a single day). This holds true for both long
and inverse leveraged ETFs.
Table 2.2 presents a clear case for the dangers of leveraged and inverse ETFs
when they are not used properly. The table compares the performance of the S&P
500 index for the ﬁrst six months of 2009 to the performance of a 2x long ETF, a 1x
inverse ETF, and a 2x Inverse ETF. While the S&P 500 index was up 3.165 percent
over the six-month period, the 2x long ETF returned a –.68 percent return (negative
return), the 1x inverse ETF returned –8.91 percent, and the 2x inverse ETF returned
–21.68 percent. Clearly all three ETFs underperformed, based upon uninformed
wisdom. The compounding effect of daily resets led to disastrous results for a buyand-hold strategy. However, it’s important to understand that none of these funds
signiﬁcantly underperformed if compared to their stated objective of “mirroring the
index for a single day.” Clearly, leveraged and inverse ETFs are not intended to be
held for extended periods.

TABLE 2.2

The Impact of Daily Resets on the Expected Returns of Leveraged ETF Instruments

S&P 500 Index Return: 3.163%
Fund

Ratio

Naïve Expectation

Actual Return

Leveraged S&P 500
Inverse S&P 500
Leveraged Inverse S&P 500

2x
–1x
–2x

6.33%
–3.16%
–6.33%

–0.68%
–8.91%
–21.68%

Source: Morningstar

24

ETF Overview and Selection

Actively Managed ETFs

In late 2007, several ﬁrms ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to
launch the ﬁrst “actively managed ETF.” Unlike the makeup of mutual funds, which is
determined by a fund manager who uses discretion to select the best stocks, ETF composition has traditionally been based on some type of underlying benchmark index.
Some companies, such as PowerShares, have taken ETF composition a step further
by using sophisticated computer programs to analyze and make slight changes to the
portfolio on a regular basis. However, prior to 2007 and the advent of actively managed
ETFs, human discretion was not used to select the stocks constituting an ETF.
Accompanied by a lot of controversy, actively managed ETFs seek to level the
playing ﬁeld between mutual funds and ETFs. Formerly, mutual fund managers
were not really worried about ETFs because they were all tied to speciﬁc benchmark
indexes, but companies in the process of applying for the ﬁrst actively managed ETFs
are causing a bit of concern for mutual fund managers who are afraid of losing business to the awesome growth of ETFs.
Whether human discretion in actively managed ETFs will be approved remains
to be seen, but I believe the decision won’t make a big difference either way. Since my
strategy is based on technical analysis, the same patterns of relative strength and weakness apply, regardless of whether the ETFs are actively managed.

Popular ETF Families

Most types of ETFs are offered through a diverse mix of fund families. Having a
basic knowledge of these families is important because it enables you to pick the top
performing ETF within each sector. This will be discussed further in Part II. Below is
a listing of the major ETF families on the market, as well as a brief overview of each.
Specialized families with only a few ETF products are not discussed here.
iShares. With more than 200 ETFs to choose from, iShares has the largest offering of
funds on the market. Issued by Barclays Global Investors, iShares ETFs include
the following types: broad-based, market segment, international, industry sector,
ﬁxed-income (bonds), commodity, and a few specialty ETFs. (See ishares.com for
more details.)
HOLDRs. Unlike the diverse mix of iShares offerings, all HOLDRs (products of
Merrill Lynch) are only for investing or trading in speciﬁc industry sectors.
Although only 17 HOLDRs exist, this family includes a couple of the most popular ETFs in the marketplace. The semiconductor HOLDR (SMH) is one such
example.
Despite their popularity, the HOLDRs have several important drawbacks.
First, each one was originally designed to have only 20 stocks in its portfolio and

Major Types and Families of ETFs

25

for its portfolio to always include the same underlying stocks. Because the number of shares of each underlying stock never varies, changes in share prices over
the years has had the unfortunate result of certain companies within each sector
developing a very high percentage weighting within each HOLDR. Be aware
that lopsided, minimally diversiﬁed portfolios often exist within the HOLDRs.
Further, note that HOLDRs can only be traded in increments of 100 shares, as
odd lots are not permissible.
Because of the problems above, speciﬁcally the lack of diversiﬁcation within
each ETF, the HOLDRs have been slipping in popularity among investors in
recent years (based on declining average daily volume). The HOLDRs seem to
have the problem of not being able to change to keep up with the times, which
is one reason why I rarely trade this family of ETFs in the Morpheus Capital
hedge fund. (See holdrs.com for more details.)
PowerShares. The PowerShares family of ETFs is designed in an impressively unique
way. Unlike many ETF families in which the underlying stocks rarely change, the
PowerShares ETFs use “dynamic indexing” in order to constantly search out the best
performing stocks within each index. Based on a sophisticated quantitative selection process, dynamic indexing enables the underlying securities to change on a
quarterly basis. The underlying stocks that comprise the ETFs of most other families
are designed only to change through acquisitions. Conversely, the dynamic indexing
of the PowerShares enables underperforming stocks within the sector to be automatically replaced by the stocks with the highest gains within the sector. This often
enables the PowerShares to outperform other ETF families within the same sector.
As of mid-2011, PowerShares has 120 offerings, covering nearly every type
of ETF, including actively managed, asset allocation, broad market, commodity,
currency, ﬁxed-income, industry sector, and international. PowerShares is also
home to the quite popular Nasdaq 100 Index Tracking Fund (QQQ). (See invescopowershares.com for more details.)
ProShares. Best known for its unique, inversely correlated “short” ETFs, the ProShares
family has created an abundance of opportunities for ETF traders and investors.
Its present offering of 121 ETFs is divided into three categories: Ultra (leveraged
at 2:1), Short (inversely correlated), Alpha (advanced investing strategies), and
Volatility (beneﬁting from market volatility).
The stock market’s correction that began in July 2007 was a boon to the success of the ProShares Short and UltraShort ETFs. At the beginning of 2007, the
UltraShort S&P500 ProShares (SDS) was averaging just 350,000 shares per day.
In September 2007, more than 15 million shares changed hands in an average
day. The other Short ETFs in the family have experienced similar growth rates.
Within just one year after their launch in 2006, the ProShares family of ETFs
had already surpassed total assets of $7 billion. Obviously, the concept has been
well received and the ProShares ETFs are here to stay. (See proshares.com for
more details.)

26

ETF Overview and Selection

Direxion Shares. Following the release of the inverse and leveraged ETFs from
ProShares, this family of ETFs joined the scene. The main difference, however, is
that the Direxion Shares are leveraged to trade at roughly three times the performance of the underlying index, not two. (See direxionshares.com for more details.)
Vanguard. Better known for its diverse selection of traditional mutual funds, Vanguard
offers a well-rounded set of more than 30 ETFs. The Vanguard ETFs primarily consist of broad-based indexes and speciﬁc industry sectors, although there
are several international ETFs that encompass whole continents. Vanguard also
offers several ﬁxed-income ETFs. (See vanguard.com/jumppage/etfs/index.html
for more details.)
SPDRs. Under the umbrella of State Street Global Advisors (SSGA) are approximately 50 SPDRs (pronounced spiders). Types include broad based, market segment, industry sector, international, and ﬁxed income. Although it retains its
former StreetTRACKS name, the Gold Trust (GLD) is also part of the SSGA
fund family. Also managed by SSGA are two of the most popular ETFs on
the planet, the S&P 500 SPDR (SPY) and the Dow Diamonds (DIA). As of
mid-2011, SPY was trading an average daily volume of more than 182 million
shares, down slightly from its peak popularity of 220 million shares in 2007.
(See spdrs.com for more details.)
Market Vectors. One of the newest players in the ETF world, the Market Vectors, by
Van Eck Global, offer a unique, concise group of funds presently not offered by any
other ETF families. The group of more than 20 ETFs covers industries from nuclear
energy to solar energy to coal mining to steel, as well as unique international ETFs.
(See vaneck.com/page_mv.aspx?Group=ETF for more details.)
Rydex. The most interesting family of ETFs from Rydex are the CurrencyShares,
which track the price of various foreign currencies against the U.S. dollar. Investing
in CurrencyShares is a great way to beneﬁt from currency trading without getting involved with the foreign exchange (forex). Rydex also has a small selection
of broad-based, market-segment, and “equal weight” industry-sector ETFs. (See
currencyshares.com and rydexfunds.com for more details.)
Others. Additionally, there are a few other families of ETFs, such as Claymore, First
Trust, and WisdomTree, as well as a handful of niche ETFs, like U.S Dollar Bull
(UUP). However, many ETFs from these newer or lesser-known ETF families
are very lightly traded, and it’s not uncommon for ETFs to close up shop and
distribute assets if they decline too much in popularity. As such, I generally stick
to trading only the higher-volume ETFs and ETF families.
Guide to ETF Families
