
Managing Currency Risk II

167

ratio should be zero. Thus, if the currency manager is operating under a symmetrical benchmark,
the manager would go overweight the hedge by 50% when the interest rate differential is in
their favour and underweight by 50% when it represents a cost.
The results of this strategy have proved to be extremely robust and have been tested across
some 91 currency pairs. For the sake of simplicity and clarity, only seven of these are shown
in Figure 8.2.
Of necessity, when the interest rate differential is favourable, the differential forward strategy
will have the same returns as a full forward hedge. Equally, when the interest rate differential
represents a cost, the differential forward strategy will have the same returns as an unhedged
strategy. Thus, overall, the returns of the differential forward strategy will be a function of
both fully hedged and fully unhedged strategies. The advantages of such a strategy are the
following:

r As established, it has consistently added alpha for active currency managers.
r Equally, it has also reduced risk relative to benchmarks.
r The strategy combines the decisiveness of a full hedge with signiﬁcant ﬂexibility when used
with a symmetrical benchmark.

r The expected returns of the differential forward strategy are a function both of the expected
returns of the fully hedged and fully unhedged strategies.
Given that the differential forward strategy is based on exploiting the principle of “forward
rate bias”, it must follow to an extent that its expected returns are also a function in turn of the
extent of that forward rate bias and thus of the interest rate differential relative to the expected
future interest rate differential. For any given interest rate differential, the hedging strategy
will perform best when the correlation between the hedged and unhedged returns is more
negative.

8.7.2 Trend-Following Strategy
A second popular strategy for active currency managers is the “trend-following” strategy, which
involves using several technical moving averages to provide trading or hedging signals. Active
currency managers can use this strategy to either trade around their benchmark in order to add
alpha, or alternatively to provide a hedging signal. The academic backing for trend-following
strategies is as deep as that for the differential forward strategy, including works by Bilson
(1990, 1993), Taylor (1990), LeBaron (1991) and Levich and Thomas (1993), which showed
that these strategies can indeed produce consistent excess returns over sustained periods of
time. I would suggest however that the seminal breakthrough in this area came in the form
of the note by Lequeux and Acar (1998), which gave the strategy more speciﬁc properties by
suggesting that in order to be representative of the various durations followed by investors an
equally weighted portfolio based on three moving averages of 32, 61 and 117 days would be
most appropriate. Simply put, the core idea behind this strategy is to go long the currency pair
when the price is above a moving average of a given length and to go short the currency pair
when it is below. More speciﬁcally, if the spot exchange rate is above all three moving averages,
hedge the foreign currency exposure 100%. If it is above only two out of the three moving
averages, hedge one-third of the position. In all other cases, leave the position unhedged.

R
ZA
=>
Y
JP

−15%

−10%

−5%

0%

5%

10%

15%

R
EU
=>
Y
JP

K
SE
=>
D
S
U

M
FI
=>
D
A
C

Unhedged

F
H
C
=>
P
B
G

Differential

K
BP
EK
SD
AD
O
G
U
C
>S
>N
=>
=>
=>
=
K=
F
F
K
M
H
H
O
FI
C
C
N
SE
Exposures (Reciprocals included)
Left currency = Base of investor ; Right currency = Denomination of foreign asset

F
H
C
=>
D
S
U

Hedged

SD
U
=>
K
SE

Y
JP
=>
R
EU

Y
JP
=>
R
ZA

Figure 8.2 Differential strategy returns tested over 91 currency pairs and reciprocals: May 1990–April 2000 (x-axis labels have been limited to seven of
the currency pairs for increased clarity)

Annualized Returns

168
Currency Strategy

Managing Currency Risk II

169

Example
For instance, consider the example of a Euro-based portfolio manager who invests in US
equities and ﬁxed income. In order to allow the potential for adding alpha, the portfolio manager
has given a mandate to an active currency overlay manager, who is allowed to operate under a
symmetrical currency hedging benchmark which gives the most ﬂexibility for providing that
alpha. Using a trend-following strategy, the currency overlay manager would hedge 100%
of the underlying US exposure if spot Euro–dollar broke above all three of the 32-, 61- and
117-day moving averages. If Euro–dollar was only able to break above two out of the three
moving averages, the currency overlay manager would hedge only one-third of the underlying.
In all other cases, they would remain unhedged.
As with the differential forward strategy, the trend-following strategy may involve numerous
transactions and thus may cause potential concern for investors with regard to transaction costs.
However, such costs have historically been small relative both to the consistent returns that
have been provided by such strategies and also to the potential losses of not hedging. Figure 8.3
looks at the dollar–mark exchange rate from 1975 to 2000, showing clearly that there were
deﬁnite and sustained trends, both in the exchange rate and in interest rate differentials which
could have been — and were — exploited to varying degrees by the differential forward and
trend-following strategies.

8.7.3 Optimization of the Carry Trade
The ﬁnal strategy example that we will look at for active currency managers is that of optimizing
the carry trade. We looked at the carry trade idea initially in Chapter 2 and will do so again in
Chapter 9 in the context of an appropriate strategy for currency speculators, when using a risk
appetite indicator, for the purpose of gauging when are the best and worst times to buy higher
carry currencies (and thus go short the lower carry currencies).
This combination of a risk appetite indicator and a basket of higher carry currencies can
also be used for the purpose of currency hedging by an active currency manager who trades
and hedges currency risk around their benchmark. For a currency speculator, the principle of
the risk appetite/carry trade combination is that the basket of higher carry currencies should
be bought when the risk appetite indicator is in either risk-seeking or risk-neutral mode and
should be shorted when it is in risk-aversion mode. Similarly, the currency hedger could use
this combination of indicators to go underweight the hedge relative to the benchmark in higher
carry currencies when the risk appetite indicator is benign and overweight when the indicator
moves into risk aversion. Such a strategy should reduce transaction costs relative to a passive
currency management programme, while also reducing the portfolio’s overall risk and adding
alpha.
Yet, we can ﬁne tune this strategy still further using a portfolio optimizer to take into account
the volatility and correlation of currencies in addition to their yield differentials alone. This
should both in theory and practice produce better returns than the simple carry trade strategy.
The carry trade can be an excellent strategy by itself for adding alpha, however it can also exhibit
substantial volatility at times. A ﬁne example of this was when the dollar–yen exchange rate
fell by around 15% in the space of a few days in October 1998. By comparison, the optimized
carry trade would in the case of the currency speculator represent the buying of higher carry
currencies with low volatility and the selling of low carry currencies with high volatility. For
the currency hedger, this would in turn mean going underweight the hedge relative to the

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

DM/USD (Left)

Figure 8.3 DEM/USD and a three-month rate differential

0.00

5 Year down trend
1980

0.50

1981

1.00

1982

1.50

1983

2.00

1996

1995

3-M USD/DM (Right)

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

2.50

Stable markets and
negative interest
rate differential

1993

3.00

1984

@Team-FLY
1985

5 Year up trend

1994

3.50

2000

1999

1998

1997

1987

1986

−8.0

−6.0

−4.0

−2.0

0.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

8.0

10.0

12.0

170
Currency Strategy

Managing Currency Risk II

171

benchmark on higher carry currencies with low volatility and overweight the hedge on lower
carry currencies with higher volatility.
For both a portfolio manager who is looking to hedge currency risk and an active currency
manager who can trade that currency risk, optimizing the carry trade can be a useful and
productive way both to reduce risk and to add alpha. Indeed, it is an improvement on the
differential forward strategy in so much as that is another expression of a basic carry trade
strategy. The optimized carry trade strategy has consistently produced good returns with of
necessity less volatility, resulting in higher Sharpe and information ratios.
It should of course be noted that just as one can optimize the carry trade for improved
performance over the simple carry trade, so one can do exactly the same thing for either
the differential forward strategy or the trend-following strategy. One does this by looking at
volatility-adjusted exposure rather than the simple exposure per se. Thus, for example in the
case of the differential forward strategy, one can over an extended period of time look at
the relationship between implied volatility and historical volatility of the underlying exchange
rate. Optimizing for volatility-adjusted exposure, the active currency manager would increase
the leverage of the forward hedge when implied vol is below a predetermined threshold relative
to historic vol at the same time as the forward points are in favour of the hedger, and conversely
lower it when implied vol is above. The extent to which this generally improves performance far
exceeds any concerns about increased transaction costs. One thing which may have to be taken
into account however is the likelihood that raising or lowering the leverage of a differential
forward strategy, both on an absolute basis and relative to the benchmark, may have an impact
on the volatility of the tracking error.
Similarly, one can seek to optimize through volatility-adjusted exposure the trend-following
strategy. Again, this should improve on the alpha provided by the basic strategy. A ﬁnal point
on these active currency strategies is that they are obviously not dependent on the base currency
for adding alpha given that the total portfolio weighting and risk remains the same whatever
the base currency.

8.8 EMERGING MARKETS AND CURRENCY HEDGING
It has been noted that emerging markets have different market properties to those of the
developed markets. Here, it is important to sell these out and then in turn relate them to
the considerations of passive and active currency risk management. First off, let us look at the
major differences that appear present in emerging markets:

r Liquidity risk — Emerging market currencies are less liquid than their developed counterparts. For instance, every day some USD300 billion goes through EUR–USD. This compares
with around USD10 billion daily in the South African rand. Needless to say, this lower liquidity affects pricing and price action.
r Convertibility risk — Even less than liquidity risk, convertibility risk is not a consideration
for developed currency markets as all major currencies are freely ﬂoating and fully convertible. A number of emerging market currencies however are still not convertible on the
capital account, and indeed a few are still not fully convertible on the current account.
r Exchange controls — In line with this, several emerging market currencies still have varying
degrees of exchange rate controls, which also distort exchange rate pricing and economic
activity. Exchange controls create “black market” activity and paradoxically can lead to
capital ﬂight.

172

Currency Strategy

r Emerging markets have structurally high levels of inﬂation — Stronger growth levels
and economic inefﬁciencies are important reasons behind structurally high levels of inﬂation
relative to developed markets. This in turn means that policy interest rates are in most cases
substantially higher in emerging markets than in developed markets, resulting in high forward
premiums.
r Capital inﬂows however can depress market interest rates — The size of global capital
ﬂows relative to the size of local capital markets in most emerging markets can mean that
the latter are swamped by a relatively small portfolio shift in assets either into the market or
out of it. As a result, interest rate volatility is a lot higher.
r Forward rate bias is lower in emerging markets — While forward exchange rates are
poor predictors of future spot exchange rates in the developed markets, this is less so in
many emerging markets. The exhaustive 2000 study by Bansal and Dahlquist tested the
presence of forward rate bias and found emerging market currencies show signiﬁcantly less
correlation between current interest rate differentials and subsequent spot returns than those
in the developed markets. That said, emerging market currencies tend to appreciate on a
real basis and then collapse to adjust for the trade balance deterioration caused by that real
exchange rate appreciation.
r Implied emerging market volatility below developed market volatility is a buy signal —
Historically, lower levels of implied volatility in emerging market currencies than the corresponding developed market currencies has proven a good buy signal for the former. Intuitively, emerging market volatility should be higher, though there are periods when the
sheer weight of capital inﬂows forces it artiﬁcially lower. Note that emerging market implied volatility is skewed in that it tends to fall only when the emerging market currency is
strengthening, but always rises when the currency weakens.
r Implied emerging market volatility is a very poor predictor of future exchange rates —
Looking at previous emerging market crises, the options market has usually got it “wrong”
in the sense that such crises have never been priced in ahead of time by the options market.
Thus, we can say that the options market is a poor predictor of future exchange rate levels
in the emerging markets, though measured against historic volatility levels it may well be a
much better indicator of relative value.
What we ﬁnd in the emerging markets is that shifts in global capital ﬂows have major domestic
interest rate implications. For instance, high inﬂation and therefore interest rate differentials
should, according to classical economic theory, suggest a depreciation of the local currency
in proportion to that interest rate differential or forward premium. However, this may not
occur due to heavy capital inﬂows, which swamp the domestic market’s ability to cope with
these without economic distortion. As a result of this, the currency may experience signiﬁcant
nominal and real appreciation, in seeming violation of the international Fisher effect and
covered interest rate parity. Real currency appreciation however leads to a real economic shock,
and more speciﬁcally real trade and current account balance deterioration. Eventually, this has
to be reversed and not too surprisingly through real currency depreciation. The longer and
more powerful the real appreciation, the potentially more violent the subsequent depreciation.
Emerging market currencies trade in these types of cycles, in line with the “speculative cycle”
that we looked at earlier in the book. As a result, we can tell from this that the forward
rate bias is extreme for emerging market currencies on both sides of the forward. In line
with this, some caution is needed in using the differential forward strategy in the emerging
markets. Emerging market interest rate differentials would mean theoretically that an investor

Managing Currency Risk II

173

never hedged emerging market currency risk using the differential forward strategy, yet this is
clearly not the appropriate strategy in some cases.
For similar reasons, the carry trade has provided signiﬁcant alpha for active currency managers, both in the basic and in the optimized version. However, the distortion to interest and
exchange rates that capital inﬂows provide in emerging markets means that a signiﬁcantly
higher degree of both care and discretion is needed in picking higher carry currencies to either
invest in or hedge depending upon the reading of the risk appetite indicator.

8.9 SUMMARY
In conclusion, when portfolio managers are taking a risk reduction approach, there is a strong
incentive to be fully hedged, particularly for ﬁxed income fund managers who generally have
less opposition to such an idea than their equity counterparts. This is consistent with the fact
that a signiﬁcant part of a ﬁxed income portfolio’s risk is the currency risk. On the other hand, if
the portfolio manager is adopting a performance approach, an active currency risk management
approach for the purpose of adding alpha is clearly more important.
In Chapters 7 and 8, we have looked at the “fundamental” world of corporations on the one
hand and “real money” or institutional investors on the other, and how they deal respectively
with the issue of currency risk. For the most part, their approach to currency risk is that of the
hedger. On the other hand, the vast majority of currency market participants are speculators,
that is people who trade currencies without an underlying attached asset. While many who
focus on the currency markets put the emphasis on so-called “real” ﬂow, the reality is in fact that
this makes up the minority of overall ﬂow relative to speculation. It is to this speculative — and
misunderstood — world that we now turn.

REFERENCES
Acar, E. and Maitra, B. (2000/2001). Optimal portfolio selection and the impact of currency hedging.
The Journal of Performance Measurement Winter.
Bansal, R. and Dahlquist, M. (2000). The forward premium puzzle: different tales from developed and
emerging economies. Journal of International Economics 51.
Bilson, J. (1990, 1993). Value, yield and trend: a composite forecasting approach to foreign exchange
trading. In A. Gitlin (ed.), Strategic Currency Investing: Trading and Hedging in the Foreign Exchange
Market, Probus Publishing.
Black, F. (1989). Universal hedging: optimising currency risk and reward in international equity portfolios.
Financial Analysts Journal July/August.
Choie, K. (1993). Currency exchange rate forecast and interest rate differential. Journal of Portfolio
Management Winter.
Fama, E.F. (1984). Forward and spot exchanges. Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 319–338.
Froot, K. and Thaler, R. (1990, 1993). Anomalies: foreign exchange. Journal of Economic Perspectives
4 (3).
Kritzman, M. (1989). Serial dependence in currency returns: investment implications. Journal of Portfolio
Management Fall.
Kritzman, M. (1993). The optimal currency hedging policy with biased forward rates. Journal of Portfolio
Management Summer.
Lequeux, P. and Acar, E. (1998). A dynamic benchmark for managed currency funds. European Journal
of Finance 4, 311–330.
Levich, R. and Thomas, L. (1993). Internationally diversiﬁed bond portfolios: the merits of active currency
risk management. In A. Gitlin (ed.), Strategic Currency Investing: Trading and Hedging in the Foreign
Exchange Market, Probus Publishing.

174

Currency Strategy

Perold, A. and Schulman, E. (1988). The free lunch in currency hedging: implications for investment
policy and performance standards. Financial Analysts Journal.
Silber, L.W. (1994). Technical trading: when it works and when it doesn’t. The Journal of Derivatives
Spring.
Strange, B. (1998, updated 2001). Currency matters. European Pension News 28 May (Currency Overlay
Supplement), 19–21.
Taylor, S.J. (1990). Proﬁtable currency futures trading: a comparison to technical and time-series trading
rules. In L.R. Thomas (ed.), The Currency Hedging Debate, IFR Publishing Ltd.
The Frank Russell Company (2000). Capturing alpha through active currency overlay, May.

9
Managing Currency Risk III — The
Speculator: Myths, Realities and How to
be a Better Currency Speculator
After looking at the different worlds of the corporation and the “real money” institutional
investor, it would be remiss of us if we did not also look at that of the “speculator”. Few
subjects related to currency markets cause more discussion, debate or emotion for that matter
than currency “speculation”. Indeed, in the last few years, currency speculators have undergone
a notable deterioration in the way they are regarded by a substantial proportion of the academic
and ofﬁcial community.
It used to be the case in standard economic text books that “speculators” were widely
viewed as a benign force, providing liquidity to the productive areas of the economy such as
manufacturing and services, thus lowering the cost of production. Speculation was seen as
a necessary balancing force in the overall economy, which provided the liquidity not found
elsewhere. Those economists who acknowledged that in the currency markets there could be
periodic if brief divergence from fundamental equilibrium also saw currency speculators as
benign in that they worked to eliminate the divergence quickly and efﬁciently, more or less
under the efﬁcient market hypothesis.

9.1 THE SPECULATOR — FROM BENIGN TO MALIGN
In the last decade however, some have increasingly taken a different view in the wake of one
currency “crisis” after another. The ﬁrst real currency crisis of the decade came not in the
emerging markets but in the developed world. The ERM crisis of 1992 was a wake-up call to
countries in a number of ways. On the face of it, it was manifested in the form of Scandinavian
currencies breaking their pegs to the Deutschmark and ERM countries such as the UK and
Italy being forced out of the system. Inevitably in the chaos of that time, many wrong lessons
were learned. It appeared that the liberalization of the currency markets had allowed currency
speculators to become such a huge force that they were now capable of dismantling exchange
rate systems and causing the downfall of governments — or at least Prime Ministers. The UK
Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont may have been said to have sung in his bath
after sterling was expelled from the ERM, but Prime Minister John Major was not singing
the same tune a few years later when his government was routed more completely than any
government this century at the 1997 general elections. Headlines reporting that George Soros’
famous Quantum “hedge fund” made around USD1 billion by speculating against sterling only
served to reinforce the misconception that currency speculators alone forced sterling out of the
ERM, that they were indeed large enough to accomplish such a feat.
A year later and currency speculators were again on the attack, this time against the ERM
system itself. Under enormous pressure, after having resisted through intervention for months,
@Team-FLY
