s James Earl, a balding astronomy professor, and proudly recalls that Earl’s parents invested with Buffett in the partnership back in 1957. Indeed, Buffett tracks the destiny of every one of Berkshire’s million-plus shares—a level of familiarity that no other public CEO would dream of or, for that matter, even remotely desire. But Buffett knows them all. Each time a share of Berkshire trades, Buffett makes a mental note of it, as though someone were getting on and off his trolley. 
 This helps to explain Buffett’s hold on his admirers. As uncanny as his success has been, his sense of fidelity is even rarer. His faithfulness to old friends and old habits illuminates his entire career. Consider, for a moment, the advice of John Train in his best-selling The Money Masters: 

 Everything has its season, which does not last forever. The world changes its spots, and the investor must change his. 20 

 Few people on Wall Street would disagree, or even give it a second thought. The former disciples of debt, the Kravises and the Perelmans and the rest, have already lost their taste for leverage and in the nineties are selling equity. 
 Yet Buffett has spent a lifetime wearing essentially the same spots. He has never opted for investment fashions, be it the Go-Go stocks of the sixties, the high leverage of the eighties, or the derivatives of the nineties. He has continued to hunt for the irreducible kernel that his teacher labeled “intrinsic value.” 
 Much has been made of Buffett’s metamorphosis away from Ben Graham, from “value” stocks to “growth” companies. The Street is fond of such pigeonholes, just as the critic of art is quick to recognize a Blue Period or a cubist phase. But such boundaries are irrelevant to the artist. To Buffett, the growth/value distinction has always been illusory. He sees the growth potential of a business as a component of its value, just as its assets are a component. 21 At a price, Coca-Cola’s potential represents good value; at some higher price, it does not. 
 The point is that Buffett views all investing, and all that he has ever attempted, as “value investing.” Anything else, he wrote a year after the Salomon episode, is unworthy of the name: 

 What is “investing” if it is not the act of seeking value at least sufficient to justify the amount paid? Consciously paying more for a stock than its calculated value—in the hope that it can soon be sold for a still-higher price—should be labeled speculation.… 22 

 The world has largely lost sight of that distinction. The treasurer of Orange County, California, thought nothing of borrowing heavily and then speculating with the funds for public schools, roads, and waterworks on esoteric interest-rate derivatives, as a consequence of which the county recently went into bankruptcy. Indeed, the notion of intrinsic value is itself something of a lost ideal. In a world of shifting benchmarks and changing “spots,” value is not intrinsic but ephemeral; the painting cannot be appreciated until the critic weighs in, and beauty is truly up to the beholder. In Orange County, beauty was whatever the treasurer or Merrill Lynch, his broker, said it was. Neither really knew, and therefore both were willing to speculate. At the other end of the spectrum, this lack of conviction results more commonly in cowardice and mediocrity. 
 If we have lost the people with Emersonian inner conviction, it is because we have lost the fixed stars that formerly guided them. The modern relativism has reduced us all to being timid specialists, peeping out from cubbyholes marked “growth” and “derivative.” For similar reasons—the lack of intrinsic value systems—educators waffle and juries seem unable to convict. They retreat, as it were, into ambiguity, complexity, and cacophony. Where one conviction is lacking, a thousand opinions will do—indeed, they become a necessary recourse. Our captains seem the smaller for it, not only on Wall Street but in industry, education, government, and public life in general. 
 Buffett, in contrast, seems the larger for his rare independence. As he expressed it, “I don’t have to work with people I don’t like.” 23 There are few people, CEOs and statesmen included, who would say the same. 
 We see him in his inner sanctum, without advisers or lackeys, opposite the framed and fading newspapers and the looming picture of his father, who counseled him toward just such sweet Emersonian solitude. Hours pass without interruption; the telephone scarcely rings. He is looking not for patterns on a screen but for the fundamental values, the time-honored merchants, the shoe companies, the Horatio Alger-Rose Blumkins, the Ben Rosner retailers, the World Books , the salt-of-New Bedford Ken Chaces, the scrupulous Tom Murphys, the universal Coca-Colas. He judges them not according to the “season,” but by the sound principles and aphorisms that his father or grandfather or Ben Graham might have recognized. Buffett has not always lived up to his heroes. He is only human, and he certainly has strayed. But he has at least been able to evoke their memory. 
 When Buffett is called to his reward, it is likely that his bequest will dwarf the legacies of Carnegie, Ford, Rockefeller, and all that have gone before him. 24 The Buffett Foundation will probably find itself with the largest endowment in the country (the Ford Foundation, the biggest, has assets of $7 billion). But the legacy that preoccupies Buffett is not what will happen to his money, but what will happen to Berkshire itself. He harbors a ghoulish fantasy that once he is in the grave, Berkshire will continue to operate as in the past. Indeed, he has taken pains to assure investors that whether he or his wife dies first, “in neither case will taxes and bequests require the sale of consequential amounts of stock.” 25 
 If Buffett and Munger are leveled by the same truck, or if Buffett does not get around to grooming a successor, the company, at least temporarily, will be run by a “third man,” chosen by Buffett. The identity of this Harry Lime has long been secret, even to Buffett’s children. § But after the GEICO deal, Buffett revealed that GEICO’s Lou Simpson would be called on to pinch hit for Berkshire “if something were to happen to Charlie and me.” 26 
 Beyond that, Berkshire will be in the hands of its board, which Buffett has handpicked. He has recently appointed his wife and son Howie as directors, steps that he hopes will perpetuate the company’s sense of mission. (The other directors are Buffett; Malcolm G. Chace III, the son of the former chairman; Munger; and Omaha businessman Walter Scott, Jr.) His family members will represent the controlling owner, presumably the foundation. “All in all,” Buffett wrote recently, “we’re prepared for ‘the truck.’ ” 27 
 At sixty-five, Buffett is in excellent health, though he seems to have slept through the dietary revolution of the professional classes. It is not uncommon for him to greet the morning with a bowl of peanuts and a Cherry Coke. During a Super Bowl weekend organized by Tom Murphy, Buffett ordered vanilla ice cream and chocolate sauce for breakfast. When his friends started kidding him about his health, he responded stagily: “What I want people to say when they pass my casket is—‘Bov, was he old!’ ” 28 
 Though still absorbed in his work, Buffett has become a tad less intense with his success. His sons say he is more relaxed than in years back; Peter is no longer aware of the clock ticking in his father’s head. 
 Some of this may be attributable to Astrid, with whom Buffett has grown highly comfortable. Buffett thinks that he has helped her self-esteem, 29 and no doubt draws pleasure from a sense of reciprocity. When Buffett and Astrid go out, say, to Gorats, Buffet looks like any Omaha gentleman and his wife, sometimes draping an affectionate arm around her. 30 Astrid has a sense of humor about her role and has told one of Buffett’s relatives that living with Warren is “the best job” she has had. Joe Rosenfield, Buffett’s octogenarian friend, says, “Astrid is what he needs now. He can go off and leave her and she doesn’t mind. She’s a free spirit—a girl of quality.” 
 For all that, Warren is deeply attached to Susie, with whom he reunites in one corner or another (such as in Paris for a board meeting of Coca-Cola) every month or so. Warren also has a sense of humor about the arrangement; he told a friend that he couldn’t divorce Susie because she is too rich. 31 
 Recently, Buffett has somewhat loosened his purse strings. He spent $1.25 million of his own money for a 25 percent interest in Omaha’s minor league baseball team—effectively an act of charity to keep the team in town. 32 In 1993, on the occasion of Mrs. B’s hundredth birthday, Buffett eschewed his usual gift of flowers and See’s candy and presented a check for $1 million to the Rose Blumkin Performing Arts Center, an abandoned vaudeville house Mrs. B was converting into a children’s theater. He also spends a bit more personally, such as on his travel and on his pricey suits, though the latter seem to develop rumples even in his closet. But in relative terms, his spending (as well as his philanthropy) remains a flyspeck. ‖ 
 His life is his work; food and shelter are minor matters. Buffett still drives his own car, a blue Lincoln Town Car. He has no fancy automobiles or homes, and he would not be interested in them if he had. On a recent two-week stay at his ocean-view home in Laguna Beach, he went out of the house but three times—twice to a movie and once to have lunch (his daughter counted). He still plays bridge, but usually via a computer (which he refuses to use for work) many miles away from his partners. 33 
 In Omaha, Buffett has become a curiosity. People drive by Farnam Street very slowly, sometimes slowing to a stop, gaping with wonderment at the incongruously modest house by the blinking light. Buffett can see them from his kitchen, where he might be scooping out some ice cream, or grabbing a Cherry Coke to take to his “pit,” to settle in with papers and annual reports. He and Astrid are alone in the house. Buffett has no flunkies or hangers-on, and the two of them have no butlers or household staff—only a maid who comes every other week. 34 Astrid still prowls the stores for bargains, and loads up her station wagon with Cherry Coke when she finds it on sale. 
 Buffett does enjoy being a billionaire, but in offbeat ways. As he put it, though money cannot change your health or how many people love you, it lets you be in “more interesting environments.” 35 Buffett mixes with a rarified crowd of CEOs, politicians, and others. Gary Kasparov, the world chess champion, who has an interest in developing capitalism in Russia, has called on Buffett in Omaha. The end of summer 1994 found Buffett on Martha’s Vineyard, golfing with Bill Clinton, after which he and the President had a quiet dinner at Kay Graham’s. Most notably, Buffett has developed an intriguing friendship with Bill Gates, his junior by twenty-six years and his financial rival. Though Gates is a technology freak and Buffett is anything but, they plainly have fun together. Both are fiercely competitive, genuinely curious, unusually boyish as CEOs go, and insanely rich. Having broken the ice at a Nebraska football game, in 1995 the two traveled together, and with their wives, to China. 
 And Buffett finds a receptive audience when he wants to distill the Zen of Warren Buffett. He goes around quite often now, at college campuses, at his companies, even in smaller, informal groups, launching into his liturgy, retelling his stories, serenading as many onto his trolley as he can. 
 Much about this life is strange, and much about Buffett remains obscure. Perhaps, as a judge in Buffalo once remarked of his purported monopolist aims, the private man may be secreted “in the unfathomable human mind.” 
 But the public legacy is secure. Buffett’s uncommon urge to chronicle made him a unique character in American life, not only a great capitalist but the Great Explainer of American capitalism. He taught a generation how to think about business, and he showed that securities were not just tokens like the Monopoly flatiron, and that investing need not be a game of chance. It was also a logical, commonsensical enterprise, like the tangible businesses beneath. He stripped Wall Street of its mystery and rejoined it to Main Street—a mythical or disappearing place, perhaps, but one that is comprehensible to the ordinary American. 
 As opposed to the dark side of Wall Street, to which the public was so accustomed, Buffett’s was a face not often seen. He was one of the few capitalists who got fabulously rich without leaving a trail of those he had victimized. (His adversaries in Buffalo were a singular exception). In Munger’s phrase, he strove to be more than a “miserable accumulator,” in particular by treating investors and investees as partners, with no fingers crossed and no “exit strategies.” 
 And it is here that Buffett begins to transcend finance and to claim a space on a broader canvas. His comment that his favorite holding period was “forever” was a stunning breach of the usual horizon both on Wall Street and off it. “Forever” has an embarrassing ring to postmodern ears; the word seems to belong to dime novels and fairy tales. 
 Buffett made that pledge to his candy business, his newspaper, to Tom Murphy and Kay Graham and many more. In an age of fraying loyalties, he turned investments into relationships, almost into a form of social contract. As he wrote to his partners in 1969, with regard to Berkshire Hathaway: 

 I certainly have no desire to sell a good controlled business run by people I like and admire, merely to obtain a fancy price. 36 

 Such a sentiment was unheard-of on Wall Street and blasphemous in academia, but rare on Main Street as well. 
 It is more stunning today because it is more rare; it deviates not only from the fickleness of mutual funds, but from all in society that is transient. Today, the frenetic trading at Wall and Broad may be seen as a metaphor for the rapidity with which once-firm social connections, to job, neighborhood, family, civic affiliation, and the past itself, become unglued. And unglued each day all the faster. When Andy Warhol predicted fifteen minutes of fame for each of us, he did not get the half of it. In these restless times, it is not only our fame that disappears in a quarter of an hour, but, seemingly, every relationship that once was enduring or valued for its ongoing character. Professional partnerships splinter apart, athletic heroes desert their teams, employers overhire and then overfire, and even our universities, the supposed repositories of our past, race to reinvent the canons that had served for a near-millennium. In our daily walks of life, the faces on the trolley change overnight. Investors seek their exit strategies, but they are hardly alone. Viewed in this light, Wall Street’s mania for shuffling paper is only the most blatant sign of the general rush to put a price on once-lasting commitments. This is why Buffett filled a hollow. More than most, he reclaimed the rewards that spring not from trading commitments one for the next, but from preserving them. 

 * Share prices in this chapter are as of December 31, 1995. 
 † In 1996, Coca-Cola’s stock split two-for-one. 
 ‡ Prices of Cap Cities/ABC shares are adjusted for a ten-for-one split in 1994. 
 § Harry Lime was the mystery figure played by Orson Welles in the 1949 film classic The Third Man . 
 ‖ In 1994, Buffett’s two foundations gave away just a shade more than the $7 million they received from the Berkshire gift program and from interest and dividend income combined. In 1995, Buffett raised Berkshire’s per-share gift from $11 to $12.

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

 Praise for Buffett 

 “In this engaging biography, Roger Lowenstein tells not only how Mr. Buffett made it but how he has managed to avoid spending it—the most fascinating part of the story … a delightful portrait of a homespun capitalist.” 
 —The New York Times 

 “Lively, smoothly written, and elaborately researched … the best book by far on this legendary character.” 
 —Business Week (Top 10 Business Books of 1995) 

 “A delightful portrait.” 
 — The New York Times Book Review 

 “A significant contribution to the craft of biography as well as an illuminating and comforting story for investors everywhere.” 
 — Chicago Tribune 

 “Thoroughly researched and perceptive … a highly readable account.” 
 — Financial Times 

 “Lowenstein has accomplished something remarkable.” 
 — Los Angeles Times 

 “ Buffett throws a lot of light on the character of a man who is now almost as famous for his homespun aphorisms as he is for the prowess which has made him the second wealthiest individual in the United States.” 
 — The Independent (London) 

 “Lowenstein’s excellent … biography … burnishes the Buffett myth while deconstructing it with heavy doses of reality.” 
 — Barron’s 

 “Many people know of Warren Buffett’s riches and investment savvy. But here you’ll get to know the boy who searched the local golf course for ‘used but marketable golf balls’ and started a lemonade stand on a heavily trafficked street in front of a friend’s house instead of his own quieter street. And you can explore the psyche of a father of three who, while married to one woman, lived with another, among other personal details about the man behind the investments.” 
 — U.S. News & World Report 

 “ Buffett is a landmark portrait of a uniquely American life—a portrait that offers an enthralling, precisely documented, full-fleshed characterization of an American icon. It is a work that should be required reading in every business curriculum, for it relates directly to the current and future interests of individual and corporate investors throughout America.” 
 —Business Book Review 

 “Anyone who reads this will walk away from the experience with a much richer sense of who Warren Buffett is and what makes him a great investor, perhaps enhancing their own investment returns as well … one heck of a good book.” 
 — The Motley Fool 

 “As much a history of investing in the latter half of the 20th century as it is a penetrating look at Buffett … splendid.” 
 —Salon.com 

 “[An] excellent biography … [that provides] personal glimpses of a very private man.” 
 — Publishers Weekly 

 “Lowenstein does a remarkable job of telling the financial story of Buffett’s rise to securities fame … [in this] highly interesting, fascinating … near hagiographic biography.” 
 — Library Journal 

 “The first definitive, inside account of the life and career of this American original.” 
 —Ingram 

 “The prose [Roger Lowenstein] displays here is an admirable mixture of the clear-eyed and the poetic. The book is both empathetic and intelligent, without ever slopping over into fawning.” 
 — The Washington Monthly 

 “This work of art from Roger Lowenstein … chronicles the intimately private as well as the investing life of one of the greatest investors ever.” 
 —MarketThoughts.com

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

 2008 Random House Trade Paperback Edition 
 Copyright © 1995, 2008 by Roger Lowenstein 
 All rights reserved. 
 Published in the United States by Random House Trade Paperbacks, an imprint of The Random House Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York. 
 R ANDOM H OUSE T RADE P APERBACKS and colophon are trademarks of Random House, Inc. 
 Originally published in hardcover and in slightly different form in the United States by Random House, an imprint of The Random House Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., in 1995. 
 Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following for permission to print both previously published and unpublished material: WARREN E. BUFFETT : Excerpts from letters, reports to the Buffett Partnership and Berkshire Hathaway, and annual reports. Reprinted by permission of Warren E. Buffett. FORBES : Excerpt from “Look at All Those Beautiful, Scantily Clad Girls Out There” (November 1, 1974). Copyright © 1974 by Forbes Inc. Reprinted by permission of Forbes magazine. OMAHA WORLD-HERALD : Excerpts from “Susie Sings for More Than Her Supper” by Al Pagel (April 17, 1977) and “Klewitt Legacy as Unusual as His Life” by Warren Buffett (January 20, 1980). Reprinted by permission of the Omaha World-Herald. THE WALL STREET TRANSCRIPT : Excerpt from “Pension Fund and Money Managers” (December 23, 1974), excerpt from editors’ interview tih Eric T. Miller (April 23, 1973), and excerpt from “Some Thoughts for Financial Analysis” (June 17, 1974). Copyright © 1973, 1974 by The Wall Street Transcript Corporation. Reprinted by permission of The Wall Street Transcript . 
 eISBN: 978-0-8041-5060-6 
 www.atrandom.com 
 v3.1_r3

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

 INTRODUCTION 

 In the annals of investing, Warren Buffett stands alone. Starting from scratch, simply by picking stocks and companies for investment, Buffett amassed one of the epochal fortunes of the twentieth century. Over a period of four decades—more than enough to iron out the effects of fortuitous rolls of the dice—Buffett outperformed the stock market, by a stunning margin and without taking undue risks or suffering a single losing year. This is a feat that market savants, Main Street brokers, and academic scholars had long proclaimed to be impossible. By virtue of this steady, superior compounding, Buffett acquired a magical-seeming net worth of $15 billion, and counting. 
 Buffett did this in markets bullish and bearish and through economies fat and lean, from the Eisenhower years to Bill Clinton, from the 1950s to the 1990s, from saddle shoes and Vietnam to junk bonds and the information age. Over the broad sweep of postwar America, as the major stock averages advanced by 11 percent or so a year, Buffett racked up a compounded annual gain of 29.2 percent. 1 
 The uniqueness of this achievement is more significant in that it was the fruit of old-fashioned, long-term investing. Wall Street’s modern financiers got rich by exploiting their control of the public’s money: their essential trick was to take in—and sell out—the public at opportune moments. Buffett shunned this game, as well as the more venal excesses for which Wall Street is deservedly famous. In effect, he rediscovered the art of pure capitalism—a cold-blooded sport, but a fair one. 
 The public shareholders who invested with Buffett also got rich, and in exactly the same proportion to their capital that Buffett did. The numbers themselves are almost inconceivable. If one had invested $10,000 when Buffett began his career, working out of his study in Omaha in 1956, and had stuck with him throughout, one would have had an investment at the end of 1995 worth $125 million. 2 
 And yet, the numbers alone do not account for the aura that Buffett cast on Wall Street. Once a year, disciples and money men would flock to Omaha like pilgrims on a hajj, to hear Buffett deconstruct the intricacies of investing, business, and finance. His annual meetings became a piece of Americana, like an Elvis concert or a religious revival. Financial groupies arrived in Omaha clutching Buffett’s writings like a Bible and reciting his aphorisms like excerpts from the Sermon on the Mount. 
 His grasp of simple verities gave rise to a drama that would recur throughout his life. Long before those pilgrimages to Omaha, long before Buffett had a record, he would stand in a corner at college parties, baby-faced and bright-eyed, holding forth on the universe as a dozen or two of his older, drunken fraternity brothers crowded around. A few years later, when these friends had metamorphosed into young associates starting out on Wall Street, the ritual was the same. Buffett, the youngest of the group, would plop himself in a big, broad club chair and expound on finance while the others sat at his feet. 
 On Wall Street, his homespun manner made him a cult figure. Where finance was so forbiddingly complex, Buffett could explain it like a general-store clerk discussing the weather. He never forgot that underneath each stock and bond, no matter how arcane, there lay a tangible, ordinary business. Beneath the jargon of Wall Street, he seemed to unearth a street from small-town America. 
 It is a curious irony that as more Americans acquired an interest in investing, Wall Street became more complex, more abstruse, more arcane, and more forbidding than ever. When Buffett was born, in the midst of the Depression, the few Americans who did have capital felt personally equipped to manage it. This they did by salting it away in blue chips and triple-A bonds. The Depression cast a long shadow, but the postwar prosperity eclipsed it. Today, tens of millions have at least a small grubstake, but very few feel comfortable with handling it, and fewer still have the old habit of prudence. At best, they anxiously scan the financial pages, as though each day’s twitch in the data on housing or inflation might bring the long-awaited “answer.” At worst, they switch in and out of mutual funds with an impatience that would have shocked their grandparents. 
 In such a complex age, what was stunning about Buffett was his applicability. Most of what Buffett did was imitable by the average person (this is why the multitudes flocked to Omaha). Buffett’s genius was largely a genius of character—of patience, discipline, and rationality. These were common enough virtues, but they were rare in the heat of financial passions, and indispensable to anyone who would test his mettle in the stock market. In this sense, Buffett’s character and career unfolded as a sort of public tutorial on investing and on American business. Buffett was aware of his role from the very beginning, and he nurtured a curious habit of chronicling his escapades even as he lived them. 
 As an investor, Buffett eschewed the use of leverage, futures, dynamic hedging, modern portfolio analysis, and all of the esoteric strategies developed by academics. Unlike the modern portfolio manager, whose mind-set is that of a trader, Buffett risked his capital on the long-term growth of a few select businesses. In this, he resembled the magnates of a previous age, such as J. P. Morgan, Sr. 
 But the secretive Morgan was a Wall Street archetype; Buffett, a plainspoken Midwesterner, was its antithesis. He was famous for quipping that it was the bankers “who should have been wearing the ski masks,” 3 or that, as he said to a friend who had been offered a job in finance, “you won’t encounter much traffic taking the high road in Wall Street.” 4 He once wrote that he would no more take an investment banker’s opinion on whether to do a deal than he would ask a barber whether he needed a haircut. 5 This commonsensical cracker-barrel wit made him an archetype of something larger, and far more basic, to the country’s past. It answered to a deeply American need for authentic heroes. 
 This has always been America’s secular myth: the uncorrupted commoner from the Midwest or West who stands up to the venal Easterners, be they politicians, bankers, big businessmen, or other. It is a ransom to the country’s origins, a remembrance that the first authentic and pure Americans were destroyed. Let Europe have its princes; the American ideal has always been a self-made man from the midcountry—a Lincoln, a Twain, a Will Rogers. In an age without heroes, this, too, is what Buffett’s disciples were seeking in Omaha. 
 As Jack Newfield wrote of Robert Kennedy, Buffett was not a hero, only a hope; not a myth, only a man. 6 Despite his broad wit, he was strangely stunted. When he went to Paris, his only reaction was that he had no interest in sight-seeing and that the food was better in Omaha. His talent sprang from his unrivaled independence of mind and ability to focus on his work and shut out the world, yet those same qualities exacted a toll. Once, when Buffett was visiting the publisher Katharine Graham on Martha’s Vineyard, a friend remarked on the beauty of the sunset. Buffett replied that he hadn’t focused on it, as though it were necessary for him to exert a deliberate act of concentration to “focus” on a sunset. 7 Even at his California beachfront vacation home, Buffett would work every day for weeks and not go near the water. 
 Like other prodigies, he paid a price. Having been raised in a home with more than its share of demons, he lived within an emotional fortress. The few people who shared his office had no knowledge of the inner man, even after decades. Even his children could scarcely recall a time when he broke through his surface calm and showed some feeling. 
 Though part of him is a showman or preacher, he is essentially a private person. Peter Lynch, the mutual-fund wizard, visited Buffett in the 1980s and was struck by the tranquillity in his inner sanctum. His archives, neatly alphabetized in metal filing cabinets, looked as files had in another era. He had no armies of traders, no rows of electronic screens, as Lynch did. Buffett had no price charts, no computer—only a newspaper clipping from 1929 and an antique ticker under a glass dome. The two of them paced the floor, recounting their storied histories, what they had bought, what they had sold. Where Lynch had kicked out his losers every few weeks, Buffett had owned mostly the same few stocks for years and years. Lynch felt a pang, as though he had traveled back in time. 8 
 Buffett’s one concession to modernity is a private jet. Otherwise, he derives little pleasure from spending his fabulous wealth. He has no art collection or snazzy car, and he has never lost his taste for hamburgers. He lives in a commonplace house on a tree-lined block, on the same street where he works. His consuming passion—and pleasure—is his work, or, as he calls it, his canvas. It is there that he revealed the secrets of his trade, and left a self-portrait.
