 To be perfectly blunt, many security analysts are not particularly perceptive or critical, and they often make egregious errors. I found this out early in the game as a young Wall Street trainee. In attempting to learn the techniques of the pros, I tried to duplicate some analytic work done by Louie, a metals specialist. Louie had figured that for each 10¢ increase in the price of copper, a particular copper producer’s earnings would increase by $1 per share. Because he expected a $1 increase in the price of copper, he reasoned that this particular stock was “an unusually attractive purchase candidate.” 
 In redoing the calculation, I found that Louie had misplaced a decimal point. A 10¢ increase in the price of copper would increase earnings by 10¢, not by $1. When I pointed this out to Louie (assuming he would put out a correction immediately), he simply shrugged his shoulders and declared, “Well, the recommendation sounds more convincing if we leave the report as is.” Attention to detail was not Louie’s forte. 
 Louie’s lack of attention to detail revealed his lack of understanding of the industry he was covering. But he was not unique. In an article written for Barron’s , Dr. Lloyd Kriezer, a plastic surgeon, examined some reports written by biotech analysts. Kriezer paid particular attention to analysts’ coverage of those biotech companies that were creating artificial skin for use in the treatment of chronic wounds and burns—a field in which he had considerable expertise. He found the security analysts’ diagnoses of stocks far wide of the mark. First, he added the assumptions made of the market share predicted for competing companies. The predicted shares of the five biotech companies competing in the market for artificial skin added up to well over 100 percent. Moreover, the analysts’ prediction of the absolute size of the potential market bore little relationship to data on the number of actual burn victims, even though accurate data were easily available. Moreover, in examining the various analyst reports on the companies, Dr. Kriezer concluded, “They clearly did not understand the industry.” One is reminded of words attributed to the legendary baseball manager Casey Stengel: “Can’t anybody here play this game?” 
 Many analysts emulate Louie. Generally too lazy to make their own earnings projections, they prefer to copy the forecasts of other analysts or to swallow the “guidance” released by corporate managements without even chewing. Then it’s very easy to know whom to blame if something goes wrong. And it’s much easier to be wrong when your professional colleagues all agree with you. As Keynes put it, “Worldly wisdom teaches that it is better for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally.” 
 Security analysts continue to make devastating forecasting errors. Apollo Group, owner of the University of Phoenix, was a Wall Street darling in early 2012. Analysts gushed at the huge earnings potential for this leader in the for-profit college industry and projected large investor returns. Reports of high student loan defaults, low graduation rates, and predatory recruiting practices were ignored. But such problems were confirmed by a widely distributed congressional report. The bad publicity and resulting new government regulations led to a sharp drop in enrollments and an even sharper 80 percent drop in Apollo’s stock price. 
 I do not mean to imply that most Wall Street analysts parrot back what managements tell them. But I do imply that the average analyst is just that—a well-paid and usually highly intelligent person who has an extraordinarily difficult job and does it in a rather mediocre fashion. Analysts are often misguided, sometimes sloppy, perhaps self-important, and at times susceptible to the same pressures as other people. In short, they are really very human beings. 
 4. The Loss of the Best Analysts to the Sales Desk, to Portfolio Management, or to Hedge Funds 
 My fourth argument against the profession is a paradoxical one: Many of the best security analysts are not paid to analyze securities. They are often very high-powered institutional salespeople, or they are promoted to the prestigious and lucrative position of portfolio manager. 
 Investment firms known for their research prowess often send a security analyst to chaperone the regular salesperson on a call to a financial institution. Institutional investors like to hear about a new investment idea right from the horse’s mouth, so the regular salesperson usually sits back and lets the analyst do the talking. The most articulate analysts find that their time is spent with institutional clients, not with financial reports. 
 During the 2000s, many analysts were seduced away from research to take highly compensated positions in portfolio management for hedge funds. The late Barton Biggs left Morgan Stanley to form his own hedge fund. He wrote about his experiences in Hedgehogging . It’s far more exciting, prestigious, and remunerative to “run money” in the line position of hedge-fund portfolio manager than only to advise in the staff position of security analyst. Small wonder that many of the best-respected security analysts do not remain long in their jobs. 
 5. The Conflicts of Interest between Research and Investment Banking Departments 
 The analyst’s goal is to ring as many cash registers as possible, and the fullest cash registers for the major brokers are to be found in the investment banking division. It wasn’t always that way. In the 1970s, before the demise of fixed commissions and the introduction of “discount” brokerage firms, the retail brokerage operation paid the tab and analysts could feel they were really working for their customers—the retail and institutional investors. But that profit center faded in importance with competitive commissions, and the only gold mines left were trading profits and the underwriting of new issues for new or existing firms (where fees can run to hundreds of millions of dollars) and advising firms on borrowing facilities, restructuring, acquisitions, etc. And so it came to pass that “ringing the cash registers” meant helping the brokerage firm obtain and nurture banking clients. And that’s how the conflicts arose. Analysts’ salaries and bonuses were determined in part by their role in assisting the underwriting department. When such business relationships existed, analysts became nothing more than tools of the investment banking division. 
 One indication of the tight relationship between security analysts and their investment banking operations has been the traditional paucity of sell recommendations. There has always been some bias in the ratio of buy to sell recommendations, since analysts do not want to offend the companies they cover. But as investment banking revenues became a major source of profits for the major brokerage firms, research analysts were increasingly paid to be bullish rather than accurate. In one celebrated incident, an analyst who had the chutzpah to recommend that Trump’s Taj Mahal bonds be sold because they were unlikely to pay their interest was summarily fired by his firm after threats of legal retaliation from “The Donald” himself. (Later, the bonds did default.) Small wonder that most analysts have purged their prose of negative comments that might give offense to current or prospective investment banking clients. During the Internet bubble, the ratio of buy to sell recommendations climbed to 100 to 1, particularly for firms with large investment banking businesses. 
 To be sure, when an analyst says “buy” he may mean “hold,” and when he says “hold” he probably means this as a euphemism for “dump this piece of crap as soon as possible.” But investors should not need a course in deconstruction semantics to understand the recommendations, and most individual investors sadly took the analysts at their word during the Internet bubble. 
 There is convincing evidence that analyst recommendations are tainted by the very profitable investment banking relationships of the brokerage firms. Several studies have assessed the accuracy of analysts’ stock selections. Brad Barber of the University of California studied the performance of the “strong buy” recommendations of Wall Street analysts and found it nothing short of “disastrous.” Indeed, the analysts’ strong buy recommendations underperformed the market as a whole by 3 percent per month, while their sell recommendations outperformed the markets by 3.8 percent per month. Even worse, researchers at Dartmouth and Cornell found that stock recommendations of Wall Street firms without investment banking relationships did much better than the recommendations of brokerage firms that were involved in profitable investment banking relationships with the companies they covered. A study from Investors.com found that investors lost over 50 percent when they followed the advice of an analyst employed by a Wall Street firm that managed or co-managed the initial public offering of the recommended stock. Research analysts were basically paid to tout the stocks of the firm’s underwriting clients. And analysts lick the hands that feed them. 
 In 2002, the attorney general of the state of New York found a smoking gun. While Henry Blodgett and other analysts at Merrill Lynch were officially recommending a number of Internet and New Economy stocks, the same analysts were referring to the stocks disparagingly in e-mail messages as “junk,” “dogs,” or less attractive epithets. Merrill did not admit guilt, but it settled with New York and other states for $100 million. It also promised certain reforms such as not directly tying analysts’ pay to investment banking revenues, clarifying its stock recommendations, and better disclosing potential conflicts of interest. Other firms such as Goldman Sachs quickly embraced the Merrill proposals. 
 The situation today is somewhat improved. Outright “sell” recommendations have become more common, although the bias to “buy” advice remains. But the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation, which followed the scandals associated with the Internet bubble, made the job of the analyst more difficult by limiting the extent to which corporate financial officers could talk to Wall Street analysts. The SEC has promulgated a policy of “fair disclosure,” whereby any relevant company information must be made public immediately and thus disclosed to the whole market. While such a policy can help make the stock market even more efficient, many disgruntled security analysts dubbed the situation as one of “no disclosure.” Security analysts could no longer have early access to privileged information. Thus, there is no reason to believe that the recommendations of security analysts will improve in the future. 
 Conflicts of interest and analysts’ lack of independent questioning did not disappear after Sarbanes-Oxley. In 2010, immediately following announcement of the explosion and oil spill from British Petroleum’s Deepwater Horizon drilling platform, BP’s stock fell 10 points, from $60 to $50 per share. Yet the nearly unanimous verdict of the Wall Street analyst community was that the stock price had overreacted and that BP was a “screaming buy.” As one analyst put it, the decline was “disproportionate to the likely costs to the company (estimated to be $450 million), even assuming damages can be claimed.” Of the thirty-four analysts who covered the stock, twenty-seven rated it a “buy.” The other seven had “hold” ratings. There was not a single “sell” recommendation. And even the hyperactive TV host Jim Cramer told his viewers that his charitable trust was purchasing BP shares. The stock eventually dropped into the 20s, a loss of almost $100 billion in market value. (By February 2013, BP had made payments and provisions of $42.2 billion and the costs were continuing to rise. The British newspaper The Telegraph , during the same month, estimated that the final total cost was likely to be $90 billion.) 
 The pervasiveness of the error indicates that conflicts of interest have not been eliminated. BP is a major issuer of securities that generate large underwriting fees for Wall Street. Analysts are still influenced by the fear that very negative comments about a company could result in a loss of underwriting business in the future. 
 Finally, the ability of professional fund managers to make correct decisions in moving money from cash or bonds to equities on the basis of their forecasts of economic conditions has been egregiously poor. Peaks in mutual-fund cash positions have generally coincided with market troughs. Conversely, cash positions were invariably low when the market was at its highs. 
 DO SECURITY ANALYSTS PICK WINNERS? THE PERFORMANCE OF THE MUTUAL FUNDS 
 I can almost hear the chorus in the background as I write these words. It goes something like this: The real test of the analyst lies in the performance of the stocks he recommends. Maybe “Sloppy Louie,” the copper analyst, did mess up his earnings forecast with a misplaced decimal point, but if the stocks he recommended made money for his clients, his lack of attention to detail can surely be forgiven. “Analyze investment performance,” the chorus is saying, “not earnings forecasts.” 
 Fortunately, the records of one group of professionals—the mutual funds—are publicly available. Better still for my argument, the men and women at the funds are some of the best analysts and portfolio managers in the business. As one investment manager recently put it, “It will take many years before the general level of competence rises enough to overshadow the startling advantage of today’s aggressive investment manager.” 
 Statements like these were just too tempting to the lofty-minded in the academic world. Given the wealth of available data, the time available to conduct such research, and the overwhelming desire to prove academic superiority in such matters, it was only natural that academia would zero in on mutual-fund performance. 
 Again, the evidence from several studies is remarkably uniform. Investors have done no better with the average mutual fund than they could have done by purchasing and holding an unmanaged broad stock index. In other words, over long periods of time, mutual-fund portfolios have not outperformed randomly selected groups of stocks. Although funds may have very good records for certain short time periods, superior performance is not consistent, and there is no way to predict how funds will perform in any given future period. 
 The table below shows the returns from the average equity mutual fund over a twenty-year period to December 31, 2013. As a comparison, the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index is used to represent the broad market. Similar results have been found for different time periods and for pension-fund managers as well as mutual-fund managers. Simply buying and holding the stocks in a broad market index is a strategy that is very hard for the professional portfolio manager to beat. 
 MUTUAL FUNDS VS. THE MARKET INDEX 

 20 years to December 31, 2013 
 S&P 500 Index 9.22% 
 Average Equity Fund 8.36% 
 Index Advantage (percentage points) 0.86% 

 Sources: Lipper and Vanguard. 
 In addition to the scientific evidence that has been accumulated, several less formal tests have verified this finding. For example, in the early 1990s, the Wall Street Journal started a dartboard contest in which each month the selections of four experts were pitted against the selections of four darts. The Journal kindly let me throw the darts for the first contest. By the early 2000s, the experts appeared to be somewhat ahead of the darts. If, however, the performance of the experts was measured from the day their selections and their attendant publicity was announced in the Journal (rather than from the preceding day), the darts were actually slightly ahead. Does this mean that the wrist is mightier than the brain? Perhaps not, but I think Forbes magazine raised a very valid question when one journalist concluded, “It would seem that a combination of luck and sloth beats brains.” 
 How can this be? Every year one can read the performance rankings of mutual funds. These always show many funds beating the averages—some by significant amounts. The problem is that there is no consistency to performance. Just as past earnings growth cannot predict future earnings, neither can past fund performance predict future results. Fund managements are also subject to random events: They may grow fat, become lazy, or break up. An investment approach that works very well for one period can easily turn sour the next. One is tempted to conclude that a very important factor in determining performance ranking is our old friend Lady Luck. 
 This conclusion is not a recent one. It has held throughout the past forty years, a period of great change in the market and in the percentage of the general public holding stocks. Again and again yesterday’s star fund has proven to be today’s disaster. During the late 1960s, the go-go funds with their youthful gunslingers turned in spectacular results, and their fund managers were written up like sports celebrities. But when the next bear market hit from 1969 through 1976, it was fly now, pay later. The top funds of 1968 had a perfectly disastrous subsequent performance. 
 The Mates Fund, for example, was number one in 1968. At the end of 1974, the fund had lost 93 percent of its 1968 value, and Fred Mates finally threw in the towel. He left the investment community to start a singles’ bar in New York City appropriately named Mates. Indeed, most of the top-performing funds of the late 1960s were out of business by the mid-1970s. 
 The illustration from the late 1960s appeared in the first edition of this book. Similar results continue to hold. The following table presents the 1980 to 1990 performance for the twenty top funds of the 1970–80 period. Again, there is no consistency. Many of the top funds of the 1970s ranked close to the bottom during the 1980s. There was, however, one striking exception. The Magellan Fund, managed by Peter Lynch, was a superior performer in both the 1970s and 1980s. But Lynch retired in 1990 at the ripe old age of forty-six, and we will never know if he would have continued to beat the Street. 
 HOW THE TOP 20 EQUITY FUNDS OF THE 1970S PERFORMED DURING THE 1980S 

 Average Annual Return 
 1970s 1980s 
 Top 20 funds of the 1970s +19.0% +11.1% 
 Average of all equity funds +10.4% +11.7% 

 In case you think the picture changed during the decade of the 1990s, the next table shows the top twenty mutual-fund performers of the decade of the 1980s and the deterioration of their performance in the 1990s. The results are distressingly similar. Financial magazines and newspapers will keep singing the praises of particular mutual-fund managers who have recently produced above-average returns. As long as there are averages, some managers will outperform. But good performance in one period does not predict good performance in the next. 
 HOW THE TOP 20 EQUITY FUNDS OF THE 1980S PERFORMED DURING THE 1990S 

 Average Annual Return 
 1980s 1990s 
 Top 20 funds of the 1980s +18.0% +13.7% 
 S&P 500-Stock Index +14.1% +14.9% 

 Similarly, the best-performing general equity funds during the 1990s performed worse than the market during the 2000–09 period—a decade I have called “the naughties.” We find that the twenty hottest funds earned rates of return during the 1990s that were well above the return for the market. These were the “genius” fund managers interviewed adoringly on CNBC and featured in articles in investment magazines. In fact, these funds had simply loaded up their portfolios with New Economy stocks. They had ridden the Internet bubble up, but when the bubble burst, they collapsed as well. On average, during the first decade of the 2000s, these funds performed far worse than the market as a whole. Investors learned that making 100 percent one year and losing 50 percent the next left them exactly where they started out. 
 HOW THE TOP 20 EQUITY FUNDS OF THE 1990S PERFORMED DURING THE NAUGHTIES 

 Average Annual Return 
 1990–99 2000–09 
 Top 20 funds of the 1990s +18.0% –2.2% 
 S&P 500-Stock Index +14.9% –0.9% 

 Moreover, the top mutual funds during the naughties tended to have well below average returns during the 2010s. To be sure, some funds have recorded above-average returns for two decades in a row. But they are few and far between, and their numbers are no greater than might be expected according to the laws of chance. 
 Perhaps the laws of chance should be illustrated. Let’s engage in a coin-flipping contest. Those who can consistently flip heads will be declared winners. The contest begins and 1,000 contestants flip coins. Just as would be expected by chance, 500 of them flip heads and these winners are allowed to advance to the second stage of the contest and flip again. As might be expected, 250 flip heads. Operating under the laws of chance, there will be 125 winners in the third round, 63 in the fourth, 32 in the fifth, 16 in the sixth, and 8 in the seventh. 
 By this time, crowds start to gather to witness the surprising ability of these expert coin-flippers. The winners are overwhelmed with adulation. They are celebrated as geniuses in the art of coin-flipping, their biographies are written, and people urgently seek their advice. After all, there were 1,000 contestants and only 8 could consistently flip heads. The game continues and some contestants eventually flip heads nine and ten times in a row. * The point of this analogy is not to indicate that investment-fund managers can or should make their decisions by flipping coins, but that the laws of chance do operate and that they can explain some amazing success stories. 
 It is the nature of an average that some investors will beat it. With large numbers of players in the money game, chance will—and does—explain some extraordinary performances. The very great publicity given occasional success in stock selection reminds me of the story of the doctor who claimed he had developed a cure for cancer in chickens. He proudly announced that in 33 percent of the cases tested remarkable improvement was noted. In another one-third of the cases, he admitted, there seemed to be no change in condition. He then rather sheepishly added, “And I’m afraid the third chicken ran away.” 
 The Wall Street Journal did an interesting story in 2009 showing how fleeting extraordinary investment performance is likely to be. The paper noted that fourteen mutual funds had beaten the S&P for nine consecutive years through 2007. But only one continued that feat in 2008, as is shown in the table below. It is simply impossible to count on any fund or any investment manager to consistently beat the market—even when the past record suggests some unusual investment skill. 
