Liar's Poker
By Michael Lewis
I
Preface
I WAS A BOND salesman, on Wall Street and in London. Working beside
traders at Salomon Brothers put me, I believe, at the epicenter of one
of those events that help to define an age. Traders are masters of the
quick killing, and a lot of the killings in the past ten years or so have been
quick. And Salomon Brothers was indisputably the king of traders. What
I have tried to do here, without, as it were, leaving my seat on the
Salomon trading floor, is to describe and explain the events and the
attitudes that characterized the era; the story occasionally tails away
from me, but it is nonetheless my story throughout. The money I did not
make and the lies I did not tell I still understood in a personal way
because of my position.
That was somewhere near the center of a modern gold rush. Never
before have so many unskilled twenty-four-year-olds made so much
money in so little time as we did this decade in New York and London.
There has never before been such a fantastic exception to the rule of
the marketplace that one takes out no more than one puts in. Now I do
not object to money. I generally would rather have more than less. But
I'm not holding my breath waiting for another windfall What happened
was a rare and amazing glitch in the fairly predictable history of getting
and spending.
It should be said that I was, by the standards we use to measure
ourselves, a success. I made a lot of money. I was told often by people
who ran our firm that I would one day join them at the top. I would
rather not make this boast early. But the reader needs to know that I
have been given no reason to feel bitterly toward or estranged from my
former employer. I set out to write this book only because I thought it
would be better to tell the story than to go on living the story.
70
Preface
Acknowledgments
THE AUTHOR wishes to thank Michael Kinsley and The New Republic,

Stephen Fay and Business, Starling Lawrence and W. W. Norton, Ion
Trewin and Hodder & Stoughton, all of whom gave guidance and paid on
time. Also Robert Ducas and David Soskin for intelligent advice. Finally,
he wishes to thank his parents, Diana and Tom Lewis. They are, of
course, directly responsible for any errors, sins, or omissions herein.
Liar's
Poker
"Wall Street, " reads the sinister old gag, "is a street with a river at one
end and a graveyard at the other. "
This is striking, but incomplete. It omits the kindergarten in the middle.
-Frederick Schwed, Jr., Where Are the Customers' Yachts?
I
Chapter One
Liars Poker
IT WAS sometime early in 1986, the first year of the decline of my
firm, Salomon Brothers. Our chairman, John Gutfreund, left his desk at
the head of the trading floor and went for a walk. At any given moment
on the trading floor billions of dollars were being risked by bond traders.
Gutfreund took the pulse of the place by simply wandering around it and
asking questions of the traders. An eerie sixth sense guided him to
wherever a crisis was unfolding. Gutfreund seemed able to smell money
being lost.
He was the last person a nerve-racked trader wanted to see. Gutfreund
(pronounced Good friend) liked to sneak up from behind and surprise you.
This was fun for him but not for you. Busy on two phones at once trying
to stem disaster, you had no time to turn and look. You didn't need to.
You felt him. The area around you began to convulse like an epileptic
ward. People were pretending to be frantically busy and at the same time
staring intently at a spot directly above your head. You felt a chill in your
bones that I imagine belongs to the same class of intelligence as the
nervous twitch of a small furry animal at the silent approach of a grizzly
bear. An alarm shrieked in your head: Gutfreund! Gutfreund! Gutfreund!
Often as not, our chairman just hovered quietly for a bit, then left. You
might never have seen him. The only trace I found of him on two of these

occasions was a turd-like ash on the floor beside my chair, left, I
suppose, as a calling card. Gutfreund's cigar droppings were longer and
better formed than those of the average Salomon boss. I always
assumed that he smoked a more expensive blend than the rest,
purchased with a few of the $40 million he had cleared on the sale of
Salomon

Brothers in 1981 (or a few of the $3. 1 million he paid himself in 1986,
more than any other Wall Street CEO).
This day in 1986, however, Gutfreund did something strange. Instead of
terrifying us all, he walked a straight line to the trading desk of John
Meriwether, a member of the board of Salomon Inc. and also one of
Salomon's finest bond traders. He whispered a few words. The traders
in the vicinity eavesdropped. What Gutfreund said has become a legend
at Salomon Brothers and a visceral part of its corporate identity. He
said: "One hand, one million dollars, no tears. "
One hand, one million dollars, no tears. Meriwether grabbed the meaning
instantly. The King of Wall Street, as Business Week had dubbed
Gutfreund, wanted to play a single hand of a game called Liar's Poker for
a million dollars. He played the game most afternoons with Meriwether
and the six young bond arbitrage traders who worked for Meriwether
and was usually skinned alive. Some traders said Gutfreund was heavily
outmatched. Others who couldn't imagine John Gutfreund as anything
but omnipotent-and there were many—said that losing suited his purpose,
though exactly what that might be was a mystery.
The peculiar feature of Gutfreund's challenge this time was the size of
the stake. Normally his bets didn't exceed a few hundred dollars. A
million was unheard of. The final two words of his challenge, "no tears, "
meant that the loser was expected to suffer a great deal of pain but
wasn't entitled to whine, bitch, or moan about it. He'd just have to
hunker down and keep his poverty to himself. But why? You might ask if
you were anyone other than the King of Wall Street. Why do it in the
first place? Why, in particular, challenge Meriwether instead of some
lesser managing director? It seemed an act of sheer lunacy. Meriwether
was the King of the Game, the Liar's Poker champion of the Salomon
Brothers trading floor.

On the other hand, one thing you learn on a trading floor is that winners
like Gutfreund always have some reason for what they do; it might not be
the best of reasons, but at least they have a concept in mind. I was not
privy to Gutfreund's innermost thoughts, but I do know that all the boys
on the trading floor gambled and that he wanted badly to be one of the
boys. What I think Gutfreund had in mind in this instance was a desire to
show his courage, like the boy who leaps from the high dive. Who better
than Meriwether for the purpose? Besides, Meriwether was probably the
only trader with both the cash and the nerve to play.
The whole absurd situation needs putting into context. John Meriwether
had, in the course of his career, made hundreds of millions of dollars for
Salomon Brothers. He had an ability, rare among people and treasured by
traders, to hide his state of mind. Most traders divulge whether they
are making or losing money by the way they speak or move. They are
either overly easy or overly tense. With Meriwether you could never,
ever tell. He wore the same blank half-tense expression when he won as
he did when he lost. He had, I think, a profound ability to control the two
emotions that commonly destroy traders—fear and greed—and it made
him as noble as a man who pursues his self-interest so fiercely can be. He
was thought by many within Salomon to be the best bond trader on Wall
Street. Around Salomon no tone but awe was used when he was
discussed. People would say, "He's the best businessman in the place," or
"the best risk taker I have ever seen," or "a very dangerous Liar's Poker
player."
Meriwether cast a spell over the young traders who worked for him. His
boys ranged in age from twenty-five to thirty-two (he was about forty).
Most of them had Ph.D.'s in math, economics, and/or physics. Once they
got onto Meriwether's trading desk, however, they forgot they were
supposed to be detached intellectuals. They became disciples. They
became obsessed by the game of Liar's Poker. They regarded it as their
game. And they took it to a new level of seriousness.
John Gutfreund was always the outsider in their game. That Business
Week put his picture on the cover and called him the King of Wall Street
held little significance for them. I mean, that was, in a way, the whole
point. Gutfreund was the King of Wall Street, but Meriwether was King
of the Game. When Gutfreund had been crowned by the gentlemen of
the press, you could almost hear traders thinking: Foolish names and

foolish faces often appear in public places. Fair enough, Gutfreund had
once been a trader, but that was as relevant as an old woman's claim that
she was once quite a dish.
At times Gutfreund himself seemed to agree. He loved to trade.
Compared with managing, trading was admirably direct. You made your
bets and either you won or you lost. When you won, people—all the way up
to the top of the firm—admired you, envied you, and feared you, and with
reason: You controlled the loot. When you managed a firm, well, sure you
received your quota of envy, fear, and admiration. But for all the wrong
reasons. Vou did not make the money for Salomon. You did not take risk.
You were hostage to your producers. They took
risk. They proved their superiority every day by handling risk better
than the rest of the risk-taking world. The money came from risk takers
such as Meriwether, and whether it came or not was really beyond
Gutfreund's control. That's why many people thought that the single
rash act of challenging the arbitrage boss to one hand for a million
dollars was Gutfreund's way of showing he was a player, too. And if you
wanted to show off, Liar's Poker was the only way to go. The game had a
powerful meaning for traders. People like John Meriwether believed that
Liar's Poker had a lot in common with bond trading. It tested a trader's
character. It honed a trader's instincts. A good player made a good
trader, and vice versa. We all understood it.
The Game: In Liar's Poker a group of people—as few as two, as many as
ten—form a circle. Each player holds a dollar bill close to his chest. The
game is similar in spirit to the card game known as I Doubt It. Each
player attempts to fool the others about the serial numbers printed on
the face of his dollar bill. One trader begins by making "a bid." He says,
for example, "Three sixes." He means that all told the serial numbers of
the dollar bills held by every player, including himself, contain at least
three sixes.
Once the first bid has been made, the game moves clockwise in the
circle. Let's say the bid is three sixes. The player to the left of the
bidder can do one of two things. He can bid higher (there are two sorts
of higher bids: the same quantity of a higher number [three sevens,
eights, or nines] and more of any number [four fives, for instance]). Or
he can "challenge"—that is like saying, "I doubt it."
The bidding escalates until all the other players agree to challenge a

single player's bid. Then, and only then, do the players reveal their serial
numbers and determine who is bluffing whom. In the midst of all this,
the mind of a good player spins with probabilities. What is the statistical
likelihood of there being three sixes within a batch of, say, forty
randomly generated serial numbers? For a great player, however, the
math is the easy part of the game. The hard part is reading the faces of
the other players. The complexity arises when all players know how to
bluff and double-bluff.
The game has some of the feel of trading, just as jousting has some of
the feel of war. The questions a Liar's Poker player asks himself are, up
to a point, the same questions a bond trader asks himself. Is this a smart
risk? Do I feel lucky? How cunning is my opponent? Does he
have any idea what he's doing, and if not, how do I exploit his ignorance?
If he bids high, is he bluffing, or does he actually hold a strong hand? Is
he trying to induce me to make a foolish bid, or does he actually have
four of a kind himself? Each player seeks weakness, predictability, and
pattern in the others and seeks to avoid it in himself. The bond traders
of Goldman, Sachs, First Boston, Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch, and
other Wall Street firms all play some version of Liar's Poker. But the
place where the stakes run highest, thanks to John Meriwether, is the
New York bond trading floor of Salomon Brothers.
The code of the Liar's Poker player was something like the code of the
gunslinger. It required a trader to accept all challenges. Because of the
code—which was his code—John Meriwether felt obliged to play. But he
knew it was stupid. For him, there was no upside. If he won, he upset
Gutfreund. No good came of this. But if he lost, he was out of pocket a
million bucks. This was worse than upsetting the boss. Although
Meriwether was by far the better player of the game, in a single hand
anything could happen. Luck could very well determine the outcome.
Meriwether spent his entire day avoiding dumb bets, and he wasn't about
to accept this one.
"No, John," he said, "if we're going to play for those kind of numbers,
I'd rather play for real money. Ten million dollars. No tears."
Ten million dollars. It was a moment for all players to savor. Meriwether
was playing Liar's Poker before the game even started. He was bluffing.
Gutfreund considered the counterproposal. It would have been just like
him to accept. Merely to entertain the thought was a luxury that must

have pleased him well. (It was good to be rich.)
On the other hand, ten million dollars was, and is, a lot of money. If
Gutfreund lost, he'd have only thirty million or so left. His wife, Susan,
was busy spending the better part of fifteen million dollars redecorating
their Manhattan apartment (Meriwether knew this). And as Gutfreund
was the boss, he clearly wasn't bound by the Meriwether code. Who
knows? Maybe he didn't even know the Meriwether code. Maybe the
whole point of his challenge was to judge Meriwether's response. (Even
Gutfreund had to marvel at the king in action.) So Gutfreund declined. In
fact, he smiled his own brand of forced smile and said, "You're crazy."
No, thought Meriwether, just very, very good.
Chapter Two
Never
Mention
Money
I want to be an investment banker If you had 10,000 sheres [sic] I sell
them for you. I make a lot of money. I will like my job very, very much 1
will help people I will be a millionaire I will have a big house It will be fun
forme
—Seven-year-old Minnesota schoolboy, "What I Want to Be When I
Grow Up," dated March 1985
I WAS LIVING in London in the winter of 1984, finishing a master's
degree in economics at the London School of Economics, when I received
an invitation to dine with the queen mother. It came through a distant
cousin of mine who, years before, and somewhat improbably, had married
a German baron. Though I was not the sort of person regularly invited to
dine at St. James's Palace, the baroness, happily, was. I rented a black
tie, boarded the tube, and went. This event was the first link in a chain
of improbabilities, culminating in a job offer from Salomon Brothers.
What had been advertised as a close encounter with British royalty
proved to be a fund raiser with seven or eight hundred insurance
salesmen. We fanned out across the Great Hall in dark wooden chairs on
wine red carpets beneath sooty portraits of the royal family, as if
auditioning to be extras on "Masterpiece Theatre." Somewhere in the
Great Hall, as luck would have it, were two managing directors from
Salomon Brothers. I knew this only because, as luck would further have
it, I was seated between their wives.

The wife of the more senior Salomon Brothers managing director, an
American, took our table firmly in hand, once we'd finished craning
our necks to snatch a glimpse of British royalty. When she learned that I
was preparing to enter the job market and was considering investment
banking, she turned the evening into an interview. She prodded, quizzed,
needled, and unsettled me for about an hour until finally she stopped,
satisfied. Having examined what good had come from my twenty-four
years on earth, she asked why I didn't come and work on the Salomon
Brothers trading floor.
I tried to keep calm. I was afraid that if I appeared too eager, it might
dawn on the woman she had made a terrible mistake. I had recently read
John Gutfreund's now legendary comment that to succeed on the
Salomon Brothers trading floor a person had to wake up each morning
"ready to bite the ass off a bear." That, I said, didn't sound like much
fun. I explained to her my notion of what life should be like inside an
investment bank. (The description included a big glass office, a
secretary, a large expense account, and lots of meetings with captains of
industry. This occupation does exist within Salomon Brothers, but it is
not respected. It is called corporate finance. It is different from sales
and trading, though both are generally referred to as investment
banking. Gutfreund's trading floor, where stocks and bonds are bought
and sold, is the rough-and-tumble center of moneymaking and risk taking.
Traders have no secretaries, offices, or meetings with captains of
industry. Corporate finance, which services the corporations and
governments that borrow money, and that are known as "clients," is, by
comparison, a refined and unworldly place. Because they don't risk
money, corporate financiers are considered wimps by traders. By any
standards other than those of Wall Street, however, corporate finance
is still a jungle full of chest-pounding males).
The lady from Salomon fell silent at the end of my little speech. Then, in
a breath, she said limp-wristed, overly groomed fellows on small salaries
worked in corporate finance. Where was my chutzpah? Did I want to sit
in an office all day? What was I—some numbnut?
It was pretty clear she wasn't looking for an answer. She preferred
questions. So I asked if she had the authority to offer me a job. With
this she dropped the subject of my manhood and assured me that when
she got home, she would have her husband take care of it.

At the end of the meal the eighty-four-year-old queen mother tottered
out of the room. We—the eight hundred insurance salesmen, the two
managing directors from Salomon Brothers, their wives, and I—
stood in respectful silence as she crept toward what I at first took to be
the back door. Then I realized that it must be the front of the palace
and that we fund raiser types had been let in like delivery boys, through
the back. Anyway, the queen mother was headed our way. Behind her
walked Jeeves, straight as a broom, clad in white tie and tails and
carrying a silver tray. Following Jeeves, in procession, was a team of
small, tubular dogs, called corgis, that looked like large rats. The English
think corgis are cute. The British royals, I was later told, never go
anywhere without them.
A complete hush enveloped the Great Hall of St. James's Palace. As the
queen mother drew near, the insurance salesmen bowed their heads like
churchgoers. The corgis had been trained to curtsy every fifteen
seconds by crossing their back legs and dropping their ratlike bellies
onto the floor. The procession at last arrived at its destination. We
stood immediately at the queen mother's side. The Salomon Brothers
wife glowed. I'm sure I glowed, too. But she glowed more. Her desire to
be noticed was tangible. There are a number of ways to grab the
attention of royalty in the presence of eight hundred silent agents of
the Prudential, but probably the surest is to shout. That's what she did.
Specifically, she shouted, "Hey, Queen, Nice Dogs You Have There!"
Several dozen insurance salesmen went pale. Actually they were already
pale, so perhaps I exaggerate. But they cleared their throats a great
deal and stared at their tassel loafers. The only person within earshot
who didn't appear distinctly uncomfortable was the queen mother
herself. She passed out of the room without missing a step.
At that odd moment in St. James's Palace, representatives of two proud
institutions had flown their finest colors side by side: The unflappable
queen mother gracefully dealt with an embarrassing situation by ignoring
it; the Salomon Brothers managing director's wife, drawing on hidden
reserves of nerve and instinct, restored the balance of power in the
room by hollering. I had always had a soft spot for the royals, and
especially the queen mother. But from that moment I found Salomon
Brothers, the bleacher bums of St. James's, equally irresistible. I mean
it. To some, they were crude, rude, and socially unacceptable. But I

wouldn't have had them any other way. These were, as much as any
investment bankers could be, my people. And there was no doubt in my
mind that this unusually forceful product of the Salomon Brothers
culture could persuade her husband to give me a job.
I was soon invited by her husband to the London offices of Salomon and
introduced to traders and salesmen on the trading floor. I liked them. I
liked the commercial buzz of their environment. But I still did not have a
formal job offer, and I wasn't subjected to a proper round of job
interviews. It was pretty clear, considering the absence of harsh crossexamination, that the managing director's wife had been true to her
word and that Salomon intended to hire me. But no one actually asked me
to return.
A few days later I received another call. Would I care to eat breakfast
at 6:30 A.M. at London's Berkeley Hotel with Leo Corbett, the head of
Salomon recruiting from New York? I said naturally that I would. And I
went through the painful and unnatural process of rising at 5:30 A.M. and
putting on a blue suit to have a business breakfast. But Corbett didn't
offer me a job either, just a plate of wet scrambled eggs. We had a
pleasant talk, which was disconcerting, because Salomon Brothers'
recruiters were meant to be bastards. It seemed clear Corbett wanted
me to work at Salomon, but he never came right out and proposed. I went
home, took off the suit, and went back to bed.
Finally, puzzled, I told a fellow student at the London School of
Economics what had happened. As he badly wanted a job with Salomon
Brothers, he knew exactly what I had to do. Salomon Brothers, he said,
never made job offers. It was too smart to give people the chance to
turn it down. Salomon Brothers only gave hints. If I had been given a hint
that it wanted to hire me, the best thing forme to do was call Leo
Corbett in New York and take the job from him.
So I did. I called him, reintroduced myself, and said, "I want to let you
know that I accept."
"Glad to have you on board," he said, and laughed.
Right. What next? He explained that I would start life at "the Brothers"
in a training program that commenced the end of July. He said that I
would be joined by at least 120 other students, most of whom would have
been recruited from colleges and business schools. Then he hung up. He
