
■■Recommended Reading
Murphy, John J., Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (New York: New York
Institute of Finance, 1999).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

FIVE

Volume and Time

Answer 5-1: A
Each trade reflects a financial and emotional commitment by two traders: a buyer
and a seller. Since one of them is bound to be right and the other wrong, volume
represents the activity of winners and losers. It surges when losers panic. It mirrors
current activity but doesn’t forecast the future.
Answer 5-2: 1 = B; 2 = A; 3 = C; 4 = D
Trends tend to persist when the volume is steady or rises in an orderly manner. They
usually expire with either a bang or a whimper—a burst of volume or its drastic
shrinkage. The trend cannot continue after masses of losers start leaving.
Answer 5-3: 1 = D; 2 = A and B; 3 = C and F; 4 = E and G
Rising or steady volume confirms trends. When prices rise to a new high or fall to a
new low while volume shrinks, it tells us that the price trend is likely to reverse or
at least to pause.
Answer 5-4: B
There is a powerful rally going on, with a steady pattern of higher highs and lows.
CPST is slowly declining from its latest high, while volume is shrinking. Wait for a
bar or a few bars that fail to reach a new low for this minor downmove—and then
go long.

113

114

ANSWERS

Answer 5-5: C (I, II, and III)
OBV is created by adding each day’s volume to a running total when a trading vehicle
rises and subtracting it on the days when that vehicle falls. OBV confirms bull moves
when it rises to a higher high than at the previous peak; it confirms declines when it
falls to a lower low than at the previous bottom. Prices represent the consensus of
value, while volume, measured by OBV, tracks traders’ emotions.
Answer 5-6: 1 = D; 2 = C; 3 = B; 4 = A
Opening and closing prices are among the most important prices of the day. Openings tend to be dominated by amateurs whose orders flood the markets in the
mornings. Closings tend to be dominated by professionals who monitor the conditions all day. Accumulation/Distribution ties daily volume to the relationship between opening and closing prices.
Answer 5-7: B
The number of long and short positions in the derivatives markets is always equal.
While stocks represent current ownership, derivatives are contracts for future delivery. Each contract has two sides: a seller and a buyer. This is why open interest
reflects the number of contracts held by longs or owed by shorts in any given market
on any given day. It equals the total long or the total short position.
Answer 5-8: 1 = B; 2 = C; 3 = C; 4 = A
Open interest rises only when a new buyer and a new seller enter the market because their trade creates a new contract. Open interest falls when a bull who is long
sells his contract to a bear who buys it to cover his short trade, and both close out
their positions. If a new bull buys from an old bull who’s getting out, open interest
remains unchanged. Nor does it change when a new bear sells to an old bear who
buys to get out of his short position.
Answer 5-9: D (1, 2, 3, and 4)
When open interest rises, it shows that a crowd of confident bulls is facing down a
crowd of equally confident bears. One group is sure to lose, but as long as potential
losers keep pouring in, the trend is likely to continue.
Answer 5-10: C (1, 2, and 3)
The direction of the move shows whether the dominant force was up or down. The
distance between today’s and yesterday’s closing prices reflects the margin of victory
by bulls or bears. High-volume rallies and declines are more forceful and more likely
to persist.While related markets are important, they don’t reflect the force of moves
elsewhere.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

VOLUME AND TIME

115

Answer 5-11: D
Force Index links three essential factors: the direction of price change, its extent, and
the volume on which it occurred. To calculate the daily Force Index, subtract yesterday’s closing price from today’s and multiply the result, whether positive or negative,
by today’s volume.
Answer 5-12: D (I, II, III, and IV)
Smoothing the raw Force Index with a moving average helps recognize its trend—a
short-term trend using a short EMA or an intermediate trend using a longer EMA.
When the 2-day EMA of Force Index dips below zero during market rallies, it identifies buying opportunities, and when it rallies above zero during market drops, it
marks shorting opportunities. The 13-day EMA of Force Index helps identify bullish
and bearish zones by its position above or below its zero line. Divergences between
Force Index and price tend to mark approaching trend reversals.
Answer 5-13: 1 = G and H; 2 = F; 3 = A, B, C, and D; 4 = E
In the left half of the chart, prices are in a downtrend, confirmed by a falling EMA.
Whenever the 2-day EMA of Force Index rises above zero, it shows a brief recovery
by the bulls—a shorting opportunity. In area E, prices fall to a new low but recoil
from it, leaving behind a false downside breakout, while Force Index traces a bullish
divergence, with a much more shallow low. This is a good time to cover shorts. In
area F, the EMA of prices turns up—it signals to stop shorting and look for buying
opportunities. Afterwards, Force Index declines below zero in areas G and H, giving
buy signals.
Answer 5-14: B
At the right edge of the screen, a moving average of price is trending higher, indicating an uptrend. The 2-day Force Index has dipped below zero, signaling that the
stock is short-term oversold and giving a buy signal. You have two main ways to act
on this signal. You may place a buy order at the high of the current bar, aiming to
catch an upside breakout. Alternatively, you may measure the extent of an average
downside penetration of the EMA and place your buy order at a similar distance
below the current EMA.
Answer 5-15: 1 = C; 2 = A and D; 3 = B
The longer-term Force Index, smoothed with a 13-bar EMA, helps identify trend reversals: bullish when it crosses above the zero line and bearish when it crosses below
that line. It is also possible to draw horizontal bullish and bearish lines slightly above
and below the zero line. Waiting for their crossovers, rather than those of the zero
line, will reduce whipsaws—but it will also slow down the good signals. What you’d
gain in one trade, you’ll lose in another. A lower peak of Force Index in area B shows
that the bullish force is weakening and prepares you for a coming trend reversal.

116

ANSWERS

Answer 5-16: B
The Force Index is positive—bullish, while the trend is up, confirmed by a rising
EMA. This combination suggests going long, using pullbacks to the EMA for buying.
Answer 5-17: C (1, 2, and 3)
Price cycles owe their existence to fundamental production factors, such as weather
and seasonal shifts in supply and demand, as well as waves of greed and fear among
traders.
Answer 5-18: 1 = D; 2 = A and E; 3 = B and F; 4 = C and G
The season of an indicator is defined by its slope and its position above or below the
centerline.When an indicator turns up but is below its centerline, it is spring; when it
rises above its centerline, it is summer; when it declines but is above its centerline, it
is autumn; and when it falls below its centerline, it is winter. Spring is the best season
for going long, and autumn is the best season for selling short. Seasons are not rigid—
not in nature and not in the markets. Notice a brief warm spell in winter in the area
between letters B and C.
Answer 5-19: A
Each timeframe relates to its next greater and lesser timeframes by a factor of 5.
When you analyze a market in two timeframes, the shorter of them has to be about
five times shorter than the longer one. If your favorite timeframe is daily, you must
first examine weekly charts.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

VOLUME AND TIME

117

■■Rating Yourself
0–7 correct: poor.
You need to learn more about volume and time. These essential aspects of market
analysis will give you an edge over most traders. Please reread the relevant chapter
and retake this test before proceeding to the rest of this book.
8–14 correct: fairly good.
You have a working grasp of the essential concepts of volume and time, which most
traders neglect at their peril. Please review your answers to see whether your score
was lowered by a weak knowledge of a certain area, such as time, volume, or open
interest. Review the appropriate chapters and retake this test a few days later.
15–19 correct: excellent.
You understand the concepts most traders miss. Time, volume, and open interest
provide an extra dimension of analysis and deepen your understanding of market
dynamics.

■■Recommended Reading
Belveal, L. Dee. Charting Commodity Market Price Behavior (1969) (Homewood, IL:
Business One Irwin, 1985).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

SIX

General Market
Indicators
Answer 6-1: C (1, 2, 3, and 4)
New Highs are the stocks that have risen to the highest level in a year, while New
Lows are the stocks that have fallen to the lowest level in a year on any given day.
New Highs are the leaders in strength and New Lows are the leaders in weakness.
The New High–New Low Index (NH-NL) works by measuring the difference between the strongest and the weakest stocks on any given day. It is a leading indicator
of the stock market.
Answer 6-2: 1 = D; 2 = C; 3 = A; 4 = B
When the market rallies and NH-NL rises to a new high, it shows a growing bullish
leadership. It pays to follow the leaders and go long. When the market declines and
NH-NL drops to a new low, it shows that bearish leadership is becoming stronger.
This bearish divergence indicates that it pays to go short. If the broad market rallies
but NH-NL traces a lower peak, it shows that the uptrend is losing its leaders and
may be in trouble. If the market falls to a new low but NH-NL traces a higher bottom, it shows that the downtrend is losing its leaders and nearing a bottom.

119

120

ANSWERS

Answer 6-3: 1 = A and D; 2 = B and F; 3 = G–H; 4 = D–E
NH-NL tracks the numbers of the market leaders, making it a leading indicator of
the stock market. Its bullish zone is above the zero line or, if you want to make it less
prone to whipsaws, above the plus 100 level. Its bearish zone is below the zero line
or, if you want to make it less prone to whipsaws, below the minus 100 level.
Divergences show that the leadership of the current trend is becoming weaker.
Both the S&P 500 and the NH-NL rallied to new highs in area D, but in area E, only
the S&P reached a new high— this bearish divergence of NH-NL gave a sell signal.
Both the S&P 500 and the NH-NL fell to new lows in area G, but in area H, only
the S&P fell to a lower low; NH-NL bottomed out at a higher level, and its bullish
divergence flashed a buy signal.
Answer 6-4: 2
The EMA is rising and the NH-NL Index is positive, showing that the bulls are in
charge. The New High–New Low Index has just rallied to a new high for the current
move, showing that the bullish leadership is becoming stronger. Prices are already
above value, but still close enough to it to make going long a realistic choice.
Answer 6-5: C (1, 2, and 3)
The A/D line measures mass participation in rallies and declines. A stock market
rally is likely to persist when the A/D line rises to a new high, while a decline is
likely to continue when the A/D line falls to a new low. Traders need to monitor the
pattern of A/D peaks and valleys because its absolute level depends mainly on its
starting date. The A/D line tracks only price changes, not volume.
Answer 6-6: B (1 and 3)
Uptrends attract traders, and poorly capitalized newcomers enter the market in
droves near major peaks. Many of them double up at the worst possible time. As
Humphrey Neill put it, “When everyone thinks alike, everyone is likely to be wrong.”
When bullish consensus reaches a record peak, a savvy trader starts taking profits on
long positions and looking for shorting opportunities. He knows that the record high
bullish consensus means that bulls are already loaded with stocks and can hardly buy
more to support the uptrend.
Answer 6-7: A
The structure of the derivatives markets, including futures, ensures that the number
of long and short contracts is always equal. If 75 percent of market participants are
bullish, then there are three times more bulls than bears. In that case, an average bear
is short three times as many contracts as an average bull is long. It shows that the big
money is on the bearish side. Big money did not grow big by being stupid; it pays to
bet on the wealthy minority.When bullish consensus rises to 75 percent, start selling
and look for shorting opportunities.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

121

Answer 6-8: D
The number of short and long contracts is always equal in the futures markets. If the
majority of participants are bearish, then the bullish minority must hold more contracts per trader. A 20 percent bullish consensus means that there are four bears for
each bull—an average bull holds four times as many contracts as an average bear is
short. With big money on the long side of the market, be prepared for a sharp rally.
Answer 6-9: B
A bull market that has caught the attention of the general public is probably very old
and getting ready to reverse. Markets are often very volatile at tops; scaling into a put
position may be the safest trading strategy. Trying to buy coffee now means betting
on a greater fool theory. Other markets should be traded based on their own merits.
Answer 6-10: 1 = C; 2 = A; 3 = D; 4 = B
Traders’ positions get reported to the government after their sizes reach reporting
levels. Those levels differ from market to market. Position limits indicate the maximum number of contracts that a speculator is allowed to hold in any given market.
Hedgers are exempt from position limits. Many traders are shocked to learn that
trading on many kinds of inside information is perfectly legal in the futures markets.
Answer 6-11: 1 = D; 2 = A; 3 = B; 4 = C
Commercials deal in commodities in the normal course of their business and use
futures to hedge inventory risks. Large speculators are those whose positions reach
or exceed reporting levels. If you subtract the holdings of those two groups from
open interest, you’ll find out how many contracts are held by small traders who
often wind up on the wrong side of market trends. Corporate insiders are officers
of publicly traded firms and those who hold 5 percent or more of company shares.
Answer 6-12: D
Buying by corporate insiders is a strong bullish sign, but you need to see a bullish
confirmation from price action. At 11 months, the bear market is old. Nobody will
ring a bell to advertise the start of a bull market. As an investor, it’s time to start
slowly accumulating the stock you’ve selected.

122

ANSWERS

■■Rating Yourself
0–4 correct: poor.
If you don’t trade stocks, you may skip NH-NL, but if you plan to trade stocks or
stock index futures or options, you owe it to yourself to learn how to use the best
leading indicator of the stock market. Indicators of mass psychology provide unique
insights into the forces that move markets, and it’s important to understand how
they work.
5–8 correct: fairly good.
You have a decent grasp of the indicators that measure mass market behavior. This
may be enough if you only want a general understanding of the concept. If you plan
to use them in trading, reread the appropriate chapter, look up the answers to the
questions you missed, and retake this test several days later.
9–12 correct: excellent.
You understand the essential stock market indicators. They help you recognize
when the market is in a top or a bottom area. Armed with this knowledge, you can
use computerized indicators (see Part 4) to fine-tune your entries and exits.

■■Recommended Reading
Elder, Alexander & Kerry Lovvorn. The New High–New Low Index (Alabama: SpikeTrade,
2012).
Neill, Humphrey B., The Art of Contrary Thinking (1954) (Caldwell, ID: Caxton
Printers, 1985).

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

SEVEN

Trading Systems

Answer 7-1: C (I, II, III, and IV)
Trends may point in different directions at the same time in different timeframes:
for example, up on the daily chart but down on the weekly, or vice versa. A trendfollowing indicator may be giving a buy signal, while an oscillator is giving a sell
signal, or vice versa. The Triple Screen trading system is designed to manage those
contradictory signals.
Answer 7-2: B
The Triple Screen trading system begins by identifying the trend on a chart one
order of magnitude greater than the one you are planning to trade. Find the trend
on the weekly chart and then look for entry points in that direction on the dailies.
If you begin by analyzing the daily chart and only check the weekly chart later, your
eyes will be prejudiced by what you saw on the daily chart. A monthly chart is too far
removed from the daily—the timeframes of two charts should relate to one another
by a factor of five. A weekly bar contains the data from 5 daily bars.

123

124

ANSWERS

Answer 7-3: C
Keeping good records is essential for testing a system. Start at the beginning of your
data file and move forward one day at a time, recording each signal and planned
actions. Watching signals emerge and gradually deliver paper profits and losses is the
closest you can get to real trading without risking money. If you like what you see
and start trading that system in your account, keep your positions small. Concentrate on learning how the system works in the real world before gradually increasing
position size. Since you cannot know exactly how others may use this system, their
feedback is not nearly as meaningful as your own results.
Answer 7-4: B
The entry, the target, and the stop are the three essential numbers for every trade—
you must write them down before you enter. They provide the structure for every
trade, allowing you to compare risk and reward and decide what size to trade.
A trade without these numbers is not a trade but a gamble. Counting profits in an
open trade will only distract you from managing that trade.
Answer 7-5: B
A directional trader has three choices: buy, sell, or stand aside. The first screen of
Triple Screen acts as a censor that takes away one of those choices.You may look for
trades only in the direction of the long-term timeframe or stand aside.
Answer 7-6: C
When the first screen of the Triple Screen trading system points up, use declines of
a short-term oscillator to find buying opportunities. When the first screen points
down, use rallies of a short-term oscillator to identify shorting opportunities. This
rule helps avoid chasing uptrends and downtrends. In this example, the short-term
oscillator is already overbought; wait for it to decline before going long.
Answer 7-7: B
When the weekly trend is up but the daily trend is down, Triple Screen points to a
buying opportunity. One of the options is to place a buy-stop above the last day’s
high to catch a short-term upside breakout.
Answer 7-8: C
The uptrend of Bed, Bath & Beyond Inc. (BBBY) on the weekly chart is confirmed
by its rising EMA as well as the uptrend of MACD-Histogram. The weekly uptrend
leads to a strategic decision to look only for buying opportunities on the daily chart.
There we see a pullback to the EMA, while the Force Index below zero indicates an
oversold condition. According to Triple Screen, pullbacks on the daily charts during
weekly uptrends signal buying opportunities. Place a buy order above the latest daily
high. The fact that the weekly and daily trends are in conflict is a normal occurrence
in the markets—it is the purpose of the Triple Screen to resolve such conflicts to your
benefit.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TRADING SYSTEMS

125

Answer 7-9: 1 = C; 2 = A; 3 = B; 4 = C
When the weekly trend is up and the daily trend is down, use those declines to catch
buying opportunities. When the weekly trend is down and the daily trend is up, use
those rallies for entering shorts. Trying to enter a trade when both weekly and daily
trends are moving in the same direction is like hopping aboard a moving train. It can
be done, but it’s safer to wait for a pullback.
Answer 7-10: A
The slope of the fast EMA tracks the market’s inertia, while the slope of the MACDHistogram reflects the direction of market power. The primary role of the Impulse
system is not to tell traders when to buy or sell. Rather, it shows them when they’re
prohibited from buying or shorting. It is a censorship system, and when the Impulse
system is red, it prohibits buying. It removes that prohibition when its color changes
from the bearish red to a neutral blue or a bullish green.
Answer 7-11: 1 = A; 2 = C; 3 = B; 4 = C
The color of the Impulse system depends on its two components—an EMA and
MACD-Histogram. When both are rising, the Impulse turns green—bullish, prohibiting short trades. When both decline, the Impulse turns red—bearish, forbidding buying. When these two components contradict one another, the Impulse turns
blue—neutral.
Answer 7-12: 1 = E and H; 2 = A and C; 3 = B, D, F, G and I
The Impulse system is a censorship system. When both the EMA and MACD-Histogram turn down, coloring the bar red, it prohibits buying.When both indicators turn
up, coloring the bar green, shorting is not allowed.
The Impulse system shouldn’t be used as an automatic trading method: while it
catches every trend, it would subject an automatic trader to multiple whipsaws, for
example, in the area between the letters C and G. Its best signals emerge when red
or green colors disappear. For example, the disappearance of red at the bar G showed
that the double bottom was being completed and suggested buying. The disappearance of green at the bar I signaled the approaching end of a powerful upswing and
suggested taking profits.
Answer 7-13: A
At the right edge of the chart, both the EMA and MACD-Histogram are rising—the
Impulse system would color that bar green. Had both indicators been declining,
the bar would be red; had they pointed in opposite directions, the bar would be blue.
This is important to keep in mind if you want to find the Impulse color at the right
edge of a chart using software that doesn’t let you actually color the bars.

126

ANSWERS

Answer 7-14: C
There is no mystery in constructing a channel. Keep adjusting its width until it contains the bulk of prices, leaving out only the most extreme highs and lows for the
past 50 to 100 bars. Prices moving outside of a well-drawn channel identify zones of
unsustainable optimism or pessimism, where the market is likely to reverse. Keep in
mind that on rare occasions the market may stay outside of its channel for a longer
time—but that’s an exception that confirms the rule.
Answer 7-15: 1 = C; 2 = A; 3 = D; 4 = B
A moving average reflects the average consensus of value. A channel tracks the
boundaries between normal and abnormal price action. The market is undervalued
when it falls below its lower channel line and overvalued when it rises above its upper channel line. The channel coefficient needs to be adjusted until a channel contains 90 percent to 95 percent of the price action for the past 50 to 100 bars.
Answer 7-16: A
The slope of a channel provides important information. When it rises, it shows that
the market is bullish. When it falls, the market is bearish. When it is flat, the market is neutral. A breakout in the direction of the channel slope indicates a powerful
trend; a return to the moving average almost always offers a good opportunity to
trade in the direction of the trend. Swings between the walls of a flat channel also
provide good trading opportunities. Buying and selling at the moving average isn’t
always a good idea. It tends to work when a channel is slanted but not when it is flat.
