
30
Jet Jack

Omaha • 1967

As late as 1967, Susie seemed to think that Warren would be more attentive to her and the family if he quit
working. In her mind, the two of them had an understanding that they would scale back their lives once he
made $8 or $10 million. His 1966 fees of $1.5 million and gains on his capital brought the family’s net worth
to over $9 million.1 She badgered him that the time had come. But Warren’s pace never slackened as he
shifted his focus from one preoccupation to another: raising money for the partnerships, buying National
American, Sanborn Map, Dempster, Berkshire Hathaway, Hochschild-Kohn, American Express, and any
number of investments in between. Sometimes his back seized up when he got on a plane, and occasionally
Susie had to nurse him for several days while he was bedridden with pain. His doctor couldn’t find any
specific cause, suggesting that work or stress might have something to do with it. But Warren was about as
likely to stop working for the sake of his back as he was to fork down a big plate of broccoli for the sake of
his health.
He was always sitting hunched over something, a book, the phone, a bridge or poker game with friends like
Dick Holland and Nick Newman, a prominent businessman who owned Hinky Dinky, the same grocery chain
from which Warren had slunk, humiliated, as a boy after his grandfather sent him to buy loaves of bread.
Newman and his wife were active in the community and in civil-rights circles, and, like the low-key Hollands,
they were typical of the Buffetts’ friends. Warren and Susie stayed away from the Omaha social circuit.
Their joint social life was evolving into a series of recurring events that followed the rhythm of Warren’s
work and often took place when they were traveling to see Warren’s friends. In town, however, Susie stayed
on call; she shuttled between her own friends, family, needy cases, and community work. A sign now hung
on the Buffetts’ unlocked back door that read: “The Doctor Is In.” One or another of Susie’s “patients” could
often be found wandering around the house. Her clientele came from all different ages and stations in life,
and some were more demanding than others. They asked and Susie gave, and when they asked for more, she
gave more.
When Susie asked, Warren gave, and when Susie asked for more, Warren complied. Unyielding about how
he spent his time, he gave in to her on almost everything else. This was the year they remodeled the house.
Already the biggest on the block, under Susie’s direction a new wing replaced the old garage, giving the
neighborhood kids a place to gather in a new family room. Warren was excited at having his own racquetball
court in the basement underneath—like Ping-Pong on a human-size scale—where he took his friends and
business colleagues to play.
But even though Warren was like a kid in many ways, and Susie wished he were a more attentive father, he
was loyal and committed: He showed up at school events and took the children on vacations. And while
1967, the year of White Rabbit and Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band, marked the apex of the
rock-and-roll drug culture, with Susie Jr. in eighth grade, Howie in sixth, and Peter in third, the Buffetts were
blessedly free of worries faced by many other parents.
Susie Jr. had developed from a timid child to a self-sufficient teen and the undisputed boss of her siblings.
While her mother filled the house with ballads and soul music when she sang and played albums, Little Sooz
had turned into a rock-and-roll girl; she introduced her brothers to groups like the Byrds and the Kinks. She
was a straight kid, however, not sucked into the druggy element at school. Howie, now twelve, was still
young enough to try to scare his sister and her friends by looming from the crabapple tree outside her window
in a gorilla costume. But his pranks were getting more sophisticated, and more dangerous. He put Scout the
dog on the roof, went downstairs, and called him to see if he would come. Scout did, and wound up at the vet
with a broken leg. “Well, I just wanted to see if he would come,” Howie protested.2 To foil his mother from
periodically locking him in his room out of frustration, he bought a lock at a hardware store and started
locking her out. Peter spent hours at the piano, playing by himself or with his friend Lars Erickson. He was
winning talent shows and seemed as absorbed in his music as his father was in making money.

The one person in the family who was seduced by the dark side of the psychedelic sixties was seventeenyear-old Billy Rogers, son of Susie’s sister, Dottie, now a budding jazz guitarist who was experimenting with
drugs. His mother did some volunteer work and was an expert seamstress, but she also slept until noon,
seemed paralyzed by making decisions, and at times was so distant and vague that it was literally impossible
to carry on a coherent conversation with her. Dottie was drinking more and not paying attention to her kids.
Susie often took Billy to watch Calvin Keys, a local jazz guitar player—so that Billy could learn technique
from him, but also to try to straighten Billy out.3
She faced a daunting task in an era when the drug culture of pot and LSD was ubiquitous and Timothy Leary
invited America to “Turn on, tune in, drop out.” The youth-led counterculture was rebelling against all forms
of authority, everything for which the prior decades had stood. “This ain’t Eisenhower’s America no more,”
said one of the hundred thousand hippies milling about San Francisco’s Haight-Ashbury that summer, as if
that were explanation enough.4
Warren still lived in Eisenhower’s America. He had never suffered from Beatlemania. He wasn’t singing
“Kumbaya” or putting up posters saying that war was unhealthy for children and other living things. His state
of consciousness remained unaltered. His mind was deep in rigorous philosophical inquiry, torn between the
cigar-butt philosophy of Ben Graham and the “great businesses” of Phil Fisher and Charlie Munger.
“I was in this Charlie Munger–influenced type transition—sort of back and forth. It was kind of like during
the Protestant Reformation. And I would listen to Martin Luther one day and the Pope the next. Ben
Graham, of course, being the Pope.”
While Munger was nailing his theses on the door of the Cigar Butt Cathedral, the market itself had
abandoned all authorities past and present; as the 1960s progressed, chatter about stocks enlivened cocktail
parties, and housewives called their brokers from the beauty parlor. Trading volumes were up by one-third.5
Buffett, at thirty-six, felt like a grizzled old man in a world that craved Transitron, Polaroid, Xerox,
Electronic Data Systems—companies whose technology he did not understand. He told his partners that he
was slowing down. “We simply don’t have that many good ideas,” he wrote.6
Yet he did not relax his rules in search of ways to keep the money at work. Instead, he laid out two new
restrictions that would make it even harder for him to invest. These personal preferences now became part of
the official canon.
1. We will not go into businesses where technology which is way over my head is crucial to the investment
decision. I know about as much about semiconductors or integrated circuits as I do of the mating habits of
the chrzaszcz.
2. [W]e will not seek out activity in investment operations, even if offering splendid profit expectations,
where major human problems appear to have a substantial chance of developing.
By “major human problems” he meant layoffs, plant closings—and union businesses that couldn’t take a
strike. This also meant he would think once, twice, three times, before smoking any more cigar butts.
The cigar butts he owned were problem enough. Berkshire Hathaway was now “on life support.” Buffett had
recently hired his Peat, Marwick auditor, Verne McKenzie, and sent him off to New Bedford to oversee the
wretched textile mill. He had been regretting a mistake he had made at a recent Berkshire Hathaway board
meeting. Feeling flush during what would turn out to be a brief moment of financial success—“we were
selling out of rayon linings for a few months and making a lot of money”7—Buffett had let himself get talked
into a ten-cent-per-share dividend. The firm’s lawyers had argued that Berkshire was doing so well that it
might be accused of unjustifiably retaining earnings. Either while daydreaming or simply in a moment of
weakness, Buffett went along with the distribution; a dime a share sounded measly; it somehow took him
twenty-four hours to realize the fallacy of their argument. By then it was too late and his uncharacteristic
agreeableness had showered on the partners and shareholders $101,733 that he knew he could have turned

into millions someday.8 He would never make a mistake like that again.
Eight months later, Buffett offered the Berkshire shareholders a swap. Anyone who wanted an incomeproducing security could have a 71/2 percent debenture in exchange for stock. A total of 32,000 shares were
turned in. With this move Buffett washed out of the mix a group of shareholders who wanted income,
ensuring that the rest were more likely to care about growth instead of dividends. “It was brilliant,” says
Verne McKenzie.9 And, of course, with fewer shares outstanding, he was able to tighten his grip on Berkshire
that much more—curiously, even as the magnitude of his original error in buying the place was clearer. Ken
Chace stoically followed Buffett’s orders to shrink the business. Rather than precipitate a hateful backlash
like that at Dempster, Buffett listened to Chace’s recommendations that the unions be treated well, and
decided to tolerate losses to keep some remnant of the company operational and New Bedford content.
By 1967 Chace and McKenzie had managed to pull the hapless maker of men’s suit linings back to
breakeven. But the term “inflation”—moribund since the Second World War—was again on everyone’s lips.
The costs of wages and raw materials were rising like silt in a river, and both foreign and southern textile
mills with cheaper labor were drying up Berkshire’s sales.
Buffett gave the news to his partners: “B-H is experiencing and faces real difficulties in the textile business.
While I don’t presently foresee any loss in underlying values, I similarly see no prospect of a good return
on the assets employed in the textile business. Therefore, this segment of our portfolio will be a substantial
drag on our relative performance…if the Dow continues to advance.”10
He tried to pull money out of the textile business as fast as possible. He became intimately involved in the
most ordinary decisions of the mills, on the phone almost daily with Chace and McKenzie.11 Chace had had
to shut down the Box Loom division for a week back in October 1966 because of competition from imports;
less than six months later Buffett told him to permanently shut down the King Philip D division in Rhode
Island, which made fine lawn cotton, about one-tenth of Berkshire’s output. The loss of 450 jobs marked the
end of Rhode Island’s cotton industry.12 “The tide continues to be far more important than the swimmers”
was the bottom line, as Buffett saw it.13
It wasn’t enough. As the numbers came in, Buffett realized that the Apparel Fabrics and Box Loom divisions
were losing so much money that the only way to salvage them was to modernize the equipment. But throwing
good money after bad had been Seabury Stanton’s mistake. Buffett refused to invest in the business; it would
be like trying to irrigate the desert with a garden hose. Still, closing the plants down would throw hundreds of
people out of work. He sat behind his desk and swiveled his chair and thought about it, then thought about it
some more.
The irony was that the partnership was swimming in a sea of money.14 And on Wall Street, brokers in
pinstripes were getting high on cash. A new breed of men, who had come of age after World War II without
the lessons of the Crash and the Great Depression seared into their brains, had risen on the Street. As they
pushed stocks to never-before-seen values, Buffett began selling down his American Express position, which
by now was worth $15 million more than the $13 million that it had cost, accounting for two-thirds of the
partnership’s gain. But he didn’t want to plow that money back into Berkshire Hathaway.
Rather, his most important task that year was to find something new to which he could hitch the
broken-down nag of Berkshire before its “substantial drag” on his performance became intolerable. In
Omaha, he had long had his eye on a company, National Indemnity, headquartered just a few blocks away
from his Kiewit Plaza office. Buffett first met its founder, Jack Ringwalt, in the early 1950s, in the boardroom
at the broker Cruttenden and Company. Ringwalt was one of the smartest, most enterprising men in town.
Then Warren’s aunt Alice had tried to steer Ringwalt into the Buffett Partnership.15 Ringwalt later claimed
that Buffett had demanded a minimum investment of $50,000 (though Buffett was taking far less than that
from nearly everyone at the time). “If you think I am going to let a punk kid like you handle $50,000 of my
money, you are even nuttier than I think you are,” Ringwalt supposedly replied, and declined to invest.
Ringwalt considered himself an investing expert, however, and Buffett’s penchant for secrecy put many

people off.16
Buffett kept an eye on National Indemnity nonetheless. A nonstop learning machine, he wanted to know
everything there was to know about the insurance business. He checked out armloads of books from the
library and came to understand Ringwalt’s strategy, which was to insure the most difficult customers.
Ringwalt, Buffett saw, was the mix-up player of insurance—the cautious risk-taker and the penny-pinching,
aggressive underwriter who went around the office every night and turned off all the lights.17 For a fancy
price, he insured the unusual: circus performers, lion tamers, the body parts of burlesque stars.18 “There’s no
such thing as a bad risk,” Ringwalt liked to say, “only bad rates.” His first break had come when a bank
asked him to guarantee that a bootlegger—presumed murdered—would not return to Omaha, because the
presumptive widow wanted to withdraw his account without waiting the legally required seven years.
Ringwalt figured the alleged murderer’s lawyer might have a pretty good idea whether the missing
bootlegger’s blood no longer pulsed. He had helped the accused murderer beat the rap, but the dead man’s
widow (and the bank) suspected that was mainly just good lawyering, not exoneration. Still, the lawyer
couldn’t say whether his client had confessed to him. So Ringwalt got him to put up some of his own money
on the guarantee, on the theory that unless the bootlegger had croaked louder than a bullfrog, the lawyer
wouldn’t take the risk. Sure enough, the cash told all; the bootlegger never reappeared, and the bank never
made a claim. Jack Ringwalt was enterprising, and a natural handicapper.
From there, he expanded into insuring taxicabs, then he put up the stakes for radio-station treasure hunts,
hiding the clues in lipstick cases, burying them himself, using clues so obscure that only one prize was ever
claimed. He soon became the fastest-moving, most swashbuckling, energetic businessman in Omaha. His
daughter referred to him by the racy-sounding nickname Jet Jack. He managed National Indemnity’s
investments himself, buying tiny positions in hundreds of stocks, scribbled almost illegibly on ledger sheets:
fifty shares of National Distillers, 2,500 of Shaver Food Marts. He carried around hundreds of stock
certificates in an old gym bag.
In the early 1960s, Buffett had called his friend Charlie Heider, who was on the board of National Indemnity,
and asked whether Ringwalt had any interest in selling. Heider’s answer was intriguing.
“For fifteen minutes every year, Jack would want to sell National Indemnity. Something would make him
mad. Some claim would come in that irritated him, or something of that sort. So Charlie Heider and I
discussed this phenomenon of Jack being in heat once a year for fifteen minutes. And I told him if he ever
caught him in this particular phase to let me know.”
One gray and gloomy February Omaha day in 1967, Heider was having lunch with Ringwalt, who said, “I
don’t like this weather.” The conversation wound around to the fact that he wanted to sell National
Indemnity. Ringwalt had convinced himself he was better off without it; the fifteen-minute window had
appeared. “There’s somebody here in town who might want to buy it,” Heider said. “Warren Buffett.”
Ringwalt allowed as how he might be interested. Heider called Buffett afterward and told him that Jack
Ringwalt would possibly sell the company for so many million. “Do you care to meet with him in the coming
days?”
“What about this afternoon?” Buffett said immediately. Ringwalt was leaving for Florida the next morning,
but Heider convinced him to go down to Kiewit Plaza first.19
Buffett asked Ringwalt to explain why he hadn’t sold to anyone yet. Ringwalt said that all the offers came
from crooks. He started laying down conditions. He said he wanted to keep the company in Omaha. Sensing
that the fifteen-minute window was about to disappear, Buffett agreed he wouldn’t move the company.
Ringwalt said he didn’t want any employees fired. Buffett said that was okay. Ringwalt said all the other
offers had been too low. “How much do you want?” Buffett asked. Fifty dollars a share, said Ringwalt,
fifteen dollars more than Warren thought it was worth. “I’ll take it,” Buffett said.
“So we made a deal in that fifteen-minute zone. Then, Jack, having made the deal, really didn’t want to do

it. But he was an honest guy and wouldn’t back out of a deal. However, he said to me after we’d shaken
hands, ‘Well, I suppose you’ll want audited financial statements.’ And if I’d have said yes, he would’ve said,
‘Well, that’s too bad, then, we don’t have a deal.’ So I just responded, ‘I wouldn’t dream of looking at
audited financial statements—they’re the worst kind.’ Then Jack said to me, ‘I suppose you’ll want me to
sell my insurance agencies to you as well.’”
It would have been natural for Buffett to want the agencies. They controlled relationships with some of the
customers who did business with National Indemnity. “I just said, ‘Jack, I wouldn’t buy those agencies
under any circumstances.’ If I’d said yes, that I wanted him to sell the agencies to Berkshire—he would’ve
said, ‘Well, I can’t do that, Warren. We must’ve misunderstood each other.’
“So we went through about three or four iterations like this. And finally Jack gave up and sold me the
business, though I don’t think he really wanted to do it.”
Buffett wanted him to do it, because Berkshire Hathaway was a lousy business that he had partially
liquidated, and this was his chance to swap those funds for a great business. Since he knew that Ringwalt
would be having second thoughts while away in Florida, he moved fast to seal the deal before Ringwalt could
change his mind. Both men wanted a contract no more than one page long.20 Buffett had final papers drawn
up quickly and the funds deposited in the U.S. National Bank.21
When Ringwalt returned from Florida a week later, Buffett freight-trained him with a deal ready to close. But
Ringwalt showed up to the closing meeting ten minutes late. Buffett and Heider would later explain this by
saying that Ringwalt was driving around the block looking for a parking meter with time left on it.22 Ringwalt
always said he was just late. But maybe he’d realized he wasn’t actually better off without it, and was
dragging his feet, sorry at having bowwowed himself into thinking he was better off without National
Indemnity.
Buffett, of course, knew full well that the partnership was better off with it; National Indemnity was the
chance to give his fortunes a gigantic push. A short time later, he wrote a paper on the subject under the dull
title “Thoughts Regarding Capital Requirements for Insurance Companies.”
The word “capital”—money—was an important hint at what Buffett was thinking when he acquired National
Indemnity, for capital was his partnership’s lifeblood. He was pulling capital from Berkshire and it needed to
be put to work. National Indemnity took a lot of risk and needed gobs of capital to do so. “By most
standards,” he wrote, “National Indemnity is pushing its capital quite hard. It is the availability of additional
resources in Berkshire Hathaway that enables us to follow the policy of aggressively using our capital which,
on a long-range basis, should result in the greatest profitability within National Indemnity…. Berkshire
Hathaway could put additional capital into National Indemnity, should underwriting turn sour.”23
Buffett had figured out a whole new type of business. If National Indemnity made money, he could send
those profits out to buy other businesses and stocks, instead of leaving them to hibernate in National
Indemnity’s vault. But if the lion ate the lion tamer, National Indemnity might need money to pay the lion
tamer’s weeping family. Then the money could come back home to National Insurance from the other
businesses.
Grafting the insurance business onto Berkshire Hathaway, the mess of a textile mill, made its capital
homeostatic. It could respond internally to the environment at Buffett’s command, rather than hibernating
like a lizard when it got cold or running out when the sun shone to find a rock on which to sun itself.
The key was to price the risks right. Thus he needed Jack Ringwalt, who had talked himself into selling his
own business, to stick around. Buffett paid Ringwalt handsomely and cultivated him as a friend; and as with
Ben Rosner and Associated Cotton Shops, he had bought an excellent business run by an able manager.
The two men often played tennis in California. Ringwalt, whose taste in clothes resembled Buffett’s, would
show up in a grimy old sweatshirt that his daughter had made for him. His racy nickname, Jet Jack, stretched

in huge letters over his bay window of a gut. Once when he and Buffett were having lunch at a Jolly Roger
restaurant, a little kid came up to him. “Can I have your autograph, Jet Jack?” he asked. Ringwalt swelled
with pride. The kid thought he was a celebrity: an astronaut or a movie star. He may not have looked the part
except to a little kid, but in his heart, he still felt like Jet Jack.
And rightly so, because the swashbuckle came from inside, not from the way he looked. Ringwalt may have
sold his company, but he had gotten back a bit of his own—for what he did with some of the money he got
from selling National Indemnity was to buy stock in Berkshire Hathaway.24
