
Euro
The euro was introduced in 1999 and entered circulation in 2002. As of 2012,
it has replaced 20 separate sovereign currencies, including the deutsche mark
and French franc. The Eurozone is the world’s second largest economy, and
the euro is easily the second most important currency.
The euro owes its existence both to political and economic forces. It was
intended to further unify the European Union by eliminating the need for
currency conversion within its borders. Moreover, it was deliberately

Forex for Beginners
engineered to be stronger than the US dollar (i.e., one euro is worth more
than one dollar), and has remained quite strong since its inception. From
2002 to 2008, it appreciated by more than 70% against the dollar, and many
currency investors netted a healthy profit. For both political and economic
reasons, it has gained widespread acceptance as an alternative to the US
dollar. This is displayed in Figure 2-3.

Figure 2-3. Complete history of EUR/USD

After peaking at $1.60 in 2008, however, the euro entered a period of
decline. The first punch came in the form of the global credit crisis, which
froze the European banking system and required significant intervention by
the European Central Bank (ECB). Then came the revelation that some of the
peripheral members of the European Union had overextended themselves and
were teetering on the verge of bankruptcy. Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and
Spain have all received financial support from the European Union and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), but investors remain skeptical that these
countries can avoid defaulting on their debt. These countries have
experienced repeated cuts in their sovereign credit rating and skyrocketing
borrowing rates, and at this point, the vicious cycle of economic decline and
cuts in government spending seem to make default a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The ultimate concern is that other EU economies will become engulfed in the
storm, and that the European fiscal crisis will morph into a full-blown
financial crisis. The reason being is that European banks lent heavily to the

29

30

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
so-called PIGS countries (Portugal, Ireland, Greece, and Spain) during the
economic boom years, and would certainly collapse if one or more of these
countries defaulted on their debts. The extent to which foreign banks are
exposed to Eurozone debt default is displayed in Figure 2-4.

Figure 2-4. Foreign banks’ exposure to Eurozone debt default2

In hindsight, it looks as though the original case for monetary union of the
Eurozone was overstated. The Eurozone economies are simply too different
from one another for their monetary unification to be justified. Furthermore,
unifying under the umbrella of a common currency stripped them of their
ability to carry out independent monetary policies, but did not similarly
mandate a common fiscal policy. This sowed the seeds for extreme
imbalances: during the boom years, low interest rates promoted overheating
on the Eurozone periphery. These economies have been hit
disproportionately hard by the bust, and without currency
depreciation—rendered impossible by the euro—they have very few
prospects for recovery. In short, the luster of the euro has been dented
severely. It remains possible that the ten-year common currency experiment
will soon come to an end.

2 Bank for International Settlements (BIS), Quarterly Review March 2011, www.bis.org/

publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1103.pdf.

Forex for Beginners

Japanese Yen
The Japanese yen is perhaps the world’s best performing currency of the
modern era, having strengthened by 400% against the US dollar since 1971!
(See Figure 2-5.)

Figure 2-5. Recent history of USD/JPY (with exchange rate shown in reverse)

Initially, the yen’s resurgence was due to a post–World War II economic
boom in Japan that lasted well into the 1980s and culminated in Japan’s
emergence as the world’s second largest economy. (It has since been eclipsed
by China in 2010.) Ultimately, however, this boom proved unsustainable,
and Japan’s economy has stagnated for the better part of two decades. The
same can also be said of its stock market.
What has saved the yen from the same dubious fate is Japan’s export sector.
Up until 2009, Japan had recorded a trade surplus (where exports exceed
imports) for more than 30 consecutive years! This is especially amazing
when you consider that Japan lacks natural resources and relies almost
entirely on deposits in other countries to satisfy its needs for energy and other
commodities. In addition, price inflation (which directly erodes the value of
money) has been virtually nonexistent in Japan. Even though Japan’s public
debt is the largest in the world (on a per-capita basis), it is financed entirely
from domestic savings. Finally, Japan’s financial system is as sophisticated
as any in the world and continues to attract strong investment. All of these
forces ensure that demand for yen continually exceeds supply.

31

32

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
For most of the 2000s, the yen suffered a mild decline due to record low
interest rates in Japan that enabled opportunistic investors to borrow in yen
and use the proceeds for high-yielding investments abroad. This caused a
massive outflow of yen from Japan. However, this phenomenon came to an
end in 2008 when investors got spooked and moved to unwind all of their
short bets on the yen. Ironically, the March 2011 tsunami/earthquake only
accelerated this trend, and the repatriation of yen to fund reconstruction and
insurance payouts has even further provided support for the currency. Even a
historic-joint intervention by the world’s largest central banks was unable to
stop the yen from surging toward record highs.

British Pound
The pound sterling (or cable) was the strongest currency in the pre–World
War II era. Despite ceding this title to the US dollar, it has managed to
remain the fourth-most traded currency in the world, which is due in no small
part to London’s position as the world’s preeminent currency trading center.
The British economy largely mirrors that of the United States. It has been
hollowed out by the shift of manufacturing to developing countries, and has
been plagued by a perennial trade deficit. Unemployment and inflation levels
are consistently among the highest in the industrialized world. Its housing
market is still weak and may not recover for several years. UK public debt
more than doubled from 2007 to 2011, which the Bank of England enabled
by printing money on a never-before-seen scale following the 2008 economic
downturn.
After a record run-up, the pound collapsed in the fall of 2008, depreciating
by more than 30% from peak to trough. The UK government has yet to
produce a coherent plan for exiting from recession, and four years later, the
pound is still referred to as a “sick” currency.

Swiss Franc
Without knowing anything about the Swiss franc, there are already a few
prima facie observations that can be made. First, the Swiss franc has proven
itself to be an excellent store of value, especially relative to the US dollar.
Second, the value of the Swiss franc has closely mirrored that of the euro, as
can be seen in Figure 2-6.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 2-6. Swiss franc / euro correlation

The Swiss economy is one of the most stable in the world, and on a percapita basis, Switzerland is the world’s second wealthiest country (not
including city-states), trailing only Norway. It boasts low unemployment and
low inflation. Its trade surplus has expanded in spite of the rising franc
thanks to key exports, such as jewelry (including watches), textile machines,
chemicals, and tobacco products. The Swiss National Bank (SNB) has helped
the overall health of the Swiss economy with a conservative monetary policy;
it was one of the few major central banks that refrained from printing money
during the credit crisis.
In some ways, the Swiss franc is the world’s ultimate safe-haven currency.
Whenever there is a flare-up in financial uncertainty, the franc typically rises
more than both the Japanese yen and US dollar. This is perhaps due to the
fact that the Swiss economy and financial markets are not large enough to
absorb massive amounts of capital inflows without exerting upward pressure
on the franc.
As for the Swiss franc’s historic correlation with the euro, as shown in Figure
2-6, the Swiss and Eurozone economies are closely intertwined. Thus, it
should come as no surprise that for most of the euro’s existence, the two
currencies have moved in tandem with one another. With the inception of the
credit crisis, however, investors began to see the franc as a proxy for betting
on the stronger members of the Eurozone (Germany, France) without the
baggage from the weaker members that comes with owning the euro. The
benefits of Swiss neutrality (it is a member of neither the European Monetary
Union nor the G7 and was one of the last countries to join the United
Nations) have trickled all the way down to the franc.

33

34

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
In 2009, the SNB undertook a serious effort to prevent the franc from rising,
and it even managed to hold the franc at €1.50 for several months. This can
be seen in Figure 2-7. The upward pressure on the franc instead found an
outlet in the CHF/USD, which rose by a whopping 60% from 2009 to 2011!
The franc eventually broke through the barrier with the euro, rising to a
record high and costing the SNB more than $20 billion in losses. In
September of 2011, the SNB shocked the markets when it resumed its
campaign and announced that the franc would not be permitted to rise
beyond €1.20.

Credit Crisis

SNB Intervention

Figure 2-7. Rising franc (shown in reverse) and SNB intervention

Canadian Dollar
The Canadian dollar (or Loonie) is one of a handful of major currencies that
correlates closely with commodity prices. Canada is one of the world’s major
producers of petroleum, electricity, timber, and certain agricultural products.
Thus, the commodities boom that began in the 2000s and picked up again in
2010 coincided with a steady rise in the Loonie, which breached parity (1:1)
against the US dollar for the first time in 30 years. This can be seen in Figure
2-8.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 2-8. Recent history of CAD/USD

Ultimately, the most important facet of Canada’s economy is its relationship
with the United States. Canada is the most important foreign supplier of oil,
natural gas, and electricity to the United States. Moreover, the United States
absorbs around 75% of all Canadian exports. Thus, the economic fortunes of
Canada hinge closely on those of the United States, and so it should come as
no surprise that the economic downturn in the United States, combined with
a soaring Loonie, hit Canada hard. In 2009, the balance of trade shifted
towards deficit, and reports of cross-border shopping trips by deal-hunting
Canadians have since abounded in the news media. Some commentators
wonder whether the Loonie really deserves to trade at parity with the dollar.

Australian Dollar
The correlation between the Australian dollar (or Aussie) and commodities
prices is perhaps the strongest among the so-called commodity currencies, as
can be seen in Figure 2-9. In fact, Australia is among the world leaders in the
production of coal, iron ore, and other precious metals. Thanks to these vast
resources of energy and commodities, supported by interminably growing
demand from China, Australia managed to emerge from the global financial
crisis virtually unscathed.

35

36

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?

Figure 2-9. Correlation between AUD/USD and commodities prices

There are a couple of other observations that can be made about the
Australian dollar. First, Australia’s economy is closely tied to that of
Asia—the destination for the majority of its exports—and especially China.
As the Chinese yuan is pegged to the US dollar (more on that later) and
Chinese capital markets are somewhat opaque, investors have started to treat
the Australian dollar as a proxy for investing in the Chinese yuan. Second,
Australian interest rate levels tend to be significantly higher than those in
other industrialized countries. The Reserve Bank of Australia’s (RBA)
benchmark rate touched 7.25% in 2008, and was held above 3% during the
depths of the global financial crisis. When investor risk appetite is high, then,
Australia typically experiences an influx of speculative capital from investors
seeking to take advantage of relatively high interest rates.

New Zealand Dollar
The New Zealand dollar (or Kiwi) is influenced by the same key economic
factors as the Australian dollar; namely, high GDP growth, high inflation and
interest rates, and a reliance on commodities as a driver of economic growth.
Instead of metals and energy, however, New Zealand is a leading producer of
dairy products and agricultural staples. Due to these factors as well as mere
proximity, the NZ dollar has historically traded close to the Australian dollar,
which can be seen in Figure 2-10. An unfavorable balance of trade and
relatively high public debt levels, however, have caused the Kiwi to fall
behind in the last several years.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 2-10. Recent history of AUD/NZD

Hong Kong Dollar
While Hong Kong is politically part of China, its economy and monetary
system are still considered separate entities. It has its own currency and an
independent central bank. However, its currency—the Hong Kong
dollar—has been pegged at 7.8 HKD/USD since 1983 and is permitted to
fluctuate only within a tight band. Despite being the eighth most traded
currency in the world, it is ironically of little interest to currency speculators.
It is important to forex markets mainly because of the vast sums its central
bank must spend in order to maintain the peg. It has built up foreign
exchange reserves of approximately $300 billion, providing great support for
the US dollar in the process.3

Chinese Yuan
The Chinese yuan (or renminbi, RMB) should be one of the most important
currencies in the world. The Chinese economy is already the world’s second
largest, and it leads the world in the volume of international trade. Alas, the
People’s Bank of China (PBOC) pegs the yuan to the US dollar at an
artificially low rate in order to provide a benefit to Chinese exporters.
Technically, the yuan has been allowed to float freely since 2005, as can be
seen in Figure 2-11.
3 Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Annual Report 2010, www.hkma.gov.hk/media/eng

/publication-and-research/annual-report/2010/ar2010.pdf.

37

38

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?

Figure 2-11. Recent history of CNY/USD (with exchange rate shown in reverse)

While it has risen by more than 25% against the US dollar in the ensuing
years, however, its appreciation is still tightly controlled and remains an
important component of China’s national economic policy. In order to
maintain this peg, the PBOC must buy $40 billion in foreign currency every
month. It also strictly limits the trading of yuan outside of its borders, and
maintains rigid controls on the movement of capital in and out of the country.
In addition, China’s capital markets are disproportionately small, and far
from transparent. Most public companies are majority-owned by the state,
and a lack of accounting controls has given rise to repeated corporate
scandals. As companies tend to borrow directly from banks, and municipal
governments borrow from the central government (or not at all), the bond
markets are similarly undeveloped. Furthermore, China’s multi-tiered market
structure discriminates against foreign investors. Even in matters of foreign
direct investment (FDI), foreign companies are typically required to enter
into joint ventures with local partners.
The Chinese government has tried to encourage the use of the yuan to settle
trade. Toward this end, it has signed swap agreements with a handful of trade
partners. In the end, however, the yuan will not achieve widespread
acceptance until it is truly allowed to float freely and until Chinese capital
markets are liquid enough to absorb significant inflows of international
capital. Thus, it may account for “about 3% to 12% of international reserves
by 2035.”4

4 Asian Development Bank, The Future Global Reserve System—An Asian Perspective,

June 2010, http://aric.adb.org/grs/papers/Future_Global_Reserve_System.pdf.

Forex for Beginners
By most estimates, the yuan remains undervalued. Unfortunately, further
appreciation depends more on political factors than on financial economic
forces. For those that nonetheless want to bet that the yuan will be worth
more in the future, there are investment vehicles that enable such speculation
that will be discussed later in this chapter.

Exotic Currencies
With a handful of exceptions (Swedish krona, Norwegian krone, Singapore
dollar, etc.), the rest of the lot can be broadly lumped into the category of
exotic currencies. As most of these currencies also happen to be associated
with emerging market economies, they are often referred to as emerging
currencies or emerging market currencies. Emerging market currencies are
somewhat akin to growth stocks and high-yield bonds. They are
characterized by extremely high rates of growth, but also by high rates of
inflation. Their capital markets are not as sophisticated and transparent as
their G8 equivalents, but they are often backed by high interest rates. During
boom times, their currencies typically outperform major currencies. During
times of crisis or uncertainty, their currencies are likewise the biggest
sufferers.
While emerging currencies account for a minority of forex turnover, their
share is growing rapidly. The 14 exotic currencies depicted in Figure 2-12,
for example, accounted for a combined 9% of overall volume in 2010,
compared to a meager 2% in 1998.

Figure 2-12. Growing share of forex market turnover by emerging currencies

39

40

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?
The consensus among forex market watchers is that emerging market
currencies nonetheless represent the future. Their economies collectively
account for more than half of the global economy and an even greater share
of global growth. In 2010, emerging market economies expanded at a
collective 7.1%, compared to 2.7% growth in advanced economies. The
disparity in financial market returns is similarly wide. Emerging market
central banks control the majority of the world’s foreign exchange reserves,
and collectively add nearly $1 trillion in new reserves every year. Debt levels
in advanced economies are projected to reach 114% of GDP in 2014,
compared to 35% in emerging market economies.
At a certain point, the rise in emerging market currencies will become selffulfilling. For now, liquidity is still too low and spreads are still too high to
attract serious institutional interest. A handful of currencies, such as the
Korean won, Mexican peso, and South African rand, are settled by the CLS
Bank and are thus more attractive to speculators. Even so, trading such
currencies against anything besides the US dollar or euro would be
uneconomical. With a few exceptions, then, the majority of emerging
currencies are suitable only for medium-term (greater than one month) and
long-term (less than three months) trend trading.
Investors are often quick to lump emerging market currencies into one group,
as though they move as one cohesive bunch. To be fair, sometimes this
practice is indeed justified. During the credit crisis, for example, emerging
currencies rose and fell in unison, in accordance with the frequent changes in
investor market sentiment. During periods of normal market function,
however, emerging currencies fluctuate independently. Every economy is
different, and the characteristics of one currency might be completely
different from the currency of a bordering country. For example, Brazilian
interest rates are among the highest in the world, and the Brazilian real is a
popular currency for yield-hungry carry traders. South Africa is a leading
producer of gold, and the South African rand sometimes mirrors gold prices.
The same can be said for Mexico (oil), Russia (natural gas) and Chile
(copper). South Korea is a high-tech export powerhouse, and the Korean won
can be counted on to outperform when the global economy is strong. As a
result, performance can vary significantly from one emerging currency to
another (Figure 2-13).

Forex for Beginners

Figure 2-13. Variations in performance among emerging currencies

There is one final point that I would like to make regarding emerging market
currencies: their governments pay much closer attention to them than
advanced economies do to their respective currencies. Due to higher saving
rates and lower domestic spending, emerging market economies are often
more dependent on exports to drive growth. That means that their central
banks have a vested interest in keeping their currencies as cheap as possible.
Thus, you can always count on emerging markets to step in when their
currencies appreciate too quickly. Sometimes, they will verbally warn
speculators. Other times, they will impose capital controls (in the form of
taxes or other punitive measures) in order to limit short-term investment
inflows and stem the upward pressure on their currencies. As we will see in
Chapter 3, such efforts are rarely successful in the long-term, but traders
need to be aware of them in the short-term.

Currency Trading Instruments
Choosing a currency pair to trade represents only the tip of the currencytrading iceberg. In fact, currencies are exchanged through a wide variety of
different instruments, and each one is governed by different rules and
different strategies. For administrative purposes, instruments are classified as
spot, forward, futures, options, or swaps. (See Figure 2-14.)

41

42

Chapter 2 | What Are Your Options?

Figure 2-14. Daily forex turnover, by instrument5

Spot Instruments
A spot transaction is defined as a “single outright transaction involving the
exchange of two currencies at a rate agreed on the date of the contract for
value or delivery (cash settlement) within two business days.”6 For all intents
and purposes, spot refers to all real-time, actual currency trades. If you are
buying and selling currency right now (as opposed to at some point in the
future), you are almost certainly engaging in spot trading. While this
probably sounds repetitive, consider that the vast majority of forex exchange
contracts are intended for delivery in the future, or not at all!
As I explained in Chapter 1, most spot trading takes place electronically and
instantaneously. Traders simply select the currency pair they want to trade
and the amount of currency, key the order (along with a few other variables)
into their trading platform, and voilà, a spot trade is executed. This goes for
both institutional and retail traders.
