
285

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

the stock, as you know, is done on the way down. It is
perfectly astonishing how much stock a man can get rid of
on a decline.
I repeat that at no time during the manipulation do I
forget to be a stock trader. My problems as a manipulator,
after all, are the same that confront me as an operator. All
manipulation comes to an end when the manipulator
cannot make a stock do what he wants it to do. When the
stock you are manipulating doesn't act as it should, quit.
Don't argue with the tape. Do not seek to lure the profit
back. Quit while the quitting is good and cheap.

286

XXI
I am well aware that all these generalities do not sound
especially impressive. Generalities seldom do. Possibly I
may succeed better if I give a concrete example. I'll tell you
how I marked up the price of a stock 30 points, and in so
doing accumulated only seven thousand shares and
developed a market that would absorb almost any amount
of stock.
It was Imperial Steel. The stock had been brought out
by reputable people and it had been fairly well tipped as a
property of value. About 30 per cent of the capital stock
was placed with the general public through various Wall
Street houses, but there had been no significant activity in
the shares after they were listed. From time to time
somebody would ask about it and one or another insider—
members of the original underwriting syndicate would say
that the company's earnings were better than expected and
the prospects more than encouraging. This was true
287

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

enough and very good as far as it went, but not exactly
thrilling. The speculative appeal was absent, and from the
investor's point of view the price stability and dividend
permanency of the stock were not yet demonstrated. It was
a stock that never behaved sensationally. It was so
gentlemanly that no corroborative rise ever followed the
insiders' eminently truthful reports. On the other hand,
neither did the price decline.
Imperial Steel remained unhonored and unsung and
un-tipped, content to be one of those stocks that don't go
down because nobody sells and that nobody sells because
nobody likes to go short of a stock that is not well
distributed; the seller is too much at the mercy of the
loaded-up inside clique.
Similarly, there is no inducement to buy such a stock.
To the investor Imperial Steel therefore remained a
speculation. To the speculator it was a dead one—the kind
that makes an investor of you against your will by the
simple expedient of falling into a trance the moment you
go long of it. The chap who is compelled to lug a corpse a
year or two always loses more than the original cost of the
deceased; he is sure to find himself tied up with it when
some really good things come his way.
One day the foremost member of the Imperial Steel
syndicate, acting for himself and associates, came to see
me. They wished to create a market for the stock, of which
they controlled the undistributed 70 per cent. They wanted
me to dispose of their holdings at better prices than they
thought they would obtain if they tried to sell in the open
market. They wanted to know on what terms I would
undertake the job.
I told him that I would let him know in a few days. Then
I looked into the property. I had experts go over the
various departments of the company—industrial,
commercial and financial. They made reports to me which
were unbiased. I wasn't looking for the good or the bad
points, but for the facts, such as they were.
288

XXI

The reports showed that it was a valuable property. The
prospects justified purchases of the stock at the prevailing
market price if the investor were willing to wait a little.
Under the circumstances an advance in the price would in
reality be the commonest and most legitimate of all market
movements to wit, the process of discounting the future.
There was therefore no reason that I could see why I
should not conscientiously and confidently undertake the
bull manipulation of Imperial Steel.
I let my man know my mind and he called at my office
to talk the deal over in detail. I told him what my terms
were. For my services I asked no cash, but calls on one
hundred thousand shares of the Imperial Steel stock. The
price of the calls ran up from $70 to $100. That may seem
like a big fee to some. But they should consider that the
insiders were certain they themselves could not sell one
hundred thousand shares, or even fifty thousand shares, at
$70. There was no market for the stock. All the talk about
wonderful earnings and excellent prospects had not
brought in buyers, not to any great extent. In addition, I
could not get my fee in cash without my clients first
making some millions of dollars. What I stood to make
was not an exorbitant selling commission. It was a fair
contingent fee.
Knowing that the stock had real value and that general
market conditions were bullish and therefore favourable
for an advance in all good stocks, I figured that I ought to
do pretty well. My clients were encouraged by the opinions
I expressed, agreed to my terms at once, and the deal
began with pleasant feelings all around.
I proceeded to protect myself as thoroughly as I could.
The syndicate owned or controlled about 70 per cent of the
outstanding stock. I had them deposit their 70 per cent
under a trust agreement. I didn't propose to be used as a
dumping ground for the big holders. With the majority
holdings thus securely tied up, I still had 30 per cent of
scattered holdings to consider, but that was a risk I had to
289

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

take. Experienced speculators do not expect ever to engage
in utterly riskless ventures. As a matter of fact, it was not
much more likely that all the untrusted stock would be
thrown on the market at one fell swoop than that all the
policyholders of a life-insurance company would die at the
same hour, the same day. There are unprinted actuarial
tables of stock-market risks as well as of human mortality.
Having protected myself from some of the avoidable
dangers of a stock-market deal of that sort, I was ready to
begin my campaign. Its objective was to make my calls
valuable. To do this I must put up the price and develop a
market in which I could sell one hundred thousand shares
—the stock in which I held options.
The first thing I did was to find out how much stock was
likely to come on the market on an advance. This was
easily done through my brokers, who had no trouble in
ascertaining what stock was for sale at or a little above the
market. I don't know whether the specialists told them
what orders they had on their books or not. The price was
nominally $70, but I could not have sold one thousand
shares at that price. I had no evidence of even a moderate
demand at that figure or even a few points lower. I had to
go by what my brokers found out. But it was enough to
show me how much stock there was for sale and how little
was wanted.
As soon as I had a line on these points I quietly took all
the stock that was for sale at $70 and higher. When I say
"I" you will understand that I mean my brokers. The sales
were for account of some of the minority holders because
my clients naturally had cancelled whatever selling orders
they might have given out before they tied up their stock.
I didn't have to buy very much stock. Moreover, I knew
that the right kind of advance would bring in other buying
orders and, of course, selling orders also.
I didn't give bull tips on Imperial Steel to anybody. I
didn't have to. My job was to seek directly to influence
sentiment by the best possible kind of publicity. I do not
290

XXI

say that there should never be bull propaganda. It is as
legitimate and indeed as desirable to advertise the value of
a new stock as to advertise the value of woolens or shoes or
automobiles. Accurate and reliable information should be
given by the public. But what I meant was that the tape did
all that was needed for my purpose. As I said before, the
reputable newspapers always try to print explanations for
market movements. It is news. Their readers demand to
know not only what happens in the stock market but why
it happens. Therefore without the manipulator lifting a
finger the financial writers will print all the available
information and gossip, and also analyse the reports of
earnings, trade condition and outlook; in short, whatever
may throw light on the advance. Whenever a
newspaperman or an acquaintance asks my opinion of a
stock and I have one I do not hesitate to express it. I do not
volunteer advice and I never give tips, but I have nothing
to gain in my operations from secrecy. At the same time I
realise that the best of all tipsters, the most persuasive of
all salesmen, is the tape.
When I had absorbed all the stock that was for sale at
$70 and a little higher I relieved the market of that
pressure, and naturally that made clear for trading
purposes the line of least resistance in Imperial Steel. It
was manifestly upward. The moment that fact was
perceived by the observant traders on the floor they
logically assumed that the stock was in for an advance the
extent of which they could not know; but they knew
enough to begin buying. Their demand for Imperial Steel,
created exclusively by the obviousness of the stock's rising
tendency—the tape's infallible bull tip1—I promptly filled.
I sold to the traders the stock that I had bought from the
tired-out holders at the beginning. Of course this selling
was judiciously done; I contented myself with supplying
the demand. I was not forcing my stock on the market and
I did not want too rapid an advance. It wouldn't have been
291

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

good business to sell out the half of my one hundred
thousand shares at that stage of the proceedings. My job
was to make a market on which I might sell my entire line.
But even though I sold only as much as the traders were
anxious to buy, the market was temporarily deprived of my
own buying power, which I had hitherto exerted steadily.
In due course the traders' purchases ceased and the price
stopped rising. As soon as that happened there began the
selling by disappointed bulls or by those traders whose
reasons for buying disappeared the instant the rising
tendency was checked. But I was ready for this selling, and
on the way down I bought back the stock I had sold to the
traders a couple of points higher. This buying of stock I
knew was bound to be sold in turn checked the downward
course; and when the price stopped going down the selling
orders stopped coming in.
I then began all over again. I took all the stock that was
for sale on the way up—it wasn't very much and the price
began to rise a second time; from a higher starting point
than $70. Don't forget that on the way down there are
many holders who wish to heaven they had sold theirs but
won't do it three or four points from the top. Such
speculators always vow they will surely sell out if there is a
rally. They put in their orders to sell on the way up, and
then they change their minds with the change in the
stock's price-trend. Of course there is always profit taking
from safe-playing quick runners to whom a profit is always
a profit to be taken.
All I had to do after that was to repeat the process;
alternately buying and selling; but always working higher.
Sometimes, after you have taken all the stock that is for
sale, it pays to rush up the price sharply, to have what
might be called little bull flurries in the stock you are
manipulating. It is excellent advertising, because it makes
talk and also brings in both the professional traders and
that portion of the speculating public that likes action. It
is, I think, a large portion. I did that in Imperial Steel, and
292

XXI

whatever demand was created by those spurts I supplied.
My selling always kept the upward movement within
bounds both as to extent and as to speed. In buying on the
way down and selling on the way up I was doing more than
marking up the price: I was developing the marketability
of Imperial Steel.
After I began my operations in it there never was a time
when a man could not buy or sell the stock freely; I mean
by this, buy or sell a reasonable amount without causing
over-violent fluctuations in the price. The fear of being left
high and dry if he bought, or squeezed to death if he sold,
was gone. The gradual spread among the professionals and
the public of a belief in the permanence of the market for
Imperial Steel had much to do with creating confidence in
the movement; and, of course, the activity also put an end
to a lot of other objections. The result was that after buying
and selling a good many thousands of shares I succeeded
in making the stocks sell at par. At one hundred dollars a
share everybody wanted to buy Imperial Steel. Why not?
Everybody now knew that it was a good stock; that it had
been and still was a bargain. The proof was the rise. A
stock that could go thirty points from $70 could go up
thirty more from par. That is the way a good many argued.
In the course of marking up the price those thirty points
I accumulated only seven thousand shares. The price on
this line averaged me almost exactly $85. That meant a
profit of fifteen points on it; but, of course, my entire
profit, still on paper, was much more. It was a safe enough
profit, for I had a market for all I wanted to sell. The stock
would sell higher on judicious manipulation and I had
graduated calls on one hundred thousand shares
beginning at $70 and ending at $100.
Circumstances prevented me from carrying out certain
plans of mine for converting my paper profits into good
hard cash. It had been, if I do say so myself, a beautiful
piece of manipulation, strictly legitimate and deservedly
successful. The property of the company was valuable and
293

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

the stock was not dear at the higher price. One of the
members of the original syndicate developed a desire to
secure the control of the property a prominent banking
house with ample resources. The control of a prosperous
and growing concern like the Imperial Steel Corporation is
possibly more valuable to a banking firm than to
individual investors. At all events, this firm made me an
offer for all my options on the stock. It meant an enormous
profit for me, and I instantly took it. I am always willing to
sell out when I can do so in a lump at a good profit. I was
quite content with what I made out of it.
Before I disposed of my calls on the hundred thousand
shares I learned that these bankers had employed more
experts to make a still more thorough examination of the
property. Their reports showed enough to bring me in the
offer I got. I kept several thousand shares of the stock for
investment. I believe in it.
There wasn't anything about my manipulation of
Imperial Steel that wasn't normal and sound. As long as
the price went up on my buying I knew I was O.K. The
stock never got waterlogged, as a stock sometimes does.
When you find that it fails to respond adequately to your
buying you don't need any better tip to sell. You know that
if there is any value to a stock and general market
conditions are right you can always nurse it back after a
decline, no matter if it's twenty points. But I never had to
do anything like that in Imperial Steel.
In my manipulation of stocks I never lose sight of basic
trading principles. Perhaps you wonder why I repeat this
or why I keep on harping on the fact that I never argue
with the tape or lose my temper at the market because of
its behaviour. You would think—wouldn't you?—that
shrewd men who have made millions in their own business
and in addition have successfully operated in Wall Street
at times would realise the wisdom of playing the game
dispassionately. Well, you would be surprised at the
frequency with which some of our most successful
294

XXI

promoters behave like peevish women because the market
does not act the way they wish it to act. They seem to take
it as a personal slight, and they proceed to lose money by
first losing their temper.
There has been much gossip about a disagreement
between John Prentiss and myself. People have been led to
expect a dramatic narrative of a stock-market deal that
went wrong or some double-crossing that cost me or him—
millions; or something of that sort. Well, it wasn't.
Prentiss and I had been friendly for years. He had given
me at various times information that I was able to utilise
profitably, and I had given him advice which he may or
may not have followed. If he did he saved money.
He was largely instrumental in the organisation and
promotion of the Petroleum Products Company. After a
more or less successful market debut general conditions
changed for the worse and the new stock did not fare as
well as Prentiss and his associates had hoped. When basic
conditions took a turn for the better Prentiss formed a
pool and began operations in Pete Products.
I cannot tell you anything about his technique. He
didn't tell me how he worked and I didn't ask him. But it
was plain that notwithstanding his Wall Street experience
and his undoubted cleverness, whatever it was he did
proved of little value and it didn't take the pool long to find
out that they couldn't get rid of much stock. He must have
tried everything he knew, because a pool manager does not
ask to be superseded by an outsider unless he feels
unequal to the task and that is the last thing the average
man likes to admit. At all events he came to me and after
some friendly preliminaries he said he wanted me to take
charge of the market for Pete Products and dispose of the
pool's holdings, which amounted to a little over one
hundred thousand shares. The stock was selling at $102 to
$103.

295

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

The thing looked dubious to me and I declined his
proposition with thanks. But he insisted that I accept. He
put it on personal grounds, so that in the end I consented.
I constitutionally dislike to identify myself with enterprises
in the success of which I cannot feel confidence, but I also
think a man owes something to his friends and
acquaintances. I said I would do my best, but I told him I
did not feel very cocky about it and I enumerated the
adverse factors that I would have to contend with. But all
Prentiss said to that was that he wasn't asking me to
guarantee millions in profits to the pool. He was sure that
if I took hold I'd make out well enough to satisfy any
reasonable being.
Well, there I was, engaged in doing something against
my own judgment. I found, as I feared, a pretty tough state
of affairs, due in great measure to Prentiss' own mistakes
while he was manipulating the stock for account of the
pool. But the chief factor against me was time. I was
convinced that we were rapidly approaching the end of a
bull swing and therefore that the improvement in the
market, which had so encouraged Prentiss, would prove to
be merely a short-lived rally. I feared that the market
would turn definitely bearish before I could accomplish
much with Pete Products. However, I had given my
promise and I decided to work as hard as I knew how.
I started to put up the price. I had moderate success. I
think I ran it up to $107 or thereabouts, which was pretty
fair, and I was even able to sell a little stock on balance. It
wasn't much, but I was glad not to have increased the
pool's holdings. There were a lot of people not in the pool
who were just waiting for a small rise to dump their stock,
and I was a godsend to them. Had general conditions been
better I also would have done better. It was too bad that I
wasn't called in earlier. All I could do now, I felt, was to get
out with as little loss as possible to the pool.

296

XXI

I sent for Prentiss and told him my views. But he started
to object. I then explained to him why I took the position I
did. I said: "Prentiss, I can feel very plainly the pulse of the
market. There is no follow-up in your stock. It is no trick to
see just what the public's reaction is to my manipulation.
Listen: When Pete Products is made as attractive to
traders as possible and you give it all the support needed
at all times and notwithstanding all that you find that the
public leaves it alone you may be sure that there is
something wrong, not with the stock but with the market.
There is absolutely no use in trying to force matters. You
are bound to lose if you do. A pool manager should be
willing to buy his own stock when he has company. But
when he is the only buyer in the market he'd be an ass to
buy it. For every five thousand shares I buy the public
ought to be willing or able to buy five thousand more. But I
certainly am not going to do all the buying. If I did, all I
would succeed in doing would be to get soaked with a lot
of long stock that I don't want. There is only one thing to
do, and that is to sell. And the only way to sell is to sell."
"You mean, sell for what you can get?" asked Prentiss.
"Right!" I said. I could see he was getting ready to
object. "If I am to sell the pool's stock at all you can make
up your mind that the price is going to break through par
and..."
"Oh, no! Never!" he yelled. You'd have imagined I was
asking him to join a suicide club.
"Prentiss," I said to him, "it is a cardinal principle of
stock manipulation to put up a stock in order to sell it. But
you don't sell in bulk on the advance. You can't. The big
selling is done on the way down from the top. I cannot put
up your stock to $125 or $130. I'd like to, but it can't be
done. So you will have to begin your selling from this level.
In my opinion all stocks are going down, and Petroleum
Products isn't going to be the one exception. It is better for

297

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

it to go down now on the pool's selling than for it to break
next month on selling by some one else. It will go down
anyhow."
I can't see that I said anything harrowing, but you could
have heard his howls in China. He simply wouldn't listen
to such a thing. It would never do. It would play the
dickens with the stock's record, to say nothing of
inconvenient possibilities at the banks where the stock was
held as collateral on loans, and so on.
I told him again that in my judgment nothing in the
world could prevent Pete Products from breaking fifteen or
twenty points, because the entire market was headed that
way, and I once more said it was absurd to expect his stock
to be a dazzling exception. But again my talk went for
nothing. He insisted that I support the stock.
Here was a shrewd business man, one of the most
successful promoters of the day, who had made millions in
Wall Street deals and knew much more than the average
man about the game of speculation, actually insisting on
supporting a stock in an incipient bear market. It was his
stock, to be sure, but it was nevertheless bad business. So
much so that it went against the grain and I again began to
argue with him. But it was no use. He insisted on putting
in supporting orders.
Of course when the general market got weak and the
decline began in earnest Pete Products went with the rest.
Instead of selling I actually bought stock for the insiders'
pool by Prentiss' orders.
The only explanation is that Prentiss did not believe the
bear market was right on top of us. I myself was confident
that the bull market was over. I had verified my first
surmise by tests not alone in Pete Products but in other
stocks as well. I didn't wait for the bear market to
announce its safe arrival before I started selling. Of course
I didn't sell a share of Pete Products, though I was short of
other stocks.
298
