A Risky Business
Perhaps more than any other type of financial trading, foreign
exchange trading makes it extremely difficult for inexperienced
traders to manage risk effectively. This is partly due to the fact that
the leverage offered in forex is so high when compared with other
markets. When $1 in margin can control $100 or more in a trade,
the potential for profit is magnified to an extreme degree. But many
beginners seem to forget that the risk of ruin is magnified just as
much. High leverage can certainly be a powerful feature in a positive
way, but it can also have a way of tempting unsuspecting traders into
becoming reckless and greedy. As we will soon find out, recklessness

196

c06.indd 196

1/13/09 10:11:31 AM

F a t t e r I s H e a l t h i e r ( B u t O n l y f o r Tr a d i n g A c c o u n t s )

and greed are two characteristics that, at some point, will invariably
destroy a trading account.
This brings us to the number one priority of successful traders—
preservation of capital. Risk and money must be managed in a way
that the ultimate goal is to survive to trade another day. Without
this, all is lost and the game is over. Many experienced traders go a
step further by subscribing to the winning philosophy that if virtually every ounce of focus is concentrated on preserving capital, the
profits will take care of themselves.

F atter Is Healthier (But Only for
Trading Accounts)
There are many important ways in which traders can work toward
the goal of preserving capital. The most obvious initial step is to
have enough capital to begin with. But how much is “enough?”
First, it depends on the amount of risk capital one can afford to
put aside for trading without substantially impacting one’s lifestyle. Then, it depends on the size of the positions that one will be
trading. But just because there is sufficient margin on account to
open a certain position, does not mean that a trader has sufficient
capital to trade successfully. For example, many beginners believe
that if $1000 is required as margin for one standard lot trade of
$100,000 at 100:1 leverage, $1000 is enough capital to have in the
account for making the trade. This could not be further from
the truth. Having only enough funds in an account to cover the
minimum required margin for a given position is one of the quickest routes to disaster.

197

c06.indd 197

1/13/09 10:11:32 AM

E l e m e n t s o f S u c c e s s f u l F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

The exact amount of money that is considered “enough” and
sufficiently capitalized will vary from trader to trader. But one general guideline used by many prudent retail traders is always to have
in the account, at the very least, ten times the amount of margin
required for a typical trade. So, for example, if a trader wishes to trade
one mini-lot of $10,000 at a time at 100:1 leverage, where the margin required is $100, that trader should always have at least $1000
in the account. By the same token, if a trader wishes to trade one
standard lot of $100,000 at a time at 100:1 leverage, where the margin required is $1000, that trader should always have $10,000 in the
account at the very least. This, again, is only a very general guideline,
as each trader’s risk profile and risk appetite will necessarily differ.

R isk and Reward
After overcoming the first hurdle of being properly capitalized, the
trader can then turn attention to creating a risk/money management
plan to preserve capital. One of the key components of this plan is
to set consistent risk parameters with regard to stop losses and profit
targets. These should be set in accordance with a properly planned
risk:reward, or perhaps more aptly named, “reward-to-risk” ratio.
The reward-to-risk ratio is a simple concept that can work
wonders for the overall profitability of an account. While optimal
reward-to-risk ratios can be difficult to attain in everyday trading,
foreign exchange traders should always strive for the best, or highest, ratios possible. A rather high ratio like 4:1, for example, simply
means that on any given trade, a trader is looking to profit by four
times the amount that the trader is prepared to lose. In real-world

198

c06.indd 198

1/13/09 10:11:32 AM

Risk and Reward

terms, this means that if a trade is entered with a 30 pip stop loss, for
example, the profit target would be set at least at 120 pips. The ramifications of the reward-to-risk ratio are considerable. With a good
ratio, traders can actually lose significantly more trades than they
win, and still be consistently profitable. This is because their average
profits are much larger than their average losses. The concept of a
high reward-to-risk ratio lends itself well to the oft-repeated trader’s
maxim, “Let your profits run and cut your losses short.”
So what exactly is the optimal ratio? It can be difficult in trading
foreign exchange to achieve ratios as high as 4:1, because at a certain
point with these higher ratios, the trade-off is that losses become
much more frequent than wins. Since the wins would be much
larger in dollar value than the losses, this is perfectly fine from a
long-term profitability standpoint, as mentioned earlier. But the psychological toll of excessively frequent losses, even if relatively small
in value, can eventually become devastating to a trader’s psyche.
Generally speaking, many forex traders like to target a reward-torisk ratio of 3:1 as the ideal. This means that each profit is targeted
to be at least three times as large as each loss.
While 3:1 may be optimal, however, shooting for 2:1 can often be
more practical in many real-life trading situations. The trick in consistently achieving good ratios like these lies in adapting the ratios to
prevailing market conditions. For example, if a certain chart pattern is
identified on a currency pair, the technical trader will need to make
sure that a profit target two or three times the magnitude of the stop
loss is realistic before taking the trade. This is just prudent trading. But
if the trader rigidly adheres to unrealistically high ratio requirements,
this may result in too many voluntarily missed opportunities. The

199

c06.indd 199

1/13/09 10:11:32 AM

E l e m e n t s o f S u c c e s s f u l F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

best solution is often the middle path—a reward-to-risk ratio that is
high enough to achieve long-term profitability, while low enough
to fit market conditions realistically. Therefore, the true optimal ratio
ultimately depends on each trader’s own experimentation and what
works best through actual experience.

F ix Your Fractions
Besides finding the right reward-to-risk balance, another important
aspect of a money management plan that focuses on capital preservation is called fixed fractional money management. This generally
refers to the percentage of total account equity that a trader is willing to risk on each trade. So, for example, if a trading account has
$1000 in it, and the trader trades one mini-lot (10,000 units) at a
time for approximately $1 per pip, a fixed fractional plan of 3% of
total equity would necessitate a 30-pip maximum stop loss on each
mini-lot trade. Why? Because if the trader wants the maximum risk
per trade to be set at 3% of $1000, or $30, and each pip is worth
about $1, that would mean the trader could accept losing up to 30
pips on each trade. This would necessitate putting in stop losses that
are a maximum of 30 pips away from the trade entry for all trades.
Contrary to the common belief that fixed fractional money management refers directly to the percentage of account equity actually put
up to make a trade, the real meaning generally refers to the percentage
of total funds placed at risk on each trade as it relates to stop loss placement (along with position sizing). Therefore, the fact that $100 of a
trading account’s total $1000 is put up in margin for a trade does not
necessarily mean that 10% of account equity is being risked on this

200

c06.indd 200

1/13/09 10:11:32 AM

Tr a i l i n g S t o p s — L o y a l F o l l o w e r s

trade. Only if a stop loss of 100 pips (at a value of $1 per pip) is instituted into this trade would 10% of total equity actually be risked.
Many traders do not favor fixed fractional money management because it encourages the basing of stop losses on an arbitrary
number that generally has very little to do with prevailing market
and trading conditions. For example, a 30-pip stop loss may be perfectly reasonable for a trendline breakout trade on an hourly chart,
but may be completely inappropriate for a head-and-shoulders trade
on a weekly chart. Just because the fixed fractional percentage may
work well for a trader’s money management profile, does not make
it appropriate for every type of trade entered.
At the same time, however, fixed fractional money management,
when used more as a restraining guideline than as a strict stop loss value,
can serve as a very effective deterrent against the self-destruction of a
trading account. So instead of specifying an exact (fixed) percentage risk
for each trade, it often works better for traders to loosen the percentage
and make it a maximum risk parameter. For instance, instead of creating the rigid rule that exactly 2% of total equity will be risked on each
trade, a more adaptable rule might be to require that no single trade can
have a stop loss that exceeds, for example, 4% of total equity. As long as
the stop loss represents less than the predetermined maximum percentage of account equity, it can be fine-tuned, with the additional help of
position-sizing, to suit the prevailing market and trading conditions.

T railing Stops — Loyal Followers
In general, stop losses are an integral component of good risk management. To go a step further in the right direction, the liberal use

201

c06.indd 201

1/13/09 10:11:32 AM

E l e m e n t s o f S u c c e s s f u l F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

of a trailing stop loss strategy can do even more for a trader’s bottom
line. A trailing stop, as explained in Chapter 2, is a dynamic order to
close a trade at progressively better prices.
So, for example, a trader buys EUR/USD and applies a 30-pip
trailing stop to the trade. If price moves in the profitable direction for this trade (i.e., up), the stop loss follows price by 30 pips.
If price moves at least 30 pips above the entry point of the trade,
profits begin to be effectively locked in. This process is automatically
accomplished by the trailing stop mechanism. If, at anytime, price
moves down by 30 pips, the trade gets closed out by the moving
stop loss. Theoretically, if there is no profit target set and price keeps
moving up forever without fluctuating down by at least 30 pips, the
trade could gain unlimited profit. Of course, this would never happen in the real world of trading, but it just displays the potential
power of the trailing stop.
From a risk management perspective, trailing stops can automate
the twin concepts of cutting losses and letting profits run. A trailing
stop ensures that a protective stop loss is always in place, and provides an easy way to secure hard-earned profits on an ongoing basis.
Trailing stops can be instituted automatically using a trading platform’s trailing stop function, or can be performed manually simply
by moving the static stop loss on an open position in logical increments as price moves in the trade’s favor.

S ize Matters
Very closely related to sufficient capitalization, reward-to-risk ratios,
and fixed fractional money management through stop-loss placement,

202

c06.indd 202

1/13/09 10:11:33 AM

Size Matters

is the sizing of trade positions. Position-sizing is a vital aspect of good
money management. In fact, sufficient capital and sensible positionsizing go hand in hand to help curtail risk and prevent the depletion
of a trading account.
As discussed earlier in this book, there are three primary position sizes in retail foreign exchange trading. Trading accounts with
the smallest equity usually trade the micro, or super-mini, lot. These
consist of 1000 units of a given currency, and the dollar value
per pip is approximately $0.10. The next size up, traded by slightly
larger trading accounts, is called the mini-lot. Mini-lots consist
of 10,000 units of a given currency, and the dollar value per pip
is approximately $1.00. Finally, for even larger accounts there is the
standard lot, which consists of 100,000 units of a given currency
and whose per-pip dollar value is approximately $10.00. Trading
accounts that are even larger than this may trade in multiple standard
lots at a time.
Which size is best? It all depends on how well capitalized the
account is, as well as the particular risk profile of the trader. As noted
earlier in this chapter within the section on being properly capitalized, there are some rough guidelines that many prudent traders
follow when planning their trade size and account capitalization.
For example, a trader planning on trading standard lots of $100,000,
where the margin required per trade is $1000 (at 100:1 leverage),
would probably want to have $10,000 in trading account equity, at
the very least. At the same time, however, this does not necessarily
mean that a trader with $10,000 in a trading account has to trade in
standard lots. Mini-lots are perfectly fine, even for larger accounts,
and they actually have an advantage over standard lots. Mini-lots

203

c06.indd 203

1/13/09 10:11:33 AM

E l e m e n t s o f S u c c e s s f u l F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

are much more flexible than standard lots in providing the ability
to trade in odd unit sizes (e.g., 70,000 currency units traded with 7
mini-lots, as opposed to a 100,000 unit minimum for standard lots).
In addition, mini-lots can accommodate multiple fractional positions
(as explained later in this section).
Clearly, one of the most significant results of trading larger lot
sizes is the increased dollar value per pip. Among other effects of
higher pip value is that it can obviously impact trading psychology a
great deal. Any trader knows the difference between having a small
amount on the line and having a great deal on the line. A trader
watching $1/pip price movements is generally less apt to sweat and
make rash trading decisions than the one watching $10/pip price
movements.
Overtrading with regard to position-sizing often forces the
trader either to abandon proper money management principles or
set stop losses that are unrealistically close. This is due to the fact
that in order to retain the same risk profile, higher pip values necessarily mean a smaller number of pips to cushion the trade. The primary point about proper position-sizing is to avoid overextending
account capital and getting into financially uncomfortable trading
situations.
Closely related to overall position-sizing in the realm of risk
management is the concept of multiple fractional positions. This is
yet another method to help spread and control risk. Multiple fractional positions are smaller components of the main trade. These
smaller positions may be entered all at the same time, and then each
fractional position can progressively be closed in a staggered manner

204

c06.indd 204

1/13/09 10:11:33 AM

Position Overload

to lock in profits as the position moves in a profitable direction. So,
for example, if a trader enters into a long position using 10 mini-lots
(instead of 1 standard lot), each mini-lot can be closed for a profit as
the price increases, thereby securing partial profits in a progressive
fashion.
Another method of spreading risk using multiple fractional
positions employs staggered entries, as opposed to staggered exits.
Each fractional position would be entered at a different price level.
Because it is extremely difficult to pinpoint precisely the best single
entry on a trade, multiple fractional entries allow traders to get in on
a position within a flexible price range instead of at just one price,
thereby spreading some risk among different price levels.

P osition Overload
Also closely related to overall position-sizing is the common affliction of overtrading by opening too many full-sized positions (as
opposed to fractional) at the same time. In foreign exchange trading,
the danger in overtrading lies in more than just the overextension of
account margin, although that is also of grave concern.
The danger that is often overlooked in this market stems from
the fact that, relatively speaking, there are so few different instruments that are practically tradable. This means that it is extremely
difficult, if not virtually impossible, to diversify holdings adequately.
In addition, the primary trading instruments in foreign exchange
trading are correlated very closely with one another. This can be
either a positive correlation or a negative correlation.

205

c06.indd 205

1/13/09 10:11:33 AM

E l e m e n t s o f S u c c e s s f u l F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

In the world of equities trading, finding diverse, noncorrelated
investments can be relatively straightforward. In forex, on the other hand,
the four most actively traded currency pairs, EUR/USD, USD/JPY,
GBP/USD, and USD/CHF, are all dependent on the relative value of
the U.S. dollar. The same is true for the next most actively traded pairs,
AUD/USD and USD/CAD. Beyond this, there are only a handful of
common cross currency pairs that are not dollar-based, like EUR/GBP,
EUR/JPY, GBP/JPY, and so on, but these are also extremely interrelated. Rounding out the list, most of the exotic pairs are not even practically tradable because of their intolerably wide spreads stemming from
their low liquidity. So if a trader/investor is involved solely in the forex
market, diversification is simply not a viable option.
Therefore, overtrading in forex can be doubly dangerous. Not
only does it create risk in overextending margin, but it also increases
exposure to highly correlated instruments.
There are several ways to help mitigate this type of risk. The
most obvious way is to place a strict maximum on the number of
positions entered at one time. This means that the trader must simply have the discipline to refrain from overtrading. Another way is
to reduce the size of each individual trade, as in multiple fractional
positions. This is an easier method, as it allows the trader to enter
the same number of positions as usual, while committing a much
smaller amount to each position.
Yet another method for combating correlation risk that many
novice traders try in the beginning of their forex explorations centers around attempting to structure a hedged currency portfolio for
controlling risk. For example, since EUR/USD and USD/CHF
generally have a relatively high negative correlation, going long in

206

c06.indd 206

1/13/09 10:11:33 AM

Position Overload

both or going short in both could potentially be considered akin to
a hedged position with significantly reduced risk.
In actuality, however, there is really no reason to trade like this,
even if it does succeed in controlling volatility risk to a substantial
degree. Because currencies are traded in pairs, going long in correlated pairs like EUR/USD and USD/CHF, for example, simply creates a synthetic pairing that is akin to just going long a third pair,
in this case EUR/CHF. In the same way, being short both EUR/
USD and USD/CHF is like being short just EUR/CHF. The risk
reduction in quasi-hedging of this nature is limited to reducing
exposure to volatility by trading the much tamer EUR/CHF pair as
opposed to the much more volatile EUR/USD or USD/CHF pair.
Therefore, the entire exercise of opening two opposing positions
does not make a great deal of sense, as the same goal can be accomplished by the much simpler act of trading just the one synthetic pair.
Other traders utilize their broker’s hedging functionality, which
gives the ability to be long and short in the same currency pair at
the same time, in the hopes that it will provide a reduced risk environment for trading. The issue with this perspective, however, is
that without any risk exposure to the market, neither profits nor
losses can be made. So it is akin to not having any position at all.
Therefore, hedging within the forex market, though it may be a
component of certain specialized trading strategies, is not one of the
more viable methods for controlling risk in general forex trading.
In short, there are really no shortcuts to proper risk and money
management. The best ways to combat the tendency to overtrade
is simply either to cut back on the number of positions opened or
reduce the size of each position.

207

c06.indd 207

1/13/09 10:11:34 AM

E l e m e n t s o f S u c c e s s f u l F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g

M easuring Risk with a Trendline
As touched upon earlier in the book, the primary analytical method
for measuring and controlling risk from a trading strategy perspective lies in the use of technical analysis. One of the greatest strengths
of technical analysis is that it allows traders to quantify precisely, and
thereby help control, the risk factors inherent in trading.
The most obvious risk control application of technical analysis is
stop-loss placement. Technical analysis employs a simple and elegant
rationale for determining the location of stop losses. When the technical reasons for getting into a trading position no longer exist or
are no longer valid, that position should be abandoned, even if at a
loss. The purpose of a stop loss, after all, is to cut losses while those
losses are still manageable.
For example, in a potential breakout situation where a trade is
entered on a breakout above a certain price level, if price subsequently
falls back below that level, the reasons for entering the trade are no
longer valid. Therefore, the stop loss should be placed right underneath the breakout level, where the break will have proven itself to be
either false or premature. A failed breakout, as described above, is certainly a good reason to get out of a trade with a manageable loss.
Here is another example of risk management from a technical
analysis perspective. For a trader who has entered a short position
on a pullback up to a downtrend resistance line, if on one of the
subsequent pullbacks price exceeds that downtrend line by a significant amount, a good location for a stop loss would be right above
the trendline. A break above the descending trendline would mean
that price is no longer pulling back and continuing the downtrend,
but might perhaps be reversing its trend. If this is the case, a properly
208
