
—

Chapter 1 • Introduction

ten by a non-Japanese. In early 1990, as my thesis for the
Chartered Market Technician exam for the MTA, I wrote a
paper on candle charts. This was the first detailed article ever
authored by an Occidental about Japanese candle charts. A
pamphlet at Merrill Lynch (which had over 10,000 requests)
soon followed.
Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques was published in
1991, followed in 1994 by Beyond Candlesticks (John Wiley). As
of this writing, these books have been translated into eight languages and have gone through many printings.
My work has been highlighted in financial media around the
world including The Wall Street Journal , The Japan Economic
Journal , Barron's , Worth Magazine , Institutional Investor , and
scores of other publications. An appearance on FNN (the predecessor to CNBC) drew the largest audience that station ever
had.
I've had the privilege of revealing my trading strategies to
thousands of traders and analysts in over seventeen countries,
including, of all places, Hanoi, Vietnam. I also had the honor of
speaking before the World Bank and the Federal Reserve.
I founded Nison Research International in 1997 to provide
institutional on-site customized seminars and analytical services.
I formed Candlecharts.Com in 2000, which offers Web-based
seminars, videos, and other services. I invite you to visit our
site at www.candlecharts.com.

WHAT 1 $ IN THIS BOOK?
In the first part of the book, you'll learn how to draw and interpret scores of candle lines and formations. This will slowly and
clearly lay a solid foundation for Part 2 where you will discover the value of integrating candles with Western technical techniques. My goal is not to give you market omniscience. My
hope is that the ideas in this book will show how Japanese candles can "enlighten" your trading.
The best way to explain how an indicator works is through
marketplace examples. The Japanese say, "One seeing is better
than a hundred hearings." Therefore, there will be numerous
real-world examples of each technique.

7

8

Chapter 1 • Introduction

My focus will be mainly on the U.S. markets, but the tools
and techniques in this book are applicable to any market and
time frame. This is attested by the fact that candle charts are
used on weekly (for hedgers), daily (for swing and intermediate term traders), and intraday charts (for swing and day
traders). The tactics addressed in this book can be used for
equities, futures, options, foreign exchange anywhere and in
any time frame in which technical analysis is applied.
I have drawn illustrations of candle patterns to assist in the
educational process. These illustrations are representative
examples only. The drawn exhibits should be viewed in the
context that they show certain guidelines and principles. The
actual patterns do not have to look exactly as they do in the
exhibits in order to provide you with a valid signal. This is
emphasized throughout the book in the many chart examples.
You will see how variations of the patterns can still provide
important clues about the state of the markets.
Thus, there is some subjectivity in deciding whether a certain
candle formation meets the guidelines for that particular formation, but this subjectivity is no different from that with other
charting techniques. For instance, if a stock has support at $100,
is support considered broken if prices go under $100 intraday,
or do prices have to close under $100? Does a 50-cent penetration of $100 substantiate broken support or is a larger penetration needed ? You will have to decide these answers based on
your trading temperament, your risk adversity, and your market philosophy. Likewise, through text, illustrations, and realworld examples I will provide the general principles and
guidelines for recognizing the candle formations. But you
should not expect the real-world examples to always match
their ideal formations.
Two glossaries are at the end of the book. The first includes
candle terms and the second, Western technical terms used in
the book. The candle glossary includes a visual glossary of all
the patterns.

—

SOME CAUTIONS
As with any subjective form of technical analysis, there are, at
times, variable definitions that will be defined according to the

Chapter 1 • Introduction

users' experience and background. This is true of some candle
patterns. Depending on my source of information, there were
instances in which I came across different, albeit usually minor,
definitions of what constitutes a certain pattern. For example,
one Japanese author writes that the open has to be above the
prior close in order to complete a dark-cloud cover pattern.
Other written and oral sources say that, for this pattern, the
open should be above the prior high.
In cases where there were different definitions, I chose the
rules that increased the probability that the pattern's forecast
would be correct. For example, the pattern referred to in the
prior paragraph is a reversal signal that appears at tops. Thus, I
chose the definition that the market should open above the prior
day's high. This is because it is potentially more bearish if the
market opens above the prior day's high and then fails, versus if
the market opens above the prior day's close and then failed.
Much of the Japanese material I had translated is less than
specific. Part of this might be the result of the Japanese penchant for being vague. The penchant may have its origins in the
feudal ages when it was acceptable for a samurai to behead any
commoner who did not treat him as expected. The commoner
did not always know how a samurai expected him to act or to
answer. By being vague, many heads were spared. However, I
think the more important reason for the somewhat ambiguous
explanations has to do with the fact that technical analysis is
more of an art than a science.
One should not expect rigid rules. Most forms of technical
analysis are guideposts. For instance, if one of the Japanese
books says that a candle line has to be surpassed to forecast the
next bull move, I equate "surpassed" with "on a close above."
That is because, to me, a close is more important than an intraday move above resistance or below support. This is another
example of subjectivity: In the Japanese literature many candle
patterns are described as important at a high-price area or at a
low-price area. Obviously what constitutes a "high-price" or
"low-price" area is open to interpretation. One of the techniques I suggest using to gauge "low" or "high" price is an
oscillator to see if the market is oversold or overbought. This is
an example of why it is valuable to add classic Western technical tools (such as oscillators) to those of candle charts.

9

10

Chapter 1 • Introduction

As with all charting methods, candle chart patterns are subject to the interpretation of the user. Extended experience with
candle charting in your market will show you which of the patterns, and variations of these patterns, works best in your markets. In this sense, subjectivity may not be a liability. This may
give you an advantage over those who have not devoted the
time and energy in tracking your markets as closely as you
have.
As discussed in Chapter 3, drawing the individual candle
chart lines requires a close. Therefore, you may have to wait for
the close to get a valid trading signal. This may mean a market
on close order may be needed or you may have to try and anticipate what the close will be and place an order a few minutes
prior to the close. You may also prefer to wait for the next day's
opening before placing an order.
This aspect of waiting for a close is not unique to candle
charts. There are many technical systems (especially those
based on moving averages of closing prices) that require a closing price for a signal. This is why there is often a surge in activity during the final few minutes of a trading session as computerized trading signals, based on closing prices, kick into
play. Some technicians consider only a close above resistance a
valid buy signal so they have to wait until the close for confirmation.
Candle charts provide many useful trading signals. They do
not, however, provide price targets. This is why it is so important to use Western technical techniques on candle charts. This
will be a focus of Part 2.
With the hundreds of charts throughout this book, do not be
surprised if you see patterns that I have missed within charts.
There will also be examples of patterns that, at times, did not
work. No technical tool, including candles, is infallible.
Candles are not designed to be a complete system; they are
just one weapon, albeit a powerful one, to use in your trading
battles.
Before I delve into the topic of candle charts, I will briefly discuss the importance of technical analysis as a separate discipline. For those of you who are new to this topic, the following
section is meant to emphasize why technical analysis is so
important. It is not an in-depth discussion. If you are already

Chapter 1 • Introduction

familiar with the benefits of technical analysis, you can skip
this section. Do not worry if you do not read the following section; it will not interfere with later candle chart analysis information.

THE IMPORTAN CE OF TECHNICA L ANALYSIS
The importance of technical analysis is multifaceted. First,
while fundamental analysis may provide a gauge of the supply / demand situations (i.e., price / earnings ratios, economic
statistics) and so forth, there is no psychological component
involved in such analysis. Yet the markets are influenced at
times, to a major extent, by emotionalism. As John Maynard
Keynes stated, "There is nothing so disastrous as a rational
investment policy in an irrational world."2 Technical analysis
provides the only mechanism to measure the "irrational" (emotional) component present in all markets.
Here is an entertaining story about how strongly psychology
can affect a market. It is from the book The New Gatsbys? It
takes place at the Chicago Board of Trade.
Soybeans were sharply higher. There was a drought in the
Illinois Soybean Belt. And unless it ended soon, there would be
a severe shortage of beans. . . . Suddenly a few drops of water
slid down a window. "Look," someone shouted, "rain!" More
than 500 pairs of eyes [the traders editor 's note] shifted to the
big windows. . . . Then came a steady trickle, which turned into
a steady downpour. It was raining in downtown Chicago.
Sell. Buy. Buy. Sell. The shouts cascaded from the traders' lips
with a roar that matched the thunder outside. And the price of
soybeans began to slowly move down. Then the price of soybeans broke like some tropic fever.
It was pouring in Chicago all right, but no one grows soybeans
in Chicago. In the heart of the Soybean Belt, some 300 miles
south of Chicago the sky was blue, sunny and very dry. But even
if it wasn't raining on the soybean fields it was in the heads of the
traders , and that is all that counts [emphasis added ]. To the market
nothing matters unless the market reacts to it. The game is played
with the mind and the emotions ." [Emphasis added .]

—

In order to drive home the point about the importance of
mass psychology, think about what happens when you
exchange a piece of paper called "money" for some item like

11

12

Chapter 1 • Introduction

food or clothing. Why is that paper, with no intrinsic value,
exchanged for something tangible? It is because of a shared
psychology. Everyone believes it will be accepted, so it is. Once
this shared psychology evaporates, when people stop believing
in money, it becomes worthless.
Second, technicals are also an important component of disciplined trading. Discipline helps mitigate the nemesis of all
traders, namely, emotion. As soon as you have money in the
market, emotionalism is in the driver 's seat and rationale and
objectivity are merely passengers. If you doubt this, try paper
trading. Then try trading with your own funds. You will soon
discover how deeply the counterproductive aspects of tension,
anticipation, and anxiety alter the way you trade and view the
markets usually in proportion to the funds committed.
Technicals can put objectivity back into the driver 's seat. They
provide a mechanism to set entry and exit points, to set
risk / reward ratios, or stop out levels. By using them, you foster a risk and money management approach to trading.
As touched upon in the previous discussion, the technicals
contribute to market objectivity. It is human nature to see the
market as we want to see it, not as it really is. How often does
the following occur? A trader buys. Immediately the market
falls. Does he take a loss? Usually no.
Although there is no room for hope in the market, the trader
will glean all the fundamentally bullish news he can in order to
buoy his hope that the market will turn in his direction (as one
of our advisory clients put it, "You root for your position.")
Meanwhile prices continue to descend. Perhaps the market is
trying to tell him something. The markets communicate with
us. We can monitor these messages by using the technicals. This
trader is closing his eyes and ears to the messages being sent by
the market.
If this trader stepped back and objectively viewed the price
activity, he might get a better feel of the market. What if a supposedly bullish story is released and prices do not move up or
even fall? That type of price action is sending out volumes of
information about the psychology of the market and how one
should trade in it.
I believe it was the famous trader Jesse Livermore who
expressed the idea that one can see the whole better when one

—

Chapter 1 • Introduction

sees it from a distance. Technicals make us step back and get a
different and, perhaps, better perspective on the market.
Third, following the technicals is important even if you do
not fully believe in their use. This is because, at times, the chart
actions are the major reason for a market move. Since they are
a market-moving factor, they should be watched.
Fourth, random walk proffers that the market price for one
day has no bearing on the price the following day. But this academic view leaves out an important component—people.
People remember prices from one day to the next and act
accordingly. To wit, people's reactions indeed affect price, but
price also affects people's reactions. Thus, price, itself , is an
important component in market analysis. Those who disparage
technical analysis forget this last point.
Fifth, the price action is the most direct and easily accessible
method of seeing overall supply / demand relationships. There
may be fundamental news not known to the general public, but
you can expect it is already in the price. Those who have
advance knowledge of some market-moving event will most
likely buy or sell until current prices reflect their information.
Notes
1. For anyone seriously interested in technical analysis, I strongly recommend joining the MTA . Their web site is www.mta .org.
2. Smith, Adam. The Money Game (New York: Random House, 1986, p. 154).
3. Tamarkin, Bob. The New Gatsbys (Chicago: Bob Tamarkin, 1985, pp. 122123).

13

CHAPTER 2

A HISTORICAL
BACKGROUND
# § & 8SfcT #r l S
Through inquiring of the old we learn the new.

chapter provides the framework through which
I Japanese technical analysis evolved. For those who are in a
rush to get to the "meat" of the book (that is, the techniques and
uses of candlesticks), you can skip this chapter, or return to it
after you have completed the rest of the book. It is an intriguing history.
Among the first and the most famous people in Japan to use
past prices to predict future price movements was the legendary Munehisa Homma.1 He amassed a huge fortune trading
in the rice market during the 1700s. Before I discuss Homma,
however, I want to provide an overview of the economic background in which Homma was able to flourish. The time span of

15

16

Chapter 2 • A Historical Background

this overview is from the late 1500s to the mid-1700s. During
this era Japan went from sixty provinces to a unified country
where commerce blossomed.
From 1500 to 1600, Japan was a country incessantly at war as
each of the daimyo (literally "big name" meaning "a feudal
lord") sought to wrestle control of neighboring territories. This
100-year span between 1500 and 1600 is referred to as "Sengoku
Jidai" or, literally, "Age of Country at War." It was a time of disorder. By the early 1600s, three extraordinary generals
Nobunaga Oda, Hideyoshi Toyotomi, and Ieyasu Tokugawa—
had unified Japan over a 40-year period. Their prowess and
achievements are celebrated in Japanese history and folklore.
There is a Japanese saying: "Nobunaga piled the rice,
Hideyoshi kneaded the dough, and Tokugawa ate the cake." In
other words, all three generals contributed to Japan's unification but Tokugawa, the last of these great generals, became the
Shogun whose family ruled Japan from 1615 to 1867. This era is
referred to as the Tokugawa Shogunate.
The military conditions that suffused Japan for centuries
became an integral part of candlestick terminology. If you think
about it, trading requires many of the same skills needed to win
a battle. Such skills include strategy, psychology, competition,
strategic withdrawals, and, yes, even luck. So it is not surprising that throughout this book you will come across candlestick
terms that are based on battlefield analogies. There are "night
and morning attacks," the "advancing three soldiers pattern,"
"counterattack lines," the "gravestone," and so on.
The relative stability engendered by the centralized Japanese
feudal system led by Tokugawa offered new opportunities. The
agrarian economy grew, but more important, there was expansion and ease in domestic trade. By the seventeenth century, a
national market had evolved to replace the system of local and
isolated markets. This concept of a centralized marketplace was
to lead indirectly to the development of technical analysis in

—

Japan.
Hideyoshi Toyotomi regarded Osaka as Japan's capital and
encouraged its growth as a commercial center. Osaka's easy
access to the sea, at a time where land travel was slow, dangerous, and costly, made it a national depot for assembling and
disbursing supplies. It evolved into Japan's greatest city of

Chapter 2 • A Historical Background

commerce and finance. Its wealth and vast storehouses of supplies provided Osaka with the appellation "the Kitchen of
Japan."
Osaka contributed much to price stability by smoothing out
regional differences in supply. In Osaka, life was permeated by
the desire for profit (as opposed to other cities in which money
making was despised ). The social system at that time was composed of four classes. In descending order they were the
Soldier, the Farmer, the Artisan, and the Merchant. It took until
the 1700s for merchants to break down the social barrier. Even
today the traditional greeting in Osaka is "Mokarimakka"
which means, "Are you making a profit?"
In Osaka, Yodoya Keian became a war merchant for
Hideyoshi (one of the three great military unifiers). Yodoya had
extraordinary abilities in transporting, distributing, and setting
the price of rice. Yodoya's front yard became so important that
the first rice exchange developed there. He became very
wealthy as it turned out, too wealthy. The Bakufu (the military government led by the Shogun) confiscated his entire fortune in 1705 on the charge that he was living in luxury not befit-

—

ting his social rank. The Bakufu was apprehensive about the
increasing amount of power acquired by certain merchants.
Certain officials and merchants tried to corner the rice market
in 1642. The punishment was severe: Their children were executed, the merchants were exiled, and their wealth was confiscated .
The rice market that originally developed in Yodoya's yard
was institutionalized when the Dojima Rice Exchange was set
up in the late 1600s in Osaka. The merchants at the Exchange
graded the rice and bargained to set its price. Up until 1710, the
Exchange dealt in actual rice. After 1710, the Rice Exchange
began to issue and accept rice warehouse receipts. These warehouse receipts were called rice coupons. These rice receipts
became the first futures contracts ever traded.
Rice brokerage became the foundation of Osaka's prosperity.
There were more than 1,300 rice dealers. Since there was no currency standard (the prior attempts at hard currency failed due
to the debasing of the coins), rice became the de facto medium
of exchange. A daimyo needing money would send his surplus
rice to Osaka where it would be placed in a warehouse in his

17

18

Chapter 2 • A Historical Background

name. He would be given a coupon as a receipt for this rice. He
could sell this rice coupon whenever he pleased. Given the
financial problems of many daimyos, they would also often sell
rice coupons against their next rice tax delivery ( taxes to the
daimyo were paid in rice usually 40 to 60 percent of the rice
farmer 's crop). Sometimes the rice crop of several years hence
was mortgaged. These rice coupons were actively traded. The
rice coupons sold against future rice deliveries became the
world's first futures contracts. The Dojima Rice Exchange,
where these coupons traded, became the world's first futures
exchange. Rice coupons were also called "empty rice" coupons
(that is, rice that was not in physical possession). To give you an
idea of the popularity of rice futures trading, consider this: In
1749, there were a total of 110,000 bales ( rice used to trade in
bales) of empty-rice coupons traded in Osaka. Yet, throughout
all of Japan there were only 30,000 bales of rice.2
Into this background steps Homma, called "god of the markets." Munehisa Homma was born in 1724 into a wealthy family. The Homma family was considered so wealthy that there
was a saying at that time, "I will never become a Homma, but
I would settle to be a local lord." When Homma was given control of his family business in 1750, he began trading at his local
rice exchange in the port city of Sakata. Sakata was a collections
and distribution area for rice. Since Homma came from Sakata,
you will frequently come across the expression "Sakata's
Rules" in Japanese candlestick literature. These refer to
Homma.
When Munehisa Homma's father died, Munehisa was placed
in charge of managing the family's assets. This was in spite of
the fact that he was the youngest son. (It was usually the eldest
son who inherited the power during that era.) This was probably because of Munehisa's market savvy. With this money,
Homma went to Japan's largest rice exchange, the Dojima Rice
Exchange in Osaka, and began trading rice futures.
Homma's family had a huge rice farming estate. Their power
meant that information about the rice market was usually
available to them. In addition, Homma kept records of yearly
weather conditions. In order to learn about the psychology of
investors, Homma analyzed rice prices going back to the time
when the rice exchange was in Yodoya's yard. Homma also set
