has185 members, most who joined after 1981. Government-to-government
relations are transacted by the SDR system.
From 1969 to 1973, SDR’s value was pegged to gold at 0.888671 grams
of gold as the U.S. dollar equivalent (IMF). After 1973, ﬂoating exchange
rates were the new world order so SDRs were pegged to a basket of four
currencies with various weights: U.S. dollar—44 percent, euro—34 percent,
yen—11 percent, and British pound—11 percent (IMF).
The IMF sums the value of the four currencies in U.S. dollars measured to
six decimal places directly after the London British Bankers Association (BBA)
LIBOR release and reported on the IMF web site, with updates every 20 minutes. SDRs are then priced and exchanged by members on a voluntary basis or
the stronger nations purchase from the weaker nations (IMF). Basket weights
are reviewed every ﬁve years to determine changes. The factors considered are
amounts of trade in goods and services. The November 2010 release of the
new basket weights works as follows: US dollar 41.9, euro 37.4, British pound
11.3 and Japanese yen 9.4. For the ﬁrst time since weights were ﬁrst reported,
the US dollar lost value.
Interest is credited or deducted every Friday based on SDR allocations.
The euro is credited or debited based on Eurepo rates, United Kingdom
based on Treasury Bills, Japanese based on Treasury Discount Bills, and the
United States based on Treasury bills (IMF).
Two previous allocations were distributed to nations. The ﬁrst was SDR
$9 billion, distributed between 1970 and 1972. The second $12 Billion
SDR was distributed between 1979 and 1981 (IMF).
The G-20 nations voted and approved a special allocation in 2009 of
U.S. $250 billion, 74.3 percent of eligible participants’ quota. This means
each participating member receives their SDR quota equal to 74 percent of
present totals (IMF Press Release). Emerging markets received U.S. $100 billion,
with U.S. $18 billion to low-income nations. A special SDR $21.5 billion was
allocated. The SDR $21.5 billion allocation brings the total SDR fund to
U.S. $283 billion. The goal is to increase cumulative totals to US $1.1 trillion
(IMF Press Release).
One ﬁfth of new member nations that joined the IMF after 1981 never
participated in the SDR program, yet the special allocation was available to
them. Critics argued many allocated SDRs were sold and transferred back
to the home currency and used to increase a nation’s ofﬁcial reserves. China
and Russia were beneﬁciaries, China by an increase and Russia by joining
the SDR program for the ﬁrst time, along with many African and South
American nations.

Technical Analysis

293

SDRs can’t be traded and only have ramiﬁcations for nation-to-nation
business conducted through the IMF. The implications for future policy are
what is important.
If nation reserves are increased due to SDR allocations, then SDR must
be monitored as an indicator and insight into reserves. Spot prices will reﬂect
any increases because economies and economic releases will improve.
Australia is a true commodity currency as deﬁned by the IMF because
more than 50 percent of exports are deﬁned as commodities. Currently the
Royal Bank of Australia (RBA) monitors the Australian commodity index,
called the Index of Commodity Prices (ICP), by SDR rates. This is the ﬁrst of
its type and could have huge implications for future policy. A few questions
to ponder include what if commodities were bought and sold strictly between
governments? What if SDRs became the new reserve currency used as a sole
method of trade? What are implications for private companies and importers
and exporters who can’t participate in the SDR system? As new SDR allocations are funded, old questions materialize in the research. Votes in the committee to determine any SDR policy is based on SDR holdings and the US
currently by far represents the largest vote.
Australia’s ICP is actually calculated in Australian dollar, U.S. dollar, and
SDR terms, possibly because most Australian commodities are exported in
non-Australia dollars and commodity exports comprise about 25 percent of
Australia’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (RBA). Possibly the reason to calculate the ICP in Australian dollar, U.S. dollar, and SDR terms is to determine which currency should be employed to export and measured against
the proﬁts of the imported nation’s currency. All nations measure Home
currency/SDR for evaluation terms. For the future, this development may
deserve special attention as an economic indicator.
Pivot Points

The purpose for introduction of this old and reliable indicator is due to its
widespread use by ﬂoor traders and other market professionals. The tradition
continues to this day. Yet pivot points are important to measure other instruments such as stock indices against currency pairs.
The basic pivot-point calculation is provided, yet much experiment
can be formulated for other uses. For example, Daniel Fernandez in the
December 2010 Currency Trader magazine highlighted pivot points calculated to Fibonacci numbers.

294

Inside the Currency Market

Traditional pivot-point applications determined support and resistance
levels, but as time progressed, trading methodologies were employed such as
range and price breaks with addition of new sets of pivot points. It became a
trading plan used as a single indicator.
The calculation is:
PP  (High  Low  Close)/3 1st Support  (2  PP) – High
• 1st Resistance  (2  PP)  Low
• 2nd Support  PP  (High  Low)
• 2nd Resistance  PP  ( 2  High)  Low
• 3rd Support  2PP  (High – Low)
• 3rd Resistance  2PP  High  (2  Low)
Currency Correlations and Trend Lines

An explanation of correlation coefﬁcients is included to understand why and
how currency pairs correlate or don’t correlate.
Somewhere around the late 1800s or early 1900s, Karl Pearson was credited with Pearson’s Product Moment Correlation Coefﬁcient, the famous R.
The formula is:
r=

(
n (∑ X ) − (∑ X )

)( ∑ y )
n (∑ y ) − (∑ y )

N∑ xy − ∑ X

2

2

2

2

This equation asks the question how strong and what direction is a linear
relationship between X and Y ? The purpose is only to determine if a positive
or negative relationship exists. It’s a measure on a number line with 0 as the
middle bound between positive and negative values. A perfectly positive value
means r  1 and perfectly negative values means r  1. This says both
are perfect ﬁts. As X increases or decreases, y increases or decreases in perfect
unison. But currency pairs are never perfect ﬁts.
To determine the ﬁt, measure the proportion of the variance from one
variable to the other, x and y by squaring the sums. This explains the percent
variation determined by the variance and predicts future outcomes. Suppose
the euro/U.S. dollar and British pound/U.S. dollar has a 0.70 positive relationship. Multiply by 100 and 70 percent is the correlation between the two
pairs. The other 30 percent is unexplained and called randomness if no other
considerations are factored in this regression model.

295

Technical Analysis

Many factor other pairs and plot the x and y results on a chart. A trend
line called a regression line can be drawn using the equation
y  mx  b
where
m  slope, and
b  y intercept.
The slope is the change in y divided by change in x. The more positive the
slope, the more the line will trend up. Likewise, the more negative the slope,
the more the line will trend down. Much can be done with trend lines.
Edson Gould invented what was known as Speed Resistance Lines, today
known as one-third—two-thirds lines and used to measure market corrections. Gould employed the lines to measure price points. For example, rising
speed lines are measured by “taking the vertical distance between recent
highs and lows and divide into thirds. Straight lines are drawn from the low
through the one-third—two-thirds vertical distance. For a falling line, divide
the vertical distance from high to low into thirds and draw straight lines from the
high through the one-third—two-thirds point on the vertical distance” (Shade).
Many still employ Edson Gould’s long-ago invention by measuring other markets and currency pairs for one-third and two-thirds corrections.
The trend line drawn to measure highs to lows is not only popular today
but used by a vast, vast majority to measure price points. Price points should
always be measured in percents. It’s an observation that various trend lines
were the beginning of channel lines that boxes candlesticks and/or prices in a
channel. All are viable technical tools and all work equally well.
The euro/U.S. dollar and British pound/U.S. dollar may be positively
related, but that doesn’t mean it will move in unison 100 percent of the time
because it’s not correlated to 100 percent, only 70 percent. Many times one
pair will move without the other. That is a market gift and can be measured
by the above formulas. If the euro trends without the British pound, it’s only
time before the British pound will trend. Why it didn’t move is explained by
randomness, the 30 percent unexplainable. Yet opposite correlations don’t
mean prices move pip for pip, because the correlations aren’t perfectly ﬁt to
100 percent.
The positive aspect about correlations is other markets can be measured
in relation to currency pairs. Yet currency pairs can be measured against a
bond’s cash ﬂows. These indicators are time tested by past generations of
market professionals and all work as intended.

296

Inside the Currency Market

Whatever strategy is employed, the recommendation is use it, practice it,
perfect it, and stay with the same methodology day after day. It’s the market
that may deviate, not the strategy. That can be expected from time to time,
this is why they are called markets. Live with the idea of reasonable expectations where probabilities and risk are factored into every trade. The rewards
of the markets will be seen.
Currency pairs can be volatile; they trend, range, cluster, and even stay congested for long periods of time. For the most part, currency pairs tend to range
more than they trend and experience volatility. An essential ingredient to any
trader’s arsenal is to employ, to know, and to understand an indicator. One indicator may work to capture consistent proﬁts but a risk factor—an error term must
be employed. That is found in an opposite indicator rather than its complement.
One risk measure is the second set of Bollinger Bands. If one set fails, the other
set will alert to a problem, an unexpected market development. Unexpected market developments occur all the time so it’s essential to always be ready.
Indicators such as the Baltic Exchange, the SDR, and COT reports have
a worth for capturing consistent proﬁts as much as a trading indicator because
of its market alert to future price moves.
The purpose of this chapter was not only to highlight indicators that
work to capture proﬁts but to outline currency pairs and their movements. My
hope is that this was a consistent theme throughout the book. This chapter
focused on two consistent themes, trading indicators and market indicators.
Each have a value of equal worth. One alerts to future market conditions and
periods while the other alerts to price moves. One complements the other.
Trading indicators together complement each other. Simple moving averages
complement Ichimoku because simple moving averages focus on closing
prices while Ichimoku focuses on market highs and lows. It’s a continuousmarket moving average.
Bollinger Bands work together with pivot points as a pivot-point support
or resistance line may align to a band’s support or resistance line. All indicators can be employed with a trend line whether it is a speed line, a regression
line, or trend lines that comprise a channel. Different trend lines can be drawn
simultaneously. A regression line complements a speed line.
Conclusion

My purpose for this book was to address the various issues involved that
comprise a currency pair not only from a strict trading perspective but to
bring an understanding from a whole host of perspectives. Part was historic

Technical Analysis

297

to understand the full context for trade and approach the markets. To know
where we were may help to know where we are.
The real purpose for my book is to understand the second side of a
currency-pair equation so a pair is fully understood for its purpose, history,
movements, and factors that make it move. Armed with this information, it is
my hope that this book will be a continuous resource for not only those that
know, understand, and trade the markets but for those who wish to learn,
for some to be better at their craft. For those who wish to capture consistent
proﬁts with a full comprehension of market factors, much exists in this book
for you.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

Bibliography
ASEAN. March 24, 2010. “USD 120 Billion Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation
Swap Facility Comes Into Effect.” ASEAN Secretariat Press Release. http://www
.aseansec.org/24433.htm
Baba, Naohiko, and Yasunari Inamura. April 2002. “The Japanese Repo Market:
Theory and Evidence.” Financial Markets Department Working Paper 02-E-1.
Baba, Naohiko, Frank Packer, and Teppei Nagano. March 2008. “The Spillover of
Money Market Turbulence to FX Swaps and Cross Currency Swap Markets.”
Bank of International Settlements Quarterly Review.
Baer, Julius, and George P. Woodruff. Commodity Exchanges. New York, London:
Harper & Brothers, 1935.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes. “The Price of Options and Corporate Liabilities.”
Journal of Political Economy, 1973.
Bank of International Settlements. 2009. “The Role of Valuation and Leverage in
Procyclicality.” Bank of International Settlements.
Bank of Japan. February 2009. “Guidelines on Eligible Collateral.” Bank of Japan.
Becker, Chris, and Michael Davies. October 2002. “Developments in the Trade
Weight Index.” Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin.
Bianchetti, Marco. “Two curves, one price.” Risk. August 2010, Vol. 23, Issue 8,
pp. 66–72, 7p.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. “Section 13. Powers of Federal
Reserve Banks.” Federal Reserve Act. http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/
section13.htm
Buldorini, Luca, Stelios Makrydakis, and Christian Thimann. “The Effective
Exchange Rates of the Euro.” ECB: Occasional papers by Stelios Makrydakis.
Series No. 2, February 2002. http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/scientiﬁc/ops/
author/html/author324.en.html
Chauvet, Marcelle, and Simon Potter. “Forecasting Recessions Using the Yield
Curve.” Journal of Forecasting 24, no. 2 (March 2005): 77–103.
Chionis, Dionisios, Perikils Gogas, and Ioannis Pragidis. “Predicting European Union
Recessions in the Euro Era: The Yield Curve as a Forecasting Tool of Economic
Activity.” International Advances in Economic Research 16, no.1 (February 2010):
1–10, 6 Charts, 4 Graphs.

299

300

Bibliography

Cox, John, Stephen Ross, and Mark Rubenstein. “Option Pricing: A Simpliﬁed
Approach.” Journal of Financial Economics, 1979.
Elliott, Nicole. Ichimoku Charts, An introduction to Ichimoku Kinko Clouds. Hampshire,
UK: Harriman House, 2007.
Evans, H. Parker. “An Empirical Study of Rotational Trading Using the % b Oscillator.”
Journal of Technical Analysis. Summer/Fall 2008.
“Export and Import Price Index Manual.” Chapter 3: The Price and Volume of
International Trade: Background, Purpose and Uses of Export and Import Price
Indices. IMF Draft July 2003. http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/tegeipi/ch3.pdf
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. “Depository Institutions Deregulation And
Monetary Control Act of 1980.” FDIC Law, Regulations, Related Acts. http://
www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/rules/8000-2200.html
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Foreign Exchange Committee, Annual
Report. 2005.http://www.ny.frb.org/fxc/annualreports/fxcar05.pdf
Federal Reserve System. “Reserve Maintenance Manual.” Federal Reserve System.
December, 2010. http://www.frbservices.org/ﬁles/regulations/pdf/rmm.pdf
Fernandez, Daniel. “Daily Pivot Breakouts.” Currency Trader Magazine, December 2010.
Fleming, Michael J., and Kenneth D. Garbade. “Repurchase Agreements with
Negative Interest Rates.” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, April 2004.
Fleming, Michael J., and Kenneth D. Garbade. “The Repurchase Agreement Reﬁned:
GCF Repo.” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, June 2003.
Goldberg, Linda S. with Cedric Tille. “Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade”,
Journal of International Economics, December 2008
Groom, John. “The Development of the Kauri Bond Market.” Reserve Bank of New Zealand,
2008. http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research/workshops/capitalmarkets20june2008/
3345557.pdf
Garman, Mark and Steven Kohlhagen. “Foreign Currency Option Values.” Journal of
International Money and Finance, 1983.
Haubrich, Joseph G. “Swaps and the Swaps Yield Curve.” Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland, December 2001. http://www.scribd.com/doc/19606659/
Federal-Reserve-Bank-of-Clevland-Haubrich-Swaps-and-the-Swaps-Yield-Curve
Haubrich, Joseph G. “Does the Yield Curve Signal Recession?” Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland, April 2006.
Haubrich, Joseph G., and Timothy Bianco. “Yield Curve and Predicted GDP
Growth.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, October 2010.
Hordahl, Peter, and Michael R. King. “Developments in Repo Markets during
the Financial Turmoil.” Bank of International Settlements Quarterly Review,
December 2008.
Hurd, Matthew, Mark Salmon, and Christopher Schleicher. “Using Copulas to
Construct Bivariate Foreign Exchange Distributions with Application to ERI.”
Center for Economic Policy Research, 2005.
Japanese Bankers Association. http://www.zenginkyo.or.jp/
Japanese Securities Dealers Association. “Review of Fails Practice for Bond Trading.”
Japanese Securities Dealers Association. 2009.

Bibliography

301

Jongmoo, Jay Choi, and Shmuel Hauser. “The Effects Of Domestic And Foreign
Yield Curves On The Value of Currency American Call Options.” Journal of
Banking & Finance 14, no. 1 (March 1990): 41–53.
Jorian, Philippe. Value at risk: The new benchmark for managing ﬁnancial risk. 3rd ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
Kite, Hannah. “A Review of the Trade Weighted Exchange Rate Index.” Reserve Bank
of New Zealand Bulletin, June 2007.
Krause, Robert. “Volatility Contracts - A New Alternative.” The Journal of Alternative
Investments. Summer 2000.
Krause, Robert. “Volatility Trading: VolContracts™ Jump into the Mix.” Swiss
Derivatives Review. Autumn 2010.
Lynch, Birone, and Simon Whitaker. “The New Sterling.” ERI Quarterly Bulletin.
Winter 2004.
MacGorain, S. “Stabilising short-term interest rates.” Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin (Winter, 2005): 462–470.
Market Technicians Association, MTA Knowledge Base. http://knowledgebase.mta
.org/?fuseaction=kb.resource&kbDomainID=BDA870A8-CF1C-2465-1FE10C
6186345CA5&kbResourceID=13F1448F-AD6A-93F9-09E38B20030C01B4
Mehl, Arnaud. “The Yield Curve as a Predictor and Emerging Market Economies.”
European Central Bank, ECB Working Paper 691, 2006.
Morrow, Ron. “Repo, Reverse Repo and Securities Lending Markets in Canada.”
Bank of Canada Review. Winter 1994–1995.
New York Federal Reserve. “Tri Party Repo Infrastructure Reform and White Paper.”
New York Federal Reserve. May 17, 2010.
Olivei, Giovanni P. “Japan’s Approach to Monetary Policy.” New England Economic
Review, 00284726, 2nd Quarter 2002.
Ong, Janone. “A New Effective Exchange Rate Index for the Canadian Dollar.” Bank
of Canada Review. Autumn 2006.
Reid, Christopher. “The Canadian Overnight Market, Recent Evolution and
Structural Changes.” Bank of Canada Review. Spring 2007.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand. “Operating Rules And Guidelines - Section 2
Domestic Market Operations.” Reserve Bank of New Zealand Financial Markets,
Department Domestic Markets Section, October 29, 2009, 18 pages, http://
www.rbnz.govt.nz/ﬁnmarkets/domesticmarkets/3519153.pdf
Royal Bank of Australia. “Open Market Operations.” Royal Bank of Australia, http://
www.rba.gov.au/mkt-operations/open-mkt-oper.html
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. “Section 11A - National Market System for
Securities.” Securities Exchange Act of 1934. www.sec.gov/about/laws/sea34.pdf
Sengupta, Rajdeep, and Yu Man Tam. “The Libor-OIS Spread as a Summary
Indicator.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Synopses, 2008, No. 25.
http://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/es/08/ES0825.pdf
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Regulation National Market System.“Rule
600 b 23.”17 CFR Parts 200, 204, 230, 240, 242, 249 and 270. 523 pages.
http://www.sec.gov/rules/ﬁnal/34-51808.pdf

302

Bibliography

Schade, George A. Jr. “Noted Market Technicians (Biographies) - Edson B. Gould”
Technically Speaking authored by Michael Carr based on prior research presented
at 2000 Annual MTA conference, Atlanta Georgia. mta.org.
———. “Forecasting Like the Technical Masters, Edson Gould’s Three Steps and a
Stumble Rule”, Stocks, Futures and Options Magazine, September 2004, Vol 3, no
9, pgs 68-72
Shaleen, Kenneth. Volume and open interest: Classic trading strategies for 24-hour market.
Revised edition. Chicago: Irwin Professional Publishing, 1997.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. “Treasury International Capital System (TIC).”
U.S. Department of the Treasury, http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/datachart-center/tic/Pages/index.aspx
Volkman, David A., Olivier J. P. Maisondieu Laforge, and Donna Dudney. “The
Effect of Federal Reserve Policy, Yield Curves, and Current Level of Interest Rates
on Equity Returns.” Journal of Investing. Winter 2009, Vol. 18, Issue 4, pp. 82–95.
Whitehouse, Mark. “Economists Ask if Bonds Have Lost Predictive Power.” Wall
Street Journal, December 29, 2005, eastern edition, C1–C3.

Inside the Currency Market: Mechanics, Valuation, and Strategies
by Brian Twomey
Copyright © 2012 Brian Twomey

About the Author
Brian Twomey is an independent trader and a proliﬁc writer on trading,
having authored more than 60 articles in Technical Analysis of Stocks and
Commodities and Investopedia. His article on Welles Wilder is one of the
most heavily accessed pieces in Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities
in recent years. Through his writings, he has established a strong following
among traders and market analysts. He is an adjunct professor of Political
Science at Gardner-Webb University. He has a BA in Political Science, a
Masters in Public Administration and 24 graduate hours in Political Science
from the University of Central Florida.
