
book_c06.qxd

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 55

A Turn for the Worse

55

I then pulled from my pocket the napkin from lunch. It still read:
Rule Number One: Don’t Become Cocky
Right then I was anything but arrogant. Upset. Confused. Angry, certainly. I took a moment and added up three month’s rent in my mind.
And before I could think twice, I was walking back to Herbie’s office,
where I found him already doing three other things, not thinking at all
about the fact that he was kicking me in the teeth professionally. When I
looked inside his office, he stared right back at me.
HERBIE: What.
It wasn’t a question. It was a demand.
ME: I’ll sign the release for $6,400.
HERBIE: Done. Sign it, bring it back to me.
He went back to his work. Not one bit of emotion. I should have asked
him for three times as much. Then I should have jumped on his desk and
kicked him in the head.
Instead I returned to my cubicle and signed the form. By the time I was
on my way back to his office, Bill from accounting met me in the hallway.
He had an envelope in his hand, which he handed to me in exchange for the
signed release. Now I had a check that would cover three month’s rent. The
firm had my promise not to sue for wrongful termination. I had also written
in on the firm’s copy of the form that they were to buy me a Porsche 911
and a private jet.
This is the part in a book where the protagonist usually tells you that
he left the office, head hung low, fearful of his wife’s reaction to the news,
fated to never work again as a mail carrier or whatever. Not me! I had a
good trade going and three month’s rent. And now I was going into the file
room and make a list of every Wall Street firm we had ever represented and
the name of the head trader if I could find it.
I called Scott on his cell phone. He rushed over to my desk within seconds. He had been hiding out. He looked at the box on my desk.
“I’m sorry,” he said. He didn’t ask why I had been fired.
“I need you to cover for me for a few minutes.”
He looked reluctant. “I don’t know, man. I don’t want Herbie to find out
I’m helping you. I can’t afford to lose my job.”
“In twenty four hours you’re going to have my job. There are only two
of us here. They are not going to fire you. So congratulations. Now help me
for five minutes.”

book_c06.qxd

56

12/20/06

2:03 PM

Page 56

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“Five minutes. Okay.”
I told him to call me on my cell phone if anyone approached the filing
room.
In 20 minutes I had the names and numbers of nine Wall Street traders.
I then left as fast as I could. When I got home, my wife was in such a good
mood that I decided not to tell her that I had been fired. I took her and the
kids to the park until the sun went down, then put the kids to bed, and then
we both fell asleep early. I had forgotten entirely about my trade.

book_c07.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 57

CHAPTER 7

Trying to
Awake from
the Nightmare

hat night I had a dream. I was running on top of a cloud bank, toward
the setting sun, up as high as you would be if you were in a 747. I was
running really fast, and I was skipping across those clouds toward the
setting sun.
The clouds were dark behind me—storm clouds. I kept my eyes focused on the setting sun—the pink clouds, the last light of the day. But
every couple of seconds, I could see a flash of light from the corner of my
eye, and the thunderclap was so loud that it shook my entire body. And
after each clap, the booming sound stayed in the air, echoing out and then
back, out and back, out and back. Each time it hit me, it punched me in the
chest. I thought my chest would cave in with each pulse. But I kept running.
I couldn’t make any forward progress, in the same way that earlier that
week on the trading floor, I felt I was standing still while time and space
passed me by. Only on the trading floor, I was filled with optimism and
possibility.
This time it was only fear.
Far in the distance to my left, I saw my wife. I saw my children:
Nathan, and Judy, and Jonathan. I passed them by so slowly that it seemed
as if they were moving and I was not. And I saw Caroline—she hadn’t been
born yet, but I could see her, as if she had been born and had grown to at
least five years old. She was standing in a white dress, and she was the only
figure that I could not run past. She was smiling at me. She had my wife’s
pretty smile and curly hair. I could tell she was calling out to me to come to
her—but I couldn’t make any progress.

T

57

book_c07.qxd

58

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 58

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

So I ran harder. It didn’t help. I stretched out my hands, and that didn’t
help. I considered crawling on all fours and scraping for more traction. It
didn’t make a difference either. I was losing ground fast. The thunder was
louder, the pulses more powerful, the pain in my chest greater, the lightning was brighter, and Caroline’s voice was softer.
And softer.
Until I could no longer hear her.
Until I could barely see her waving to me.
Until she was no longer smiling.
And then the darkness wrapped around me, I lost sight of Caroline,
and I woke up screaming.

YOU NEVER FORGET YOUR FIRST MARGIN CALL
When I woke up from the nightmare, my first thought was the open trade.
Covered in sweat, with Franklin standing at attention by my side of the
bed, and my wife sitting next to me, combing my hair back with her hand—
I was thinking about my trade.
I knew it was bad. I hadn’t seen it yet, but I knew it was really bad.
Now I wanted to check on it. We had a computer in the next room. It didn’t
have any of the software on it, but I could load it on there and check on the
trade. Just imagining the Amazing Forex software put a pit in my stomach.
“What can I get for you?” Gini asked.
“I need to take a walk.”
“In the middle of the night?”
I nodded. “I need to cool off.”
It was 2:00 A.M. I got up out of bed, put on a robe, and walked into the
living room. I flipped on the television, looking for SportsCenter. On the
way there, I passed by the Bloomberg Channel. I stopped. They were talking about the FOMC interest rate decision.
FANCY HOST: So the Federal Reserve kept interest rates low today.
FANCIER EXPERT: Yes, they did, and thank goodness. The easy money policy is really keeping the stock market on track for a good year. No need
to ruin that.
FANCY HOST: Currencies didn’t move much on the news yesterday. Why is
that?
FANCIER EXPERT: They were looking for another 25 basis point rate cut,
and didn’t get it. Or at least a substantial change in the FOMC’s statement.
FANCY HOST: What’s next for the Fed?

book_c07.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 59

Trying to Awake from the Nightmare

59

I lost track of what they were saying and pulled a chair up to the computer desk. In the next 20 minutes, I tried to load the software, but I could
not get it to download correctly and discovered that I needed a “pass key”
to install the Amazing Forex Profits software on more than one computer.
All the while, I missed any further discussion of foreign exchange rates on
Bloomberg.
So I Googled “forex prices” and got a zillion results. One of the results
was for “Professional Currency Charting Software,” and I clicked on it. I
downloaded a free trial of the program and started it up. The software was
thankfully easy to use. I chose GBP/USD from the menu of available currencies, and here is what I saw. I have added some notes to the chart (see
Figure 7.1).
The trade had completely blown up. For sure, I had lost everything.
It had fallen over 100 pips from where I had bought the GBP/USD. All
that had happened as I was riding the subway home, just probably 20 minutes after I’d left the office. I had traded for $20 per pip. That was over
$2,000 in losses. Did I owe money to my forex dealer now?
I scrambled over to my briefcase, knocking over a plant in the process.
I didn’t bother to pick it up. Soon I found the phone number for my forex
broker. A pleasant-sounding customer service representative answered on
the first ring.
“Thank you for calling Universal Currency Brokers! How may I help
you?”
“I want to check on a trade.”

FIGURE 7.1

Harry’s trade dies.

book_c07.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 60

60

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I quickly read her my account number. Maybe she would give me a
break? Perhaps they had a one-time policy of offering mercy to hopeless
traders who had been fired earlier in the day? Surely they had the power
to reverse the trade. I could claim that I hadn’t made the trade, and argue
that I should not stand to lose money on what I didn’t mean to do in the
first place. None of this made any sense, but it was two o’clock in the
morning.
“Your account has no open trades at this time, sir.”
Oh, no. “Do I owe you money?” I asked. “I had a terrible trade today, I
think.”
“You did have a losing trade,” she answered quickly. “You bought the
GBP/USD at 1.8170 this afternoon. The trade was closed just a little while
later. You got a margin call.”
“A margin call?”
“Well, you put up $500 in margin to trade two standard lots. This reduced your available margin to $1,200. When your losses reached $1,200,
you had used up all the available margin. So we closed your trade automatically as a service to you. This leaves you with the $500 in margin in your
account.”
“As a service to me?” I noticed on my charts that the price had risen
back up afterward. I told her so. “Why not keep it open for me?”
“We did that up until a few years ago. But traders were leaving losing
trades open so long that they owed us money. That was worse.”
I immediately agreed. That left me with this fact: I had lost $1,200. One
thousand two hundred dollars. In one day. One trade.
I then hung up the phone.
When I looked up, my wife was standing beside me, looking at the
computer screen over my shoulder.
“Did you make a trade?” she asked. “This late at night?”
What was I going to tell her?

MY WIFE’S ANGRY EYES
I told Gini everything, starting with the lunch with Craig all the way up to
the time when I called the dealer and found out that my trading account
had burst into flames.
She was angry. Not about the trade—which surprised me—but about
my job.
MY WIFE: How could you let this happen?
ME: [silence]

book_c07.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 61

Trying to Awake from the Nightmare

61

There wasn’t anything smart for me to say. My wife needed to hear the
truth, but the problem was that the truth didn’t make any sense, and she
was only going to think it was a lie.
I told her: “I am not sure I had any choice in the matter at all. I mean, it
was over before it began. I got back from lunch with Craig and wham! Herbie fired me.”
“But how? On what grounds? You’ve been there 11 years!” Calling my
boss Herbie didn’t help; it only increased the notion that I wasn’t serious or
worried about any of this.
“I don’t know.” I’d been right. The truth came off worse than a lie
would have. I could have just told her a lie and it would have been much
better. Something like this:
MY WIFE: But why? Why did they fire you?
ME: I told you that I don’t know. It might have something to do with the
handicapped person.
MY WIFE: What handicapped person?
ME: The firm is suing a handicapped person—a quintiplegic Rwandan
refugee—and I sneaked a peek at the files while I was scanning them
into the system. We are suing this poor man for $20,000 because he hit
Herbie Johnson right in the crotch with his wheelchair. The firm has
seven attorneys working on it [I wipe a single tear from my eye].
MY WIFE: How terrible! How could you stand for that?
ME: Well, I didn’t. I copied the entire case file, with some very damaging
evidence that proves that Herbie was not in fact fitted with a prosthetic
you-know-what. That medical report is the smoking gun document in
the case. And I gave the entire file to the poor handicapped man’s attorney today. And my forex dealer promised to donate my losses from this
one trade to this poor man from Rwanda.
MY WIFE: You did the right thing! You are my hero!
“Hello? Hello, Harry! Are you listening to me?”
I fell back to earth and my wife’s angry eyes were staring at me. I never
got the chance to explain to Gini all about the Rwandan refugee. She just
started crying.
“So you really have no clue as to why he fired you?” She was drying her
eyes with her robe and sobbing quietly on purpose so that she did not wake
the children.
All this was very distressing. Especially because we hadn’t even
started to talk about the bad trade, which was going to make matters even
worse. And we couldn’t even get to that horrible subject until I could tell
her why I lost my job. Maybe I would get the chance to tell her about the
quintiplegic and the wheelchair.

book_c07.qxd

62

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 62

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“And we’re going to lose our benefits,” she noted. “How are we going
to pay for the pregnancy?”
I shook my head. Her worry was starting to transfer itself head on,
right to me. My leg was going to start shaking any moment, because I realized that the delivery of a healthy baby would cost over $10,000. We were
only a few months away. How was I going to raise that kind of money? I
should have demanded an extra 10 grand from Herbie.
Instead, I said: “I don’t know! Really! I don’t know. This was my worst
day in forever. It was terrible. Herbie came after me like he was hunting me
down. Angrier than I have ever seen him. Something was very wrong,
something that he thinks that I did. Something so bad that he wanted to
blame someone for it. He needed a scapegoat, and I was going to be the
one. I think that’s why they offered me so much money to leave. They’d
needed to place the blame on someone and I fit the description.”
She sniffled. “That would explain why he didn’t tell you why he was firing you. Because he knew you didn’t do anything wrong, and he didn’t want
to give you a chance to defend yourself.”
“And now they can place the blame on me and say they’ve taken care
of the problem.”
I wondered if it was Herbie who had done something wrong. “You
know,” I told her, “I could probably still talk to an attorney. There is no way
I could have done something so wrong to deserve being fired.”
“You were a good employee.”
I shrugged. We were both calming down by talking about it. “I wasn’t a
good employee. I was a great filing manager, but I took advantage of them
a lot. I had even started to do my trading on the job.”
She didn’t argue. She knew how much I disliked the job and wasn’t
going to blame me for not being thrilled about going to work every day.
“Do you think you can still trade?”
This was unexpected. I deserved a beating for the way I had acted with
forex trading. In fact, I had half decided never to take another trade. Better
to get out with a five-hundred-dollar overall loss, than trade the rest of the
account into the toilet. On the other hand, what were my job prospects?
Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey would give a rotten reference for me if
they agreed to offer one at all. And I had no other marketable skills. And I
liked trading. And I had Craig, and perhaps Craig’s mentor.
And as simply as that, I decided that from that time onward, I was
going to be a full-time trader.
“I think I can still trade,” I told Gini.
She smiled. My heart jumped. A smile popped onto my face. My skin
tingled, and a shot of happy adrenaline shot up my spine.
I could do this!

book_c08.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 63

CHAPTER 8

Charlie Flank
Goes to U.S.
National Bank

I called Craig the next day.
CRAIG: Don’t think of this as a wrench in the gearbox. Think of this as
a chance for you to pay some rent with the severance; sit down andmake a trading plan; and think about how you want your family’s future
to look. I was forced to do this after my big trading loss—most trade
traders put themselves in some kind of disaster scenario at the beginning. But you can choose what you want to do about it.
ME: Did you trade after the FOMC interest rate decision?
CRAIG: Yes, I sure did. I bought the British Pound for a quick profit. I
might have been getting out just as you were getting in.
ME: How did you know to do that?
CRAIG: I followed the immediate movement. I was ready to buy Pounds
right away, as soon as I saw price move up quickly. Price jumped up
in the first minute and then fell back down, but as soon as it continued
higher than the first move, I bought. I got in at 1.8130, and a few
moments later, I was positive by 40 pips. I was tempted to take the
money and get out. But I have a profit target at a previous level of
support and resistance, where price stopped cold several times this
year, and as recently as just a week ago. People were yelling and
screaming around me to get out of the trade as it went into the
red, but I am holding out for 1.8600. That’s 470 pips away, but it
can get there. I made up my mind before I took the trade today (see
Figure 8.1).
63

book_c08.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 64

64

FIGURE 8.1

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Craig makes up his mind.

ME: Did you learn how to do this kind of stuff on your own?
CRAIG: Mostly, yes. And with the help of a mentor and friend.
ME: How soon do you think that I can talk to your trading mentor?
CRAIG: Soon, yes.
ME: Where do I find him?
CRAIG: He’ll find you.
ME: I’ll just start studying some things about trading, maybe fix up the
house a bit, things my wife has been wanting me to do anyway. And I
can start trading when I get over this bad experience.
CRAIG: No. Don’t take any more trades right now.
ME: Why not?
CRAIG: Because you’re a horrible trader.
ME: Thanks a lot.
CRAIG: You bet. Happy to boost your spirits anytime. Listen, I gotta run.
Market’s gonna blast off here in a few minutes. Get some books. Dig in.
See if you can sneak your way onto a Wall Street trading desk. You’ll be
surprised what you can learn by sitting there for a morning. Then call
me back.
ME: Okay.

SNEAKING INTO U.S. NATIONAL BANK
I put on my only suit. I borrowed my neighbor’s briefcase. I shined my
shoes. I hadn’t looked this good for work in at least 10 years. And I was

book_c08.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 65

Charlie Flank Goes to U.S. National Bank

65

going to need to look my best indeed, because today I was going to become
Charlie Flank.
All Gini knew was that I was following up on a job lead from Craig Taylor. Perhaps I could get myself a job on a trading floor. That was everything
that she needed to know. I didn’t want to tell her I wasn’t making any
trades; she asked me twice the morning after our talk when I was going to
be making some money from full-time trading. Now that we had both committed to my career as a trader, she expected that I would work at it like a
full-time job.
But I knew that I should obey Craig’s advice. I wanted to trade—after
all, my first two trades were brilliant successes, and I had the Amazing
Forex software. It was hard enough to explain to Gini that I was going to
wait a day or two, let alone try to explain it over and over to myself.
The best way to pass the time, I decided, was to capture another
glimpse of a trading floor. Armed with my list of nine Wall Street trading superstars that I had taken from the office, I decided that I had a chance of
seeing at least one more trading operation. If I couldn’t get on the floor at
the first two or three, then I would start begging for a tour. Surely one of
the firms would allow tours.
It was Friday April 2, 2004. I took the C train to Wall Street, and at
8:15 A.M., I entered an emotionless granite building that looked as much
like a train station as a New York office building, and certainly was older
than any of its surrounding firms. I knew that U.S. National Bank had a
trading operation here, and because it was located in the heart of Wall
Street, I assumed these guys were good. There were other firms on my
list that I’d taken from Wakeman on my last day at work; I came to U.S.
National first because I wanted to visit Wall Street anyway. If I didn’t like
it here, or they didn’t let me in, I’d have my choice of three or four other
firms nearby.
When I thought about it, I realized that being the filing manager at a
law firm had paid off in an important way. The Anderson case files were
full of names of Wall Street firms and traders; after all, the case was about
how much a good trader deserved to be paid, and all I needed to look at
was the research compiled by our firm. The research file was a gold mine
of information. With more time, I could have stockpiled a ton of names,
salaries, addresses, and probably phone numbers of traders. But I’d only
had time to take the names of a few firms and individuals.
I knew that if I could investigate just one of these trading operations, I
could learn enough to convince Craig I was doing my part to be ready to
learn from him or his mentor. Craig had been right when he said that I was
a terrible trader. Who would want to work with me unless I at least learned
more?
Which was exactly what I was going to do right then at U.S. National
Bank.

book_c08.qxd

66

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 66

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I took the elevator up 20 floors and exited. There I found a front desk
that looked a lot like the one at Ernest Wellington, which protected a large
door not much different from the steel one that I had passed through to see
Anderson and Craig and 200 other wild traders. I walked confidently up to
the desk and offered a professional smile that said, “You are about to let
me in the large door.” But what I really said was:
ME: I have a file to drop off for Mr. Sutherland.
I knew from the Anderson files that Mr. Sutherland was an executive who
worked on the trading floor. My ingenious plan would now unfold like the
napkin on a fancy place setting, or some other thing that unfolds very
classy-like and easily, without any problems from the police or building
security.
BORED RECEPTIONIST: Your name. Your firm.
ME: Charlie Flank, with Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey.
I was lying a lot more these days, and getting pretty good at it, or the
people I was talking to were just getting dumber. Either way, the Bored Receptionist was going to escort me through the trading door any moment. I
could feel it.
She didn’t even verify my credentials. What a pushover! After I signed
a guest registry, she stuck a name tag on me that said VISITOR and CHARLIE FLANK, and then she unlocked the large door and let me through.
Next time I was just going to tell her to print me off a name badge and
put me on the payroll! This was easy! I had assumed that Craig had been
a genius for installing himself at a trading desk at Ernest Wellington.
Not so! I could probably get myself onto five or six other trading floors in
the next week. If sneaking onto trading floors could pay money, I could
make a living at it for sure. I was the James Bond of sneaking into Wall
Street firms!
Before I could complete my fantasy, the receptionist led me onto a
much smaller trading floor than the one I had seen at Ernest Wellington.
Maybe half as large. Probably 60 or 70 people in this room. But it wasn’t the
size of the space that seemed odd. Here everyone spoke in hushed voices
or not at all. I saw no sports sections from the Daily News. No messy
desks. Hardly any computers! While every desk had a coffee cup and a
large phone with colorful buttons, not every desk had a computer monitor.
While there had been three or four screens per desk at Ernest Wellington, I
could count on my hands the number in this room. Dark green carpet covered the floor and stopped at each cherry-wood paneled wall. There were
windows on the western and northern walls, but most of the curtains were
