
112

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

Neural networks “learn” to solve problems by transmitting
information between neurons, which are the basic processing units
of a neural network. A neural network typically includes several
layers of neurons. Network architecture determines how many layers there are, how many neurons are in each layer, how they are connected, and what transfer function is to be used. There are numerous learning paradigms, including two that are popular in financial
analysis. The first popular paradigm is a recurrent back-propagation network that learns temporal information through the order in
which the facts are presented. The second paradigm is a feed-forward back-propagation network that trains through back propagation of error, in which temporal information is encoded into the
input data by taking a preprocessed “snapshot” of the data. A typical back-prop network architecture is shown in Figure 5-7. This paradigm will be used here to illustrate network architecture.

output
Price, Direction or Signal
c

OUTPUT

t
HIDDEN

INPUTS

Technical. Fundamental and Intermarket
Input Data

Figure !&7 Simple feed-forrvard

back-propagation network.
A back-prop net ustig technical, fundamental, and
intermarket d&&The network trains by back~propagation
of error throughout the network.

CHAPTER 5 Selecting a Concept That Works

113

The back-propagation network is composed of an input layer,
one or more hidden layers, and an output layer. The input layer
contains a neuron corresponding to each input (independent) variable. The output layer contains a neuron for each (dependent) variable to be predicted. The hidden layer contains neurons that are
connected to both the input and output layers. The layers are typically fully connected, with every neuron in one layer connected to
each neuron in an adjacent layer.
The values associated with each input neuron are fed forward
into each neuron in the first hidden layer. They are then multiplied
by an appropriate weight, summed, and passed through a transfer
function to produce an output. The outputs from the first hidden
layer are then fed forward either into the next hidden layer or
directly into the output layer in networks that have only one hidden layer. The output layer’s output is the prediction made by the
network.
The number of neurons in the hidden layer is determined
through experimentation. For any nonlinear problem such as prediction of stock or futures prices, the network needs at least one
hidden layer. In addition, the transfer function should be a nonlinear, continuously differentiable function, such as the sigmoid,
which allows the network to perform nonlinear statistical modeling. Figure 5-8 presents an example of a hidden neuron.

Input Data Selection and Preprocessing

Neural network modeling is
based upon the developer’s understanding of the underlying realworld relationship between the inputs and the output. Decisions
must be made about what is to be predicted and what data will be
used as inputs in the network. “Garbage-in, garbage-out” applies
to neural networks. Knowledge of the financial markets, coupled
with the use of various tools such as principal component analysis
to find correlations between related markets, is necessary for
appropriate input data selection.
Once input data have been selected, they must be preprocessed. By reducing the number of inputs to the network, preprocessing helps it learn more easily. Two widely used preprocessing methods are known as “transformation” and “normalization.”
Transformation manipulates raw data inputs to create a single

PART 2

Conceptualization of ‘four System

Fact Selection

A fact is represented as a row of related numbers
where the first i numbers correspond to the i network inputs and
the last j numbers correspond to the j network outputs. A group of
related facts is known as a “fact set.” If two facts have exactly the
same input and output values, only one of the facts should be
included in the fact set. Once it has been defined, in most financial
applications the fact set should be separated into mutually exclusive training and testing subsets.
Back-propagation networks operate in two modes: One is a
learning mode in which the network uses facts from the training set
to modify its internal representation through weight changes. The
other is a recall mode in which the network processes inputs from
the test set and utilizes its previously learned representation to generate associated outputs. The relative performance on the test set of
various trained networks is used to determine which net should be
incorporated into the final application.

Figure 54 An example of a hidden neuron.
Neural nehvorks are composed of individual, interconnected,
processing elements called “neurons.”

input to a net. Normalization transforms a single data input to distribute the data evenly and scale the data to match the range of the
input neurons.
In most neural network applications, transformation involves
algebraic or statistical manipulation of the input data. In financial
forecasting applications, a wide variety of technical indicators,
commonly used by traders to interpret market behavior, can be
used as transforms. Preprocessed inputs might include differences,
ratios, and moving averages of the open, high, low, close, volume,
and open interest raw data. Each neuron in the input layer represents one of the prPprocessed~inputs.
Various transformation and normalization methods can be
explored, since some are more appropriate than others for specific
applications. Once the network architecture has been selected and
the inputs have been chosen and preprocessed, data facts must be
selected.

kining and Testing

Once the facts have been selected, they are presented to the network serially during training. The weights, which
allow the network to adapt its internal representation when modeling a problem, are typically initialized with small randomly
assigned weights. If the weights are initially set to the same value,
the network might never learn since error changes are proportional
to the weight values. For each pass through the training set, the
network computes a measure of the error between its generated
output and the desired output for each output in the output layer.
The errors are then propagated backward through the network,
layer by layer, altering the connection weights between the neurons
in order to minimize the total error associated with each output.
Each time the weights change, the network is taking a step on
a multidimensional surface, representing the overall error space.
During training the network is traveling along the surface, trying
to find the lowest point or minimum error. The weight changes are
proportional to a training parameter called the “learning rate.”
Other training parameters that can be adjusted during the training
process include temperature, gain, and noise.
With various training parameters, preprocessing methods,
and architectural configurations that can be explored, an auto-

116

P.4RT 2

conceptualiration

of Your system

mated training and testing regime that integrates testing with
training is needed. Tools such as genetic algorithms and simulated
annealing can be used to expedite searching these parameter
spaces. Genetic algorithms are effective for many parameter optimization tasks. Simulated annealing automates learning rate
adjustments during training by including a variable temperature
term that affects the learning rate. When the temperature is high,
learning is rapid. When the temperature drops, learning slows
down as the network settles upon a solution.
Ouertraining
Overtraining, analogous to curve fitting of rule-based
trading systems, is one of the major pitfalls that must be avoided
when developing neural networks. Overtraining occurs when a
network memorizes the subtleties and idiosyncrasies specific to the
training set, lessening its ability to generalize to new data. When
overtraining occurs, a network performs well on the training set,
but poorly on an out-of-sample test set and later during actual trading. To avoid overtraining, network training should be halted periodically at predetermined intervals and then run in recall mode on
the test set to evaluate the network’s performance on predetermined error criteria. Then the training resumes from the point at
which it was halted. This automated process continues iteratively
until the performance on the test set begins to degrade, suggesting
that the network has begun to overtrain. All interim results that
met the error criteria are evaluated further.
Error Sto~istics Another important network design decision concerns which error statistics to use for training and testing. One measure might be the difference between the actual calculated statistic
such as a moving-average value and the network’s output. This difference would be calculated for each fact in the test set, summed,
and divided by the number of facts in the test set. This is a standard
error measure called “average error.” Various error measures
include average absolute error, sum-of-squares error, and rootmean-squared (RMS) error, After a neural network model has been
selected, it wiil need to be retrained periodically. Ongoing research
should be conducted to modify the inputs, outputs, architecture,
and overall implementation of then testing and training process for

CHAPTER 5

Selecting a Concept That Works

117

the purpose of improving network performance and predictive
accuracy.
You cannot expect to design an effective neural network financial forecasting application unless you have considerable trading
experience, programming and mathematics expertise, and the time
to devote to the task. Successful development of a neural network
apphcation is a combination of both “art” and “science.” This
endeavor can be extremely time consuming and labor intensive,
even for a group of experts working collectivelv.
I speak from experience. In 1991 the Predictive Technologies
Group, the research and development division of my firm, introduced VantagePoint Intermarket Analysis software, after experimenting with intermarket analysis since the mid-1980s.
VantagePoint applies neural networks to intermarket analysis in
order to predict market trends, moving averages, and next-day
prices for various financial futures markets. Currently there are 21
custom-designed VantagePoint programs for currencies, interest
rate markets, stock indices, and the energy complex which allow
traders to benefit from intermarket analysis, without having to
reinvent the wheel or become rocket scientists,
Practical Applications

While used extensively by traders to identify trends, simple moving averages, due to their mathematical construction, are considered a lagging indicator. This limitation has presented an enormous
challenge to technical analysts for decades. Continuing research
directed at reducing the lag has resulted in a steady stream of modifications to this relatively simple, yet effective, technical indicator.
[These are discussed extensively in Chapter 8.1

Moving-Averages Primer A moving average smoothes out fluctuations in prices to demonstrate an underlying directional trend. In a
typical moving-average system, a crossover oscillator, involving
either two moving averages or a price and a moving average, is
developed. Entry and exit points are determined when one indicator crosses above or below the other indicator. For instance, a trader
might rely upon Donchian’s 5-day versus a ZO-day moving-average method to determine entry and exit points

Still, moving averages are slow to react at turning points.
Traditional moving-average systems typically get in and out of
trades after a change in market direction has occurred-often by
several days-which gives back profits and can turn winning
trades into losers. Additionally, crossover systems tend to generate
false signals during sideways or nontrending markets, resulting in
whipsaws when alternating buy and sell signals are triggered as
the moving averages crisscross one another.
Through system testing, the size of the moving averages can
be optimized in an effort to tailor them to each market’s price
behavior and to find the best crossovers that will capture the
“turns” in that market and help reduce the lag. Additionally, other
smoothing methods can be used in conjunction with moving averages to reduce the lag further, resulting in trading strategies that
presumably will be more responsive to abrupt changes in the market. These include the use of price filters or sensitivity bands surrounding the moving averages and the addition of a third moving
average, both of which were part of ProfitTaker’s
original system
architecture. Other widely used methods include Bollinger bands
and the popular 4-9-IS-day moving-average combination.

Forecasting Mooing Auerages

Of all the variations on simple movingaverage approaches that have been developed to date, displacing
moving averages probably comes the closest to what is desired,
since it is an attempt to convert them into an “anticipatory” technical indicator. Yet even a displaced moving average has one glaring
weakness: the simplistic assumption that the moving-average value
at a future time will be the same as its calculated value today.
Basically, this is nothing other than a primitive prediction of the
moving-average value for a time period in the future, in which that
value is assumed to be identical to today’s calculated moving-average value-a highly unrealistic assumption under real-world trading conditions. Why not take this concept one step further and actually predict moving averages? By doing so, their smoothing benefits
are retained, while their lag is totnl2y eliminated once and for all.

Refuted fntermarkets Additionally, by incorporating intermarket
inputs into the neural network design, the moving-average predic-

tions are not limited to single-market inputs. In the case of the
VantagePoint T-bond program, for instance, the inputs into the
forecast of the moving averages take into consideration the open,
high, low, close, volume, and open interest for the past 10 years
from actual T-bond contracts during their most actively traded
periods, plus nine related markets (T-bond cash, NY Light Crude
Oil, CRB Index, deutschemark, US dollar index, Eurodollar, Comex
gold, Japanese yen, and S&P 500 Index) that have been determined
to have a significant effect on Treasury bonds.
Since correctly identifying trend direction is crucial to sucicessful trading, trendforecnsting, compared with trend,following,
offers a promising new way for traders to identify trends and
changes in their direction as they are happening, not after the fact.
Coupling neural networks with intermarket analysis, Vantagel’oint
forecasts trends by predicting moving averages for up to 4 days in
the future. To do this, VantagePoint is composed of five separate
neural networks that are each responsible for predicting a particular output variable. One neural network predicts tomorrow’s high,
a second predicts tomorrow’s low, and a third predicts a “neural
index” which indicates when the market is about to make a top or a
bottom. The fourth network predicts what a 5-day moving average
of closes will be 2 days in thefuture, while the fifth network predicts
what a lo-day moving average of closes will be 4 days in thefuture.
While the moving-average predictions are used to determine
trend direction, the predicted highs and lows are used to set entry
and exit points and stops. This predicted high-low range is analogous to support and resistance lines in traditional single-market
technical analysis, except that VantagePoint’s predicted daily range
is based on the pattern recognition capabilities of the neural net,work coupled with the intermarket analysis of 10 related markets.
Position traders utilize the predicted highs and lows to help
set entry points, and then use the predicted high-low range on subsequent days to tighten stops. For example, if you are long Treasury
bonds and the market is expected to continue to move up tomorrow, you might set a trailing stop for tomorrow a few ticks below
tomorrow’s predicted low which acts as a support level. This
would decrease the likelihood of being stopped out prematurely as
the result of intraday volatility in the market, and yet protect prof-

its in the event of an abrupt market downturn in which the predicted low is breached.
The predictions of the next day’s high and low are useful for
determining entry and exit points for day trading as well. If the
forecasted indicators suggest that tomorrow will be an up day, day
traders can wait for the market to trade down toward the predicted
low and then enter a long position a few ticks above the predicted
low, to be closed out intraday just below the predicted high. The
reverse would involve entering a short position just below the predicted high on a day expected to be down and exiting the position a
few ticks above the predicted low. This may be done several times
daily.

necessarily an expert in another, and (2) the experts seemed to be
more concerned with proving (or disproving) their theories than
with the issue of whether or not the concept is tradable. Since I
believe that almost any concept is tradable, I thought it would be
easier for me to discuss the concepts in general terms and then indicate how one might trade them.
Basically, there are three types of concepts which presume there is
sofne order to the markets. All these concepts function to predict turning points in the market. I am making some gross oversimplifications in discussing them, so I ask the indulgence of any experts in
the various concepts described.

Editor’s Comments Obviously, there are numerous procedures that
you can do with neural networks. Mendelsohn is absolutely correct
in saying that you must thoroughly understand what you are
doing-both with respect to neural networks and with respect to
financial modeling. When you read and thoroughly understand the
subsequent chapters, you’ll probably realize that there are vast
untapped areas to apply neural networks to-such as exits and
position sizing.

Human Behavior Has a Cycle

THERE’S AN ORDER TO THE UNIVERSE
The idea that there is an order to the universe is extremely popular.
People want to understand how the markets work, so it is most
appealing to them to be able to find some underlying structure.
They believe, of course, that once you know the underlying structure, you can predict market movements. In many cases, such theories are even more exact because they attempt to predict market
turning points. This naturally appeals to the psychological bias that
most people have of wanting to be right and to have control over
the markets. As a result, they want to catch market turning points.
In addition, it’s a highly marketable idea to sell to the public. There
are a number of different types of theories involving market order,
including Gann, Elliott Wave, astrological theories, etc.
I elected to write this party of this chapter myself because (1)
someone who is an expert ins one market-orderliness theory is not

The first concept says that the markets are a function of human
behavior and that the motives of human beings can be characterized by a certain structure. The most well-known structure of this
type is Elliott Wave theory. Here one assumes that the impulses of
fear and greed follow a distinct wave pattern. Basically, the market
is thought to consist of five up waves followed by three corrective
waves. For example, the major upthrust of the market would consist of five waves up (with waves 2 and 4 being in the opposite
direction) followed by three waves down (with the middle wave
being in the opposite direction). Each wave has a distinct characteristic, with the third major wave in the series of five being the
most tradable. However, the theory gets much more complex
because there are waves within waves. In other words, there are
Elliott Waves of different magnitudes. For example, the first wave
of the major movement would consist of another whole sequence
of five waves followed by three corrective waves. Elliott, in fact,
decided that there were nine categories of magnitude of waves,
ranging from the Grand Supercycle to the subminuette waves.
Certain rules aid the Elliott Wave theoretician in making decisions about the market. There are also variations to the rules in that
waves may be stretched or compressed and there are some pattern
variations. The nature of those rules and variations is beyond the
scope of this discussion, but the rules do allow you to arrive at market
turning points that are tradable. In other words, the task one has in

“assigning” order to the market is one of determining which wave
series was responsible for any given turning point.
Physical Systems Influence Human Behavior in Predictable Patterns
The second concept of order in the markets is based on the aspects
of physical systems in the universe. The logic of looking at physical
systems is based on the following assumptions: (1) Market movements are based upon the behavior of human beings; (2) human
beings are influenced, both physically and emotionally, by the various physical systems and the energy they put out; therefore, (3) it
seems logical that if there are patterns to those physical energies,
then they should have strong predictable effects on markets.
For example, scientists have shown that there are regular
cycles to sunspots. Sunspots are actually a release of electromagnetic energy from the sun and can have profound effects on the
earth.
Large amounts of sunspot activity will cause huge amounts
of charged particles to be trapped in the earths magnetosphere.
This seems to protect the earth from some of the harmful effects of
the sun. In addition, the most intense periods of sunspot activity,
as one might expect if this theory were true, seem to correlate with
the high points in civilization. We’re currently in one! In contrast,
low periods of sunspot activity seem to correlate with what might
be termed declines in civilization. Obviously, if such a theory is
valid and if sunspot activity is predictable, then one would expect
sunspot activity to have a strong effect on what happens in the
market.
There are numerous attempts to correlate and predict markets
based upon major physical systems such as the activity of the sun.
It is very easy to put together enough best-case examples to prove’
to others--or yourself-that these theories are correct. I’ve seen it
happen hundreds of times because there is a simple perceptual bias
that will convince people of certain relationships from just a few
well-chosen examples. Nevertheless, there is a big difference
between theory and reality.
John Nelson-a radio propagation specialist-was able to predict 6-hour intervals of radio propagation quality at 88 percent
