
I

111

112

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

SINGLE VERSUS MULTIPLE INDICATORS
Indicators can be used one at a time or in combination. To better understand this, it is important to know that indicators come in two very different types: overlaid and independent.
An overlaid indicator is one that is put in the same space as the price
chart itself. A good example is the moving average indicator. This line is
plotted directly on top of the price chart and is thus laid over the original chart. An independent indicator, on the other hand, appears in its own
separate window. This window can appear above or below the price window so that the time series lines up, but it is not within the price chart
itself.
If you choose to use more than one indicator, those that you choose
can be any combination of overlaid or independent indicators. For example, you might choose to put (1) a 20-day moving average, (2) a 50-day moving average, (3) a 200-day moving average, (4) a MACD histogram, and (5)
an RSI study on a chart. Of these five indicators, the first three are overlaid,
and the last two are independent. (Thus, you would wind up with three
stacked chart panes: one with the price chart and the other two with the
MACD and the RSI.)
This chapter focuses on using just one indicator at a time. In Chapter
7, you will learn how to edit the parameters of individual indicators as well
as how to combine indicators into Study Sets.

MOVING AVERAGES
One of the most popular and simple indicators is the moving average. There
are a number of kinds of moving averages (simple, exponential, displaced,
bands, and so on), but as was mentioned earlier, the purpose of this chapter
isn’t to address every possible permutation of every indicator; instead, its
purpose is to understand the basics so that you can apply that knowledge
to any of the hundreds of indicators available.
The purpose of a moving average is to smooth the price data in such
a way as to filter out the noise—the daily up-and-down price movements.
The computation of a simple moving average is the sum of “n” number of
prices (typically, the closing price) divided by “n.” For instance, suppose
that over a five-day period, the following closing prices existed for a given
stock:
Day 1: $12.50
Day 2: $13.75

Indicators in Action

113

Day 3: $13.27
Day 4: $14.23
Day 5: $14.05
The five-day moving average, as computed for Day 5, would be the sum
of the prior five days ($67.80) divided by 5, which equals 13.56. By computing this value on a continuous basis, and plotting the line graph of the moving average, ProphetCharts is able to display a smoothed representation of
price action.
Look at the chart in Figure 6.1, which is a price chart of Nucor Corporation (symbol NUE) with a plot of its 20-day simple moving average (which
is the smooth line). Creating this study is simply a matter of (1) opening
the Technical Studies module and (2) double-clicking on the study desired,
which, in this case, is Simple Moving Average.
There are a number of things to notice about this chart:

r In the upper-left corner of ProphetCharts is the notation MA(20)
last=110.4075. This is a shorthand way of ProphetCharts indicating
that the smooth line is a 20-day moving average whose last value is
$110.4075. If you are using multiple studies, a legend will appear with
an abbreviation for each study used and a colored line to indicate
which color corresponds with what study.

FIGURE 6.1 The price of Nucor, which has stayed above the 20-day moving average for many months, crosses beneath it, indicating a sell signal.

114

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

r The moving average is represented as a smooth line graph, as opposed
to the open, high, low, and close bars of the price chart. By its very
nature, this line is a lagging indicator; in other words, it is based on
old data (in this instance, the past 20 days) and is therefore behind the
price trend. But that is the value of this indicator: because it lags the
prices, it provides a slower-moving representation of the general price
action and can suggest important directional change when the price
crosses above or below it.
r Once the price pushed above the moving average in January, it stayed
above that level until late April, denoted with a large arrow in this
graph. This is known as a crossover, and in this instance, the price
crossing below the moving average would be interpreted as a sell signal. So if you were long this stock at about $70, when the price moved
clearly above the indicator, you would have held it until about $110,
when the price finally dipped below the moving average.
The basic principle at work here—and you will see this many times
with technical indicators—is that positive crossovers generate bullish signals and negative crossovers generate bearish signals. The more sensitive
an indicator, the more volatile it is, which means that whipsaws are a common and dangerous phenomenon. A whipsaw takes place when signals are
so common that you would, in theory, be jumping in and out of a stock far
too frequently, and with poor results. The chart in Figure 6.1 illustrates a
smooth and useful indicator, because the price was plainly above the moving average until a very clear signal was generated. If the price had crossed
under and over the indicator 10 times during the course of the chart, it
would obviously be much less useful.
Moving averages can be set to virtually any length of time. To take an
extreme example, a one-day moving average would match the closing price
exactly (and would therefore simply be a line graph of the price chart).
The shortest time span typically seen with moving averages is 10 days, and
other common lengths include 30-, 50-, 100-, and 200-day moving averages.
The longer the period, the slower (and smoother) the moving average
is. A 200-day moving average is going to lag the price far more than, for
instance, a 30-day moving average. Generally speaking, the longer the time
period you use, the less frequent the signals will be. If you are a relatively
conservative trader, a 200-day moving average will be far better suited to
you than a shorter time horizon.
Figure 6.2 provides a good example of this. The security OIH made a
broad upward movement, nearly doubling in price during the time frame
shown. A buy signal, highlighted with the arrow, took place early in December when the price moved above the 200-day moving average. Even
though it dipped close to this moving average a couple of times, it stayed

Indicators in Action

115

FIGURE 6.2 The buy signal is generated here when the price of OIH crosses above
its 200-day moving average.

above it, which means you would have stayed in the position if you were
using this indicator as the basis of your trade. A shorter moving average
would have generated sell signals much earlier.
Zooming in much closer on the same graph (Figure 6.3), it is much easier to see exactly when the crossover took place. In this instance, the price
got very close to the moving average, touching it exactly on the day before
the crossover. But until the price truly crosses over, there is no signal. On
December 5, the price pushed over the 200-day moving average, and the
stock ultimately tripled in price after the crossover (only the first portion
of the move is shown in these graphs).
The simple moving average is the easiest to calculate and understand.
However, it treats all price data equally; in other words, with a 20-day moving average, the price 20 days ago is just as important as the current day.
If you would prefer to give a greater weighting to more recent data and a
lesser weighting to older data, use an exponential moving average (EMA).
The mathematics need not be understood here—the computer does all that
work—but the concept is that the indicator does not lag as severely since
recent price data have a heavier weighting.

116

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.3 A close-up of the OIH graph, highlighting the point where the price
crossed above the 200-day moving average.

There is even a kind of moving average that can be shifted forward or
backward in time to compensate for the lag in the indicator. It is called
the displaced moving average (DMA). No matter which moving average is
used, the basic principles are the same in how to apply it to trading.
Figure 6.4 provides an example of the DMA in action. This graph is a
somewhat more realistic example than the earlier moving average graphs,
because prices do not always behave perfectly with respect to indicators. In other words, whipsaws are very common, and some amount of
discretion is needed to ascertain when a crossover has taken place and
whether a crossover in the opposite direction negates the earlier signal or is
simply noise.
In this case, symbol ESRX crossed beneath the 100-day DMA. This signaled the end of a rather long uptrend in the stock and could have been
interpreted as a sell signal. The price moved above the DMA, then below,
then above, then below again before staying clearly beneath the indicator
and falling in earnest. In this example, interpreting the violation of the DMA
as a change in trend was the right move, since ultimately the stock fell hard,
even though it took a few weeks to truly do so.
To understand the premise behind crossovers, remember that there
are three basic directions that a stock (or any financial instrument) can
be heading: up, down, or sideways. A market moving up makes a series of
higher lows and higher highs, creating stairsteps that generally push prices
higher. A market moving down makes a series of lower lows and lower
highs, also creating stairsteps, but moving lower. A market that fits neither
of these trend definitions is going sideways.

Indicators in Action

117

FIGURE 6.4 Symbol ESRX crossed beneath the moving average early in March and
started falling in earnest by late April.

Indicators such as moving averages are useful during trending markets,
be they up or down. If used in a sideways market, a lagging indicator will
create little more than false signals, frustration, and capital losses.
Until now, the examples shown have been for bullish moves. Figure 6.5
illustrates the DMA as a bearish signal, which would be useful to either (1)
close a long position or (2) sell the stock short, aiming to buy it back later
at a lower price. At a minimum, such a signal would at least let you know
not to be long the stock in the first place.
For this stock, Home Depot (symbol HD), the price briefly dipped below its 200-day DMA early in May, popped back above the DMA for a few
trading sessions, and then once again fell below the DMA, staying beneath
the indicator for many months to come. This signal preceded a nearly
60 percent fall in the price of the security.
About 11 months later, the stock had formed a fairly decent base in the
low 20s, picked up steam, and crossed back above the DMA. As before, the
price initially crossed the indicator, fell to the other side for a few sessions,
and then very clearly crossed to the other side. This kind of noise is very
common, and it is up to your judgment and discretion whether to make

118

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.5 How crossovers work in both directions. After Home Depot crossed
beneath its moving average, it fell for many months afterward. The price ﬁrmed up
and crossed above the moving average again, preceding a handsome move higher.

a trade at the first sign of a crossover or whether to wait for a very plain
confirmation that the price is well away from the indicator and is not likely
to be crossing it again.
Because lagging indicators by definition will trail the price movement
of a security, you will not get in or out of a position at the optimum time.
That is the price you pay for catching broad trends. It is virtually impossible
to pinpoint the precise top or bottom of any market. But if you are able to
capture 80 percent of the movement from one extreme to another, you will
do very well as a trader.
Figure 6.6 shows a good example of this with the stock Yahoo!
(YHOO). The indicator used is a slow-moving 200-day DMA. The price of
this stock bottomed at about $4.50 (which, as with all the examples in this
book, is a split-adjusted price) and crossed above its DMA at about $7.50.
So the price of the stock had moved up handsomely before a buy signal
was generated. The stock got as high at $40 and then started softening up,
and eventually the price crossed beneath the DMA at about $34.
The move from $4.50 to $40 was about a ninefold move in the stock,
whereas the move from $7.50 (the entry point, based on the DMA) to $34

Indicators in Action

119

FIGURE 6.6 An owner of Yahoo! might have held on to YHOO from $7 to $34
using just a moving average, since the stock stayed clearly above it during most of
this graph prior to the crossunder.

(the exit point, based on the DMA) was only about a fivefold move. But
the fact is that only in hindsight could one pinpoint these precise low and
high values, and with a relatively conservative approach, the majority of
the upward movement was still captured.

BOLLINGER BANDS
Bollinger Bands is a widely used indicator, which, like moving averages,
is an overlaid indicator. As the name implies, Bollinger Bands are made
up of more than one part—there is an upper band (which is two standard
deviations above the simple moving average) and a lower band (which is
two standard deviations below the simple moving average).
Figure 6.7 illustrates what Bollinger Bands look like in ProphetCharts.
As with any other indicator, applying these bands is simply a matter of double-clicking the study from the Technical Studies module.
ProphetCharts makes it easy to see where the price is relative to the

120

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.7 The Bollinger Bands are shaded to make the price’s relative position
easy to see.

boundaries created by the Bollinger Bands since it shades in the area contained by the bands. These bands make it easy to view both volatility and
price levels (relative to past history) over any period of time.
Bollinger Bands aren’t particularly useful for ascertaining future price
movements. Instead, they provide insight as to where a price is relative
to its past action. If prices are mashed up against the upper band quite
tightly, it indicates that the price is relatively high. If prices are pushed
down hard against the lower band, it indicates that prices are relatively
low. Just because prices are at the upper band doesn’t mean they will soon
be going down, nor does it mean prices will go up if prices are at the lower
band. But you can at least understand which direction is more likely based
on the prices’ relative position to the shaded portion of the banded area, as
shown in Figure 6.8.
Bank of America’s stock (symbol BAC) moved outside the Bollinger
Bands in Figure 6.9. It is possible, although not very common, for a price
to do this when it is making an extremely fast move either up or down. A
price can sometimes stretch and even break its bands in this manner, but
eventually, the price will return to the range-bound domain.

Indicators in Action

121

FIGURE 6.8 A price can cling to an extreme for many trading days.

THE RIBBON STUDY
One of the most interesting—some might even say beautiful—studies available in ProphetCharts is known as the Ribbon Study. This study is comprised of any number of moving averages of various periods. In Figure 6.10,
a Ribbon Study made up of 16 different moving averages is shown, each of
which has a different time period (10-day, 20-day, 30-day, and so on).
The Ribbon Study is unusual in that it creates somewhat of a threedimensional representation of price movement (Figure 6.11). When a price
is moving generally higher or lower, the moving averages eventually all
move in the same direction and get evenly wide from one another. When a
price begins to move sideways (or change direction altogether), the moving
averages get tighter and coil up into a band, almost as if the threads of the
study are forming a rope. During direction shifts of a security’s price, you
can actually see the band turn as it twists from one direction to another.
This coiling and turning is helpful in knowing when prices are consolidating and, ultimately, changing direction.

122

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.9 Sometimes a price movement is so sudden and unidirectional that it
stretches the Bollinger Band in the extreme.

FIGURE 6.10 The ribbons were tightly wound here, preceding the major movement of this stock.

Indicators in Action

123

FIGURE 6.11 The ribbon study can often take on a three-dimensional eﬀect, as
shown here, as the ribbons twist into a new direction.

Figure 6.12 shows a close-up view of the area called out from Figure 6.11. This stock, NutriSystem (symbol NTRI) made an incredible upward move from $1.50 to about $70 in just a couple of years. The individual
strands of the ribbon were moving up together, then started heading down,
and then twisted back up again. This twist of the ribbon preceded an astonishing move higher, and the twisting of this study demonstrated that
although the prices were basing for a short period, the core direction of
the stock was up, and the energy released after this coiling was sufficient
to propel NTRI far higher.
The Ribbon Study is just noise for a stock that isn’t heading in any
particular direction (Figure 6.13). The threads of the study remain compressed, twisting this way and that, indicating no plain movement.
The Ribbon Study is most useful for a stock that is about to commence
a broad move up or down, as shown in Figure 6.14. These moves are usually preceded by a compressing of the threads. The more compressed the
study, the more powerful the subsequent move, particularly if the ribbon
twists and changes direction. The application of this indicator is very similar to that of the moving average except that, because there are many moving averages involved, you have the added benefit of seeing multiple time
periods represented all at once.

124

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.12 This close-up of the symbol NTRI illustrates the detail of how the
ribbons twist to change direction.

FIGURE 6.13 A stock stuck in a trading range, such as YHOO during the time
shown here, results in a ribbon study that remains relatively compressed.

Indicators in Action

125

FIGURE 6.14 When a stock price is moving sideways, the ribbons will become
denser.

LINEAR REGRESSION CHANNEL
One study, which is somewhat like Bollinger Bands in its application, is the
Linear Regression Channel. There are actually a variety of Linear Regression studies, but they all are based on the same principle: a trend line is laid
down that corresponds to an equilibrium in price. That is, a line is drawn
that is the best fit based on past price activity. Two other lines are then
laid down—one above and one below—that are the same distance from
the equilibrium line, with distance based on past price volatility.
What this results in is a channel with an upper half and a lower half.
Some Linear Regression studies have straight lines, and others are curved.
Figure 6.15 shows one style of Linear Regression Channel with curved
lines. The prices are generally bound by the lines, bouncing between the
upper and lower boundaries and hugging the center line. As the area with
the rounded rectangle illustrates, the prices sometimes do go outside their
boundaries. These extremes are usually corrected, however, which means
that these outlier prices can be viewed as special buying or selling opportunities.
While the prior figure shows price action that had dipped beneath
the lower boundary, Figure 6.16 shows a stock whose upward movement was so swift and strong that it moved above its upper boundary.

126

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.15 A linear regression study will typically keep a boundary on prices,
but sometimes price movement is so extreme it goes outside the lines.

FIGURE 6.16 Another example of the price movement being so extreme that it
moves outside the normal range of the linear regression channel.

Indicators in Action

127

Events like this can sometimes be exploited for quick trading profits,
since the stock has moved to an extreme level based on its past price
behavior.

PARABOLIC STOP AND REVERSAL
(PSAR)
The Parabolic Stop And Reversal (PSAR for short) was developed by famed
technician Welles Wilder in 1978. The PSAR is a wonderfully simple indicator to use, and its express purpose is to provide a stop price for a given
position. The PSAR provides a trailing stop so that a person knows when
to get out of (and, if he is a particularly aggressive trader, even reverse) a
position.
Unlike most other indicators, the PSAR is drawn using not lines but
dots. If the dots are below the prices, it indicates the stock is moving
upward. If the dots are above the prices, it indicates the stock is moving downward. If the price touches or goes beyond its dot for a current
day, the PSAR flips and moves to the other side of the price movement
(Figure 6.17).
So, at any given time, the current PSAR dot will be either above or below the current day’s price bar. Strictly speaking, you would reset your stop

FIGURE 6.17 The PSAR indicator is very easy to use: be long if the price is above
the PSAR and short if the price is below it.

128

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 6.18 When a price bar pushes through a PSAR level, the PSAR ﬂips from
either bullish to bearish or vice versa.

price every day based on the PSAR value, if you were using this indicator
devoutly. Take a look at the chart of symbol HANS in Figure 6.18. The activity for most of April had prices moving higher, and the PSAR was below
the prices. The last two price bars on the graph, however, have the PSAR
above instead of below the prices. The reason is that the second-to-last
price bar touched the PSAR dot, flipping this dot’s location from beneath
the price bar to above it. Until such time as the prices touch a PSAR dot,
the PSAR will remain in this bearish position.

MACD INDICATOR
So far in this chapter, the indicators discussed have been overlays.
The Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) indicator is an
independent study, since it is displayed in its own graph pane instead of
being put on top of the price chart.
As the name suggests, the MACD is based on moving averages. There
are three moving averages involved:
1. A fast-moving one.
2. A slow-moving one.
3. A trigger.
