Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits
and Other Writings


INTRODUCING WILEY INVESTMENT CLASSICS

'

There are certain books that have redefined the way we see the worlds of
finance and investing—books that deserve a place on every investor’s shelf.
Wiley Investment Classics will introduce you to these memorable books,
which are just as relevant and vital today as when they were first published.
Open a Wiley Investment Classic and rediscover the proven strategies, mar-
ket philosophies, and definitive techniques that continue to stand the test
of time.


Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits
and Other Writings

—_
rri-o

W)

WILEY
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


Copyright © 1996, 2003 by Philip A. Fisher. All rights reserved.

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.

!
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning,
or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy free to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax
978-750-4470, or on the web at www. copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, e-mail:
permcoordinator@wiley.com.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically
disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitabic for your situation. You
should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author
shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not
limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at 800-762-2974,
outside the United States at 317-572-3993 or fax 31/-572-4002.

Wiley also publishes its books in a varicty of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books

For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Fisher, Philip A.
Common stocks and uncommon profits and other writings / by Philip A. Fisher.
p. cm. — (Wiley investment classic)

Originally published: Common stocks and uncommon profits. Harper & Brothers,
1958.

Includes index.

ISBN 0-471-44550-9

1. Stocks. 2. Investments. I. Fisher, Philip A. Common stocks and uncommon
profits. I. Title. III. Series.

HG4661.F5 1996

332.83'223—de20 95-51449

Printed in the United States of America.

10 9 8 7


This book is dedicated
to all investors, large and small,
who do NOT adhere to the philosophy:
“I have already made up my mind,
don’t confuse me with facts.”


h


Contents

Preface What I Learned from My Father’s Writings
Kenneth L. Fisher

Introduction
Kenneth L. Fisher

PART ONE COMMON STOCKS AND
UNCOMMON PROFITS
Preface
1. Clues from the Past
2. What “Scuttlebutt” Can Do
3. What to Buy: The Fifteen Points to Look for in a
Common Stock
What to Buy: Applying This to Your Own Needs
When to Buy
‘When to Sell: And When Not To
The Hullabaloo about Dividends
Five Don'ts for Investors
Five More Don'ts for Investors
How I Go about Finding a Growth Stock
Summary and Conclusion

mew aONnaus

moe

PART TWO CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS
SLEEP WELL

Epigraph
Introduction
1. The First Dimension of a Conservative
Investment

xi

31
34
44

47
79
89
105
114
123
135
162
172

176
177

180


viii
2.

3.
4.
5
6

Contents

The Second Dimension

The Third Dimension

The Fourth Dimension

More about the Fourth Dimension
Still More about the Fourth Dimension

PART THREE DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT

PHILOSOPHY

Dedication to Frank E. Block

1.

2.

3.

4,

Origins of a Philosophy
The Birth of Interest
Formative Experiences
First Lessons in the School of Experience
Building the Basics
The Great Bear Market
A Chance to Do My Thing
From Disaster, Opportunity Springs
A Foundation Is Formed
Learning from Experience
Food Machinery as an Investment Opportunity
Zigging and Zagging
Contrary, but Correct
Patience and Performance
To Every Rule, There Are Exceptions... But
Not Many
An Experiment with Market Timing
Reaching for Price, Poregoing Opportunity
The Philosophy Matures
E Pluribus Unum
History versus Opportunity
Lessons from the Vintage Years
Do Few Things Well
Stay or Sell in Anticipation of Possible
Market Downturns?
In and Out May Be Out of the Money
The Long Shadow of Dividends
Is the Market Efficient?
The Fallacy of the Efficient Market

187
198
207
213
218

226
227
228
229
231
232
234
235
236
237
238
239
242.
243
244

247
248
249
252
253
255
257
259

260
263
264
266
267


Contents

The Raychem Corporation

Raychem, Dashed Expectations, and the Crash
Raychem and the Efficient Market
Conclusion

Appendix Key Factors in Evaluating Promising Firms
Functional Factors
People Factors
Business Characteristics

Index

270
271
274
275

279
279
281
282

283




Preface

What | Learned from
My Father’s Writings

This book grows on you. I know because it grew on me. It took me
about fifteen years to understand Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits.
When I first read the book, it made darned little sense. I was eight. It
was a waste of the start of a perfectly good summer vacation. Too many
big words that required I use a dictionary—ugh. But it was my father’s
book, and I was proud of him. I had heard at school and from neigh-
bors and had read in the local paper that his book was making a big
splash. I was told that it was the very first investment book ever to have
made the New York Times bestseller list, whatever that meant. I felt it was
my absolute duty to read it. So I did, and when completed, I was glad
to be finished and free for the summer.

Who knew that I would later go on to found a large investment
management firm serving thousands of clients, write my own books,
and become the sixth-longest-running columnist in Forbes magazine’s
formidable eighty-plus-year history or that I would write numerous
annual “Best of the Year” investment book reviews and recommend
dozens of books over the decades to readers? And, yes, maybe it helped
in route that I could say I’d read my first investment book when I was
eight, even if I didn’t understand it.

The book next seriously crossed my mind at age twenty as I faced
college graduation. Father had offered me a job working with him and


xii Preface

my older brother. Anxious, but skeptical, I was curious to see if this job
was really an opportunity. So, | read Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits
again. (There were only a few words I didn’t understand this time.)

Reading about my father’s fifteen points to look for in a stock, I
wondered if I could apply them to a local stock. If so, | thought this
would affirm the benefit of working with my father.

Well, it didn’t work. There was a local publicly-traded lumber stock,
Pacific Lumber, that looked like a good profit opportunity. But the few
folks I approached weren’t impressed with some wanna-be kid-sleuth
seeking competitive detail who was clearly ill-prepared to analyze or do
anything with it. I didn’t even know how to ask meaningful questions.
After being shut out by the first few folks I approached with my fact-
seeking questions, | gave up. But it showed me that I needed quite a bit
of polishing.

Working for my father was a bumpy ride, a bit like my first profes-
sional stock purchase—a reverse “ten bagger”: it fell from ten to one.
I tell you all this only so you can see that even a kid in his twenties,
without a lifetime at the top of his school class, having never attended a
big-name university, and with no major accomplishments under his belt
to brag on, even that kid could go on and in just a few years learn to
effectively use the principles in this book. And so can you.

THE FIFTEEN POINTS

Ultimately, when you're a young man starting out in the industry as I was
and haven’t yet bought any stocks, figuring out what to buy seems
immediately more important than figuring out what to sell. Fortunately,
this book teaches that if you figure out the right things to buy, selling
becomes a lot less important because you can hold the stocks you own
longer. And what to buy derives directly from my father’s fifteen points.

Applying his fifteen points was a repeatable real-world experience
linked to “scuttlebutt,’ as he described it, all aimed at researching one
stock here, another there. And it worked. I will not here recount in
detail the successes that the fifteen points helped me achieve early in my
career. But I gained tremendous career momentum by discovering a
handful of great stocks that did wonderful things for me. From the fif-
teen points, I could fathom gencrally where a firm fit into the world
and how it would or wouldn’t prosper. If it wouldn’t, what might its hic-

pune ha? To cann undaretand urhy my callece try at the fifteen naints


Preface xiii

failed. The craft is in the scuttlebutt, which, like all craft, takes time to
learn. Scuttlebutt is simply about finding out from real, “Main Street”
sources if a firm is strong or weak. Most folks don’t use this approach,
relying instead on the local ramor mill and Wall Street noise, most of
which is aimed at selling you product.

As the century ended and a new one began, the power of scuttle-
butt should have been obvious to folks, but it wasn’t. If you had applied
the fifteen points in this book and got your information sources from
“Main Street” instead of Wall Street, you would never have bought any
of the scandal stocks that so penetrated the news of the 2000-2002 bear
market. The likes of Enron, Tyco, and WorldCom are always easily avoided.
Those who fell for these stocks depended on gossip and Wall Street
opinion rather than on “Main Street” verification of the business’s
strengths. The fifteen points are about very fundamental business fea-
tures that can’t be faked. Scuttlebutt means avoiding malarkey mills and
seeking information from competitors, customers, and suppliers, all of
whom have a vested interest in the target company, and few of whom
have any reason to see the firm unrealistically. It means talking to the
sales representatives of a company’s competitors, who inherently have a
basis to see the target company negatively but typically don’t if the target
is great. It means talking to the research people and management people
of competitors as well. If all those folks see reality and strength in the
target’s operations and respect it and even fear it, well, simply said, it isn’t
Enron or Adelphia. You can count on it.

Scuttlebutt itself can be a sort of art form that identifies character-
izations of the fifteen points. It’s the difference between learning to
play the piano (craft) and then composing (art). Art takes time to learn.
You probably won’t compose until you're pretty competent at playing.
In almost any field, you can learn craft by repetition, but not otherwise.
You may appreciate the art without any ability to create it yourself. Or,
after mastering craft, you may turn yourself into an artist. But this book
allows you to sense the art, and fortunately it doesn’t take that long to
learn because a lot of it is common sense. The problem for most folks
is that they don’t know that this common sense can be applied, and
hence they don’t try. But Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits shows
you how.

Think about the fifteen points for a moment. I know, you haven't read
them yet. Let me describe in a straightforward way what they prescribe,
and you will immediately see how universally desirable the attributes are.

Van can read them in mare detail in muy fithar’e warde and enviar tham


xiv Preface

My father’s fifteen points are a prescription for what to buy. They
describe a firm with huge product and market potential and a manage-
ment determined to continue exploiting that potential far beyond the
current product generation. The prescription means an existing research
effectiveness to create future product, linked to a sales-force size and
efficiency that will overcome all obstacles in carrying existing and future
product to market. That is very futuristic. It means enough raw product
profitability, combining gross profit margins and the ratio of gross profits
to administrative costs to pay for the whole darned thing. It means a
real, concrete plan to maintain and to improve that profitability and
happy employees at all levels, in depth, who will be loyal and produc-
tive, again futuristic and open-ended, never ending. Then, too, it means
tight, great cost controls and some aspect, peculiar to its industry, that
allows the target to excel relative to others in the industry. And, finally,
all that must be wrapped up and guided by an open, articulate manage-
ment of unquestionable integrity.

Consider the scandal stocks or other overvalued portfolios. Not a
one could have passed the test via scuttlebutt because if you talked to
competitors, they weren’t overly scared of those slinky firms. If you
talked to customers or supplicrs, they weren’t overly impressed either.
The customers weren’t impressed because the products weren’t all that
good by relative comparison. The venders and suppliers weren’t all that
impressed because the vendors’ other customers would have been doing
better and ordering more—the real sales volume wasn’t there. And the
competitors would not have held these firms in awe because they were
not held by them at competitive disadvantage.

Not only would the fifteen points have easily eliminated all scandal
stocks of the 2000-2002 bear market, they would have also eliminated
all the so-called 95 percent club—the tech stocks that lost 95 percent or
more of their value during the bear market because they were internet
pipe-dreams, or whatever, with basically 1999 hype but nothing real
there. Think of how many internet stocks had no real sales force (and
certainly none to intimidate a competitor), and no profit margin at all,
and no plan to achieve profitability much less improve it, and no
fundamental research, and no ability to exist without future equity
financing. And, and, and. They couldn’t have made it on half the fifteen
points. Then, too, the fifteen points by exclusion would have eliminated
quite a lot of other companies. But think of the firms of the prior
decades that the fifteen points would not have eliminated. They would



Preface xv

have hooked you into real firms, whether cheap or expensive, and
would have allowed you to navigate the tricky currents of financial mar-
ket volatility whether your own personal inclinations were toward
growth stocks or value stocks, small stocks or big ones.

i

GOALS VERSUS SCUTTLEBUTT

My father’s goals and mine were never the same. But this book works
for both our goals—and for yours, too. My father was almost always a
growth-stock investor—almost always. [t was simply who he was. I was,
in my youth, for a variety of reasons a value guy. These days, I’m nei-
ther a value, growth, big cap, or small cap guy. I’m kind of prone to go
any which way I want, but that is a different story and not for this book.
Anyway, as a youth and a value guy, the fifteen points served me nicely,
getting me into high-quality firms with cheap stocks that as businesses
did spectacularly but that were overlooked as stocks in the mid-1970’s.
He wanted stock in a firm that could grow and grow and grow, and he
wanted stock that could be bought at a reasonable price and virtually
never be sold. I wanted a dirt cheap stock that was a great firm with a
bad Wall Street image, a stock that could grow fundamentally and have
a price to multiple expansion so it could be sold at a premium multiple
or a big markup in five to ten years.

My point: Scuttlebutt and the fifteen points work for growth stocks
or value stocks, for big cap stocks or small cap stocks. Take point four:
An above-average sales organization is as important, or maybe more so,
to a value firm without great natural sales momentum behind it as it is
to one with the wind to its back. It is also critical for a small firm that
wants to overcome larger brethren. And an above-average sales organ-
ization is hard to accomplish but needed for a huge firm that wants to
stave off a myriad of small venture-capital-funded wanna-bes swarm-
ing mass capital after its market. Ditto for point five about a worth-
while profit margin. For example, in a commodity-type business, with-
out natural growth, it is true that market share, relative production
costs, and long-term profit margins all tend to be pretty tightly linked.
Good management gains market share and lowers relative production
costs, often by introducing enhanced production technology (the
application of technology rather than the production of it). Bad man
agement simply but irregularly lowers margins until they disappear.


xvi Preface

Hence, in 1976, I discovered Nucor, a tiny low-cost steel vendor—
great management, innovative technology, lower production cost, high
relative market share in tiny steel niches, gaining market share, and
adding niches. I bought it as a value guy; my father followed me and
promptly bought Nucor as a gtowth guy. Same fifteen points. 1 sold
some years later at a huge profit, and my father held it for decades, selling
at a much larger profit, by which time it had become the second-largest
US. steel manufacturer.

I think my father, who was fifty-one when this book came out and
a bit of an eclectic genius and already very successful, failed to see how
the understanding of the craft, turning into an art, which had come to
him slowly and intuitively over the years, would take time for a neo-
phyte to learn. He regularly thought of things in his life differently than
how he initially explained them. It was a quirky part of how his brain
worked. As | write today, | am fifty-two, almost the same age as he was
then; and I know, because I had to learn the process rather than invent
it, that it takes time to learn.

I’m more linear than my father was and in many ways more intro-
spective, and I urge you to read this book multiple times spanning your
investment life. Take scuttlebutt, again. The scuttlebutt chapter is only
three pages long. But they are among the book’s most important pages.
It is clear to me, in retrospect, that my father simply skipped the craft part
of what otherwise might have been in the book. He just assumed it.

Over the years, I applied this process to lots of stocks on an indi-
vidual basis, gaining great insights. The key? Focus on customers, com-
petitors, and suppliers. I described the craft in my first book, Super Stocks
(Dow Jones-Irwin, 1984), including how to do it with several real-world
examples. My book was a good book, 1984—1985's best-selling stock
market book. And I’m proud I wrote it. But it was not nearly as good
as this book. Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits had much less that
would become obsolete over time than my first book had; and while
both books introduced new concepts, my father’s new concepts were
more radical for their day and more uniformly applied and more time-
less—which is what makes it such a great book. My book was mostly
about craft, not art. With craft, whenever you ask, you get answers. The
art is to get more questions—and the right questions—flowing from the
answers you receive to prior questions. I’ve seen people who rigidly run
down a standard question list, regardless of the responses they get. That
isn’t art: You ask; he or she answers. What question best flows from the


Preface xvii

answer? And so on. When you can do that well on a real-time basis, you
are a composer, an artist, a creative and investigative investor. That is
what my father in his prime did best.

I went with my father about a jillion times to visit companies
between 1972 and 1982.1 worked: for him for only a year, but we did
lots of things together after that. In looking at companies, he always pre-
pared questions in advance, typed on yellow pages with space in
between so he could scribble notes. He always wanted to be prepared,
and he wanted the company to know he was prepared so they would
appreciate him. And he used the questions as a sort of outline of topics
to be covered. It was also a great backup in case the conversation went
cold, which occasionally it did. Then he could get things back on course
instantly with one of his prepared questions. But his very best questions
always popped out of his mind, unprepared, never having been written
down in advance because they were the angle he picked up on the fly,
as he heard an answer to a lesser question. Those creative questions were
the art. It is what, in my mind, made his querying great.

His mind was financially facile until he was pretty darned old. I
want to tell you about one of the best questions I never heard him use
in person and only heard about later from James Michacls. It wasn’t in
his books, but it would have made a great addition anywhere.

A great honor of my life was that for fifteen years before his retire-
ment I was edited personally in Forbes by the great James Walker
Michaels, who at his retirement as editor of Forbes in 1998 was beyond
doubt the dean of U.S. business journalism. He brought me into Forbes,
took a personal interest in me, and edited virtually every column I wrote
by himself (which is rare for a periodical editor) until his retirement as
editor. He also admired my father greatly. Once, and only once, Jim and
I had a reason to spend a weekend together on the West Coast, and he
hoped to come a few hours early and sit down with my father, who
then would have been just shy of eighty-nine.
