
53

54
find out what he's doing wrong. In the case of the trader who knows what he's doing wrong, my advice
is deceptively simple: He should stop doing what he is doing wrong. If he can't change his behavior, this type
of person should consider becoming a dogmatic system trader.
==== Were there any trades in your experience that proved especially difficult on an emotional level?
====
One day in my first year of trading, I went long soybeans just a few I cents from limit-up. The market
proceeded to go from limit-up to limit-down without an uptick. It took about three minutes. This display convinced me to get short at limit-down. Two minutes later, the market was limit-up again.
==== What did that experience teach you? ====
It was my first lesson in risk management. I lost more than half my equity on those two trades in five
minutes.
==== How did you recover from that loss? ====
Trading small, making a lot of little decisions rather than trying to make a few blockbuster trades.
==== Do you find it difficult to deal with the emotional impact of large losses? ====
In many ways, large profits are even more insidious than large losses in terms of emotional
destabilization. I think it's important not to be emotionally attached to large profits. I've certainly made some
of my worst trades after long periods of winning. When you're on a big winning streak, there's a temptation
to think that you're doing something special, which will allow you to continue to propel yourself upward. You
start to think that you can afford to make shoddy decisions. You can imagine what happens next. As a
general rule, losses make you strong and profits make you weak.
==== Allow me to broaden my question then. Do you find it difficult to deal with the emotionality of
trading-whether due to large losses or large profits? ====
Trading can be a positive game monetarily, but it's a negative game emotionally. On a few occasions, I've
had the following experience: A group of markets to which I'm heavily committed open sharply against me,
almost at my loss cutoff point. The loss seems crushing; I may even be wondering if my risk hasn't been set
too high. Then, miraculously, I'm not stopped out, and by midday these markets have gone roughly as much
with me as they were against me earlier. How does this feel? There's nothing in the elation that would
approach compensating for the morning's distress. The profit seems large, of course, but it doesn't seem to
help nearly as much as the earlier loss hurt.
To some extent, the foregoing example may simply be emotional exaggeration, but asymmetrical
responses are perfectly valid. For example, if a price move brings the market to your stop point, you
shouldn't be thinking in terms of retracements. This is the kind of hopeful thinking that makes a trader keep
giving a loss a little more room. Of course, the market may be retracing (as opposed to having reversed
trend), but that's not what you should be thinking about when it's time to get out. Now consider the case
where the market is sharply with you, rather than against you. Here it is quite appropriate to think about
retracements. The sharpness of the move indicates that volatility has just increased; hence, even a windfall
profit might dissipate rapidly. The situation is asymmetrical. When you're losing and the thought that the
market is retracing might be comforting, the concept is off limits for consideration. On the other hand, when
you have a large profit and the idea of a retracement is a discomforting thought, it should be in the forefront
of consideration. Trading is full of such asymmetries that make it an emotionally negative-sum proposition.
==== If trading is so emotionally unsatisfying, is the only rationale for doing it financial? ====
I can't imagine why anyone would do it if it weren't financially positive. This is one of the few industries
where you can still engineer a rags-to-riches story. Richard Dennis started out with only hundreds of dollars
and ended up making hundreds of millions in less than two decades-that's quite motivating.
If you're playing for the emotional satisfaction, you're bound to lose, because what feels good is often the
wrong thing to do Richard Dennis used to say, somewhat facetiously, "If it feels g-ood, don't do it." In fact,
one rule we taught the Turtles was: When all the criteria are in balance, do the thing you least want to do.
You have to decide early on whether you're playing for the fun or for the success. Whether you measure it in
money or in some other way, to win at trading you have to be playing for the success. Trading is also highly
addictive. When behavioral psychologists have compared the relative addictiveness of various reinforcement
schedules, they found that intermittent reinforcement-positive and negative dispensed randomly (for
example, the rat doesn't know whether it will get pleasure or pain when it hits the bar)-is the most addictive
alternative of all, more addictive than positive reinforcement only. Intermittent reinforcement describes the
experience of the compulsive gambler as well as the futures trader. The difference is that, just perhaps, the
trader can make money. However, as with most of the "affective" aspects of commodity trading, its
addictiveness constantly threatens ruin. Addictiveness is the reason why so many players who make fortunes
leave the game broke.
==== What advice do you have for dealing with the emotional pitfalls inherent in trading? ====
Some people are good at not expending emotional energy on situations over which they have no control.
(I am not one of them.) An old trader once told me: "Don't think about what the market's going to do; you
have absolutely no control over that. Think about what you're going to do if it gets there."
In particular, you should spend no time at all thinking about those roseate scenarios in which the market
goes your way, since in those situations, there's nothing more for you to do. Focus instead on those things
you want least to happen and on what your response should be.
==== Any advice about handling the losing periods? ====

54

55
It helps not to be preoccupied with your losses. If you're worried, channel that energy into research.
Over the years at C&D [the company at which Dennis and Eckhardt were partners], we made our best
research breakthroughs when we were losing.
==== Do you think that`s because those are the times you have the greatest motivation to improve your
approach? ====
That's probably true.
==== Among the observations you have made about markets and trading over the years, do any stand out
as being particularly surprising or counterintuitive? ====
Some years back, a company ran an annual charting contest. The contestants had to predict the
settlement prices of several futures for a certain date by a given deadline. Someone in our office [Dale
Dellutri] decided, I believe prankishly, to use the random walk model. In other words, he simply used the
settlement prices of the deadline as his prediction. He fell just short of becoming a prizewinner with this
procedure. His name was among the first five of a list of fifty or so close runners-up.
This contest had hundreds of entrants. Therefore, more than 95 percent, and probably more than 99
percent, of the contestants scored worse than blind randomness. This is no mean feat.
The extremeness of the outcome in this story seems to support an apparent phenomenon that I've
observed many times over the years, but for which I have no hard evidence: The majority of people trade
worse than a purely random trader would.
==== Your hypothesis implies that most traders would be better off throwing darts than using their existing
method-a provocative thought. How do you explain this phenomenon? ====
The market behaves much like an opponent who is trying to teach you to trade poorly. I don't want to
suggest that the market actually has intentions, because it doesn't. An appropriate analogy is evolutionary
theory, in which you can talk as though evolution has a purpose. For example, birds evolved wings in order to
fly. Technically, that's wrong. Birds aren't Darwinians, and you can be sure no bird or protobird ever intended
to evolve a wing. Nevertheless, natural selection acts very much like it intends for species to evolve things
that are beneficial. You can talk about the markets in a similar fashion. Anybody who has traded for a while
begins to feel that the markets have certain personal characteristics. Very often the feeling you get is that
"they are out to get you," which is simply a personalization of the process. This illusion is well founded. The
market does behave very much like a tutor who is trying to instil] poor trading techniques. Most people learn
this lesson only too well.
==== Please elaborate. What kind of lessons is the tutor teaching? ====
Since most small to moderate profits tend to vanish, the market teaches you to cash mem in before they
get away. Since the market spends more time in consolidations than in trends, it teaches you to buy dips and
sell rallies. Since the market trades through the same prices again and again and seems, if only you wait long
enough, to return to prices it has visited before, it teaches you to hold on to bad trades. The market likes to
lull you into the false security of high success rate techniques, which often lose disastrously in the long run.
The general idea is that what works most of the time is nearly the opposite of what works in the long run.
A basic theme that runs through Eckhardt's comments is that what feels good is usually the wrong thing
to do. As one example, decision theorists have demonstrated that people consistently prefer to lock in a sure
win rather than accept a gamble with a higher expected payoff. They also prefer to gamble with a loss, even
when the bet has a worse expected outcome than a sure loss alternative- These instinctive preferences run
counter to perhaps the most fundamental principle of successful trading: Cut your losses short and let your
profits run. Just because this aphorism has become a cliche makes it no less valid.
Another example of counterproductive instincts is what Eckhardt terms "the call of the countertrend."
Selling on strength and buying on weakness appeals to people's desire to buy cheap and sell dear. While such
trades may feel better at the moment of implementation, following a countertrend strategy is almost
inevitably doomed to failure. (This contention does not, however, imply that the reverse strategy-trend
following-is assured success, since both approaches incur transaction costs.)
Traders' excessive concern regarding their current positions involves yet another example of the
detrimental impact of gravitating toward comfortable actions. Taking profits before intended objectives are
reached so that the market won't take away the gains, holding positions beyond intended loss liquidation
points in the hopes that the market is only witnessing a retracement, and liquidating positions before stoploss points are reached because of the fear of losing are all examples of actions intended to make current
positions feel better. However, all of these actions are likely to negatively impact long-term performance.
People's natural inclinations also lead them astray in systems trading. The more closely a system is fit to
past price behavior, the more impressive the historical simulations will appear and the better the trader will
feel about using the system. Yet, ironically, beyond a very limited point, the more effort expended to make a
system fit past price behavior more closely, the worse actual future performance is likely to be. The desire to
design a system that looks great also leads people to accept favorable simulated results without sufficient
scrutiny. Very often, great results are simply the consequence of error or naive methodology. Eckhardt1 s
advice is that system designers should believe their results only after they have done everything possible to
disprove them.
Eckhardt proposes that the tendency to do what is comfortable will actually lead most people to
experience even worse than random results in the markets. In effect, he is saying that most people don't lose
simply because they lack the skill to do better than random but also because natural human traits entice

55

56
them into behavioral patterns that will actually lead to worse than random results-a particularly compelling
observation. If Eckhardt is right-and I believe he is-the critical implication is that our natural instincts will
mislead us in trading. Therefore, the first step in succeeding as a trader is reprogramming behavior to do
what is correct rather than what feels comfortable.

56

57
The Silence of the Turtles
Picture an oak-paneled English drawing room. Two obviously wealthy gentlemen sit in their armchairs
facing a roaring fire, puffing on their pipes and discussing their philosophy of trading. "It is my proposition,
Colin, that anyone can be taught to be a superior trader. There is nothing magical about it. There is no rare
talent involved. It is simply a matter of being taught the appropriate rules and following those rules. There is
no question in my mind that I could train virtually anyone to make a fortune trading." "That is nonsense,
Duncan. You just think your trading success is due to your system. What you do not realize is that you have
a special talent. You could print out your rules in twelve-inch-high letters and have people read them every
day for a year, and they still would not be able to do what you do in the markets. Your success is a function
of your talent. It cannot be taught!"
"Well, Colin, this must be the hundredth time we've had this discussion. Let's settle it once and for all.
Why don't we just pick ten people, teach them my system, give them each £1 million to trade and see what
happens."
"That's an excellent idea, Duncan. Pick your ten people, train them, and if by the end of one year they are
not ahead, on average, by at least 25 percent-a modest figure considering that you normally make two to
three times that per year-you pay me £1 million. If they are up by more than 25 percent, I will pay you the
same amount."
Duncan and Colin then proceed to the window, watching the passersby for potential candidates for their
experiment. Each time they agree on an individual, they send their butler out to summon the person.
The above may sound like a fanciful plot for a story or movie. (Actually, it is a very loose adaptation
inspired by the delightful Mark Twain story, "The £1,000,000 Bank-Note. ") However, change the setting from
London to Chicago, eliminate the monetary element of the bet, and substitute a more sophisticated method
for screening candidates, and you actually have a true story. The legendary trader Richard Dennis, who
reputedly transformed an initial stake of several thousand dollars into a fortune estimated at $200 million,
essentially had the same argument with his partner, William Eckhardt (interviewed in the previous chapter).
It was Dennis's contention that trading success could be taught, while Eckhardt scoffed at the idea.
To settle their ongoing argument, Dennis and Eckhardt decided to run a version of the above experiment.
They placed an ad in the Wall Street Journal seeking persons interested in being trained as traders. Through
a process of reviewing written applications, evaluating the results of an exam, and interviewing selected
finalists, approximately one thousand respondents were eventually whittled down to a group of thirteen. Over
a period of about two weeks, Dennis and Eckhardt taught this fortunate group some of their systems. No
holds barred, they gave the group all the specifics. After the training, Dennis then funded this group and sent
them off to trade on their own.
The first group performed so well during the initial year that Dennis repeated the experiment the following
year with a second group of ten. These two groups of traders collectively became known in the industry as
the Turtles. This rather curious name had its origins in a trip Richard Dennis took to the Orient during this
period of time. At one point, he visited a turtle farm, in which turtles were raised in huge vats. In Dennis's
mind, the image of growing thousands of squirming turtles in a huge vat was a perfect analogy for training
traders. The name stuck.
Was Richard Dennis right? Could people actually be trained to be exceptionally successful traders? To
answer this question, let's pick up the scene six years later, when I am preparing to do this book. My first job
is to research possible candidates to be interviewed. In the area of futures traders, one reference source I
used was the quarterly summary provided by Managed Accounts Reports. This report summarizes the
performance of a large number of commodity trading advisors (CTAs), providing a single synopsis sheet for
each advisor. At the bottom of each sheet is a summary table with key statistics, such as average annual
percentage return, largest drawdown, Sharpe ratio (a return/risk measure), percentage of winning months,
and the probabilities of witnessing a 50 percent, 30 percent, and 20 percent loss with the given CTA. To be
objective, I flipped through the pages, glancing only at the tables (not the names at the top of the sheets)
and checking off the names of those advisors whose exceptional performance seemed to jump off the page.
By the end of this process, I had checked off eighteen of the more than one hundred CTAs surveyed. Eight of
these eighteen names (44 percent) turned out to be Turtles. Absolutely astounding! Richard Dennis was
obviously right. (Admittedly, the results would have been less dramatic a year later, as 1991 proved to be a
tough year for many of the Turtles.)
It seemed clear to me that if I were going to pursue the quest for the ingredients in trading success, I
should be talking to the Turtles- The uniqueness of Dennis's experiment seemed to provide an unusual
opportunity to see how different individuals exposed to the same training differed in the way they approached
the markets.
Although the idea looked good on paper, the execution proved to be very difficult. First of all, I found that
a number of the Turtles simply refused to talk. "Look," I would say, ''I understand your reticence. However, I
assure you that I will not print anything until you have seen it, and if you fee! that you have inadvertently
divulged any trade secrets, I promise not to use that material. The risk is all mine. I can go through the
entire interview and editing process, only in the end to have you refuse to grant me permission to use the
copy. What do you have to lose?" Despite these assurances, a number of the Turtles simply refused even to
consider participating.
Those who refused to talk at all were only part of the problem. The major problem was that the remainder
of the group was largely tight-lipped about anything of interest. I was well aware that the group had signed
agreements not to divulge any parts of the system, and I hardly expected them to share these secrets with

57

58
the world, let alone betray a trust. Therefore, in the interviews, I avoided any specific questions regarding
the system. Unfortunately, the Turtles' caution was so extreme that they avoided talking about anything even
remotely connected with the system. (I couldn't help but be reminded of the World War II movies where the
downed American pilot responds to all the interrogator's questions by repeating his rank, file, and serial
number.) The following is a representative segment intended to provide a flavor of the typical interview.
==== How do you pick your trades? ====
I basically use the system, but I can't say much more than that.
==== I know we can't discuss the specifics of the system, but can you just tell me in general terms why this
system tends to do so much better than the vast majority of trend-following systems that are out there?
====
I really don't know the other systems.
==== Well, for purposes of comparison, let`s just use the typical moving average system, which is
essentially a trend-following approach. Without divulging any specific trade secrets, in a general conceptual
sense, how do the systems that Dennis taught you differ from these more standard approaches? ====
I'd rather not answer that.
==== What are the trading rules you live by? ====
The same general rules I'm sure you've heard everywhere. I don't think mere's anything new I could add.
==== Let's talk about a specific trading situation. The recent start of the U.S. air war against Iraq resulted
in a number of huge overnight price moves. Were you in any of those markets? Were you watching those
markets during the nighttime session? ====
I was lucky-I was out of the crude oil market at the time.
==== How about a market like gold, which also had a huge price reversal at the time? ====
Yes, I had a position in gold.
==== It's no secret that Dennises approach was trend-following in nature. Obviously then, since the market
had been rising for a while prior to the outbreak of the air war, you must have been long at the time. The war
started at night, and although gold prices initially rose, by the next morning they were down over $30. Were
you watching the market during the night session? And if so, how did you react? ====
I got out.
==== Was this because the market received news that should have been bullish-that is, the outbreak of
war-moved slightly higher, and then started trading lower? ====
I can't say.
==== Im hardly talking trade secrets here. The concept that a market's failure to respond appropriately to
important news is a significant price action clue is something that I put in a book six years ago. And I'm sure
I was not the first or last person to talk about this idea. All I'm asking is whether this was the reasoning
behind taking the loss quickly or whether there was more to it ====
There was more, but I can't talk about it.
==== Is there anything that we haven't discussed concerning the concepts and philosophy of successful
trading that you would care to comment on? ====
[Long pause. ] No, not really. I can't think of anything.
OK, you get the idea. Applying the appropriate trading principle, I decided to cut my losses short and stop
requesting additional Turtle interviews after the first few. Obviously, the extraordinary sensitivity of the
Turtles to the possibility of revealing anything about what Richard Dennis had taught them, even
inadvertently, provided a seemingly insurmountable impediment to achieving the type of relatively open
discussions I had enjoyed with other traders.
I have, however, selected short excerpts from two of the Turtle interviews I conducted. The following
material offers some feel for the Turtle experience and provides a few insights in terms of useful trading
lessons or advice.
=== Michael Carr ===
After the near paranoia, and even rudeness, I encountered in some of my preliminary interview requests
among the Turtles, Michael Carr's attitude came as a pleasant relief. (He not only graciously accepted the
interview request but, upon learning that I was a hiking enthusiast, was thoughtful enough to send me a
brochure on the Ice Age Trail, which passes near his house.)
Carr was in the first group of Turtles trained by Richard Dennis. He began trading in 1984, arid in his four
years of trading for Dennis, Carr averaged 57 percent annually (he was down moderately for the first third of
1988, when Dennis terminated the program). Carr did not begin trading again until August 1989, when he
launched his own CTA company. As of late 1991, Carr was up 89 percent from that starting point.
I interviewed Carr at his Wisconsin home, which virtually sits in a lake and is connected to the mainland
by a very long driveway. I arrived just as it began to storm. Carr's office, which has windows all around,
offers views of the water in every direction. The combination of the all-encompassing water views and the
storm provided a spectacular backdrop. Unfortunately, the setting was far more dramatic than our
conversation. Although Can- was quite friendly, our interchange was stymied by the same cautiousness that
characterized all the Turtle interviews.
