
Chapter 12: Walking through a Trade, Swing-Style
So that’s how I go about ranking securities, but your method may vary. You
can approach this process in literally an endless number of ways, and no one
way is right. The important thing is that your method is based on principles
that you agree with and that lead to strong performance.
Chapters 4 and 5 take you through finding securities from the technical
side of the market, whereas Chapters 7, 8, and 9 take you through the
fundamental steps. In this section, though, I walk you through the process
I’d follow if I were trading these securities.

Narrowing your list of prospects
Ranking securities pushes the cream to the top. For this trade, I’ve ranked
the securities in both industry groups by return on equity (which is covered
in Chapter 8). The results are shown in Figure 12-4.

Figure 12-4:
A ranking
of stocks
by return
on equity in
two industry
groups.

Handpicking the lucky ones
After you rank the securities you zone in on, go through the stock charts to
identify criteria that meet your trading strategy. What you look for depends
on what you’ve decided to incorporate into your trading plan. Perhaps you’re

253

254 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
looking for moving average crossovers in the presence of strong volume. Or
maybe you’re looking for cup-and-handle formations. Your trading rules need
not be complex.
In fact, simple entry rules trump more complex ones. Buying when the
moving average slope turns positive, for example, can be an effective entry
criterion. Or you can buy when the MACD line crosses the 0 line. But more
complex entry techniques can also work well. Perhaps you implement a trading indicator you read about in a trade magazine, or you wait to trade on
divergences between an indicator and the share price. Whatever the method,
make sure your entry criteria are clear and not subjective. You don’t want an
entry method that gives ambiguous signals or relies on someone’s interpretation to determine whether to buy. Subjective analysis is risky because it
opens up trading to inconsistent behavior.
For the purposes of this example, I’ll buy a security when the MACD line
crosses above its signal line, and I’ll exit when the security closes below its
nine-day moving average. To be more precise, I’m not looking for securities
where the MACD line is simply above its signal line — several securities meet
that rather loose criterion. No, I’m looking only for those securities with MACD
lines above signal lines today. (You should only go on green. Never jump the
gun by buying before a signal is generated and never wait and buy a few days
after a signal is given.)
After reviewing the securities listed in Figure 12-4, I find two stocks that meet
my entry criteria: Gafisa S.A. (symbol: GFA) in the Construction Residential/
Commercial group, and Companhia Siderurgica Nacional (symbol: SID) in the
Steel Producers group.
I never trade a security that’s due to report earnings in the next two weeks,
and I strongly advise you to follow this rule. As trading expert Ian Woodward
said: “You don’t have your hand on the steering wheel when you trade securities right before earnings dates.” (If you’re wondering, I confirmed that GFA
and SID aren’t due to report earnings in the next two weeks.)
GFA’s chart, shown in Figure 12-5, reveals a security that’s been in a trading
range. On the far right side of the chart, notice that the MACD line has
crossed above its signal line, meeting the entry criterion I outlined earlier.
Also notice that volume on the day of the crossover was above average. The
nine-day moving average has turned higher, but it has generated several
whipsaw signals, a sign that the stock is in a trading range.
Figure 12-6 shows a chart of SID. SID has been consolidating for a few weeks
and is breaking out of its consolidation. The MACD line is crossing over its
signal line, but volume is below average. The nine-day moving average
recently turned higher. Both are signs that the short-term trend is turning up.

Chapter 12: Walking through a Trade, Swing-Style

Figure 12-5:
This chart of
GFA shows
the stock
in a trading
range.

Figure 12-6:
This chart of
SID shows
the stock
moving
out of a
consolidation phase.

Step 4: Determining Position Size
Okay, so I’ve found my trade, but how much do I allocate to it? Not all of it —
nobody’s that certain about a trade unless they have inside information, and
even then, there’s never a 100 percent guarantee that things will turn out the
way you want.
Chapter 10 outlines two different ways to set your position size: by percent of
capital (not recommended) or by risk level. Determine your position size by
identifying your stop loss level and limiting losses between 0.25 percent and
2.0 percent of your account value should the security reach that stop loss
level. For these two trades, I’m setting my position size based on a risk level.
Specifically, I’m going to calculate how many shares I can buy of GFA and SID,
assuming I place stop loss orders below a recent support level.

255

256 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Keeping an eye on dollar fluctuations
Both swing trade candidates in this chapter are
foreign firms, as is probably evident by the companies’ names. Foreign companies that generate profits in foreign currencies are more
valuable in U.S. dollars if the dollar weakens
relative to those foreign currencies.
As you can see from the nearby graph, the U.S.
dollar index hit major peaks in July 2001 and
February 2002, but it’s been in a strong downtrend since then because budget deficits and
current account deficits have made the dollar

less attractive to foreign investors. Should the
U.S. continue to run major current account
deficits (driven by balance of trade deficits), the
dollar may continue to weaken. That’s why
reviewing the strength or weakness of the U.S.
dollar should be a routine part of your market
analysis. A declining dollar should heighten
your awareness of foreign firms (often traded
as American Depository Receipts) or U.S. firms
with significant sources of foreign income. A
complete listing of ADRs can be found at www.
adr.com.

Setting your stop loss level
Your stop loss level is your emergency exit. Trading without one is akin to
suicide. You need to know where to get out if things turn sour.
The GFA chart (refer to Figure 12-5) has a clear support level of $33.50. If the
stock were to trade below $33.50, I believe it would be a sign that the trade
had failed. But of course, I never place stop loss orders at predictable price
levels where others may also place their orders. So I’ve decided to set my
risk level at $33.18.

Chapter 12: Walking through a Trade, Swing-Style
The SID chart (refer to Figure 12-6) has a clear support level of $35. If the
stock were to trade below $35, I believe it would be a sign that the trade had
failed. But again, I avoid placing stop loss orders at predictable price levels.
So I’ve decided to set my risk level at $34.59.

Limiting your losses to
a certain percentage
Your losses should be limited to some percentage of your total assets. Your
position size is based on that percentage. If you limit losses to 2 percent of
your total assets (an amount I consider aggressive), you should be able to
take larger trades than swing traders who limit losses to 0.5 percent of their
account values.
I’m assuming that my investment account is $100,000 and I want to limit my
risk to 1 percent of my account. Also, I’m using the closing share price on
April 4, 2008 — $38.54 — as my purchase price.
So how many shares of GFA can I buy? Here’s how the math goes:
1. Subtract the stop loss level from the purchase price.
$38.54 – $33.18 = $5.36
2. Multiply the maximum allowable risk by the investment account total.
1% × $100,000 = $1,000
3. Divide the number in Step 2 by the number in Step 1.
$1,000 ÷ $5.36 = 186 (rounded down)
Hence, I can buy 186 shares of GFA. (I recommend rounding down so you
don’t increase your risk beyond the 1 percent level).
Assuming the same account total, risk level, and purchase date as GFA, how
many shares of SID can I buy? To get the answer, I go through the same mathematical procedure as I did with GFA:
1. Subtract the stop loss level from the purchase price:
$39.22 – $34.59 = $4.63
2. Multiply the maximum allowable risk by the investment account total:
1% × $100,000 = $1,000
3. Divide the number in Step 2 by the number in Step 1:
$1,000 ÷ $4.63 = 215 (rounded down)
Hence, I can buy 215 shares of SID.

257

258 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
Step 5: Executing Your Order
Your order entry strategy should be consistent with your swing trading time
commitment. Full-time swing traders can add an intraday trading overlay
strategy to attempt to buy at a better price (flip to Chapter 11 for more on
using this approach). Part-time swing traders should use limit orders to enter
near the closing price on the day the signal was generated.
Personally, I don’t use a secondary trading overlay for the simple reason
that I’m not looking to add value on such a micro level. My outperformance
(or alpha) should come over holding the trade for a few days or a few weeks.
Hence, I’m not as concerned about what the security is doing minute to
minute — as long as it holds above my stop loss level.
Whether you’re a full- or part-time swing trader, entering stop loss orders
(as good until cancelled so they aren’t cancelled after one day) as soon as you
execute your trades is critically important.
The only exception to this rule is for full-time traders who watch their positions during market hours, every day. Such traders can, if they so choose,
enter price alerts on their positions at levels where a stop loss order would
be entered. Using shares of SID from earlier in this chapter as an example, a
full-time swing trader may enter the stop loss level $34.59 as the level when
he or she receives an alert from TradeStation in the form of an e-mail or a
message box. After that alert is hit, the trader can execute the order, perhaps
using a Level II quote to assist in the timing of the trade.
But using such mental stop loss orders has its downsides, the biggest of
which is that exiting losing positions isn’t automated. Entering a position
isn’t as laced with emotions as exiting for a loss is. When you have to sell a
losing position (or cover a losing short position), you may start to secondguess yourself. You may look at the chart to see whether the stop loss level
was set too aggressively. Perhaps there’s a support level a few points below
the current price and you’d prefer to nudge down the stop loss level. And
then perhaps while you’re thinking about this, you notice that the price
has temporarily recovered above the stop loss level. “See, I knew this was
probably going to turn around.” Before you know it, you’ve come up with
perfect excuses on why you should let it run farther and cut losses at some
other level.
That’s why I prefer automated stop loss levels. Yes, entering a stop loss
level does officially post my order for all to see. But I’ll take that cost over
the possibility of letting my emotions influence my exit from a losing position. The stop loss order does its job, no emotions involved. It executes, and
you’re notified after it happens.

Chapter 12: Walking through a Trade, Swing-Style

Step 6: Recording Your Trade
Now that I’ve executed my trades, my next job is to record them in my
trading journal. The more detailed your journal, the more helpful it is. On the
other hand, if you enter so much detail that you come to dread recording
your trades, you may fail to keep your journal up to date and the work will
eventually pile up. So always try to strike a balance.
In Chapter 3, I highlight the information your journal should contain — you
want to keep it simple but provide enough detail to make the journal useful.
Figure 12-7 shows a snapshot of a journal entry for SID.

Figure 12-7:
Your trading journal
should
include
enough
details
to make it
useful.

Step 7: Monitoring Your Shares’ Motion
and Exiting When the Time is Right
After you enter your positions and record them in your trading journal, you
should monitor them and focus on your exit strategy, which should tell you
when to exit in three scenarios:

259

260 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
 When the position is profitable
 When the position is unprofitable
 When the position meanders sideways
My exit strategy in this example, like my entry strategy, is simple:
 Ideally, I exit on a close below the nine-day moving average. If shares
rally, the close below the nine-day average will keep me on an uptrend.
 If and when shares hit their stop loss level, I exit, pronto.
 If shares meander and do nothing, I exit after ten days so I can deploy
the capital elsewhere.
Going back to the examples from earlier in this chapter, right after I purchased shares of GFA, the stock began declining (see Figure 12-8). Within
four days, it was trading below its nine-day moving average, triggering an exit
based on the strategy I outlined. I purchased shares at $38.54 and exited
around $35.92, a loss of 6.8 percent. However, the position sizing step of my
strategy (remember, I only purchased 186 shares) limited the extent to
which this position affected my account — I lost only 0.5 percent of my entire
portfolio, which is an acceptable loss.
The SID trading position turned out differently (see Figure 12-9). Shares of SID
rose right after my entry and, as of the date of this writing, haven’t triggered
one of my established sell rules. The position has gained 10.66 percent since
my entry, or 0.9 percent for my total portfolio.

Figure 12-8:
Shares of
GFA fell
below their
nine-day
moving
average
on April 10,
2008.

Chapter 12: Walking through a Trade, Swing-Style

Figure 12-9:
Shares of
SID rallied
after my
entry and
have yet to
trigger my
sell rules.

Step 8: Improving Your
Swing Trading Skills
No swing trader is perfect, and no trading system works 100 percent of the
time. You’ll always suffer losses — they’re unavoidable. You must expect
losses and work them into your swing trading strategy. Many a good system
has been corrupted by an ambitious swing trader tinkering with this and that,
trying to achieve a success rate that’s simply unrealistic.
But that doesn’t mean you can’t improve your system. One way to refine your
system and become a better trader is to review your journal entries monthly
to detect patterns in your winning or losing positions. But don’t change your
trading plan often or because of one or two losing trades. Alter your plan
only in response to a pattern of losses that you think can be improved upon,
or in response to a significant — or potentially significant — loss (such as 5
percent or more of your total account value). For instance, if your losses are
large, you likely need to adjust your risk management strategy as opposed to
your entry and exit strategy.
Returning to the example from earlier in this chapter, I’m going to review the
losing GFA trade with an eye on improving my trading strategy. When I look
at the GFA position (see Figure 12-10), I see that shares are in a trading range.
Notice that the daily ADX indicator is at 11.27 on entry, signaling a nontrending market (for more on the ADX indicator, check out Chapter 5). The
weekly ADX (not shown in the chart) is even worse: 12.19 at entry. When
the ADX rises above 20, a trend is in place. The ADX indicator in shares of
GFA is communicating something very different.

261

262 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan

Figure 12-10:
Shares of
GFA were
in a trading
range when
my buy
order was
executed.

My trading strategy is based on riding trends. As a result, I may improve my
trading plan by filtering out securities that aren’t clearly trending. Perhaps I
could improve my strategy by filtering out securities where the weekly ADX
indicator is below 20.
Why did I choose to use the weekly ADX versus the daily ADX to filter out
non-trending stocks in my trading plan? Technically, this is just a preference.
Either strategy will work. But I noticed that shares of SID had an ADX value of
16 on entry. Filtering out stocks with daily ADX values below 20 excludes SID
as well as GFA. However, filtering out stocks with weekly ADX values below
20 excludes GFA but not SID, the profitable trade. That’s why reviewing not
only your losing positions but also your profitable ones is important.

Chapter 13

Evaluating Your Performance
In This Chapter
 Calculating simple returns
 Computing annualized returns
 Using the time-weighted return method
 Measuring up to the benchmarks
 Making changes to your trading plan

A

re you a swing trading star or a work in progress? The only way to
know is by calculating your portfolio’s returns. Admittedly, doing so
isn’t the most exciting task. But as a swing trader, you must compute your
returns to find out whether you’re doing an amazing job or a lousy one.
Performance calculation can be complicated by several factors, including
taxes, commissions, SEC fees, and other expenses. Cash deposits or withdrawals, which I cover later in this chapter, also complicate the process
of figuring your returns. Your job is to account for such complications
accurately so that your return figures solely reflect your skill. Return miscalculations can lead to unskilled traders thinking they’re hot stuff (see a reallife example of this embarrassment in the Beardstown Ladies sidebar later in
this chapter) or skilled traders thinking they aren’t making the grade.
Although some brokers offer performance calculation, far too many simply
report the account balances at month’s end, which fails to remove the
distorting effects of cash flows. If your broker computes performance, find
out whether the performance figures are time weighted. If they are, you can
use them.

No Additions, No Withdrawals?
No Problem!
The simplest return calculation occurs when an account begins at a certain
asset level, experiences no withdrawals or deposits, and appreciates or

264 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
depreciates over time solely due to trading in the account. To calculate your
returns in this situation, use the following formula:

Total Return =

Ending Market Value – Beginning Market Value
Beginning Market Value

Here’s a quick example to illustrate this performance calculation.
On December 31, 2009, Trader Claire’s account value is $86,430. Trader Claire
swing trades in the first three months of 2010, buying and selling different
stocks every few days. By March 31, 2010, Trader Claire’s account value has
reached $92,872. During the first three months, Trader Claire made no deposits or withdrawals from her account. The ending account value reflects all
commissions Trader Claire paid in the first three months, but it doesn’t
reflect taxes because she’s trading in an Individual Retirement Account (IRA),
a tax-deferred investment account. What is Trader Claire’s total return during
the period? If you plug these account values into the preceding equation, you
find that her return was 7.45 percent:

7.45% =

$92, 872 − $86, 430
$86, 430

Although this equation is the simplest return calculation equation, swing
traders may be depositing and withdrawing assets periodically, which
requires adjustments to the formula. To figure out how to calculate your
return in such a situation, see the later section “Accounting for Deposits and
Withdrawals: The Time-Weighted Return Method.”

Comparing Returns over Different Time
Periods: Annualizing Returns
The return calculated in the preceding section represents a return over a
specified time period. The return calculation remains the same whether the
beginning and ending values are three months apart or three years apart.
However, you can’t really compare a return achieved over three years to one
achieved over three months. That’s why the investment management industry usually calculates annualized returns, or returns converted to an annual
basis. You can think of annualized returns as an average return. For example,
a 50 percent return over a five-year period is roughly equivalent to an annual
return of 10 percent.

Chapter 13: Evaluating Your Performance
I say roughly because the actual annualized return is less than 10 percent due
to compounding — or generating earnings on reinvested earnings. I’m just
using an average to illustrate the concept. I show you how to calculate the
actual annualized return with a tale of two traders who are arguing about
who has superior investment skills.
Trader Hot Stuff is convinced his return of 76.23 percent achieved over a fiveyear period is superior to the return of his friend, Trader Humble, who
achieved a return of 52.09 percent over a three-year period. So who’s right?
To find out, you must convert both traders’ returns into annual returns,
which you can do by completing the following steps:
1. Compute the return over the specified time period.
Assuming no withdrawals or deposits were made, calculate the return
over the time period using the equation shown in the preceding section.
(If deposits or withdrawals did occur, use the time-weighted return
calculation method I describe in the later section “Accounting for
Deposits and Withdrawals: The Time-Weighted Return Method.”)
In the case of Trader Hot Stuff and Trader Humble, the return has already
been calculated over the time period for both traders. The returns are
76.23 percent over five years and 52.09 percent over three years.
2. Add 1 to the return calculated in Step 1.
Returns are expressed in percentages, so if you want to add 1 to a percentage, you have to convert the percentage into decimal form. Trader
Hot Stuff had a return of 76.23 percent, which equals 0.7623 in decimal
form. Trader Humble had a return of 52.09 percent, which equals 0.5209
in decimal form. Adding 1 to both returns yields 1.7623 for Trader Hot
Stuff and 1.5209 for Trader Humble.
3. Determine what time-period conversion fraction you should use to
convert the return into an annual return.
Use the following equation to calculate the fraction:
Time period you want to convert return into
(Usually expressed in months or years)
Time-Period Conversion Fraction =
Time period return is currently expressed in
(Must use same unit of measurement as numerator)

• The numerator in this fraction will always be either 12 (months), 1
(year), or 4 (quarters). Whether you use 12, 1, or 4 in the numerator depends on what time period the return you computed in Step
1 is measured in.
