
Brief History
The first chartists in the United States appeared at the turn of the century.
They included Charles Dow, the author of a famous stock market theory, and

70

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

William Hamilton, who succeeded Dow as the editor of the Wall Street
Journal. Dow's famous maxim was "The averages discount everything." He
meant that changes in the Dow Jones Industrial and Rail Averages reflected
all knowledge and hopes about the economy and the stock market.
Dow never wrote a book, only the Wall Street Journal editorials.
Hamilton took over the job after Dow died and struck a blow for charting
when he wrote "The Turn of the Tide," an editorial following the 1929 crash.
Hamilton laid out the principles of Dow theory in his book, The Stock
Market Barometer. Robert Rhea, a newsletter publisher, brought the theory
to its pinnacle in his 1932 book, The Dow Theory.
The decade of the 1930s was the Golden Age of charting. Many innovators
found themselves with time on their hands after the crash of 1929. Schabaker,
Rhea, Elliott, Wyckoff, Gann, and others published their research during that
decade. Their work went in two distinct directions. Some, such as Wyckoff
and Schabaker, saw charts as a graphic record of supply and demand in the
markets. Others, such as Elliott and Gann, searched for a perfect order in the
markets- a fascinating but futile undertaking (see Section 6).
In 1948, Edwards (who was a son-in-law of Schabaker) and Magee published Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. They popularized such concepts
as triangles, rectangles, head-and-shoulders, and other chart formations, as
well as support and resistance and trendlines. Other chartists have applied
these concepts to commodities.
Markets have changed a great deal since the days of Edwards and Magee.
In the 1940s, daily volume of an active stock on the New York Stock
Exchange was only several hundred shares, while in the 1990s it often
exceeds a million. The balance of power in the stock market has shifted in
favor of bulls. Early chartists wrote that stock market tops were sharp and
fast, while bottoms took a long time to develop. That was true in their deflationary era, but the opposite has been true since the 1950s. Now bottoms
tend to form quickly while tops tend to take longer.

The Meaning of a Bar Chart

Chart patterns reflect the tides of greed and fear among traders. This book
focuses on daily charts, but you can apply many of its principles to other
data. The rules for reading weekly, daily, hourly, or intraday charts are very
similar.
Each price is a momentary consensus of value of all market participants

18. CHARTING

,

71

1I , I '

s&p500

.L

396,.

I

'
1
11'
IItII 'I
Professionals (dose)
Max power of bean (low)
T

Figure 18-1.

,

399.00
393.

.. 398,W

.. 381,W

.. 384,88
.. 381,88
.. 318.88

.. 315,W
7

372188

nu!
The Meaning of a Bar Chart

Opening prices are set by amateurs, whose orders accumulate overnight
and hit the market in the morning. Closing prices are largely set by market professionals, who trade throughout the day. Note how often opening and closing prices are at opposite ends of a bar.
The high of each bar marks the maximum power of bulls during that
bar. The low of each bar marks the maximum power of bears during that
bar. Slippage tends to be less when you enter or exit positions during
short bars.

expressed in action. Each price bar provides several pieces of information
about the balance of power between bulls and bears (Figure 18-1).
The opening price of a daily or a weekly bar usually reflects the amateurs' opinion of value. They read morning papers, find out what happened
the day before, and call their brokers with orders before going to work.
Amateurs are especially active early in the day and early in the week.
Traders who researched the relationship between opening and closing prices
for several decades found that opening prices most often occur near the high or
the low of the daily bars. Buying or selling by amateurs early in the day creates
an emotional extreme from which prices recoil later in the day.
In bull markets, prices often make their low for the week on Monday or

72

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Tuesday on profit taking by amateurs, then rally to a new high on Thursday
or Friday. In bear markets, the high for the week is often set on Monday or
Tuesday, with a new low toward the end of the week, on Thursday or Friday.
The closing prices of daily and weekly bars tend to reflect the actions of
professional traders. They watch the markets throughout the day, respond to
changes, and become especially active near the close. Many of them take
profits at that time to avoid carrying trades overnight.
Professionals as a group usually trade against the amateurs. They tend to
buy lower openings, sell short higher openings, and unwind their positions as
the day goes on. Traders need to pay attention to the relationship between
opening and closing prices. If prices closed higher than they opened, then
market professionals were probably more bullish than amateurs. If prices
closed lower than they opened, then market professionals were probably
more bearish than amateurs. It pays to trade with the professionals and
against the amateurs.
The high of each bar represents the maximum power of bulls during that
bar. Bulls make money when prices go up. Their buying pushes prices
higher, and every uptick adds to their profits. Finally, bulls reach a point
where they cannot lift prices - not even by one more tick. The high of a daily
bar represents the maximum power of bulls during the day, and the high of a
weekly bar marks the maximum power of bulls during the week; the high of
a 5-minute bar reflects the maximum power of bulls during that 5-minute
period. The highest point of a bar represents the maximum power of bulls
during that bar.
The low of each bar represents the maximum power of bears during that
bar. Bears make money when prices go down. They keep selling short, their
selling pushes prices lower, and every downtick adds to their profits. At
some point they run out of either capital or enthusiasm, and prices stop
falling. The low of each bar shows the maximum power of bears during that
bar. The low of a daily bar marks the maximum power of bears during that
day, and the low of a weekly bar identifies the maximum power of bears during that week.
The closing tick of each bar reveals the outcome of a battle between
bulls and bears during that bar. If prices close near the high of the daily bar,
it shows that bulls won the day's battle. If prices close near the low of the
day, it shows that bears won the day. Closing prices on daily charts of the
futures markets are especially important. The amount of money in your
account depends on them because your account equity is "marked to market"
each night.
The distance between the high and the low of any bar reveals the inten-

18. CHARTING

73

sity of conflict between bulls and bears. An average bar marks a relatively
cool market. A bar that is only half as long as average reveals a sleepy, disinterested market. A bar that is two times taller than average shows a boiling
market where bulls and bears battle all over the field.
Slippage (see Section 3) is usually lower in quiet markets. It pays to enter
your trades during short or normal bars. Tall bars are good for taking profits.
Trying to put on a position when the market is running is like jumping on a
moving train. It is better to wait for the next one.

JapaneseCandlesticks

Japanese rice traders began using candlestick charts some two centuries
before the first chartists appeared in America. Instead of bars, these charts
have rows of candles with wicks at both ends. The body of each candle r e p
resents the distance between the opening and closing prices. If the closing
price is higher than the opening, the body is white. If the closing price is
lower, the body is black.
The tip of the upper wick represents the high of the day, and the bottom of
the lower wick represents the low of the day. The Japanese consider highs and
lows relatively unimportant, according to Steve Nison, author of Japanese
Candlestick Charting Techniques. They focus on the relationship between
opening and closing prices and on patterns that include several candles.
The main advantage of a candlestick chart is its focus on the struggle
between amateurs who control openings and professionals who control closings. Unfortunately, most candlestick chartists fail to use many tools of
Westem analysts. They ignore volume and have no trendlines or technical
indicators. These gaps are being filled by modem American analysts such as
Greg Morris, whose Candlepower software combines Western technical
indicators with classical candlestick patterns.

Market Profile

This charting technique for tracking accumulation and distribution during
each trading session was developed by J. Peter Steidlmayer. Market Profile
requires access to real-time data-a constant flow of quotes throughout the
day. It assigns one letter of the alphabet to each half-hour of trading. Each
price level reached during that half-hour is marked with its own letter.
As prices change, more and more letters fill the screen, creating a bell-

74

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

shaped curve. When prices erupt in a trend, Market Profile reflects that by
becoming elongated. Market Profile is sometimes combined with Liquidity
Data Bank. It tracks intraday volume of trading by several groups-floor
traders, hedgers, and off-the-floor traders.

Efficient Markets, Random Walk, and Nature's Law

Efficient Market tbeory is an academic notion that nobody can outperform
the market because any price at any given moment incorporates all available
information. Warren Buffet, one of the most successful investors of our century, commented: "I think it's fascinating how the ruling orthodoxy can
cause a lot of people to think the earth is flat. Investing in a market where
people believe in efficiency is like playing bridge with someone who's been
told it doesn't do any good to look at the cards."
The logical flaw of Efficient Market theory is that it equates knowledge
with action. People may have knowledge, but the emotional pull of the
crowd often leads them to trade irrationally. A good analyst can detect repetitive patterns of crowd behavior on his charts and exploit them.
Random Walk theorists claim that market prices change at random. Of
course, there is a fair amount of randomness or "noise" in the markets, just
as there is randomness in any other crowd milling around. An intelligent
observer can identify repetitive behavior patterns of a crowd and make sensible bets on their continuation or reversal.
People have memories, they remember past prices, and their memories
influence their buying and selling decisions. Memories help create support
under the market and resistance above it. Random Walkers deny that memories of the past influence our behavior in the present.
As Milton Friedman has pointed out, prices carry information about the
availability of supply and the intensity of demand. Market participants use
that information to make their buying and selling decisions. For example,
consumers buy more merchandise when it is on sale and less when prices are
high. Financial traders are just as capable of logical behavior as homemakers
in a supermarket. When prices are low, bargain hunters step in. A shortage
can lead to a buying panic, but high prices choke off demand.
Nature's Law is the rallying cry of a clutch of mystics who oppose
Random Walkers in the financial markets. Mystics claim that there is a perfect order in the markets, which they say move like clockwork in response to
immutable natural laws. R. N. Elliott even titled his last book Nature's Law.

19. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

75

The "perfect order" crowd gravitates to astrology and looks for links
between prices and the movements of the planets. Most mystics try to hide
their astrological bent, but it is easy to draw them out of a shell. Next time
someone talks to you about natural order in the markets, ask him about
astrology. He will probably jump at the chance to come out of the closet and
talk about the stars.
Those who believe in perfect order in the markets accept that tops and
bottoms can be predicted far into the future. Amateurs love forecasts, and
mysticism provides a great marketing gimmick. It helps sell courses, trading
systems, and newsletters.
Mystics, Random Walk academics, and Efficient Market theorists have
one trait in common. They are equally divorced from the reality of the markets. Extremists argue with one another but they think alike.

19. SUPPORT A N D RESISTANCE
A ball hits the floor and bounces. It drops after it hits the ceiling. Support
and resistance are like a floor and a ceiling, with prices sandwiched between
them. Understanding support and resistance is essential for understanding
price trends and chart patterns. Rating their strength helps you decide
whether the trend is likely to continue or to reverse.
Support is a price level where buying is strong enough to interrupt or
reverse a downtrend. When a downtrend hits support, it bounces like a
diver who hits the bottom and pushes away from it. Support is represented
on a chart by a horizontal or near-horizontal line connecting several bottoms (Figure 19-1).
Resistance is a price level where selling is strong enough to interrupt or
reverse an uptrend. When an uptrend hits resistance, it stops or tumbles
down like a man who hits his head on a branch while climbing a tree.
Resistance is represented on a chart by a horizontal or near-horizontal line
connecting several tops.
It is better to draw support and resistance lines across the edges of congestion areas instead of extreme prices. The edges show where masses of traders
have changed their minds, while the extreme points reflect only panic among
the weakest traders.
Minor support or resistance causes trends to pause, while major support or
resistance causes them to reverse. Traders buy at support and sell at resistance, making their effectiveness a self-fulfilling prophecy.

76

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

British Pound

Figure 19-1.

Support and Resistance

Draw horizontal lines through the upper and lower edges of congestion
areas. The bottom line marks the support-the level at which buyers overpower sellers. The upper line identifies resistance, where sellers overpower buyers. Areas of support and resistance often switch their roles.
Note how the level of support in March became the line of resistance in
May. The strength of these barriers increases each time prices touch
them and bounce away.
Beware of false breakouts from support and resistance. The letter F
marks false breakouts on this chart. Amateurs tend to follow breakouts,
while professionals tend to fade (trade against) them. At the right edge of
the chart, prices are hitting strong resistance. This is the time to look for
a shorting opportunity, with a protective stop slightly above the line of
resistance.

Memories, Pain, and Regret

Support and resistance exist because people have memories. Our memories
prompt us to buy and sell at certain levels. Buying and selling by crowds of
traders creates support and resistance.
If traders remember that prices have recently stopped falling and turned
up from a certain level, they are likely to buy when prices approach that

19. SUPPORT A N D RESISTANCE

level again. If traders remember that an uptrend has recently reversed after
rising to a certain peak, they tend to sell and go short when prices approach
that level again.
For example, all major rallies in the stock market from 1966 until 1982
ended whenever the Dow Jones Industrial Average rallied to 950 or 1050.
The resistance was so strong that traders named it "A Graveyard in the Sky."
Once the bulls rammed the market through that level, it became a major s u p
port area.
Support and resistance exist because masses of traders feel pain and
regret. Traders who hold losing positions feel intense pain. Losers are determined to get out as soon as the market gives them another chance. Traders
who missed an opportunity feel regret and also wait for the market to give
them a second chance. Feelings of pain and regret are mild in trading ranges
where swings are small and losers do not get hurt too badly. Breakouts from
trading ranges create intense pain and regret.
When the market stays flat for a while, traders get used to buying at the
lower edge of the range and shorting at the upper edge. In uptrends, bears
who sold short feel pain and bulls feel regret that they did not buy more.
Both feel determined to buy if the market gives them a second chance. The
pain of bears and regret of bulls make them ready to buy, creating support
during reactions in an uptrend.
Resistance is an area where bulls feel pain, bears feel regret, and both are
ready to sell. When prices break down from a trading range, bulls who
bought feel pain, feel trapped, and wait for a rally to let them get out even.
Bears regret that they have not shorted more and wait for a rally to give them
a second chance to sell short. Bulls7 pain and bears7 regret create resistance- a ceiling above the market in downtrends. The strength of support
and resistance depends on the strength of feelings among masses of traders.

Strength of Support and Resistance
A congestion area that has been hit by several trends is like a cratered battlefield. Its defenders have plenty of cover, and an attacking force is likely to
slow down. The longer prices stay in a congestion zone, the stronger the
emotional commitment of bulls and bears to that area. When prices approach
that zone from above, it serves as support. When prices rally into it from
below, it acts as resistance. A congestion area can reverse its role and serve
as either support or resistance.

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

The strength of every support or resistance zone depends on three factors:
its length, its height, and the volume of trading that has taken place in it. You
can visualize these factors as the length, the width, and the depth of a congestion zone.
The longer a support or resistance area - its length of time or the number
of hits it took-the stronger it is. Support and resistance, like good wine,
become better with age. A 2-week trading range provides only minimal support or resistance, a 2-month range gives people time to become used to it
and creates intermediate support or resistance, while a 2-year range becomes
accepted as a standard of value and offers major support or resistance.
As support and resistance levels grow old, they gradually become weaker.
Losers keep washing out of the markets, replaced by newcomers who do not
have the same emotional commitment to old price levels. People who lost
money only recently remember full well what happened to them. They are
probably still in the market, feeling pain and regret, trying to get even.
People who made bad decisions several years ago are probably out of the
markets and their memories matter less.
The strength of support and resistance increases each time that area is hit.
When traders see that prices have reversed at a certain level, they tend to bet
on a reversal the next time prices reach that level.
The taller the support and resistance zone, the stronger it is. A tall congestion zone is like a tall fence around a property. A congestion zone whose
height equals 1 percent of current market value (four points in the case of the
S&P 500 at 400) provides only minor support or resistance. A congestion
zone that is 3 percent tall provides intermediate support or resistance, and a
congestion zone that is 7 percent tall or higher can grind down a major trend.
The greater the volume of trading in a support and resistance zone, the
stronger it is. High volume in a congestion area shows active involvement
by traders - a sign of strong emotional commitment. Low volume shows that
traders have little interest in transacting at that level - a sign of weak support
or resistance.

1. Whenever the trend you are riding approaches support or resistance,

tighten your .protective stop. A protective stop is an order to sell below
the market when you are long or to cover shorts above the market
when you are short. This stop protects you from getting badly hurt by

19. SUPPORT A N D RESISTANCE

an adverse market move. A trend reveals its health by how it acts
when it hits support or resistance. If it is strong enough to penetrate
that zone, it accelerates, and your tight stop is not touched. If a trend
bounces away from support or resistance, it reveals its weakness. In
that case, your tight stop salvages a good chunk of profits.
2. Support and resistance are more important on long-term charts than on
short-term charts. Weekly charts are more important than dailies. A
good trader keeps an eye on several timeframes and defers to the
longer one. If the weekly trend is sailing through a clear zone, the fact
that the daily trend is hitting resistance is less important. When a
weekly trend approaches support or resistance, you should be more
inclined to act.
3. Support and resistance levels are useful for placing stop-loss and protect-profit orders. The bottom of a congestion area is the bottom line
of support. If you buy and place your stop below that level, you give
the uptrend plenty of room. More cautious traders buy after an upside
breakout and place a stop in the middle of a congestion area. A true
upside breakout should not be followed by a pullback into the range,
just as a rocket is not supposed to sink back to its launching pad.
Reverse this procedure in downtrends.

Many traders avoid placing stops at round numbers. This superstition
began with off-the-cuff advice by Edwards and Magee to avoid placing stops
at round numbers because "everybody" was placing them there. Now, if
traders buy copper at 92, they place a stop at 89.75 rather than 90. When
they sell a stock short at 76, they place a protective stop at 80.25 rather than
80. These days there are fewer stops at round numbers than at fractional
numbers. It is better to place your stops at logical levels, round or not.

Markets spend more time in trading ranges than they do in trends. Most
breakouts from trading ranges are false breakouts. They suck in trend-followers just before prices return into the trading range. A false breakout is the
bane of amateurs, but professional traders love them.
Professionals expect prices to fluctuate without going very far most of the
time. They wait until an upside breakout stops reaching new highs or a
