
his statement reflects his degree of concern about the outlook for the Eurozone
economy and drove the EUR/USD below 1.40. He used the words “downside risks” 2
times more than August.…The tone of Trichet's press conference makes crystal clear
that not only is he done with raising interest rates but the central bank as a whole has
now moved to a more dovish stance.5
Note her careful attention to such subtle details like the number of times Trichet used the words
“downside risks.” She was clearly studying his prior statement to the press and was comparing it
to the current one line by line. This alertness to subtle wording changes in central bank statements
is common among forex analysts because both central banks and analysts understand that these
subtle changes in wording are how central banks communicate to the markets (although some are
moving to more explicit communication in the future).

Anything That Influences Central Bank Rate Policy Influences Forex
Markets
That markets can and do move on such subtle hints again underscores how it isn't fundamentals that
move markets but rather the markets' collective perceptions of them. It highlights the power central
banks have to influence forex and other markets. So, it's no surprise that anything that might influence
central bank policy may influence forex and other financial markets regardless of whether it has any
immediate impact on the economy.
What influences central bank policy? Again, funny you should ask.

MACROECONOMIC DATA AND INDICATORS
These influence currency prices because they're barometers of the following:
The health of the underlying economy: That means increased demand for that economy's currency
from exports and foreign investment in local hard assets like businesses and real estate.
The direction of interest rates and central bank policy: As noted earlier, faster growth makes
inflation more likely and thus further rate increases more likely because:
Central banks use rate increases to reduce inflation risk
They like to raise rates in times of growth to allow room to lower rates when their economies
start slowing and need a boost.

Example: EURUSD Uptrend Reverses in Late 2009 as Data Show
Europe Slows, U.S. Grows
From early March until December 4, 2009, the EUR/USD had a strong uptrend but that trend stalled
between November 26 and December 4, reversed hard, and the dollar began to gain against the EUR
(see Figure 6.8).
FIGURE 6.8 EURUSD Daily Chart, August 11, 2009, to January 28, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Here's why.
On November 26, 2009, Dubai announced that $59 billion in government-related bonds were at risk
of default, which in turn caused markets to focus on the creditworthiness of a number of other
potential sovereign default risks in the EZ (Euro-zone), lowering expectations for EZ growth and
benchmark interest rates.
On December 4, 2009, the United States reported employment data, which were vastly better than
forecasted and which raised expectations for U.S. growth, spending, and interest rate increases. The
following week on Dec 11, those expectations were confirmed by consumer spending data that were
much better than expected. The U.S. economy still had troubles galore, from weak jobs and housing to
troubled banks, yet the EU was looking worse.
Over the coming month, credit rating downgrades to Greece and Spain, with more threatened,
further weakened EZ growth expectations, sending the pair lower.
This example underscores a key point about currency strength—that it's truly all relative. You don't
have to find a currency with a perfect underlying economy, just one with an economy that's improving
relative to that of another against which it's traded. Both the U.S. and EU economies (with some
exceptions) had deep problems that would not be solved soon.
In short, the underlying fundamentals of a currency don't have to be objectively good, just better than
enough of the others and voilà, you have an uptrending currency.
Which fundamental data are most important? Here are some guidelines:
The more directly it affects interest rate expectations, the more influential it is: Because
economic conditions change, some indicators become important to central bank policy.
What most affects rate expectations varies over time and place: During recessions, when inflation
is less of a concern, growth-related data like GDP, jobs, consumer spending, etc., become most
important. In boom times, when inflation is more of a concern, inflation data like the CPI and PPI
become more important.
If the central bank of a large economy indicates what macroeconomic data are most important in
guiding its rate policy, these data become a market focus. For example, throughout the recession

that began in 2007
The U.S. Federal Reserve said that jobs and spending data were its main guides for when it
could begin raising rates, so these reports took on added prominence.
Whereas fast growing China's central bank was most concerned about inflation, so Chinese
inflation data took on special importance. Data that suggested higher inflation meant more
steps to slow China's economy, which would be bad for global growth as China was the
primary growth engine in the world.
Thus monthly U.S. jobs and spending data as well Chinese inflation were especially strong
market moving data. Why were United States and Chinese data so influential? Take a wild guess,
then read on.
The larger the economy, the more important the data: Major fundamental data from the largest
economies like the United States, the European Union, China, and Japan are more influential on
global economic health, and forex markets than data of smaller economies like Switzerland, New
Zealand, or Canada (beyond their effects on the related forex pairs).
Influence varies with type of economy: For export-based economies like Japan and Brazil,
Russia, India, and China (the BRIC nations), data on exports and industrial production are more
important than for nations for which GDP is more based on consumer spending and financial
products like the United States and United Kingdom.
Rather than focusing on each of the key fundamentals, we'll provide a brief listing of the
macroeconomic indicators and data to watch and research as needed. Details of these may vary from
country to country. You'll find abundant free resources about them online. You need not memorize
them. Rather, check any good online economic calendar like those of ForexFactory.com and
DailyFX.com. These rank events by importance and include explanations of the significance of the
data. ForexFactory.com's calendar is better on the general significance, and DailyFX's explanations
are at times specifically updated to reflect specifics about the current announcement.
Quarterly Gross Domestic Product (GDP): Typically, there is an advanced or preliminary
reading about four weeks after the quarter ends, and a final one about three months after the
quarter ends. The preliminary reading is what carries the most influence because the final reading
rarely deviates from it.
Monthly jobs reports: Again, the more important the economy, the more important the report.
Jobs take on even greater significance in economies like the United States or United Kingdom,
where consumer spending is a more important component of GDP than manufacturing or exports.
Monthly retail sales: Same as above.
Inflation data: Typically monthly CPI and PPI.
Purchasing Manager's Index (PMI) for both manufacturing and service sectors: The key point is
that a reading over 50 suggests expansion, and under 50 suggests contraction. They provide a
measure of the health of manufacturing and service sectors, respectively.
Housing data: This includes a range of monthly reports like housing starts, new home sales,
existing home sales, new building permits, etc. Considered an indicator of what stage the
economy is in within the current business cycle. It is also a sign of the health of the banking
sector and consumer lending, consumer spending, and jobs, given the significant impact housing
has for these sectors. Remember that the Great Recession that began in 2007 started with

irresponsible and excessive mortgage lending that created a real estate bubble ending in what
became known as the subprime crisis. This in turn lead to a banking solvency and liquidity crisis,
which spread and essentially crashed much of the developed world's economies.
Again, you could follow more indicators and reports, but these are enough to get you started. As you
develop your trading style and preferred news and analysis sources, you'll develop your own list.

Geopolitics
Though all financial markets can be influenced by major geopolitical events like news of political
instability in key countries or military actions, few are as sensitive as the forex market because of its
extremely international nature. Of course, certain currencies and their related pairs will be especially
sensitive to related local developments. As stock prices reflect market sentiment about companies, so
do currencies for countries. Thus, they are responsive to geopolitical changes insofar as these affect
expectations for interest rates, growth, trade and capital flows, and so on for the underlying
economies.
Because the professional traders who manage the big money in forex focus first on risk management
(take the hint, so should you), the first rule of trading based on geopolitical unrest is that markets tend
to sell first and ask questions later. In other words, markets are prone to volatility in times of serious
unrest. Remember, whenever professionals fear any threat to their capital, they quickly retreat into
cash, especially safe haven currencies, until the political risk fades.
In sum, a general rule of thumb in all kinds of financial markets including forex is that politics
usually trumps economics. In other words, very good or bad geopolitical data tend to outweigh
economic data.

Capital and Trade Flows
Another key factor in analyzing the demand for a given currency is whether the underlying economy is
more dependent on trade flow or capital flow. In other words, is the economy based more on exports
or attracting foreign investment? Trade flow refers to a country's income from trade, i.e., exports.
Capital flow refers to how much investment it draws from abroad. Export-oriented economies depend
more on trade flows, and countries more focused on financial industries are more dependent on
capital flows.
The export-oriented economies, whose currency strength depends on their trade flows include:
Canada: oil, gas
Australia: industrial and precious metals
New Zealand: agricultural products, particularly dairy products
China, Japan, and Germany: finished high value-added manufactured goods, heavy industry
In contrast, for the United States and United Kingdom, which have large liquid investment markets,
capital flows are of far greater significance. In these countries, financial services are a larger part of
GDP compared to the export nations. For example, in the United States, financial services contributed
about 40 percent of the total profits of the S&P 500. No wonder the economic crisis that began in the
summer of 2007 in the United States and spread worldwide originated in the U.S. banking sector with
the subprime mortgage lending crisis.

All recent U.S. economic downturns (which usually become global due to the size of the U.S.
economy) originated out of the financial sector, particularly bank lending (Latin American debt crisis
of the early 1980s, savings and loan crisis of the early 1990s, the dot-com stock market collapse in
2001, and the subprime mortgage lending crisis of 2007).
The United States exemplifies why it is critical to understand which kinds of flows affect which
country. Given America's trade and current account deficit, one would think the USD would be worth
little. However, throughout the past decades, the USD has performed much better than that. The United
States' highly liquid, diverse, relatively well-regulated, and transparent capital markets allowed it to
attract more than enough surplus capital from the rest of the world to offset the negative effects of its
massive trade deficits. If, however, the United States should suddenly cease attracting adequate
capital flows to balance its trade and current account deficits, the USD would likely plunge. Badly.
There are two basic kinds of capital flows:
1. From investment in physical assets like factories, real estate, and businesses.
2. From investment in financial assets like equities and bonds or other debt instruments.
Indeed, it's possible to view financial products as just another kind of product sold that builds
demand for the local currency, just like exports of tangible goods. The result is the same: steady
demand for the local currency.
Here's another example of how capital flows can affect a currency pair. During part of 2009, as part
of its economic stimulus program, the Japanese government allowed Japanese exporters to repatriate
profits earned abroad at reduced tax rates. As the deadline for this reduced rate approached, pressure
increased on the USDJPY because whenever the pair would rise (i.e., the USD would go up relative
to the JPY), dollar-loaded Japanese exporters would sell some of their accumulated piles of U.S.
dollars and buy bargain-priced yen.

Merger and Acquisition (M&A) Activity
Remember how we warned earlier that short-term price moves can be unpredictable because they are
driven by short-term money flows that are often impossible to foresee? Here's one reason why.
Merger and acquisition (M&A) activity can be the most powerful force behind near-term currency
moves, even though it's the least significant long-term driver of forex prices. M&A activity refers to
when a company from one economic region wants to buy a corporation or large capital asset like a
division of a company or a major real estate acquisition in another currency.
For example, if an Asian company wanted to buy an American asset for $30 billion, it would have
to go into the currency market and acquire U.S. dollars to pay for it. Typically, these deals are time
sensitive because the acquirer has a contract to pay by a certain date. This time pressure can cause a
sudden spike in demand for a given currency, so M&A flow can exert a strong albeit temporary force
on FX trading, sometimes influencing currency prices for days or weeks as the buyer attempts to buy
slowly to prevent a self-inflicted loss from rising conversion costs. It may continue longer because
certain market conditions can promote a wave of such purchases. For example, when a booming
economy in one country leaves its companies flush with their native currency that is suddenly
unusually high versus another currency, assets denominated in that cheaper currency are at bargain
prices, resulting in a wave of acquisitions and a spike in demand for the cheaper currency. Look at
these examples:

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Asian buyers became significant acquirers of major U.S. assets
such as film and music companies, and landmark real estate projects like New York's
Rockefeller Center.
In the fall of 2006, Canada surprised markets, announcing that the popular Canadian income trusts
would lose their tax-advantaged status. The Harper government exacerbated the situation by not
grandfathering any of the long-term investors who held positions in income trusts. The next day,
despite the lack of good USD news, the USDCAD rose as traders dumped the CAD in
anticipation of tens of billions in investment capital fleeing Canadian stocks. Most of the
companies were healthy, and it was years before the law took effect. Again, politics trumped
economics.

Short-Term Illiquidity: A Lack of Buyers and Sellers
Periodically, typically in the final days or hours before long weekends or holidays, the number of
traders drops off sharply as they head home to start vacations early. That can mean quiet uneventful
trading. It can cause wild price movements should a sudden imbalance occur between buyers and
sellers as is the case when major surprises hit illiquid markets.
For example, on Wednesday afternoon (EST) November 26, 2009, most traders in the United States
and the Middle East had already ceased trading for holidays in both regions. Then came a shocking
announcement of a major bond default concerning the Dubai government's sovereign investment fund.
Whether or not the timing of the announcement was intentional, the resulting price movements were
exaggerated by the lack of buyers for suddenly unwanted risk currencies and of sellers of the newly
desired safe haven currencies.
As shown in Figure 6.9, risk currency pairs like the EURUSD were in strong uptrends at the time.
Indeed the EURUSD was at a multiyear high and had just made another strong move higher. Yet the
announcement brought a sharp reversal even though, on the surface, the Dubai debt could be seen as a
minor event. For those seeking to take profits on the high EURUSD, few buyers were on hand, and the
move down was significant and signaled a longer-term drop in the EURUSD.
FIGURE 6.9 EURUSD Daily Chart, September 7 to November 10, 2009
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Because low liquidity can amplify volatility if surprises occur, many traders will avoid trading on
known low liquidity days though they can provide great bargains from panicked sellers.

Government and Central Bank Special Interventions in Times of Crisis
One of the most enduring lessons of the “Great Recession” that began in the summer of 2007 is that in
desperate times governments will take desperate measures that by definition are unique and thus
unpredictable.
After the subprime crisis in the United States morphed into a global banking crisis with the fall of
Lehman Brothers and global markets appeared to be at the brink of the abyss in early 2009, intensive
government intervention produced a rally in risk assets that lasted until late 2009, with the start of the
EU sovereign debt and banking crisis.
In the fall of 2010, when it appeared that risk asset markets might again be in trouble, the U.S.
Federal Reserve Bank (Fed) came riding to the rescue with a new stimulus plan, called QE 2. Risk
asset markets perceived this would provide at least a temporary boost for risk assets.
In July 2011, when the EU sovereign debt and banking crisis worsened, a series of policy blunders
caused too-big-to-bail Italy's bond yields to spike. For the rest of 2011 and in to 2012, markets
started moving mostly with speculation about what EU and U.S. officials would do to prevent the EU
crisis from going global.
Indeed, as of this writing in mid-2012, the policies of the central banks of the largest economies, the
Fed, ECB, PBOC, BoJ, and so on have arguably become more influential than any time in the past half
century.

NEWS TRADING: DAY TRADING BASED ON SHORTTERM FUNDAMENTALS
The only day traders with any interest in fundamentals are news traders, those who base trades off of

major news announcements. Like any other forex day trading:
It's mostly based on technical analysis and methodologies, with news serving as the catalyst.
Few succeed at it though some claim to prosper handsomely from it.
Like most investors, this not my area of preference or expertise, so I can only advise you to treat
this like any other form of day trading. Study it well, and don't risk much money on it until you've
built a method and track record, first on practice accounts and then with small positions using
real money.
I'll mention a few points to get you started. From there, you can find plenty of online material, often
free. The same prior warnings about day trading forex apply.

What News Traders Watch
Certain news items change expectations about these and can move markets within moments of their
announcement. Here is a list of news items that can move markets within minutes and tend to be most
followed by news traders.
This list was prepared based on the behavior of the USD as of the time of this writing, but it applies
to the economic news of any currency, and only the names of the reports may vary somewhat from
country to country:
Any major geopolitical event: For example, political unrest or heightened military tensions
involving in a major economy or commodity supplier (especially oil) will have an impact.
Threats to global banking: Every global recession of the past 40+ years began in some form in
the banking sector. Big bank failures tend to make markets nervous, especially if they signal that
third parties could be destabilized because they, too, have third parties that could suffer, and
voila, a spreading banking crisis or contagion.6
Monthly jobs reports: Nonfarm payrolls change month to month, unemployment rate, and so on,
can have an impact.
Central Bank interest rate announcements and comments on economic outlook.
GDP (preliminary, not final reading).
Inflation (CPI, PPI).
Consumer spending: Retail sales, personal spending.
Housing: New and existing home sales, building permits, and so forth.
Durable goods orders.
Business sentiment: PMI for nonmanufacturing and service sectors, etc. Within these, pay
attention to the price (indicates degree of inflation) and employment (an advance indicator of
nonfarm payroll direction) components, or at least what your preferred commentators say about
them.
Consumer Confidence Report: Like the Conference Board and University of Michigan Consumer
Confidence.
Industrial Production: Most important for export-oriented economies.
Again, the relative importance of economic data changes with time and circumstances. For example,
during the ongoing recession that began in 2007, all major central banks cut interest rates and
increased money supply to stimulate growth. These may have been necessary steps to help their
economies, but they made financial assets like currencies less attractive to hold and more prone to

losing purchasing power.
Thus, the more a news item had the power to change expectations about the rate and extent of
stimulus withdrawal or interest rate increases, the more it influenced currency markets. In the early
1990s, however, U.S. trade balance was a foremost concern for dollar traders and a major market
mover.
As noted earlier, the more influence something is believed to have on short-term interest rates or
growth expectations, the greater its market moving potential. For example, because markets
understood that the Fed wouldn't raise rates until there was a significant and sustained improvement in
the monthly jobs and consumer spending reports, those reports became especially important.
