Violating Your Trading Plan
If you can’t stick to your trading plan, you’re unlikely to make it as a professional swing trader. Your trading plan is your strategy. It governs how you
trade, when you trade, and how you exit. Your trading plan should impose
certain restrictions, such as how much you allocate to a single position or
how you respond to losses. Those restrictions are in place to protect your
capital, because the markets often lull people into a sense of confidence —
only to pull the rug from underneath them when they start to cut corners.
Violating your trading plan is a little like defying authority. But unlike in a
traditional job setting, where defiance involves an employee and employer,
trading plan violations are acts of defiance against yourself. You’re literally
hurting yourself, whether you know it or not.

297

298 Part V: The Part of Tens
In addition to the macro problem with violating your trading plan, the other
risk is that if you violate it routinely, even in small matters, you may violate
your plan in bigger areas — such as position sizing or diversification standards. In other words, you start to think you’re above the law and can make
decisions as you see fit. Who needs a trading plan when you’re numero uno
in the market? This negligence represents a mass abandonment of timetested, necessary rules.
As a swing trader, worry about yourself and not others. Don’t chase spectacular
returns that competitors generate by being careless. History has shown that the
race goes not to the swift nor the battle to the strong. Success comes from a disciplined application of the trading rules that have proven themselves over time.
Of course, you can always revise trading plans if you want. Just do it outside the
market hours and for a good reason, like making changes only after reviewing
and assessing your trading journal entries. Random acts of violation (sounds like
a criminal term, I know) make deciphering the source of strengths or weaknesses
in your plan rather difficult.

Appendix

Resources
In This Appendix
 Choosing trading and charting software
 Researching the market
 Monitoring your portfolio
 Sharpening your trading skills

S

wing traders rely on a variety of products and services to analyze potential trades and stay sharp in their work. Throughout this book, I’ve used
snapshots from various services and Web sites I consult on a regular basis.
This appendix provides more details on the top ten resources I recommend.
These resources aren’t necessities, but they do help you quickly identify securities and monitor their activity. Other resources keep you sharp on your game.

Sourcing and Charting
Your Trading Ideas
Swing trading ideas typically come from bottom-up screening or top-down
searches. In this section, I present a bottom-up screening Web site (Magic
FormulaInvesting) and a top-down software tool (High Growth Stock Investor)
that can also do bottom-up screening. I also turn your attention to a useful
financial newspaper (Investor’s Business Daily) that publishes a wealth of
valuable data and a real-time charting system (TradeStation) so you can chart
your trading ideas.

Trading ideas:
MagicFormulaInvesting.com
Normally, I’d be turned off by a Web site that has the word “magic” in its title.
But this Web site is very different from any you’ve visited.

300 Swing Trading For Dummies
MagicFormulaInvesting.com is the brainchild of Joel Greenblatt, a successful
hedge fund manager. The “magic formula” that the site’s title refers to is a
simple quantitative ranking formula that Greenblatt developed. This formula
assesses securities by two measures:
 A cheapness measure: Similar to the inverse of the P/E ratio
 An efficiency measure: Similar to the return on equity ratio I describe in
Chapter 8
Greenblatt, who wrote a book about this formula titled The Little Book That
Beats the Market (published by Wiley), found that ranking securities solely on
these two criteria generated a list of candidates that mightily outperformed
the overall market. The formula is geared to long-term investors who are
encouraged to hold stocks appearing at the top of the formula’s rankings and
update holdings at least annually.
So how can a long-term investor-type formula serve any purpose for the
swing trader?
Well, as it turns out, these stocks are often great places to find trading ideas.
Although Greenblatt encourages his readers to be patient and wait for promising candidates to start generating healthy returns, swing traders can simply
buy those candidates that are beginning their rise and avoid those that have
yet to turn around.
The Web site — which is free to use — allows you to view the top-ranked
securities above a certain market capitalization you specify. This makes
screening for highly rated small cap stocks or highly rated large cap stocks
a cinch. After registering for the site, you’re asked to enter the minimum
market cap of the securities you’re screening for and the number of topranked securities you’d like to view (25, 50, or 100). After clicking on “Go!” the
screen generates the top-ranked securities meeting these criteria.
MagicFormulaInvesting.com is a bottom-up screen that looks only at fundamental criteria to identify promising securities. You can start using the
screen today by logging onto www.magicformulainvesting.com.

Trading software: High Growth
Stock Investor
High Growth Stock Investor (HGS Investor) is a software tool that assists in
identifying promising candidates to buy or short. The software incorporates
both fundamental analysis data and technical analysis data. The software
can be used to identify securities using both a top-down and a bottom-up
approach.

Appendix: Resources
What I like about HGS Investor is its efficiency. Inside of five minutes, I can
determine the overall state of the financial markets and where the strength
or weakness is, industry-group-wise. This makes my job easy because I can
simply look for long or short candidates in the strongest or weakest industry
groups in the market.
To assist you in identifying which industry groups to analyze, HGS Investor
color-codes industry group rankings. Industry groups performing in the top 20
percent of the market are color-coded green. The next 20 percent of industry
groups are color-coded yellow. The industry groups ranking in the bottom 60
percent of the market are color-coded red.
HGS Investor also allows you to analyze commodities, dividend-paying securities, international securities, and value investments. Though some traders
use HGS Investor for longer-term horizons than swing traders typically would,
the software can be extremely valuable for the traditional swing trader.
You can get a free trial of HGS Investor by visiting the firm’s Web site at www.
highgrowthstock.com. An annual subscription costs around $600.

Financial newspaper with stock ideas:
Investor’s Business Daily
Investor’s Business Daily (IBD) is a financial newspaper geared toward the
short-term trader. The newspaper offers stock ideas daily (primarily long)
and combines fundamental and technical criteria in its quantitative ranking
measures for nearly every company that trades on the NYSE, Nasdaq, and the
American Stock Exchange. IBD has an affinity for small cap companies generating strong earnings growth and flying under the radar screen of most asset
managers. Often, IBD highlights infant companies before they become huge.
You can use IBD as a source of trading ideas. Each day, the newspaper highlights companies making new highs — often ripe territory for finding promising
long candidates. IBD also highlights securities that have just emerged from
bases and may be ripe for purchase. IBD is built around the top-down trading
philosophy and emphasizes strong industry groups and strong stocks within
those groups. The newspaper favors growth-oriented securities over valueoriented securities.
IBD can also assist you in selecting companies with strong (or weak) fundamental and technical criteria. IBD provides a wealth of information on thousands of stocks every day, including such data as the following:

301

302 Swing Trading For Dummies
 Earnings per Share Growth Rating: This fundamentals-based ranking
compares a firm’s earnings growth history to the other companies in the
market. The higher the earnings growth relative to the overall market,
the higher the EPS rating. The scale runs from 1 to 99. As a swing trader,
you should focus on buying companies with EPS ratings of 80 or higher.
 Relative Price Strength Rating: This may be viewed as a technical ranking
because it compares the price performance of a security to all securities
in the market. The higher the rating, the better the security has performed
relative to the market. The lower the rating, the worse the security has
performed relative to the market. This scale also runs from 1 to 99, but
you want to focus on buying companies with RS ratings of 80 or higher.
 Sales + Profit Margins + Return on Equity: IBD attempts to simplify fundamental analysis for you by crunching these figures and generating a
grade of either A, B, C, D, or E. Of course, an A rating is assigned to companies with superior sales growth, profit margins, and return on equity
ratios as measured against other firms in the market. Swing traders
should focus on buying companies with a rating of A or B. Avoid buying
companies with a rating of D or E.
 Accumulation/Distribution last three months: According to IBD, this
rating measures “relative degree of institutional buying (accumulation)
and selling (distribution) in a particular stock over the last 13 weeks.”
Translated into English, this rating looks at whether investors are buying
shares en masse or selling shares en masse. Although IBD doesn’t disclose
the actual formula, it’s safe to say that the measure compares volume on
days a security closes higher to volume on days a security closes lower.
As with the previous rating, stick to companies on the long side of the
market with Accumulation/Distribution ratings of A or B and avoid buying
companies with Accumulation/Distribution ratings of D or E. Stocks rated
C are showing neither strong accumulation nor strong distribution.
 IBD Composite Rating: Finally, IBD publishes a Composite Rating that
sums up a security’s score on the aforementioned criteria and adds
in a security’s industry group ranking. The Composite Rating ranges
between 1 and 99. As with the Earnings per Share Growth Rating and the
Relative Price Strength Rating, I recommend buying stocks with an IBD
Composite Rating of 80 or higher.
You can purchase IBD at your local bookstore, or visit the firm’s Web site to
begin a free trial: www.investors.com.

Charting software: TradeStation
You can find dozens of charting programs on the market. I’m partial to
TradeStation, the software used for the majority of charts in this book,
because of its seamless integration of charting and trading.

Appendix: Resources
TradeStation is more than just a trading software tool. When the company
was founded, charting and indicators were its bread and butter. TradeStation
allows users to tap one of the dozen indicators that come prepackaged in the
program or design their own trading indicators. By using those indicators,
you can develop and backtest your trading strategies.
TradeStation now incorporates brokerage with the charting platform. It allows
users to trade futures, equities, options, and even the foreign exchange market.
What I appreciate about the program is the ability to monitor positions in
real time and put trading alerts on every position I hold. For example, if
I’m long shares of IBM and want an alert if shares trade at a price of $110, I can
automate that in TradeStation and have an e-mail sent or alert signaled if
my criterion is met. I place such alerts on every position I hold and on
candidates I’m looking to trade.
TradeStation has won broker awards from the financial newspaper Barron’s
and the trading magazine Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities. You
can learn more about the program by visiting www.tradestation.com. The
TradeStation platform is free to brokerage clients who do a minimum number
of trades a month (check with TradeStation to find out what that minimum is).

Doing Your Market Research
Swing traders should always be sharpening their pencils. They should know
what’s going on in the macroeconomic environment. For example, are interest
rates high or low? Is the Fed concerned about inflation or economic growth?
Is the U.S. dollar strengthening or weakening? You can keep abreast of these
big-picture questions by staying on top of the latest news from financial
publications. I recommend the following two.

PIMCO’s Bill Gross commentary
The Pacific Investment Management Company (PIMCO) is the largest fixed
income investment firm in the world. As of December 31, 2007, PIMCO managed
some $750 billion in assets and employed nearly 1,000 people. William H. Gross
founded PIMCO in 1971 and eventually sold the company to a German-based
insurance firm for a tidy profit. Today, Gross manages the largest bond fund in
the world, the PIMCO Total Return Fund. Prior to entering the financial world,
Gross was a professional blackjack player in Las Vegas — a profession he says
helped prepare him for Wall Street because the game focuses on calculating the
odds of success and spreading risk appropriately.

303

304 Swing Trading For Dummies
Each month, Gross publishes an investment outlook piece. Although this
outlook is unlikely to provide short-term trading ideas, Gross does identify
major themes occurring in the financial markets. These themes may play out
over the coming weeks, months, or even years, but being aware of them can
be profitable. Gross is a fundamentals-based investor, and knowing the “why”
behind Fed decisions or economic growth patterns is useful to any trader.
Gross’s commentary is humorous, enlightening, and educational, and I make
it a habit to read his outlook piece every month. But I should warn you: To
fully understand the high-level concepts that Gross presents, you may need
to do some additional reading. I view this as a good thing because it pushes
you to raise your swing trading game.
You can access Gross’s commentary by visiting PIMCO’s Web site and viewing the “Featured Market Commentary.” You can even sign up for e-mail alerts
when Gross’s commentary is published — all for free. See www.pimco.com.

Barron’s weekly financial newspaper
Barron’s is a weekly financial newspaper that covers equities, bonds, commodities, mutual funds, and so on. I subscribe to the newspaper and review
it on the weekends to keep up to speed on the major events that happened
in the past week or that may be happening in the coming week. Why do I
choose a weekly paper over a daily one, such as The Wall Street Journal? Well,
plenty of random market events occur on a daily basis. But much of it is just
noise — immaterial news used to fill pages more than to convey anything of
substance — and it can cause you to lose your focus.
Weekly newspapers are less susceptible to that problem (but still susceptible, nonetheless). Although swing traders don’t need a play-by-play of the
financial markets to profit, an ESPN summary of the game is helpful.
Generally, I don’t rely on Barron’s for trading ideas. Your primary sources for such
ideas should be HGS Investor and Investor’s Business Daily, both of which I highlight
earlier in this appendix, as well as other financial Web sites. But Barron’s is a valuable educational tool. I always review “Up & Down on Wall Street” to get a humorous and satirical take on the markets and the “Commodities Corner” to review
events taking place in major commodities. Other noteworthy columns include the
“International Trader” and “Charting the Market.”
To subscribe to Barron’s, visit www.barrons.com. As of this writing, a year’s
subscription costs $99 for the print edition or $149 for the print and online
editions.

Appendix: Resources

Keeping Tabs on Your Portfolio
and the Latest Market News
When you hold a portfolio of swing trading positions, you’re going to want
to stay on top of them like a hawk. But how can you do that, aside from
watching their prices change during the day? Monitoring your portfolio on a
day-to-day basis can be cumbersome, especially as you hold more and more
securities. Although setting alerts on your securities by using technical trading software (such as TradeStation, which I cover earlier in this appendix)
is important, you should also keep tabs on any fundamental news developments that occur.

Yahoo! Finance portfolio tool
The easiest way I’ve found to keep tabs on all the news on my positions is to
use the portfolio tool from Yahoo! Finance. This tool allows you to quickly
enter the symbols of your portfolio holdings. After the symbols are loaded, the
tool pulls down any news headlines associated with those symbols, sorted by
date, from such sources as Barron’s magazine, TheStreet.com, and company
press releases circulated by Reuters and the Associated Press. By checking
this Web site on a daily basis, you can stay on top of company announcements
(such as earnings dates) or positive/negative mentions of your securities in the
popular press. I can quickly stay on top of a portfolio of 25 positions by using
this portfolio monitoring service. And the best part is, it’s free.
To see the portfolio tool, visit Yahoo! Finance at finance.yahoo.com. Then
click on the tab labeled “My Portfolio.” You may need to sign onto Yahoo! or
create a Yahoo! ID to uniquely identify you and your holdings. After you’ve
logged onto Yahoo!, you can edit or create portfolios on Yahoo! Finance.

Yahoo! Economic Calendar
On almost every business day, the federal government or private organizations release economic news that affects financial markets. Some of the
information is very important (such as Federal Reserve Bank interest rate
decisions), whereas other data points have little impact.
To keep yourself apprised of the important stuff, turn to Yahoo! Economic
Calendar, which provides a listing of all major economic news scheduled
to be released in any given week. The Web site shows what data is to be

305

306 Swing Trading For Dummies
released, how important the data is, and what the market expects the data to
be. Some data is released before the market opens, and other data is released
during market hours. I check the site at least once a week to know what
major news items I can expect.
Most news items on Yahoo! Economic Calendar are defined and rated a grade
that indicates their level of importance. Items with low grades, like C or D,
aren’t critical to your trading game. The only time those reports move markets is when the numbers come in way too high or way too low. Keep your
watchful eye on reports graded A or B.
But how do you know when a report helps or hurts stocks? Follow these
guidelines:
 Inflation: Generally, higher-than-expected inflationary data (in the form
of the Consumer Price Index or the Producer Price Index) is negative for
both stocks and bonds.
 Economic data: The growth rate in the country’s gross domestic product may be interpreted as bearish or bullish for stocks, depending on
the stage of the economic cycle. If the economy is weak, then strong
economic growth numbers are highly prized. However, if the economy is
overheating, a strong economic report may send stock prices falling fast.
 Central Bank Actions: These actions (for example, lowering or raising
short-term interest rates) tend to have the largest effects on financial
markets. When the Federal Reserve lowers interest rates by more than
market expectations, it generally leads to rallies in stocks and bonds.
When the Federal Reserve raises interest rates by more than market
expectations, it generally leads to declines in stocks and bonds.
If these financial terms make you woozy, don’t worry. You don’t need to become
an economist to swing trade successfully. I just want you to be on top of the
reasons behind market movements so you can position yourself accordingly.
You can access the Yahoo! Economic Calendar page at biz.yahoo.com/
c/e.html.

Fine-Tuning Your Trading Techniques
In order to improve your swing trading methods, use your spare time to stay
up to speed on the latest research concerning trading techniques, indicators,
and other facets of your trading plan. I recommend a couple resources that
will help make you a better trader — a monthly magazine to assist in refining
your system and a book to help get you in the right trading state of mind.

Appendix: Resources

Technical Analysis of Stocks
& Commodities magazine
Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities is a magazine devoted to analyzing
stocks and commodities from a technical perspective. The magazine is released
monthly and covers charting, computer trading methods, and technical software
products. The magazine also features interviews with trading professionals
discussing their approach to the markets.
The magazine isn’t a resource for trading ideas. Rather, it helps traders improve
their trading techniques by applying existing indicators or by using new ones.
When computer code is necessary to implement an indicator that the magazine discusses, the formula or code is usually included. And I like the fact that
figures are interspersed with the text to make concepts easy to understand.
You shouldn’t implement every strategy or indicator you read about in this
magazine. Rather, look to refine your own systems by incorporating nuggets
of information that arise from time to time. Your trading system shouldn’t
change on a day-to-day basis (or month to month, for that matter). But the
techniques you use can be refined if such honing improves performance.
To subscribe to or find out more about this magazine, visit www.traders.
com or call 800-832-4642.

The Black Swan: The Impact
of the Highly Improbable
True knowledge is understanding one’s ignorance. Financial markets teach
that lesson to thousands every day.
Nassim Taleb’s book, The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable,
colorfully educates readers on the risks of thinking they know more than they
really do. The book’s title comes from the problem of induction, or drawing
generalities based on particular events. For example, a scientist in Europe who
witnesses thousands and thousands of white swans may come to the conclusion that “All swans are white.” However, just because the scientist never witnesses a black swan doesn’t mean that black swans don’t exist. (Black swans
do in fact exist.) Similarly in trading, you can’t assume that certain events can’t
happen just because they’ve never happened before. And you can’t assume
that certain relationships must continue to exist in the future simply because
they’ve existed in the past.
