follows the system.
93

2. The maximum risk on each trade is limited to 1 percent of total equity.
3. Mint carries diversification to an extreme. First, their system is really a combination of many
different systems, selected not only for their individual performance, but also for their degree of
lack of correlation with other selected systems. Second, Mint trades in an extraordinarily wide
spectrum of markets (nearly sixty in all), encompassing exchanges in the U.S. and five foreign
countries and diverse market groups including stock indexes, interest rates, currencies, raw industrial goods, and agricultural commodities.
4. Volatility is continually tracked in each market in order to generate signals to liquidate or
temporarily suspend trading in those markets where the risk/reward ratio exceeds well-defined
limits.
One final observation: After merely earning a modest living at some colorful careers (such as,
scriptwriter, actor, rock promoter), Larry Hite succeeded spectacularly in the single endeavor for
which he had the greatest enthusiasm—fund manager. I found this to be a striking example of Ed
Seykota' s comment: "It is a happy circumstance that when nature gives us true burning desires, it
also gives us the means to satisfy them."

94

Part II-Mostly Stocks

95

Michael Steinhardt-The Concept of Variant Perception
Michael Steinhardt's interest in the stock market dates back to his bar mitzvah, when his father gave
him 200 shares of stock as a present. He recalls hanging out in the local brokerage office as a
teenager, watching the ticker tape along with the old men, while his friends were out playing
stickball. A very bright student, Steinhardt completed his education at an accelerated pace,
graduating from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1960 at the age of
nineteen. Steinhardt headed straight for Wall Street, landing his first job as a research assistant. In
subsequent years, he held positions as a financial journalist and a research analyst. In 1967, having
established a reputation as a talented analyst, Steinhardt and two other partners founded the
investment firm of Steinhardt, Fine and Berkowitz—the predecessor to Steinhardt Partners. (Fine
and Berkowitz left the firm in the late 1970s.)
In the twenty-one years since its inception, Steinhardt's firm has achieved a truly remarkable track
record. During that time, Steinhardt Partners has realized a compounded annual growth rate of over
30 percent (just under 25 percent after subtracting a 20 percent profit incentive fee). In comparison,
the S&P 500 index registered only an 8.9 percent compounded annual growth rate (dividends
included) during the same period. One thousand dollars invested with the firm at its start in 1967
would have grown to over $93,000 by Spring 1988 (after deducting prof it incentive fees). To put
that in perspective, the same $1,000 invested in a basket of S&P stocks would only have grown to
$6,400. Gain is only part of the story; Steinhardt's track record also demonstrates admirable
consistency. Steinhardt Partners has only witnessed two losing years. In both cases, the net loss was
under 2 percent before profit incentive fee adjustments.
Steinhardt's superior performance has been achieved by using a myriad of approaches. He is both a
long-term investor and a short-term trader; he is as comfortable shorting stocks as buying them; he
will shift major chunks of the firm's capital into other investment vehicles, such as treasury
securities, if he feels that is the best investment choice.
To be sure, Steinhardt Partners' track record is not a solo performance. In addition to his
cofounding partners, over the years, the firm has employed numerous traders and analysts.
However, there was never any doubt that Steinhardt was clearly in charge. He reviews the firm's
portfolio several times each day. Although he gives the firm's traders latitude to make their own
judgments, Steinhardt will require a trader to rigorously justify his position if he has qualms about
that position. If he feels strongly enough, Steinhardt will override the trader and liquidate the
position.
Steinhardt's extreme scrutiny and control of the firm's portfolio has given him a reputation of being
a very demanding man to work for— obviously, too demanding for many of the traders who have
left the firm over the years. Keeping in mind that Steinhardt's wraparound desk has been
constructed in the shape of a ship's bow, it is not surprising that one journalist doing a profile
tagged him with the sobriquet, Captain Ahab. However, Steinhardt's tough side is very much
related to his job role—much as in football coaching, toughness is probably a virtue in managing a
group of traders.
I never saw Steinhardt's tough side. The man I interviewed was relaxed, soft spoken, patient, and
good humored. (Of course, our interviews were always conducted outside of market hours.)
Steinhardt possesses a keen sense of humor. He has been known to call friends impersonating an
IRS agent, deliberately mumble fictitious orders to brokers right before the market close, and
double-talk in a Dr. Irwin Corey -like manner when he wishes to pull the leg of an analyst or
reporter who calls him. His conversation is also liberally sprinkled with Yid-dishisms—
"proprietary dreck," for example, is how he refers to newfangled fund products.
What are the major elements of your trading philosophy?
The word "trading" is not the way I think of things. I may be a trader in the sense that my frequency
of transactions is relatively high, but the word "investing" would apply just as much, if not more. In
my mind, trading implies an anticipation of a sale at the time of purchase. For example, if I go long
stock index futures tonight because I expect tomorrow's trade number will be bullish for the
market, and I plan to sell my position tomorrow—that is trading. The bulk of what I do is for a
much longer duration and for more complex reasons. For example, when I went long the debt
96

markets in 1981, I held that position for two and a half years.
Well, for purposes of this book, I would still call what you are doing trading.
How then do you define the difference between trading and investing?
I make two key distinctions. First, a trader will go short as readily as long. In contrast, the
investor—for example, the portfolio manager of a typical mutual fund—will always be long. If he
is uncertain about the market, he may be only 70 percent invested, but he is always long. The
second distinction I make is that a trader is primarily concerned about the direction of the market. Is
the market, or stock, going up or down? The investor is more concerned about picking the best
stocks to invest in. There is no value judgment involved in my distinction between traders and
investors, it is merely a matter of maintaining a certain thematic focus for this book. In any case, on
both counts, I would certainly qualify you as a trader. To get back to my original question: How
would you define your philosophy of trading?
My particular style is a bit different from that of most people. Concept number one is variant
perception. I try to develop perceptions that I believe are at variance with the general market view.
I will play those variant perceptions until I feel they are no longer so.
Could you give me an example of variant perception in the current marketplace?
We have been short Genentech for a year and a half. There was a period of months and months
when we lost a lot of money in that position. But I stayed short because I continued to have a
variant perception about the future of their drug, TPA. [TPA can be injected intravenously to
dissolve blood clots.] It is our perception that, in a year or two, TPA will be a minor drug that will
be supplanted by more effective drugs that also cost substantially less. The thrust of the entire
company has been based on this one drug. If our perception is correct, this company will be earning
20 or 30 cents per share and selling for under $10. The stock is currently at $27 [June 1988], down
from a high of $65. [By late November, Genentech had fallen below $15 and Steinhardt was still
short.] But I think the general perception is still that Genentech is a first class biotechnology
company that will produce many products that are going to revolutionize the industry. As long as
my view is a variant perception, I will stay short.
That is a clear example, but it raises a question. Let's say you go short a stock because of your
variant perception, and the position goes against you. If the fundamentals don't change, the
more it goes against you, the more attractive the short side would appear. Yet from a money
management standpoint, at some point, the position would have to be covered. It seems like
there might be two basic trading principles in conflict here.
There are certain shibboleths that exist in the world of trading, which may or may not be accurate,
but I have not followed them. For example, there is a general view that you shouldn't short a stock
until it has already peaked and started down—that you shouldn't go short until the stock is already
reflecting problems that are evident for all to see. In some sense, I can understand that. Maybe that
is a superficially safer way to short stocks and you can sleep more comfortably using that approach.
However, I have never done it that way. My attitude has always been that to make money in the
markets, you have to be willing to get in the way of danger. I have always tended to short stocks
that were favorites and backed by a great deal of institutional enthusiasm. Generally speaking, I
have tended to short too early and, therefore, have usually started off with losses in my short
positions. If I short a stock and it goes up a lot, it may skew my exposure a bit, but as long as my
variant perception is unchanged, I'll stay short. If I'm wrong, I'm wrong.
Are you saying that as long as you think the fundamentals, as you perceive them, are
unchanged, you will hang tough no matter how much the position goes against you?
Right. Of course, if it is triple horrible, I might trade around the position to take the pressure down
a little bit. I would say, "OK, this looks awful; I see nothing but buyers. Why don't I join the buyers
and see if I can make some money." In a matter of speaking, I dichotomize myself. I have a
fundamental view, which I believe in my heart, but I try to separate that from the short-term fervor
and intensity I may see in the market. So even though I am short in that type of situation, I might
periodically be a buyer.
97

Might you actually go net long during those periods, or does your position just fluctuate
between fully short and flat?
It wouldn't even remotely approach flat, because that type of buying is based on very short-lived
perceptions. I might take 20,30, or 40 percent of the position and trade with it.
If you are very negative and short in a particular stock, but are not necessarily bearish on the
industry, might you sometimes hedge yourself by buying another stock in that group against
your short position?
I have tried that at times, but have generally found it to be unsuccessful. What it tends to do is give
me two problems instead of one. Usually, your knowledge about the second stock on the other side
will tend to be relatively skimpy because you are just grasping at it to use as a hedge. If your
problem is so great that you need to hedge it, why not address the problem directly rather than
taking on a totally separate position? Let's say you are short a paper stock and the paper stocks are
roaring, so you buy another paper stock against it. Maybe your short stock will go up more; maybe
the other stock will go up more. Who knows? If you have made a mistake, deal with the mistake;
don't compound it.
Besides the variant perception concept, what are some of the other elements of your trading
philosophy?
Nothing that is so distinctive. I don'tuse stop-loss orders or such. I don't use any rules about buying
on weakness or strength. I don't look at breakouts or breakdowns. I don't use charts.
You don't use charts at all?
Charts just leave me blank. [He adopts a Jackie Mason-like speech pattern.] I look at the stock. It
has a fantastic chart. The chart has a base like this, and then if it goes up a little bit more, boy it is a
real breakout, blah, blah, blah, blah. They all seem the same to me.
But just from an informational standpoint, don't you use charts as a quick and easy way to
see where a stock has traded over the years?
By watching stocks as closely as I do, I get some sense of price levels, uptrends, ranges, and all
that.
Let's say you know that a stock has gone from $10 to $40, wouldn't it matter to you how it
went from $10 to $40?
It makes no difference to me.
Do you have any trading rules that you could define?
Give me an example of a trading rale.
A common example might be: Before I get into a position, I know exactly where I am getting
out. It doesn't necessarily have to be a risk control rule, it could be—
No, I don't have any rules about stops or objectives. I simply don't think in those terms.
At this point, there is a call on the speakerphone. The caller is giving Steinhardt some late-breaking
news regarding a decision in a lawsuit against the tobacco industry. "The verdict is back. Everyone
was cleared except the Liggett group who had to pay a $400,000 fine and no punitive damages."
Steinhardt replies, "So it was basically a decision slightly in favor of the defendants."
I went short the tobacco stocks about a month ago. My reasoning was that if the plaintiffs won the
case, the stocks would go down a lot, but if the plaintiffs lost, the stocks wouldn't go up too much,
since the tobacco companies had never lost a case and winning another one wouldn't really be
news. That is an example of a variant perception. It will be interesting to see how much I will lose,
because my original theory was that it wouldn't be much. Here it is [reading story headline from
screen], "Liggett Group Found Liable for Contributing to Smoker's Death." You know what, I
won't lose anyway. A phrase like that will scare somebody.
Going back to our discussion, let's say you are short a stock because of your fundamental
analysis and the stock is going against you. How would you know when your analysis is wrong
because you have overlooked some unknown important element?
That situation happens fairly often. You buy or sell a stock and it doesn't act the way you think it
98

should. I go through my portfolio six times a day. There are many stocks in the portfolio that I am
not directly responsible for. For example, someone else is short Time, Inc. They are short because
the magazine business is lousy, and this or that. But the stock is acting really strong and is up 10
percent from where we shorted it. I will go over to the person responsible for the Time Life
position and ask several key questions: When are we going to get something that is going to
surprise the world? When is something going to happen that will ease the feeling that this company
is ripe for a takeover?
In a sense, I am a negative monitor of the portfolio. If there is a problem with a position I will go
through it very regularly. That makes me a very difficult person here, because I only talk to people
when things are lousy or when their stocks are not acting like they should.
If a stock is not acting like it should based on its fundamentals, would that be the type of
market action that would change your thinking?
I try to assume that the guy on the other side of a trade knows as least as much as I do. Let's say I
buy Texaco at $52 and it suddenly goes down to $50. Whoever sold Texaco at $52 had a perception
that was dramatically different from mine. It is incumbent on me to find out what his perception
was.
What if you can't explain it?
The explanation might be superficial or serious, but you can usually get something.
Let's take the situation of the tobacco companies. On balance, the news that came out after
the close sounded bearish. If the tobacco stocks go down only modestly tomorrow and then
come right back, would you cover your position?
I would cover it anyway. I would cover the position on the news. So once the news is out, the game
is over for you. Right. That was the only reason I was short.
OK, that answers the question too simply. Assume you wanted to be short the tobacco stocks
as a longer-term position and the market shrugged off today's news and closed higher
tomorrow. Would you cover then?
It depends on my reasons. If I wanted to be short the tobacco companies because I felt tobacco
consumption was going to decline much more than presently perceived, it wouldn't matter that
much. If the market rallied tomorrow, I would have to take advantage of it and sell some more.
So you wouldn't care if the market didn't react to the news the way it should have, as long as
you felt the main reason for being short was still valid.
Yes, but if the news was terrible and the stocks were up, I would try to understand why. Sometimes
the market has more information and the variant action is really telling you something.
But haven't there been instances where your analysis was completely wrong?
Sure.
And you realized it somewhere down the road?
Yes, and not necessarily so quickly.
At this point, Steinhardt gets a phone call in which his side of the conversation is filled with non
sequiturs and deliberate mumbling. He then explains to me his occasional habit of playing practical
jokes on callers.
For example, I get a call from a broker who I haven't spoken to for a long time. I swoosh some
papers around and then say, "Buy 30,000 shares of ZCU [mumbles another sentence]." Did you
understand what I said?
No [I laugh].
That is exactly right, but it sounded legitimate didn't it? Anyway, he calls me back, and I have my
secretary tell him I'm in the bathroom. He calls back again, frantic because it is five minutes before
the close, and I am still unavailable. Then at 3:58,1 call him back and say, "Haven't you done that
order yet? What's the problem? Just do the damn thing!" Of course, he says, "I didn't catch the
name of the stock." So I tell him [he mumbles another sentence] and hang up before he can say
anything else.
99

Your fund is often labeled as a hedge fund because it trades very differently than a typical
mutual fund. Could you elaborate on the meaning of a hedge fund.
The A.W. Jones Group has been given credit for being the first hedge fund. Originally, the term
referred to a precise concept, which essentially said the following: We in the world of money
management do not have the ability to forecast trends in the stock market, which are functions of a
host of variables that are largely beyond the consistent ability of individuals to anticipate. But, what
we as money managers can do, through careful analysis, is to make accurate judgments as to which
companies are doing well versus those that are not. So, if one balanced long positions in stocks that
were perceived to be relatively strong with short positions in stocks expected to act poorly, the
market risk would be totally eliminated. For example, if you loved Ford and hated General Motors,
and for every dollar long Ford you were short a dollar of General Motors, you might lose on your
shorts, but if your judgment was good, you would come out ahead. So, the original concept of a
hedge fund totally emphasized the ability to pick stocks.
Does anyone still trade that way?
No, today, the term hedge fund is somewhat of a misnomer. The term now refers to a limited
partnership in which the general partner is typically paid on a performance basis, as opposed to
more traditional money managers who are paid on assets managed. Typically, the manager of a
hedge fund has a great deal more flexibility than a traditional money manager, and that is really the
key element. That flexibility could include being able to short stocks as well as buy stocks, use
options, futures, and so on. That is what a hedge fund is in general terms, but the variations on the
theme cover a very wide continuum.
What happened to the original concept of a hedge fund?
The flexibility of the hedge fund structure attracted numerous young, aggressive entrepreneurs in
the 1960s because it allowed them an opportunity to start their own business at an early age in a
way that wasn't otherwise possible. Those were times of great stocks with wonderful stories. There
were quite a number of stocks showing terrific growth.
The people that came into the hedge fund business were not theoretical practitioners of the idea of
hedging, but were more interested in the idea of being their own bosses, and having the flexibility
to be long a lot of stock. Although they also had the flexibility of being short, they didn't use it in
any serious way. The word hedge has a very specific meaning in the English language. In most of
these hedge funds, you could seriously ask, "Where is the hedge?"
So they were hedge funds in name only?
Correct. They wouldn't even call themselves hedge funds; they were embarrassed by the name. The
term had a connotation of being short, and trading the short side had an anti-American ring to it. It
was as if you were rooting for disaster. So they started using the term [he adopts a tone of mock
pomposity] private partnership.
Ironically, today, with the disintegration of the relatively smooth secular trends of the 1950s
and 1960s, the concept of a true hedge fund may make more sense than it did in its early days.
Why aren't there any practitioners of the hedge fund concept in its pure form?
Because it is a very restricting approach. The premise of being a dollar long and a dollar short in
some related entity requires using a lot of dollars ineffectively. How different are Ford and General
Motors going to be? They are both affected by the same macroeconomic factors. If you have to put
up some dollars for the long and some dollars for the short, you may be lucky to realize a 10
percent difference over a period of a year—that is, assuming you are right.
There is a group we are associated with on the West Coast that specializes exclusively in shorting
stocks. The thought has been mentioned that maybe they should neutralize their market exposure
by being long an equal number of dollars in the stock indexes as they are short in individual stocks,
because what they bring to the party is the special ability to pick shorts. That is the closest thing to
this concept I have heard recently, but they don't do it.
How does your own fund fit into the hedge fund concept?
It fits in the sense that shorting is used actively. We always have some shorts. I also spend a good
deal of my time thinking about net market exposure and risk, and planning and adjusting for it. In
100
