
20 506455-ch14.indd 235

9/25/09 12:21:48 AM

236 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
share photos and ideas, social investing is an Internet-based way to connect
with other investors and share ideas, including fundamental analysis.

The origins of social investing
Social investing traces its roots to the late 1990s with the rather primitive and
crude concept of stock message boards. These online sites allowed investors
to anonymously share ideas and hunches about stocks. When stock message
boards started, they were a unique opportunity for investors to congregate
and share ideas.
However, the obvious problems with these stock message boards quickly
turned them into the investing equivalent of locker room gossip. Touts, or
investors who try to artificially promote a company, would talk up a company’s future with the hope of dumping their holdings at a profit to naïve
investors. Likewise, shorts, or investors betting a company’s stock would fall,
could easily spread false rumors about a company and try to drive the stock
price down.
Stock message boards are filled with all the things you, as a fundamental analyst, are trying to avoid. Rather than analysis based on fact, data and analysts,
the boards are stocked with amateurs just trying to spread false rumors and
baseless allegations about stocks. Such rumor-mongering in stock message
boards is especially problematic with stocks that don’t trade on a major stock
market exchange.
Social investing has since evolved quite a bit. Today, there are social networking sites, which I’ll discuss in a bit, that let you see actual trades make
by other investors. These sites allow you to find other investors that have
similar investing strategies, such as fundamental analysis, and trade notes
and ideas. There are other types of social networking sites that compile the
investment ideas of many other investors into a single report, which I’ll discuss in this section, too.

Why it might be worth paying
attention to non-professionals
It might seem counterintuitive and even a little amateurish to pay any attention to what lay investors think about a stock. And that’s mostly true. But, as
a fundamental analyst, you want to make sure you have examined a company
and stock from every direction. And if a non-professional can direct you to a
gap in your fundamental analysis, you might be better off as a result.

20 506455-ch14.indd 236

9/25/09 12:21:48 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

237

Some of the areas where social investing may be worthwhile for a fundamental
analyst include:
✓ Local demand information: Some social networking sites allow investors
to share potentially valuable information, such as how crowded a restaurant chain’s locations are in various cities or how busy a retailer’s stores
are. This type of information, if reliable, may serve the same purpose as
an analyst’s channel check.
✓ Industry insight: Sometimes, investors who participate in social investing sites may work at companies that buy gear from a company you’re
interested in. Their comments on the quality of a company’s products or
demand for the products can be useful.
✓ Employee’s dirty laundry: Sometimes, employees will log into social
investing sites and provide data that may be helpful in fundamental
analysis. For instance, between 1997 and 2001, there were more than 100
posts on a stock message board about Enron, many that outlined potential problems at the firm, according to research from James Felton and
Jongchai Kim in their article “Warnings from the Enron Message Board.”
Some were startlingly prescient, including one in April 2001 that said
Enron “is nothing more than a house of cards.” At the time of that post,
most Wall Street analysts rated Enron a “buy” or “strong buy.”

How to plug into social networking
Unlike financial statement analysis, getting started in social networking
doesn’t require any training. You just log into a Web site and get started. A
few types of stock message boards and social networking sites to consider
include:
✓ Stock message boards: The more popular stock message boards include
those hosted by Yahoo Finance (finance.yahoo.com), Raging Bull
(ragingbull.quote.com) and Silicon Investor (siliconinvestor.
com). Again, these stock message boards are filled with misinformation,
so it’s caveat emptor.
✓ Broker-operated sites: Online discount brokerages TradeKing and
Zecco.com are some of the leaders in allowing their members to share
investing ideas with each other. What these sites offer, which make them
more credible than stock message boards, is that you can see the actual
holdings of the members. That way, if an investor is talking up a stock,
you can see if the person owns or is buying the stock. You can also see
how successful an investor that person is.
✓ Compilation sites and dedicated social networking sites: Some sites try
to spare you from having to read through thousands of messages posted
by various members of social networking sites. For instance, if you enter

20 506455-ch14.indd 237

9/25/09 12:21:48 AM

238 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
a stock symbol at USATODAY.com’s Money section (money.usatoday.
com), you’ll find a summary of fundamental analysis performed by other
visitors of the site.

Following the moves of big-time investors
If monitoring the fundamental analysis by amateur investors isn’t all that
appealing, you might still be curious what the Warren Buffetts of the world
are doing.
Using financial documents, you can extend your fundamental analysis to
find out what other famous investors are doing with their money. And yes,
you can find out if a stock you’re interested in is owned by famous investors
including Warren Buffett or well-known portfolio managers of mutual funds
that use fundamental analysis.

Finding out who a company’s biggest investors are
Some companies list all the investors who have the biggest stakes in their
companies in their 10-K, or annual report filing that’s required by regulators,
as discussed in Chapter 12. Others may include the information in their proxy
statement, discussed in Chapter 9. Both of those places are worth checking.
But if nothing turns up, it’s time to find out about a regulatory filing called a
13F-HR. Large institutional investors are required to file 13F-HR filings when
they take significant stakes of publicly traded firms.
Following 13F-HR filings from your favorite investors can be a great way to find
out what kinds of stocks they are buying. Many investors make a pastime out
of following Buffett’s investments, for instance, by watching the 13F-HR filings
from his Berkshire Hathaway.
You can access 13F-HR filings, for free, from the SEC’s IDEA database. You can
find step-by-step directions on how to extract filings from IDEA in Chapter 4.

Following famous investors moves using Morningstar
Perhaps you’re interested in finding out what some of your favorite mutual
fund managers, who use fundamental analysis, own. Maybe you’d rather not
deal with navigating the SEC’s Web site to find out the moves of other fundamental analysts.

20 506455-ch14.indd 238

9/25/09 12:21:48 AM

Chapter 14: Gleaning from the Fundamental Analysis Done by Others

239

When a CEO can’t resist social investing
Don’t assume the only people hanging out in
stock message boards are frustrated stock
analysts and investors. Back in the late 1990s,
John Mackey, the co-founder and CEO of natural food store Whole Foods Market, started to
post in the Yahoo Finance message board dedicated to the company. But he didn’t announce,
“Hi everyone, I’m the CEO.” Instead, Mackey
responded to posts using the pseudonym
rahodeb, or his wife’s name, Deborah, spelled
backwards. Mackey’s comments ranged from
responding to questions or critiques about the
company to some critical comments about Wild

Oats Market, a rival firm Whole Foods ended up
buying.
After Mackey’s posting were discovered, the
matter was looked into by the Securities and
Exchange Commission. No punishment was
recommended. But, since that time, Mackey,
like many CEOs, maintains a blog on the company’s Web site to give his point of view on matters. Mackey’s blog is available here: www2.
wholefoodsmarket.com/blogs/
jmackey/.

Investment research company Morningstar makes it very easy to look up who
the biggest owners of a stock are, as well as the largest investments by big
money managers.
To look up the largest owners of a stock, log onto Morningstar.com, enter the
stock symbol of the company you’re interested in and click the Go button. On
the left-hand side of the screen, click the Insider Trading option. Finally, click
on the Concentrated Fund Owners tab at the top of the list to get details on
the biggest owners of a stock.
What if you want to find out what your favorite mutual fund manager owns?
It’s the same basic procedure. Just enter the name of the mutual fund or
enter the fund’s symbol at Morningstar.com and click the Go button. Next,
click on the “Portfolio” option on the left-hand side of the screen. Lastly, click
on the “Top 25 Holdings tab” at the top of the screen.
Monitoring the buying and selling of stock by a company’s officers and directors
can also be telling. You can read more about such legal insider trading, and
how that can be incorporated into fundamental analysis, in Chapter 17.

20 506455-ch14.indd 239

9/25/09 12:21:48 AM

240 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis

20 506455-ch14.indd 240

9/25/09 12:21:48 AM

Chapter 15

Performing “Top Down”
Fundamental Analysis
In This Chapter
▶ Realizing how the economy’s condition can be a factor in your fundamental analysis
▶ Understanding how the cycles of the economy play a role in a company’s profitability
▶ Analyzing and accessing key economic data released by the government
▶ Using “leading” economic indicators to help you gain a better idea of

a company’s future

E

ven the best company or investment can be tripped up by a lousy economy. This truth was demonstrated in brutal fashion during the stock
market decline that began in 2007, as prices of all sorts of stocks were punished, with little regard to what fundamental analysis would tell you.
The harsh reality that companies are subject to the vagaries of the broad
economy is a major reason why you may consider expanding your fundamental
analysis skills beyond looking just at the health and prospects of individual
companies. Understanding the ups and downs of the economy, and the
resulting business cycle, is what’s known as top-down analysis. And top-down
analysis is a critical adjunct to fundamental analysis, helping you make sure
you’re investing in the right companies for the right price at a good time.
This chapter will show how the health of the broad economy is a factor in
the health of individual companies. You’ll also discover how changes in the
economy may cause you to tweak the way you apply fundamental analysis.
I’ll show you what some of the most important pieces of economic data are
and even how some, called leading indicators, may help forecast the future.

Broadening Out Fundamental Analysis
to Include Monitoring the Economy
There’s no question that with fundamental analysis, the primary goal is often
to deeply understand the inner workings of individual companies. Investors

21 506455-ch15.indd 241

9/24/09 10:38:29 PM

242 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
who practice fundamental analysis are attempting to find those companies
that stand to benefit the most given the current economic environment.
It’s critical to recognize that changes in the economy may have big effects
on companies and dramatically alter your fundamental analysis. A large economic downturn, for instance, can cause a company’s revenue and earnings to
plummet, turning all your expectations for the company upside down.

How the economy has an overriding
effect on a company
The recession that started in late 2007, as painful as it’s been, has provided a
startling reminder to fundamental analysts of just how captive a company’s
fundamentals are to the economy.
When the economy slows down, and consumers and companies cut how
much stuff they buy, companies’ financial statements take a direct hit. Less
spending by consumers and businesses translates directly into less revenue
and earnings for companies. And revenue and earnings are precisely the
things that fundamental analysts spend their time looking at.
Sometimes, a drop in business activity can be swift and vicious, as was the
case in 2007 and 2008. Table 15-1 shows how the earnings per share of some
members of the Standard & Poor’s 500 index fell by startling amounts in 2008
as the recession ravaged the economy and their businesses.

Table 15-1

Big Drops In Earnings Amid a Recession

Company

2007 Earnings Per
Share

2008 Loss Per Share

Symantec

$0.37

–$7.52

Tellabs

$0.15

–$2.33

American International Group

$2.39

–$37.8

AES

$1.82

–$0.14

Apartment Investment &
Management

$2.98

–$0.28

Standard & Poor’s

$82.54

$49.50

Sources: Standard & Poor’s and S&P’s Capital IQ, diluted earnings on calendar year

21 506455-ch15.indd 242

9/24/09 10:38:29 PM

Chapter 15: Performing “Top-Down” Fundamental Analysis

243

When the economy tripped up Buffett
It might be tempting to think your deft fundamental analysis skills are so bulletproof, you’ll
be able to find stocks that defy gravity and do
well even when the economy is lousy. And it’s
true. There were a handful of stocks that rose
even during 2008, when the S&P 500 index
crashed 38.5%.
But before you think your fundamental analysis can lift you above the woes of the economy,
consider that even Warren Buffett faced problems during 2008. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway
posted a 9.6% drop in its book value, the company’s worst year in its history dating back to
1965. Book value is the difference between the
value of the company’s assets and liabilities,
and the way Berkshire Hathaway investors
tend to evaluate performance.

And investors in Berkshire Hathaway’s stock
weren’t spared, either. The value of Berkshire
Hathaway stock fell 31.8% during 2008, as
the per-share price of Berkshire Hathaway’s
Class A stock dropped from $141,600 a share to
$96,600. Ouch.
Buffett, in his 2008 letter to shareholders, clearly
explains how troubles in the broad economy
can translate into a slowdown for businesses,
even those with outstanding fundamentals. “By
the fourth quarter, the credit crisis, coupled
with tumbling home and stock prices, had
produced a paralyzing fear that engulfed the
country. A free fall in business activity ensured,
accelerating at a pace that I have never before
witnessed.” Well said.

Ways the economy can alter
your fundamental analysis
Considering the economy’s health in your fundamental analysis might seem
like a pretty daunting task. After all, how can you consider something as
grand as the U.S.’ economic growth when you’re poring over one company’s
financial statements?
Still, it’s important to recognize that the economy can have big-time effects
on business, especially in regard to a company’s:
✓ Ability to service its debt: A company’s level of debt might look very
manageable during normal economic times. In fact, as pointed out in
Chapter 8, companies carrying a bit of debt will generate higher returns
for stock investors. But that debt can come back to haunt companies
when the economy slows.
It might be easier to understand how a poor economy can turn debt into
poison for a company by thinking about a plain old mortgage. Let’s say a
young couple making $50,000 a year takes on a $1,000-a-month mortgage
payment. That’s really not too ridiculous. But if one breadwinner in the
family loses a job, and the couple’s annual income falls to $25,000 a year,
suddenly that mortgage payment is going to be a big nut to deal with

21 506455-ch15.indd 243

9/24/09 10:38:29 PM

244 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
every month. The same concept goes for a company. If the economy
causes net income to fall, what had been a manageable level of debt
might become pretty difficult to handle going forward.
Capacity to borrow: During the credit crunch, which intensified in
2008, many companies were no longer able to borrow at favorable interest rates or to borrow at all. That unavailability of capital caused many
companies to have to finance, or pay for, their expenses and needed
improvements out of their cash balances. What if they didn’t have much
cash? Welcome to bankruptcy court.
During severe economic contractions, the companies with access to large
sums of cash are often able to make moves to improve their position
when the economy ultimately heals. Some companies, for instance, may
use their cash to buy weaker competitors, giving them greater market
share when the economy improves.
✓ Cost structure: Some companies are able to adjust their costs and
expenses rapidly during a downturn, unfortunately, usually by laying off
workers. Yet other companies, which are capital intensive or reliant on
large and expensive facilities, may have a more difficult time reducing
their overhead costs. Closing a plant or facility may take longer than just
giving a bunch of workers pink slips.
✓ Reliance on a strong economy: Some industries are more subject to
the health of the economy. For instance, companies that make durable
consumer goods such as homes, appliances and automobiles, usually
see the largest drop-off in business as spending on such big-ticket items
cools. Companies with profits that are closely tied to the economy are
described as being cyclical. The concept of cyclicality in business will be
discussed at more length in Chapter 16.

How interest rates can alter
what companies are worth
The condition the economy is in can have profound effects on how much a
company — or its stock — is worth. As shown above, companies’ earnings
and cash flow may be held hostage by the ups and downs of the economy.
Valuations of companies are based in large part on how profitable a company
is, as you found out in Chapter 5.
But there’s another factor you need to be aware of when it comes to incorporating the economy’s health into fundamental analysis: interest rates. Perhaps
you’ve puzzled over why stocks often jump when the Federal Reserve, or the
nation’s central bank, reduces short-term interest rates. If the reduction in shortterm interest rates, or the rates banks usually charge each other to borrow

21 506455-ch15.indd 244

9/24/09 10:38:29 PM

Chapter 15: Performing “Top-Down” Fundamental Analysis

245

money overnight, prompts interest rates on longer-term loans to fall, that can
affect how much companies are worth.
Most people assume lower interest rates are good for stocks because the
companies can borrow money at a more affordable rate. And that is true.
Lower interest rates may reduce a company’s interest expense, and boost
profit. Companies might also borrow more money to expand their operations
or build new stores, which might increase future profits.
But fundamental analysis shows a more sophisticated reason why interestrate changes affect the value of stocks. Remember that one way to measure
the value of a stock is the discounted cash flow model, or DCM, which is covered in detail in Chapter 11.
If you recall, the value of a stock today, or its present value, is a function of its
expected future cash flows in today’s dollars. Go ahead. Read that sentence
one more time; I won’t mind. Believe it or not, it’s easiest to explain why interest rates are critical in fundamental analysis using the formula you discovered in Chapter 11. It looks like this:
Present value = Future value / (1+interest rate) ^ time
If you haven’t read Chapter 11 yet, some of the explanation of interest rates
might seem pretty technical. If you read Chapter 11, that will help, I promise.
Imagine that you invest in a company you know will generate $10,000 in cash
20 years from now. And consider for a moment that interest rates on savings
accounts are 5%. That means you might reasonably demand an 8% return in
exchange for investing your hard-earned cash in the company. The present
value of the company is $2,145 right now, using a formula that looks like this:
Present value ($2,145) = $10,000 / (1+0.08) ^ 20
Now imagine the economy starts to sputter, and the Federal Reserve cuts
interest rates. The interest rate for money in a savings account falls to 1%.
You might now demand a return of 4% on your money invested in the company. Just this one seemingly small change in interest rates makes the company worth $4,564, or more than double its value when interest rates were
higher.
Be careful not to confuse the short-term interest rates set by the Federal
Reserve with long-term interest rates set by investors and lenders. While
short-term interest rates affect long-term interest rates, they don’t always
move in lockstep.

21 506455-ch15.indd 245

9/24/09 10:38:29 PM

246 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Analyzing the Key Measures
of the Economy’s Health
When it comes to analyzing a company, you can zero in pretty precisely.
Companies’ financial statements allow you to dig into a company’s operations
and get a good idea of what’s going on.
But when it comes to the economy, where can you start? After all, when
analyzing the economy, you’re not just examining the performance of a single
company, but scores of businesses, consumers, and many other variables.
And that’s why you might think of the economy as a lab specimen. Doctors,
trying to understand the creature, might put probes and sensors all over the
specimen to try to get in tune with its vitals. Economists and investors, too,
try to closely monitor the economy’s health by tracking a variety of indicators that all reveal clues.

Being aware of the business cycle
Booms are inevitably followed by busts. After things get so bad, smart companies and entrepreneurs inevitably launch new ideas, and the economy gets
going again before it overheats all over. This constant boom-to-bust is characteristic of the capitalist system, and is called the business cycle. It makes
things interesting, don’t you think?
Fundamental analysts generally break the business cycle down into five
primary phases, including:
✓ Expansion: At this point, the economy is starting to pick up steam.
Economic activity is heating up, perhaps following a recession, and
sometimes powered by lower interest rates.
✓ Peak: The economy is running at full tilt. Hotels and airplanes are full.
Companies are pumping out as much product as they can handle.
✓ Contraction: Uh oh. Business activity begins to slow from the unsustainable peak levels, due to some negative event. Companies begin slashing costs, often by laying off workers. In 2007, business activity began
to slow down after lending to home buyers started to slow and home
prices fell, making consumers feel poorer.
✓ Trough: When it seems like there’s bad news about the economy and
things are only getting worse, the economy may have hit rock bottom.
✓ Recovery: Eventually, demand hits bottom, and consumers and businesses start spending. Improved demand for products allows companies
to hire back workers and increase production. And so the cycle starts all
over again.
