
JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 73 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

73

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.62

Morning star (ideal)

FIGURE 3.64

FIGURE 3.63

Morning star

Morning doji star

Pattern Psychology Price has been declining when a long black candle forms,
offering further evidence of the bears’ dominance. That leadership comes into
question during the next session with the formation of the star and the indecision
that it brings. A major shift in sentiment comes during the third session when a
strong rally erases much of the gains the bears had attained during the first
session’s sharp decline. It shows that the bulls have arrived, and many bears will
cover their positions, providing fuel for a rally.
Chart Examples Figure 3.65 shows a daily chart of Knight Capital Group
Inc. (NITE). A morning doji star formed from March 2 to 6, 2007 (circled).
The star session was a long-legged doji. Note that there were gaps on both sides
of the star, increasing its strength.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

74

Page 74 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.65

Bullish morning doji star formed in a downtrend

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Figure 3.66 shows a daily chart of Las Vegas Sands (LVS). A bullish
morning star formed from June 26 to 28, 2007 (circled). The required gap was
present between the first candle’s black real body and the star. The third candle’s white real body enveloped the star’s smaller real body; however, this was
not a bullish engulfing pattern because the two real bodies were not of opposite
color. Note that the star portion was a hammer.
Acceptable Variation The criterion for the third candle of the morning
star indicates that it should protrude deeply into the long real body of the
first candle. I consider it an acceptable variation if the third candle’s long
white real body extends beyond the first candle’s long black real body (Figure
3.67). However, such a long candle on the third session may not create an
adequate reward-to-risk ratio to enter a long position upon completion of the
pattern.
Chart Example (Variation) Figure 3.68 shows a daily chart of Under
Armour Inc. (UA). The above-referenced variation of a morning star formed
on the chart from March 2 to 6, 2007 (circled). There was a gap between the
bodies on both sides of the star strengthening the pattern. The third candle’s
long white real body extended beyond the first candle’s black real body.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 75 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.66

75

Bullish morning star formed after a downtrend

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Helpful Hint The “morning star” is a nickname for the planet Mercury,
which appears shortly before sunrise. As its appearance shows, the formation
goes from dark to light. Think of the first candlestick line as darkness, the second
as dawn, and the white real body of the third candle as daylight.

FIGURE 3.67

Morning star (variation)

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

76

Page 76 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.68
a downtrend

Variation of the bullish morning star formed after

Source: TeleChart 2007®

Multiple Signals
It is not unusual to see one reversal pattern followed by another. For example,
in Figure 3.69 a bearish harami (1-2) was followed in the next session by a bearish shooting star (3). Back-to-back bearish or bullish reversal patterns simply
send a stronger warning that a change in price direction may occur.
You’ll also see instances where a single line reversal pattern is part of a reversal pattern that includes two or three distinct candle lines. In Figure 3.69 the
second candle of the harami (2) was a bearish hanging man. And in Figure
3.70 a hammer (2) was part of a three-candle morning star (1-2-3).

Putting the Reversal Patterns
to Work
The primary focus of this chapter was to introduce you to the various reversal
patterns. You have enough information now to recognize the patterns and understand the messages they provide about investor psychology.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 77 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.69
patterns

Back-to-back reversal

Source: TeleChart 2007®

77

FIGURE 3.70 Reversal pattern
within a reversal pattern
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Chapter 4 will provide additional information on how the patterns form
and some factors that may impact their signals. These two chapters will be very
helpful in your chart analysis; however, they are not enough to show you how to
unlock the full potential of the reversal patterns. Each subsequent chapter will
provide another rich layer of knowledge that will move you toward the ultimate
goal of putting the candlestick signals to work in your chart analysis and trading
strategies.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 78 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 79 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

4
Chapter

More on Reversal
Patterns
ow that you are familiar with the primary candlestick reversal patterns,
this chapter will solidify your understanding of how they form. It will
also point to some factors that may influence the occurrence and performance of the signals.

N

The Pattern Must Have Something
to Reverse
It matters where a candlestick reversal pattern forms on a chart. In order for a
reversal signal to have significance, price must be moving in a direction, either
up or down, prior to the formation of the pattern. Bearish reversal patterns are relevant if they
oversold
overbought
form
after
an
upside
move.
ConA condition in
A condition in
versely, bullish reversal patterns
which a stock
which a stock
are important if they form after a
or market has
or market has
downside
move.
As
a
general
rule,
fallen too far
risen too far
the
reversal
pattern
should
form
too quickly
too quickly
at, or near, the end of the direcand is likely to
and is likely to
tional price move.
experience at
suffer at least
If
price
is
moving
sideways,
least a shorta short-term
referred
to
as
consolidation,
and
a
term rally or
decline or
reversal pattern forms within that
period of
period of
congestion area, it has little or no
consolidation.
consolidation.
significance, especially if price has

79

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

80

Page 80 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

been moving sideways for several days already when the pattern forms. If the
stock was in a short-term overbought or oversold condition prior to the consolidation, that overextended condition has already been alleviated by the sideways price action. In other words, there is no longer a move to reverse; price has
already changed direction.
Example

Figure 4.1 shows a daily chart of OSI Pharmaceuticals Inc (OSIP). On
October 29, 2007 a bearish hanging man formed during the session
following a very long bullish candle. This bearish signal was meaningful
because there was a price advance to reverse. Price changed direction
moving sideways for several days following the hanging man. On
November 7 a bearish shooting star formed. However, price had already
been consolidating for several days prior to the formation of the shooting
star so it had little significance as a bearish reversal signal. What the
shooting star’s long upper shadow did show us in this scenario was a failed
breakout attempt. Price had rallied intraday above the consolidation area
but the bulls were not able to sustain the rally and price closed back inside
the consolidation area leaving just the upper shadow.

FIGURE 4.1 Reversal patterns are not signiﬁcant if they form
during consolidation
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 81 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

More on Reversal Patterns

rectangle
A pattern that
forms on a
chart when
price moves
sideways,
swinging back
and forth in a
bounded
range. The top
of the range
becomes
resistance, and
the bottom of
the range
becomes
support. A
rectangle
represents a
pause within a
trend and is
usually
resolved with a
breakout in the
direction of the
trend;
however, at
times it will
precede a
trend reversal.

81

The consolidation shown in Figure 4.1 was very
tight. I refer to this type of shallow sideways movement
as “basing.” According to Nison, the Japanese refer to it
as a “box range.” Another type of consolidation occurs
when price moves sideways but makes identifiable price
swings across the consolidation (see Figure 4.2). This
price action is called a rectangle. It may also be referred
to as a trading range or a horizontal channel. The shortterm price swings across the rectangle often find resistance near the ceiling and support near the floor. You
may see candlestick reversal patterns form at those
turning points because there is a short-term trend to
reverse.
On the daily chart of Commercial Metals Co.
(CMC) in Figure 4.2, the stock was trapped in a trading
range from May through July 2007. Several of the shortterm swings across the rectangle ended with candlestick reversal patterns as follows:

1. May 9: A bearish hanging man
(1) created the first peak in
what eventually evolved into a
trading range.
2. June 4: A doji (2) formed as the
May 9 swing high was tested.
3. June 13: A bullish hammer (3),
which was also part of a bullish
harami, formed as the May low
was tested.
4. June 27: Another bullish hammer (4) formed at what is now
clearly defined as support.
5. July 16: After breaking out just above the ceiling
of the rectangle, a bearish engulfing pattern (5)
pulled price back down, leaving a false breakout. False breakdowns through support may
also occur. Such false moves are common and
are frustrating for unsuspecting traders.

In summary, a key component of analyzing candlestick reversal patterns is to make sure to evaluate the price

false
breakout
Price closes
above an
identiﬁable
resistance
area, or below
an identiﬁable
support area,
but does not
have enough
momentum to
continue the
move. Price
reverses
direction
invalidating
the breakout
and forcing
traders to exit
their positions.

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

82

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 82 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 4.2 Reversal patterns formed at the ceiling and ﬂoor
of a rectangle
Source: TeleChart 2007®

action that preceded the formation of the pattern. There must be at least a shortterm price move to reverse in order for a reversal signal to have validity.

Factors That May Strengthen the
Reversal Signal
Listed below are some factors that may increase the likelihood that a change in
price direction will follow a reversal pattern:
• The stock is overbought when a bearish pattern forms or oversold when
a bullish pattern forms. Oscillators are technical indicators that can
measure these overextended conditions. Overextended conditions and
the use of oscillators are detailed in Part II.
• The pattern follows a steep move. Significant gains can be made during
a swift move, and traders will be protective of those gains. Therefore,
these events are very vulnerable to profit-taking. If price starts to reverse, many stops will trigger. The result is often a fast and sharp decline after a bearish pattern or advance following a bullish pattern.

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 83 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

More on Reversal Patterns

83

• The pattern does not occur much on the stock. If the pattern forms frequently, it may not have a significant impact on price movement unless, of course, when it does form often, it usually follows through well.
Otherwise, if a pattern forms often, the emergence of yet another of the
same pattern may not be very significant.
• The pattern forms at a strong support level (bullish pattern) or resistance level (bearish pattern). Several such chart examples were provided
in Chapter 3 and more discussion on support and resistance is included
in Part II.
Broad Market Environment

It is important to pay attention to the broader market. If a broad market rally or
sell-off occurs, many stocks will rise or fall in kind, at least for the short term.
This can have an influence on the success or failure of reversal patterns. It can
also impact how stocks respond to support and resistance levels. When the
broad market rallies strongly, you’ll see many stocks break up through resistance. Conversely, when the broad market melts down, many stocks will break
down through previously strong support levels.
The market environment may also influence the
type and number of reversal patterns that form on the
charts of stocks. At the time of this writing (July–August
stock index
2007), the broad market was experiencing a correction.
An indicator
One of the primary drivers was the problems in the subused to track
prime mortgage market, which hit many financial stocks
the composite
hard. It sent a ripple through the markets. The result was
value for a
a dramatic increase in volatility. Day after day the Dow
particular
Jones Industrial Average experienced triple-digit adgroup of
vances or declines (see Figure 4.3). On many days, the
stocks. The S&P
intraday action resembled a roller coaster ride. The S&P
500 is a very
500 Index fared even worse since its component list inwell-known
cludes many financial stocks.
large-cap
During that volatile period, many candlestick lines
index that is
and patterns formed on charts, which echoed the marcommonly used
ket’s instability. Long shadows were common, highlightas a benchmark
ing the wide price swings intraday. Although reversal
for the stock
formations were prevalent, their signals were very short
market.
term and not always reliable given the unsettling environment. It was an exasperating time for investors as
they worried over their portfolios; however, it was a profitable time for experienced day traders and swing traders who understood how to benefit from the
volatility.

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

84

Page 84 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Example

On August 16, 2007 a hammer with a very long lower shadow formed
on the daily chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Figure 4.3). The
body was so small that some chartists would have interpreted it as a
dragonfly doji; regardless, it was a bullish signal. In fact, the three days
from August 15 to 17 formed a variation of a bullish morning star.
Hammers also formed on the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite index
charts on August 16. Given that, just imagine how many hammers,
dragonfly and long-legged doji, and other bullish reversal patterns
formed on the charts of individual stocks.

FIGURE 4.3 Volatile days for the Dow
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Remember that this broad market decline was largely spurred by credit
concerns. Therefore, many financial stocks declined sharply. The long candles and long shadows that formed on their charts illustrated the increased
volatility.

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 85 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

More on Reversal Patterns

85

Example

Figure 4.4 shows a daily chart of Morgan Stanley (MS), a brokerage
stock. Note the dramatic increase in volatility (circled) that reflected the
troubles in the financial sector.

FIGURE 4.4 Increased volatility in a ﬁnancial stock
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Reversal Patterns May Not
Reverse a Trend
Traders should be cautious of the word reversal. Although the candlestick patterns introduced in Chapter 3 are referred to as reversal patterns, and they do
have the tendency to be followed by a change in the direction of price, it does
not mean the patterns will be followed by a trend reversal. A trend reversal is a
significant event. Price would have to retrace at least two thirds of the prior
trend before it technically would be deemed a trend reversal. Moreover, these
patterns warn that price may reverse the current direction, at least temporarily.
When a bearish reversal pattern forms after an upward move, it signals
that price may change direction from up to down, or sideways, and vice versa
for a bullish signal after a downward move. If a significant reversal does not follow a candlestick signal, it does not mean that the candlestick pattern failed.

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

86

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 86 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Candlestick reversal patterns provide primarily shortterm signals. If a pattern is followed only by a pullback
price target
or period of minor consolidation, the signal was still successful at calling a change in price direction.
A projected
No matter how strong a reversal signal, or how
price level
ominous its name or appearance, it does not dictate how
where, if it is
significant the change in price will be (the magnitude).
reached, a
Candlestick patterns do not provide price targets. Nor
trader intends
do they predict how long a change in price direction will
to exit an open
last (the duration).
position.
An entire chapter in Part II is devoted to the discussion of trend analysis. Once you’ve completed that
segment, you’ll have a better understanding of the role of candlestick patterns
within the bigger picture of price movement.
Failed Reversal Patterns

Traders should not expect that every reversal signal will be successful at calling a
change in price direction. Reversal patterns can and do fail. To my knowledge,
nothing in technical analysis works 100 percent of the time. However, it is better to respond to a signal that turns out to be false than to ignore a valid one.
Price should change direction shortly after the emergence of a reversal pattern. If, instead, price immediately moves again in the direction of the trend,
the signal has been negated. For example, if a bearish hanging man forms and
price fails to close below the hanging man’s real body, and instead moves higher,
the hanging man’s signal is no longer valid. If price is still overextended, though,
the stock is vulnerable and additional reversal signals may follow. Refer back to
Figure 3.27 in Chapter 3 for an example. On that chart, a hammer formed during a sharp decline, but price continued lower in the next session, negating its
bullish signal. Two days after the hammer’s failed signal, a long-legged doji
formed at support. Buyers stepped in at that level and many shorts covered
stopping the stock’s fall.
The probability of follow-through can be enhanced by combining the
reversal signals with classic Western technical analysis, which is the focus of
Part II.
Reversal Pattern Psychology

One of the most important aspects to absorb when studying the reversal patterns is the psychology behind their formations. Rather than just memorizing

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 87 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

More on Reversal Patterns

87

the look of the pattern and its name, try to really understand how the price action unfolded during the session(s) that formed the pattern. At the close of
market, the daily bar provides a snapshot of the day’s battle; but if you view the
intraday time frames, you’ll see the details of the battle. Reference was made several times in Chapter 3 to the bulls taking control from the bears intraday, or
vice versa. The discussion that follows demonstrates how that transfer of power
might occur.

Example

Figure 4.5 shows a daily chart of Peabody Energy (BTU). On August 6,
2007, a bullish hammer formed after a price decline. A short-covering
rally occurred in the days following the reversal pattern. However, that
rally actually began intraday on the day the hammer formed, as you’ll
see on the 5-minute chart in Figure 4.6.

FIGURE 4.5 Daily chart of Peabody Energy (BTU). A bullish
hammer formed on August 6, 2007
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

88

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 88 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 4.6 5-minute chart of Peabody Energy (BTU) on August
6, 2007
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Figure 4.6 shows the August 6 intraday price action that created the bullish hammer on BTU’s daily chart. The following commentary steps you
through the day’s price action as it appeared on a 5-minute chart. The numbers
correspond to the numbers on the chart:
1. Price gapped up open and rallied for the first 5 minutes of trading.
2. Price reversed direction and declined for 15 minutes.
3. Some buying pressure occurred over the next two bars, temporarily
stopping the fall and putting in the first bottom.
4. Price turned down again and tested the bottom (at 3), which did not
hold.
5. The decline continued for several more bars. Price turned up again for 5
minutes. That bounce put in the second prominent bottom of the day.
6. Price turned back down and tested the new low (at 5). This time the
bottom provided support and price rallied.
7. After each swing up , price pulled back some before moving higher.
8. Price pulled back deeper this time, correcting part of the uptrend before continuing higher.

JWBK100-ch04.qxd

2/21/08

9:01 AM

Page 89 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

More on Reversal Patterns

89

9. Price continued its series of upward intraday swings, followed by minor pullbacks until the end of the day.
From this intraday price action you can see where the bulls were successful
at taking control from the bears. The bears dominated most of the price action
between numbers 1 and 5. This is obvious from the price direction, but also by
the fact that most of the price bars during that time were bearish candles. Between numbers 6 and 9 the bulls were in charge and were able to push price
back up to close slightly higher than it opened. The intraday decline that was
followed by a reversal is what created the hammer’s long lower shadow that you
see on the daily chart. If you were to press all those intraday price bars together,
you’d see how they translate into a hammer with a white real body on the daily
chart.
You can learn a lot by examining the daily candle and then shifting down
to a lower intraday time frame to see how that daily candle was created from the
intraday price movement. If your intention is to swing trade the markets or become a day trader, understanding these concepts will help you develop your
trading strategies. It may make a significant difference on your profitability.
Even if you intend to hold most of your positions longer-term, the weekly and
monthly charts break down to lower time frames as well, so the lesson is still
applicable.
