
30

SOLON'S

WARNING

impossible to make a scientific career. (There is a distinction, however,
between the mind of a pure mathematician thriving on abstraction and
that of a scientist consumed by curiosity. A mathematician is absorbed
in what goes into his head while a scientist searches into what is outside
of himself.) However, some people's concern for randomness can be
excessive; I have even seen people trained in some fields, like say,
quantum mechanics, push the idea to the other extreme, only seeing
alternative histories and ignoring the one that actually took place.
Some traders can be unexpectedly introspective about randomness. I
recently had dinner at the bar of the Odeon with Lauren R., a trader
who was reading a draft of this book. We flipped a coin to see who was
going to pay for the meal. I lost and paid. He was about to thank me
when he abruptly stopped and said: "Reading your book you would say
that I paid for half of it probabilistically".
I thus view people distributed across two polar categories: on one
extreme, those who never accept the notion of randomness; on the
other, those who are tortured by it. When I started on Wall Street in the
1980s, trading rooms were populated with people with a "business
orientation", that is, generally devoid of any introspection, flat as a
pancake, and likely to be fooled by randomness. Their failure rate was
extremely high, particularly when financial instruments gained in
complexity. Somehow tricky products, like exotic options, were
introduced and carried counterintuitive payoffs that were too difficult
for someone of such culture to handle. They dropped like flies; I do not
think that many of the hundreds of MBAs of my generation I met on
Wall Street in the 1980s still engage in such forms of professional and
disciplined risk taking.

SALVATION VIA AEROFLOT

The 1990s witnessed the arrival of people-of richer and more interesting
backgrounds, which made the trading rooms far more entertaining. I
was saved from the conversation of MBAs. Many scientists, some of
them extremely successful in their field, arrived with a desire to make a
buck. They, in turn, hired people who resembled them. While most of
these people were not Ph.D.s (indeed, the Ph.D. is still a minority), the

A

BIZARRE

ACCOUNTING

METHOD

31

culture and values suddenly changed, becoming more tolerant of
intellectual depth. It caused an increase in the already high demand for
scientists on Wall Street, owing to the rapid development of financial
instruments. The dominant specialty was physics, but one could find all
manner of quantitative backgrounds among them. Russian, French,
Chinese, and Indian accents (by order) began dominating in both New
York and London. It was said that every plane from Moscow had at
least its back row full of Russian mathematical physicists en route to
Wall Street (they lacked the street smarts to get good seats). One could
hire very cheap labor by going to JFK airport with a (mandatory)
translator, randomly interviewing those that fitted the stereotype.
Indeed, by the late 1990s one could get someone trained by a worldclass scientist for almost half the price of an MBA. As they say,
marketing is everything; these guys do not know how to sell themselves.
I had a strong bias in favor of Russian scientists; many can be put to
active use as chess coaches (I also got a piano teacher out of the process).
In addition, they are extremely helpful in the interview process. When
MBAs apply for trading positions, they frequently boast "advanced"
chess skills on their resumes. I recall the MBA career counselor at
Wharton recommending our advertising chess skills "because it sounds
intelligent and strategic". MBAs, typically, can interpret their superficial
knowledge of the rules of the game into "expertise". We used to verify
the accuracy of claims of chess expertise (and the character of the
applicant) by pulling a chess set out of a drawer and telling the student,
now turning pale: "Yuri will have a word with you".
The failure rate of these scientists, though, was better, but only
slightly so than that of MBAs; but it came from another reason, linked
to their being on average (but only on average) devoid of the smallest bit
of practical intelligence. Some successful scientists had the judgment
(and social graces) of a door knob - but by no means all of them. Many
people were capable of the most complex calculations with utmost rigor
when it came to equations, but were totally incapable of solving a
problem with the smallest connection to reality; it was as if they
understood the letter but not the spirit of the math. I am convinced that
X, a likeable Russian man of my acquaintance, has two brains: one for
math and another, considerably inferior one, for everything else (which
included solving problems related to the mathematics of finance). But on

32

SOLON'S

WARNING

occasion a fast-thinking scientific-minded person with street smarts
would emerge. Whatever the benefits of such population shift, it
improved our chess skills and provided us with quality conversation
during lunchtime - it extended the lunch hour considerably. Consider
that I had in the 1980s to chat with colleagues who had an MBA or tax
accounting background and were capable of the heroic feat of discussing
FASB standards. I have to say that their interests were not too
contagious. The interesting thing about these physicists does not lie in
their ability to discuss fluid dynamics; it is that they were naturally
interested in a variety of intellectual subjects and provide pleasant
conversation.

SOLON VISITS REGJNE'S

NIGHT CLUB

As the reader may already suspect, my opinions about randomness have
not earned me the smoothest of relations with some of my peers during
my Wall Street career (many of whom the reader can see indirectly - but
only indirectly - portrayed in these chapters). But where I had uneven
relations was with some of those who had the misfortune of being my
bosses. For I had two bosses in my life of contrasting characteristics in
about every trait.
The first, whom I will call Kenny, was the epitome of the suburban
family man. He would be of the type to coach soccer on Saturday
morning, and invite his brother-in-law for a Sunday afternoon barbecue.
He gave the appearance of someone I would trust with my savings indeed he rose quite rapidly in the institution in spite of his lack of
technical competence in financial derivatives (his firm's claim to fame).
But he was too much a no-nonsense person to make out my logic. He
once blamed me for not being impressed with the successes of some of his
traders who did well during the bull market for European bonds of 1993,
whom I openly considered nothing better than random gunslingers. I
tried presenting him with the notion of survivorship bias (Part II of this
book) in vain. His traders have all exited the business since then "to
pursue other interests" (including him). But he gave the appearance of
being a calm, measured man, who spoke his mind and knew how to put
the other person at ease during a conversation. He was articulate,

A BIZARRE

ACCOUNTING

METHOD

33

extremely presentable thanks to his athletic looks, well measured in his
speech, and was endowed with the extremely rare quality of being an
excellent listener. His personal charm allowed him to win the confidence
of the chairman - but I could not conceal my disrespect, particularly as
he could not make out the nature of my conversation. In spite of his
conservative looks he was a perfect time bomb, ticking away.
The second, whom I will call Jean-Patrice, in contrast, was a moody
Frenchman with an explosive temper and a hyper-aggressive personality.
Except for those he truly liked (not that many), he was expert at making
his subordinates uncomfortable, putting them in a state of constant
anxiety. He greatly contributed to my formation as a risk-taker; he is one
of the very rare people who have the guts to care only about the
generator, entirely oblivious of the results. He presented the wisdom of
Solon, but, while one would expect someone with such personal wisdom
and such understanding of randomness to lead a dull life, he lived a
colorful one. In contrast with Kenny, who wore conservative dark suits
and white shirts (his only indulgence was flashy equestrian Hermes ties),
Jean-Patrice dressed like a peacock: blue shirts, plaid sports coats stuffed
with gaudy silk pocket squares. No family-minded man, he rarely came to
work before noon - though I can safely say that he carried his work with
him to the most unlikely places. He frequently called me from Regine's,
an upscale night-club in New York, waking me up at three in the morning
to discuss some small (and irrelevant) details of my risk exposure. In spite
of his slight corpulence, women seemed to find him irresistible; he
frequently disappeared at midday and was unreachable for hours. His
advantage might have been in his being a New York Frenchman with
steady bathing habits. Once, recently, he invited me to discuss an urgent
business issue with him. Characteristically, I found him mid-afternoon in
a strange "club" in Paris that carried no nameplate and where he sat with
documents strewn across the table from him. Sipping champagne, he was
simultaneously caressed by two scantily dressed young ladies. Strangely,
he involved them in the conversation as if they were part of the meeting.
He even had one of the ladies pick up his constantly ringing mobile phone
as he did not want our conversation to be interrupted.
I am still amazed at this flamboyant man's obsession with risks, which
he constantly played in his head - he literally thought of everything that
could possibly happen. He forced me to make an alternative plan should

34

SOLON'S

WARNING

a plane crash into the office building - and fumed at my answer that the
financial condition of his department would be of small interest to me in
such circumstances. He had a horrible reputation as a philanderer, a
temperamental boss capable of firing someone at a whim, yet he listened
to me and understood every word I had to say, encouraging me to go the
extra mile in my study of randomness. He taught me to look for the
invisible risks of blowup in any portfolio. Not coincidentally, he has an
immense respect for science and an almost fawning deference for
scientists; a decade or so after we worked together he showed up
unexpectedly during the defense of my doctoral thesis, smiling from the
back of the room. While Kenny knew how to climb the ladder of an
institution, reaching a high level in the organization before being forced
out, Jean-Patrice did not have such a happy career, a matter that taught
me to beware of mature financial institutions.
It can be disturbing for many self-styled "bottom line" oriented
people to be questioned about the histories that did not take place rather
than the ones that actually happened. Clearly, to a no-nonsense person
of the "successful in business" variety, my language (and, I have to
reckon, some traits of my personality) appear strange and incomprehensible. To my amusement, the argument appears offensive to many.
The contrast between Kenny and Jean-Patrice is not a mere coincidence in a protracted career. Beware the spendthrift "businesswise"
person; the cemetery of markets is disproportionately well stocked with
the self-styled "bottom line" people. In contrast with their customary
Masters of the Universe demeanor, they suddenly look pale, humble and
hormone-deprived on the way to the personnel office for the customary
discussion of the severance agreement.

George Will Is No Solon:
On Counterintuitive, Truths
Realism can be punishing. Probabilistic skepticism is worse. It is difficult
to go about life wearing probabilistic glasses, as one starts seeing fools
of randomness all around, in a variety of situations - obdurate in their

A BIZARRE

ACCOUNTING

METHOD

35

perceptional illusion. To start, it is impossible to read a historian's
analysis without questioning the inferences: we know that Hannibal and
Hitler were mad in their pursuits, as Rome is not today Phoenicianspeaking and Times Square in New York currently exhibits no
swastikas. But what of all those generals who were equally foolish,
but ended up winning the war and consequently the esteem of the
historical chronicler? It is hard to think of Alexander the Great or Julius
Caesar as men who won only in the visible history, but who could have
suffered defeat in others. If we have heard of them, it is simply because
they took considerable risks, along with thousands of others and
happened to win. They were intelligent, courageous, noble (at times),
had the highest possible obtainable culture in their day - but so did
thousands of others who live in the musty footnotes of history. Again I
am not contesting that they won their wars - only the claims concerning
the quality of their strategies. (My very first impression upon a recent
rereading of the Iliad, the first in my adulthood, is that the epic poet did
not judge his heroes by the result: heroes won and lost battles in a
manner that was totally independent of their own valor; their fate
depended upon totally external forces, generally the explicit agency of
the scheming gods (not devoid of nepotism). Heroes are heroes because
they are heroic in behavior, not because they won or lost. Patrocles does
not strike us as a hero because of his accomplishments (he was rapidly
killed) but because he preferred to die than see Achilles sulking into
inaction. Clearly the epic poets understood invisible histories. Also later
thinkers and poets had more elaborate methods for dealing with
randomness, as we will see with stoicism.)
Listening to the media, mostly because I am not used to it, can cause
me on occasion to jump out of my seat and become emotional in front
of the moving image (I grew up with no television and was in my late
twenties when I learned to operate a TV set). One illustration of a
dangerous refusal to consider alternative histories is provided by the
interview that media person George Will, a "commentator" of the
extensively commenting variety, conducted with Professor Robert
Shiller, a man known to the public for his best-selling book Irrational
Exuberance, but known to the connoisseur for his remarkable insights
about the structure of market randomness and volatility (expressed in
the precision of mathematics).

36

SOLON'S

WARNING

The interview is illustrative of the destructive aspect of the media, in
catering to our heavily warped common sense and biases. I was told that
George Will was very famous and extremely respected (that is, for a
journalist). He might even be someone of utmost intellectual integrity;
his profession, however, is merely to sound smart and intelligent to the
hordes. Shiller, on the other hand, understands the ins and outs of
randomness; he is trained to deal with rigorous argumentation, but does
sound less smart in public because his subject matter is highly
counterintuitive. Shiller had been pronouncing the stock market to be
overpriced for a long time. George Will indicated to Shiller that had
people listened to him in the past they would have lost money, as the
market has more than doubled since he started pronouncing it
overvalued. To such a journalistic and well sounding (but senseless)
argument, Shiller was unable to respond except to explain that the fact
that he was wrong in one single market call should not carry undue
significance. Shiller, as a scientist, did not claim being a prophet or one
of the entertainers who comment on the markets on the evening news.
Yogi Berra would have had a better time with his confident comment on
the fat lady not having sung yet.
I could not understand what Shiller, untrained to compress his ideas
into vapid sound-bites, was doing on such a TV show. Clearly, it is
foolish to think that an irrational market cannot become even more
irrational; Shiller's views on the rationality of the market are not
invalidated by the argument that he was wrong in the past. Here I could
not help seeing in the person of George Will the representative of so
many nightmares in my career; my attempting to prevent someone from
playing Russian roulette for $10 million and seeing journalist George
Will humiliating me in public by saying that had the person listened to
me it would have cost him a considerable fortune. In addition, Will's
comment was not an off-the-cuff remark; he wrote an article on the
matter discussing Shiller's bad "prophecy". Such tendency to make and
unmake prophets based on the fate of the roulette wheel is symptomatic
of our genetic inability to cope with the complex structure of
randomness prevailing in the modern world. Mixing forecast and
prophecy is symptomatic of randomness foolishness (prophecy belongs
to the right column, forecast is its mere left-column equivalent).

A

BIZARRE

ACCOUNTING

METHOD

37

H U M I L I A T E D IN D E B A T E S

Clearly, this idea of alternative history does not make intuitive sense,
which is where the fun begins. For starters, we are not wired in a way to
understand probability, a point that we will examine backward and
forward in this book. I will just say at this point that researchers of the
brain believe that mathematical truths make little sense to our mind,
particularly when it comes to the examination of random outcomes.
Most results in probability are entirely counterintuitive; we will see
plenty of them. Then why argue with a mere journalist whose paycheck
comes from playing on the conventional wisdom of the hordes? I recall
that every time I have been humiliated in a public discussion on markets
by someone (of the George Will variety) who seemed to present more
palatable and easier to understand arguments, I turned out (much later)
to be right. I do not dispute that arguments should be simplified to their
maximum potential; but people often confuse complex ideas that cannot
be simplified into a media-friendly statement as symptomatic of a
confused mind. MBAs learn the concept of clarity and simplicity, the
five-minute-manager take on things. The concept may apply to the
business plan for a fertilizer plant, but not to highly probabilistic
arguments - which is the reason I have anecdotal evidence in my
business that MBAs tend to blow up in financial markets, as they are
trained to simplify matters a couple of steps beyond their requirement (I
beg the MBA reader not to take offense; I am myself the unhappy holder
of the degree).
Beware the confusion between correctness and intelligibility. Part of
conventional wisdom favors things that can be explained rather
instantly and "in a nutshell" - in many circles it is considered law.
Having attended a French elementary school, a lycee primaire, I was
trained to rehash the popular adage:
Ce qui se congoit bien s'enonce clairement
Et les mots pour le dire viennent aisement
What is easy to conceive is clear to express/Words to say it would come
effortlessly.
The reader can imagine my disappointment at realizing, while

38

SOLON'S

WARNING

growing up as a practitioner of randomness, that most poetic sounding
adages are plain wrong. Borrowed wisdom can be vicious. I need to
make a huge effort not to be swayed by well-sounding remarks. I remind
myself of Einstein's remark that common sense is nothing but a
collection of misconceptions acquired by age 18. Furthermore: what
sounds intelligent in a conversation or a meeting, or, particularly in the
media, is suspicious.
Any reading of the history of science would show that almost all the
smart things that have been proven by science appeared like lunacies at
the time they were first discovered. Try to explain to a London Times
journalist in 1905 that time slows down when one travels (even the Nobel
committee never granted Einstein the prize on account of his insight on
special relativity). Or to someone with no exposure to physics that there
are places in our universe where time does not exist. Try to explain to
Kenny that, although his star trader had made him a lot of money, I have
enough arguments to convince him that he is a dangerous idiot.

RISK MANAGERS

Corporations and financial institutions have recently created the strange
position of risk manager, someone who is supposed to monitor the
institution and verify that it is not too deeply involved in the business of
playing Russian roulette. Clearly, having been burned a few times, the
incentive is there to have someone take a look at the generator, the
roulette that produces the profits and losses. Although it is more fun to
trade, many extremely smart people among my friends (including JeanPatrice) felt attracted by such positions. It is an important and attractive
fact that the average risk manager earns more than the average trader
(particularly when we take into account the number of traders thrown
out of the business). But their job feels strange, for the following reason:
as we said, the generator of reality is not observable. They are limited in
their power to stop profitable traders from taking risks, given that they
would, ex post be accused by the George Wills around of costing the
shareholder some precious opportunity shekels. On the other hand, the
occurrence of a blowup would cause them to be responsible for it. What
to do in such circumstances?

A BIZARRE

ACCOUNTING

METHOD

39

Their focus becomes to play politics, cover themselves by issuing
vaguely phrased internal memoranda that warn against risk-taking
activities yet stop short of completely condemning it, lest they lose their
job. Like a doctor torn between the two types of errors, the false positive
(telling the patient he has cancer when in fact he does not) and the false
negative (telling the patient he is healthy when in fact he has cancer),
they need to balance their existence with the fact that they inherently
need some margin of error in their business. For my part, I resolved the
problem long ago by being both the risk manager and the boss at my
current operation.
I conclude the chapter with a presentation of the central paradox of
my career in financial randomness. By definition, I go against the grain,
so it should come as no surprise that my style and methods are neither
popular nor easy to understand. But I manage money for others, and the
world is not just populated with babbling but ultimately inconsequential
journalists with no money to invest. So my wish is for investors in
general to remain fools of randomness (so I can trade against them), yet
that there remain a minority intelligent enough to value my methods and
supply me with capital. I was fortunate to meet Donald Sussman who
corresponds to such ideal investor; he helped me in the second stage of
xny career by backing the startup of Empirica, my trading firm, thus
freeing me from the ills of Wall Street employment. My greatest risk is
to become successful, as it would mean that my business is about to
disappear; strange business, ours.
