 Diversification is an age-old concept. It showed up in the Babylonian Talmud 1,500 years ago: “A man should always place his money one-third in land, a third in merchandise, and keep a third ready to hand.” Ecclesiastes 11:2 tells us to “divide your portion to seven or even eight, for you do not know what misfortune may occur on earth.” In The Merchant of Venice , Shakespeare wrote, “My ventures are not in one bottom trusted, nor to one place; nor is my whole estate upon the fortune of the present year. Therefore, my merchandise makes me not sad.” 
 The impetus toward greater diversification got a big boost following the global financial crisis of 2007–2008 with its severe drawdown across many asset classes. A popular saying is that diversification works well … until it does not. Correlations tend to rise sharply during periods of market stress, which is when diversification is needed the most. This has led to an even greater impetus toward diversification. 
 INTERNATIONAL DIVERSIFICATION 
 A common way to diversify U.S. stock market exposure other than with bonds is to hold foreign stocks. International mutual funds have been available to U.S. investors since the 1960s, and international diversification started to catch on among U.S. institutional investors beginning in the 1970s. 8 
 From 1900 through 2012, the annual risk premium of U.S. stocks over Treasury bills averaged 6.5%. For 18 non-U.S. markets, it averaged 4.5%. 9 Long-run returns of U.S. stocks have been substantially better than the returns of non-U.S. stocks. Correlations between U.S and non-U.S. stocks have risen in recent years. The average 12-month correlation between the S&P 500 and the MSCI EAFE from 1971 through 1999 was 0.42. Since then, it has averaged 0.83. Looking at the 50 largest U.S. companies, the median firm now conducts 57% of its business outside the United States. The diversification value of U.S. and foreign equities has definitely diminished. However, given the way different markets come in and out of favor, non-U.S. stocks may still add value to a portfolio based on relative strength momentum. This is why we include them in our dual momentum portfolio. 
 EMERGING MARKETS 
 In the quest for additional diversification and higher possible returns, some investors utilize emerging market equities and treat them as a separate asset class. There are, however, additional risks associated with emerging markets. They have less than 30 years of price history, are sometimes thin and illiquid, and are more expensive to trade and to manage. Accounting methods in developing countries are also not always up to the standards used in developed countries. 
 Because emerging markets can suffer sharp and rapid price declines, you often see them aggregated into baskets that trade as a group. This stems from the belief that diversification among emerging markets will reduce their risk. However, baskets of emerging market stocks create contagion risk, causing them to trade together as a whole. Aggregation and contagion can also amplify liquidity risk. During the Russian debt crisis, emerging markets as far away as Singapore suffered major capital outflows and extreme price volatility. 
 Due to increased globalization, correlations are higher now among emerging markets, as well as between emerging and developed markets. Figure 5.4 shows the five-year rolling monthly correlations between emerging and developed markets. It was below 0.30 in the 1990s. However, for the past three years the correlation has remained steady at over 0.90. 

 Figure 5.4 Five-Year Rolling Monthly EAFE Versus Emerging Market Correlations 
 From a diversification point of view, emerging markets have lost much of their appeal. What they mostly add now is additional volatility and uncertainty, which is generally undesirable. We include emerging assets in our dual momentum–based model by virtue of their natural inclusion in the non-U.S. equity index portion of our portfolio. Since that index is capitalization weighted, emerging markets make up only 14% of that index. We could easily drop emerging markets entirely from our dual momentum portfolio without a significant dilution in our results. 
 PASSIVE COMMODITY FUTURES 
 Another volatile asset class that has attracted a considerable following in recent years is commodity futures. One reason for this is the belief that commodities act as an inflation hedge. Yet common stocks over the long run, Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), and even Treasury bills can also serve as a hedge against inflation. 
 The underlying problem with commodity futures is that they, like currencies, are not an asset class in the same sense as stocks and bonds. 10 An asset class is a portfolio of homogeneous assets delivering a positive excess return above the risk-free rate in the long run, corresponding to a “risk premium” or reward for the risk associated with holding that asset. 
 Stocks and bonds exist as vehicles for raising capital. In return for this, investors can expect streams of payments from bonds or residual cash flow from equities. However, one cannot generally expect a long-only position in commodity futures to provide an excess return, as is the case with stocks and bonds. 
 Commodity futures contracts are a zero sum game in which the profits and losses of contract buyers and sellers are equal, disregarding transaction costs. According to Erb and Harvey (2006), “The average excess returns of individual commodity futures contracts have been indistinguishable from zero.” 
 Commodity futures are an insurance-type market where hedgers and speculators trade risks. There is no expectation of aggregate positive returns. Futures contracts cease to exist on their expiration dates, and there is no wealth created in these transactions. Because gains and losses are symmetrical to the buyer and seller of a futures contract, one cannot say that the buyer, by taking on volatility, is entitled to a positive return, since the seller, by the same reasoning, would also be entitled to a fair return. One of them must lose for the other to gain. 
 Commercial hedgers are generally short sellers who need to lay off risks of the unknown in their capital-intensive business. Speculators, who have no actual need to participate in commodity markets, traditionally take the other sides of these trades because of the premiums they receive as they roll expiring futures contracts out to longer maturities. 
 In the1980s, when I was managing large commodity pools, buyers of commodity futures enjoyed a systematic positive return called the “roll yield” or “roll premium” that flowed from hedgers to speculators. Hedgers would pay what amounted to an insurance premium to speculators in order to shed themselves of the risks that they were unwilling or unable to bear. 
 However, those dynamics have now changed. Using data only through the early 2000s that showed aggregate commodities to be a decent portfolio diversifier, academic papers like the one by Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) induced many institutional investors to invest in portfolios of passive commodity futures. Goldman Sachs and other indexers promoted commodity futures as a new asset class suitable for institutional investors. 
 Spurred on by a nearly 150% increase in the value of a basket of commodities from 2002 through 2007, over $100 billion poured into the commodity futures market from 2004 through 2008. This caused the “financialization” of commodities. According to J.P. Morgan’s Commodities Research, by the end of 2009 investors had linked $55 billion to the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI) and $30 billion to the Dow Jones-UBS Commodity Index (DJ-UBSCI). 
 Commodity investments more than doubled from roughly $170 billion in July 2007 to $410 billion in February 2013. Endowments, pension funds, hedge funds, risk parity programs, and the public have all joined the bandwagon and scrambled to add long-only commodity index futures in an effort to diversify their portfolios. 
 Many pension programs now believe they should have 5 to 10% of their portfolio assets committed to commodities. As shown in Figure 5.5 , from 1990 through 2012, the share of open interest in commodity futures contracts held by noncommercial interests increased from 15% to 42%. 11 

 Figure 5.5 Percentage of Open Interest Held by Noncommercials 
 ( Source: Adam Zaremba ) 
 These new speculators tend to go long regardless of price. As the number of insurance providers (speculators) became increasingly large compared to the number of insurance buyers (hedgers), the roll yield dissipated and is now negative. From 1969 to 1992, the roll return averaged 11% per year. Since 2001, it has averaged a negative 6.6%. 12 
 The cumulative roll yield gain that existed up to 1970 was all lost by the end of 2009. Passive commodities indexes are still below their high-water marks reached in 2008. The odds are now stacked against those who hold long commodity futures. Yet passive commodities are still widely touted as a desirable portfolio diversifier. 
 Several newer commodity indexes, like the Deutsche Bank Liquid Commodity Index Optimum Yield or the SummerHaven Dynamic indexes, try to reduce the roll yield disadvantage by selectively seeking futures contracts, when possible, that still offer a positive roll premium. However, passive commodity index funds, regardless of their roll premium capture inclinations, face another formidable obstacle: front-running costs that come from regularly rolling over their commodity futures positions. They occur when others anticipate and trade in front of the futures rollover dates, then take profits afterward. 
 Yiqun Mou (2011) estimates that front-running costs were 3.6% annually from January 2000 through March 2010. J.P. Morgan Commodities Research reported in 2009 that roll returns have put a drag of 3% to 4% per year on commodity index returns since 1991. These hidden costs can quickly take the wind out of the sails of the buyers of passive commodities index futures. 
 Rising correlations are another problem associated with commodities. According to Tang and Xiong (2012), the average one-year rolling correlation among indexed commodities was at a stable level below 0.10 throughout the 1990s and 2000s. By 2009, it had climbed to 0.50. Before 2008, the correlation between the GSCI and the S&P 500 was generally in a band between –0.20 and 0.10. Since then, it has shot up to over 0.50 and has generally remained there. 13 
 Furthermore, during both the 1929 stock market crash and the 2008 financial crisis, the correlation between equities and commodities shot up to over 80%. Commodities diversification was lacking when it was needed the most. According to Lombardi and Ravazzolo (2013) of the Bank for International Settlements, the popular view that commodities should be included in one’s portfolio as a hedging device is no longer valid. 14 
 The decrease in roll return and increase in return correlation now render the mean-variance diversification benefit of a passive allocation to commodity futures insignificant. A comprehensive study by Daskalaki and Skiadopoulos (2011) called “Should Investors Include Commodities in Their Portfolios After All? New Evidence,” revealed that the introduction of commodity instruments in a traditional stock/bond portfolio is no longer beneficial for a utility-maximizing investor. Blitz and de Groot (2004) also found that commodities deserve little or no role in a stock/bond portfolio, although a case could be made for including momentum, carry, and low-volatility commodity market risk factors. 
 The first year that investors could actually include a passive commodity index in their portfolios was 1991. Table 5.1 shows the performance of the DJ-UBSCI, compared with the performance of the S&P 500, Morgan Stanley Capital International Europe, Australasia, and Far East (MSCI EAFE), MSCI Emerging Markets (MSCI EM), and Barclays Capital U. S. Aggregate Bond indexes from 1991 through 2013. 15 This includes the 2002–2007 period that was very favorable to commodities. Figure 5.6 shows visually the DJ-UBSCI versus the S&P 500. 
 Table 5.1 Dow Jones UBS Commodity Index 1991–2013 

 Figure 5.6 Dow Jones-UBS Commodity Index Versus S&P 500 Index 
 Longer term, from January 1975 through December 2011, the GSCI (DJ-UBSCI was not available before 1991) had an annual average return of 6.1% with a standard deviation of 19.3%, while five-year Treasury bonds had a 7.7% return and a 4.3% standard deviation. 
 MANAGED COMMODITY FUTURES 
 Much of what I said about passive commodities is also applicable to actively managed commodity futures. Managed futures typically use trend-following methods to participate on both the long and the short side of the commodity futures markets. However, any excess return earned from actively managed futures trading is still dependent on capturing risk premium from commercial hedgers, or it comes from the difficult task of outsmarting other speculators. 
 In the 1980s, when I successfully managed commodity pools, there was an abundance of roll premium available for speculators. This allowed many commodity-trading advisors to prosper. In recent years, however, many more speculators have entered the marketplace to compete with one another for the same trend-following profits. This has made it much more difficult to earn attractive risk-adjusted returns. The situation is now similar to active stock management, where those with the same information are competing with one another to gain an edge. With equities, however, there is an upward drift in stock prices and a proven risk premium. This is, unfortunately, not the case with commodities. 
 Despite these sobering facts, according to Barclays Hedge, the amount of assets in managed futures grew from $50.9 billion in 2007 to $325 billion in 2014. This accounts for 15% of the entire hedge fund industry. What is especially surprising about this is that the average managed futures return since 2007 has been negative with the rolling annual return being negative now for 21 straight months. 
 It could be that increased participation in managed futures has much to do with the propensity of institutional investors to diversify aggressively in recent years no matter what the consequences. The average U.S. college endowment fund, for example, now has 54% of its assets in alternative investments and only 15% in U.S. stocks. Sovereign funds have also greatly stepped up their allocations to alternatives. I call this the “everything but the kitchen sink” approach to investing. So what exactly has happened with managed futures since this onslaught of additional capital? 
 Bhardwaj, Gorton, and Rouwenhorst (2013) have a paper appropriately named “Fooling Some of the People All of the Time: The Inefficient Performance and Persistence of Commodity Trading Advisors.” They found using the equal-weighted performance of the Lipper-TASS database of 930 commodity trading advisors (CTAs), after adjusting for survivorship and backfill bias, that CTA excess returns to investors over U.S. Treasury bills averaged only 1.8% per year from 1994 through 2012 (see Figure 5.7 ). 16 This was not significantly different from zero. 

 Figure 5.7 Commodity Trading Advisor Performance, 1994–2012 
 (Source: Bhardwaj, Gorton, and Rouwenhorst) 
 As with other hedge funds, CTA fees are often 2% of assets and 20% of profits each year. During this period, aggregate CTA fees averaged 4.3% per year, which was more than twice what investors received. Investors had earned returns not much greater than Treasury bills while taking on volatility equal to equities. Bhardwaj et al. (2013) concluded that interest in managed futures has remained strong because investors’ experience of poor performance is not common knowledge. This does not speak well for due diligence these days. 
 Research into actual futures trading since the mid-1980s has confirmed the lack of profitability using quantitative timing strategies. Marshall, Cahan, and Cahan (2008) applied over 7,000 trading rules in five rule families (filter rules, moving averages, support and resistance, channel breakouts, and on-balance volume) to 15 major commodity markets from 1984 through 2005. Using two different bootstrapping methodologies and accounting for data-snooping bias, the authors found that these rules were not profitable on their own, despite their wide following. 
 Managed futures might still find a place in some portfolios due to their diversification value. In 2008, the Credit Suisse Managed Futures Index was up 17.6% (this was the last year that managed futures showed a gain), while the Credit Suisse Hedge Fund Index was down 20.7%. During this time, the Reuters/CRB Commodity Index was down 23.7%, the S&P 500 Index was down 38.4%, the MSCI World Index was down 42.1%, and the Dow Jones Wilshire Real Estate Securities Index was down 43.1%. Commodities can hedge supply shocks to the economy, such as the oil embargo of 1973–1974, but not usually overall shocks to the economy, such as the recessions of 1981 and 2001. 
 There is an alternative for those still wanting to include actively managed futures in their portfolios. Using data from 58 liquid futures markets from June 1985 to June 2012, Hurst, Ooi, and Pedersen (2014) were able to achieve comparable before-costs CTA results using a simple, trend-following absolute momentum strategy similar to the one you will see in Chapter 8 . Those who want to participate in actively managed commodity futures can avoid high fees (and achieve trends with benefits) by implementing this kind of simple, trend-following strategy. 
 HEDGE FUNDS 
 Alfred Winslow Jones became a U.S. diplomat working in Berlin in the early 1930s, where he also ran secret missions for a clandestine anti-Nazi group. During his earlier years, Jones traveled and drank with Ernest Hemingway, then later earned a doctorate in sociology from Columbia University. He joined the editorial staff at Fortune magazine in the early 1940s. While writing an article on investment trends for Fortune in 1948, Jones had the unique idea of managing the risk of holding long stock positions by selling short other stocks and using leverage to boost portfolio returns. In 1949, at the age of 48, Jones raised $60,000 from four friends, added it to $40,000 of his own money, and began the first “hedged fund,” as he called it. 
 In 1952, Jones opened the fund to new investors and altered the structure by converting it from a general partnership to a limited partnership. He also added a 20% incentive fee as compensation for himself as managing partner. He modeled his profit participation idea after the Phoenician merchants who kept one-fifth of the profits from successful voyages. As the first money manager to combine short selling, leverage, shared risk through a partnership with other investors, and a compensation system based on investment performance, Jones became the father of the all hedge funds. 
 The hedge fund industry did not really get off the ground until 1966, when an article in Fortune magazine highlighted how Jones’s obscure private investment fund had outperformed every mutual fund by high double digits over the prior five years. In the 10 years leading up to 1965, Jones had earned almost twice as much as his nearest competitor. Two years after the Fortune article, there were almost 200 hedge funds. 
 In an effort to maximize returns (and performance fees), many funds turned away from Jones’ long/short hedged strategy but retained the leverage feature. Hedge funds moved increasingly away from the theme of Conrad Thomas’s 1970s’ book (with the best title ever given an investment book), Hedgemanship: How to Make Money in Bear Markets, Bull Markets, and Chicken Markets While Confounding Professional Money Managers and Attracting a Better Class of Women . Doing away with the hedged feature led to very large losses and many hedge fund closures during each bear market. The 1973–1974 market crash, in fact, wiped out most hedge funds. According to research firm Tremont Partners Inc., there were only 84 hedge funds in 1984. 
 The industry continued this way, remaining relatively quiet until a 1986 article in Institutional Investor touted the double-digit returns of Julian Robertson’s Tiger Fund. Investors quickly started flocking to hedge funds again. Lured by the 2% of assets and 20% of profits fee structure, high-profile money managers deserted the mutual fund industry in droves during the early 1990s to seek fame and fortune as hedge fund managers. 
 The industry was hard hit by the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management in 1998, followed by the spectacular implosions of Robertson’s Tiger Funds and the high-flying Quantum Fund in 2000. In 2002, the well-known money manager Mario Gabelli called hedge funds “a highly speculative vehicle for unwitting fat cats and careless financial institutions to lose their shirts.” 
 Managed futures are but one category of hedge fund. There are 18 others, the majority of which are long only. Drawn like moths to a flame by their strong desires to enhance performance and diversify more broadly, institutions have greatly stepped up their hedge fund investments. At the end of 2011, 61% of the worldwide investment in hedge funds came from institutional sources. Hedge fund assets as a whole grew from $60 billion in 1990 to $200 billion in 1999 and were at an all-time high of more than $2.7 trillion in the first quarter of 2014. 
 Looking at hedge fund performance as of December 2013, the Bloomberg Hedge Funds Aggregate Index was down 1.8% from its July 2007 peak. This marked the eleventh consecutive year in which the performance of a balanced 60/40 stock/bond portfolio beat the hedge fund industry. 
 The average hedge fund has lagged the performance of the S&P 500 Index since 1995. This may be acceptable for hedge funds that actually do hedge, but most of them do not. In a study of 306 long-only hedge fund returns from 1986 through 2000, Griffin and Xu (2009) found that hedge funds have no special abilities to generate positive, risk-adjusted excess returns. Since then, hedge fund alpha has remained negative. 
 Funds of funds that hold other hedge funds (FOFs) have done no better. Dewaele et al. (2011) studied 1,315 FOFs in the Lipper-TASS database from 1994 through August 2009. After adjusting for risk factors, they found that only 5.6% of FOFs showed risk-adjusted returns greater than the hedge fund indexes, and there was no significant difference between the average FOF and a fund picked at random. 
 Simon Lack, author of the 2012 book The Hedge Fund Mirage , used the BarclaysHedge database from 1998 through 2010 to perform asset-weighted return calculations, similar to an internal rate of return. He argued that this is more appropriate than the usual time-weighted return calculation because hedge fund managers have control over when they accept and commit capital. Using this asset-weighted return measure, the HFR Global Hedge Fund Index returned only 2.1% annualized those 12 years. After adjusting for fees charged by FOFs and for survivorship and backfill biases, Lack estimated that from 1998 through 2010 investors collectively lost $308 billion, while the hedge fund industry earned fees of $324 billion. According to Lack, hedge funds have taken 84% of investor profits since 1998, funds of funds have taken 14% of profits, and only 2% has gone to investors. Lack further noted that if all the money ever invested in hedge funds had instead been put in Treasury bills, investors would have been twice as well off. 
 Dichev and Yu (2009) conducted a similar study using dollar-weighted hedge fund returns from 1980 through 2008. They found that dollar-weighted returns were 3 to 7% lower than buy-and-hold returns. Using factor models for risk, the authors found the real alpha of hedge funds to be close to zero. In absolute terms, weighted hedge fund returns were reliably lower than the return on the S&P 500 index. 
 Not only have hedge fund returns been lacking but also hedge fund risks have been high due to high leverage, lack of transparency, and limited liquidity. Castle Hall Alternatives, which maintains a database of hedge fund frauds and blowups, reports more than 300 frauds and implosions over the past decade. The average hedge fund lifespan has been about five years. Out of an estimated 7,200 hedge funds that existed in 2010, 775 failed or closed in 2011, 873 in 2012, and 914 in 2013. Within those three years, around one-third of all funds disappeared with new ones taking their place. 
 Hedge fund diversification value has also been declining. According to Deutsche Bank, the average correlation of hedge funds to the S&P 500 (based on monthly returns over a four-year rolling window) has risen from under 0.50 in the mid-1990s to over 0.80 now. Fourteen of the 18 hedge fund strategies suffered their worst-ever drawdown at the same time in 2008, despite their pursuing what appeared to be different strategies in different markets. 
 With standard annual fees of 2% of assets and 20% of profits, hedge funds distinguish themselves more as a compensation structure than as an asset class. Collectively, the top 25 hedge fund managers regularly earn more than the combined compensation of all 500 CEOs of the S&P 500. Hedge fund managers, in aggregate, have captured most or all of any excess return and have given little or none of it to investors. According to Warren Buffett, “A number of smart people are involved in running hedge funds. But to a great extent their efforts are self-neutralizing, and their IQ will not overcome the costs they impose on investors. Investors, on average and over time, will do better with a low-cost index fund.” 
 PRIVATE EQUITY 
