
Volume as an Indication of Continuation
We have, of course, in the common phenomenon of increased volume attending
break-outs from technical formations, one specific example of the use of the volume
chart in forecasting continuation. We have seen how a pick-up in volume almost
invariably accompanies a price break-out in an upward direction and usually, but
not always, accompanies a price break-out downward. Where higher volume does not attend the iniIt is common to see
tial break downward, it usually picks up notably
technical formations
within a day or two as the movement progresses.
where none exist;
When volume does not pick up, a ‘‘false move’’
application of the
(which we shall take up in Study X) is to be susvolume test will help.
pected. There is no need to discuss break-out volume further except to say that any conspicuous
increase in activity when prices move out of an area of congestion, regardless of its
pattern, is an indication of continuation. It should also be noted that an increase in
volume attending the penetration of a trend line has somewhat the same significance as the increase attending a break-out from a pattern, and confirms the importance of the trend penetration.
And, once more, in this connection, let us recall the rule of doubling the actual vol– 296 –

TREND LINE ACTION

ume of a Saturday’s trading in order to bring it into fair comparison for technical
purposes with the volume of trading on other days of the week.

Relation of Volume to Price Movement
There is another aspect of volume study which we have not mentioned heretofore,
the relation of volume to progress in price movement. This has been the subject of
considerable research, with rather disappointing results in so far as our being able
to discover any dependable trading rules. The most that can be said is that, so long
as prices continue to move in apparent proportion to the volume of activity, the forecast is continuation. When, however, several days of high volume are attended by
no price movement the suggestion is that important resistance has been encountered, and that some correctional movement will follow. This general principle is
subject to much leeway in its application to specific situations, and judgment must
be used in appraising its importance with relation to other factors appearing on the
same chart.

Relation of Volume Action to Basic Trend
Finally, there is one more general rule of volume action which is often of use to the
technical trader when other elements of the chart picture fail to give a definite clue.
This rule may be expressed in simple terms as follows: volume tends to run higher
when prices are moving in the direction of the basic trend, and lower when prices
are moving contrary to the basic trend. It should be noted that this rule holds true in
only a general sense; it should not be applied to a single day’s volume action for
there are frequent exceptions. Taking into account the chart picture for a reasonable
period, however, it works out with a high degree of dependability.
Good examples are plentiful – will be found, in fact, in almost any chart which we
may care to examine. The student will recall that we made use of this rule in our
analysis of the Inverted Triangle which formed at the 1929 top in General American
Transportation (Fig V.1) and again in the analysis of
the Ascending Triangle in Anaconda Copper (Fig.
Volume tends to run
VI.4). It comes into play in the analysis of the Out-ofhigher when prices are
line movements which we took up in Study VII, and
moving in the direction
is a great help in the detection of false moves which
of the basic trend.
we will take up later in Study X. And, finally, it is of
decided assistance in appraising the significance of
the set-backs which frequently follow after breakouts from area patterns, a phenomenon which we have referred to on several occasions, particularly on page 183 in Study VI.
– 297 –

STUDY VIII

Most Useful in Intermediate Trend Trading
This general rule which we are discussing applies also to the broad pictures of major
or cyclical trends presented by weekly charts, but is of little practical use in long
term trading since too great a time must always elapse before the volume relation
becomes clearly developed. It is, however, of great practical value in trading on the
intermediate movements, both in the continuation and reversal phases of those
movements.
Specifically, it is most useful in deciding whether a reaction in an upward trend is
the beginning of a reversal into a downward trend, or simply a minor fluctuation
which will soon run out and be followed by a resumption of the upward movement.
Or, in a downward trend, whether a rally is initiating a reversal or simply correcting
a temporarily over sold condition.
The student will understand that this rule is merely one more tool in the kit. By
itself it is of limited usefulness, but considered in connection with all of our other
technical guides – patterns, gaps, trend lines, etc. – it helps us in arriving at a reasonable forecast of the future price action.

THE DOW THEORY
This is a good place in our studies to give some brief attention to the Dow Theory
since that theory is based primarily on general trend and volume considerations,
with practically no reference to the many specific formations and phenomena which
we have been studying in this Course.1
It is noteworthy that Charles H Dow, the man who first set forth the principles
which have been developed into what is now known as the Dow Theory, applied
these principles himself only to the ‘‘averages’’ and apparently only, or at least
chiefly, as a means of judging the basic business and financial trends, rather than as
an aid to speculation. His followers have been more attentive to the speculative
application of the principles, and the public at large has come to conceive of the Dow
Theory as a complete guide to successful stock trading which is very far from the
fact as well as from the original purpose of its author.

. For further information on the highly respected tenets and practical applications of the Dow Theory’s
well-grounded usage for market analytics, plus the several profit-proved improvements to it by Samuel
Moment, the next work in this Series of Market Classics is recommended; ‘‘New Blueprints for Gains in
Stocks and Grains’’ combined with ‘‘One-Way Formula’’, both by William Dunnigan.
1

– 298 –

TREND LINE ACTION

The Two Averages Used by Dow
The Dow Theory depends upon the simultaneous study and interpretation of two
averages – the Dow-Jones Industrial Average (of which a long-term chart is shown
in the Frontispiece of this Course) and the Dow-Jones Railroad Average. In the days
when Mr Dow first promulgated his basic principles of market action, the railroads
collectively constituted an extremely important part of the American financial picture. The capital invested in railroads represented a very large share of the corporate
wealth of the country. Moreover, virtually every movement of goods, whether raw
materials or finished products, went by rail. Consequently, every change in business
activity was reflected promptly and directly in railroad income. This condition,
which no longer maintains, accounts for the great importance which Mr Dow
attached to the movements of the Rail Average. Many present-day students of the
averages now discount the importance of the Rails. Certainly the movements of the
railroad averages have been difficult to apply in the Dow Theory, and frequently
downright misleading, in the interpretation of the market as a whole since 1932.

The Major Tenets of the Dow Theory
The leading contemporary exponent of the Dow Theory is, without doubt, Mr
Robert Rhea, from whose work ‘‘The Dow Theory’’ the following brief summary of
six of the principal tenets of the theory are quoted.
1. Dow’s three movements: ‘‘There are three movements of the averages, all of which
may be in progress at one and the same time. The first, and most important, is the
primary trend; the broad upward or downward movements known as bull or bear
markets, which may be of several years’ duration. The second, and most deceptive
movement, is the secondary reaction: an important decline in a primary bull market
or a rally in a primary bear market. These reactions usually last from three weeks to
as many months. The third, and usually unimportant, movement is the daily fluctuation.”
2. Both averages must confirm: ‘‘The movements of both the railroad and industrial stock averages should always be considered together. The movement of one
price average must be confirmed by the other before reliable inferences may be
drawn. Conclusions based upon the movement of one average, unconfirmed by the
other, are almost certain to prove misleading.”
3. Determining the trend: ‘‘Successive rallies penetrating preceding high points,
with ensuing declines terminating above preceding low points, offer a bullish indication. Conversely, failure of the rallies to penetrate previous high points, with ensu– 299 –

STUDY VIII

ing declines carrying below former low points, is bearish. Inferences so drawn are
useful in appraising secondary reactions and are of major importance in forecasting
the resumption, continuation, or change of the primary trend. For the purpose of
this discussion, a rally or a decline is defined as one or more daily movements resulting in a net reversal of direction exceeding three per cent of the price of either average. Such movements have but little authority unless confirmed in direction by both
averages, but the confirmation need not occur on the same day.”
4. Lines: ‘‘A ‘line’ is a price movement extending two to three weeks or longer,
during which period the price variation of both averages moves within a range of
approximately five per cent. Such a movement indicates either accumulation or distribution. Simultaneous advances above the limits of the ‘line’ indicate accumulation and predict higher prices; conversely, simultaneous declines below the ‘line’
imply distribution and lower prices are sure to follow. Conclusions drawn from the
movement of one average, not confirmed by the other, generally prove to be incorrect.”
5. The Relation of volume to price movements: ‘‘A market which has been overbought becomes dull on rallies and develops activity on declines; conversely, when
a market is oversold, the tendency is to become dull on declines and active on rallies. Bull markets terminate in a period of excessive activity and begin with comparatively light transactions.”
6. Individual stocks: ‘‘All active and well distributed stocks of great American corporations generally rally and decline with the averages, but any individual stock
may reflect conditions not applicable to the average price of any diversified list of
stocks.”

Application to Stock Trading
The student who wishes to investigate the Dow Theory at length will find all of its
principles fully expounded in the works of Mr Robert Rhea. As a broad, basic study
of the general market trend it is of unquestioned authority, but as an aid to successful trading in individual stocks our experience indicates that it is of extremely limited value. One cannot buy or sell the ‘‘average’’, and individual stocks do not make
their tops or bottoms at the same time as the averages, nor move at the same rate.
More often than not, by the time a ‘‘signal’’ has been given by the averages important profits or opportunities for profit have been lost.

– 300 –

Study IX

SUPPORT AND
RESISTANCE LEVELS
■ The Importance of Reversal Levels

■ Broken Trend Lines Soon Lose their

Technical Significance

■ Deciding upon our Terminology
■ Methods of Forecasting Resistance

■ The Cradle – a Strong Resistance

Levels

Point

■ Resistance Levels Become Future

■ Resistance and Support at Head and

Support Levels

Shoulders Reversals

■ Logical Explanation for Reversal

■ Support and Resistance Lines on

Levels

Multiple Formations

■ The Memory Factor Comes into Play

■ Applying the Rules to the Rectangles

and Right-angle Triangles

■ Artificial Factors Also Occasionally

Effective
■ Degree of Reliability of Supply and
Demand Levels
■ Old Bottoms Become Future Tops
■ And Old Tops Become New Bottoms
■ Value of Weekly Charts in Forecasting
■ Volume a Factor in Estimating Future
Influence
■ Levels Established During the Bear
Market
■ Levels Repeating in the Opposite
Trend
■ Forecasting the Next Steps in
General Electric
■ Resistance and Support Levels in
Intermediate Trends
■ Minor Tops Later Become Minor Bottoms
■ Negative Usefulness of Minor Support Levels
■ Resistances Set Up by Patterns and
Trend Lines
■ Trend Lines Defining Support and
Resistance

■ Support and Resistance Set Up by

Symmetrical Triangles
■ The Apex Level Becomes Significant
■ The Symmetrical Triangle Forms a

Cradle
■ A Third Significant Level
■ Judgment Required in Forecasting

Support Levels
■ Support and Resistance at Gaps
■ Practical Uses of Pattern Resistance

Study
■ A Second Opportunity to Buy or Sell
■ How Long Are Previous Levels Valid
■ Fifty and One Hundred as Critical

Levels
■ The Half-way Intermediate

Movement Theory
■ The ‘‘Bounce’’ Away from Support or

Resistance
■ A Good Place to Take Profits
■ Use of Support and Resistance Levels

in Short Selling

– 301 –

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE LEVELS

In our last Study we learned that one of the uses of trend lines is in estimating the
probable objective of an intermediate price movement. The existence of a well
defined trend, suggesting that any movement of prices will be turned back as it
reaches the trend line, gives us a basis for measuring the probable immediate profits to be gained in a prospective trade, and for comparing the potential profits in one
stock with another. This restrictive action of trend lines may be called a phenomenon of resistance – one of the many which the technical trader finds it profitable to
know and put to use. The general subject of support and resistance levels is one of
the most interesting, and most practical as well, of our Course in Technical Analysis. We shall devote the greater part of this Section to it.

The Importance of Reversal Levels
We gave our first attention in this Course to the various formations or patterns
which forecast a reversal of price trend. Most certainly, indications of reversals are
of prime importance in practical trading, because we may assume continuation of
the previous or current trend until signs of reversal appear. Reversals are our signals
that the technical position is undergoing change and that it is necessary to take
action, to adjust our trading policy to the changing technical trend or forecast.
If we can get advance information by some means or other, regarding the probable point at which a reversal of the trend may occur, we have a great advantage in
planning our practical market operations. We shall be forewarned, if we decide to
take a position in a certain stock, to scrutinize with particular care its action as
depicted on the chart when it approaches that point or level. And we shall be prepared all the more quickly to accept and act upon any evidences of reversal that
show up there. So, any information as to the levels at which strong resistance to further movement may be expected is of practical help, first, in determining whether or
not it will be profitable to take a position in a stock, and, second, in determining
when it may be wise to take profits.

Deciding Upon Our Terminology
Resistance levels, generally speaking, are those price ranges at or within which
increased offers (or bids) are met, resulting in a stemming of the technical tide, and
either a reversal of trend or, at least, a temporary halt and ‘‘congestion’’. It will make
our study easier, however, if we abandon the broad use of the term ‘‘resistance’’, confining its application to those levels at which upward or advancing price movements
– 303 –

STUDY IX

are halted, and use instead the term ‘‘support’’ to describe those levels where downward or declining trends are arrested.
A resistance level, then, is an approximate level, or fairly well defined price range,
where a previously advancing stock meets resistance in the form of strong selling. A
support level is an approximate level or price range where a preceding decline
meets support. In the form of strong buying. A resistance level may, therefore, be
called also a ‘‘supply area’’ – an area, that is, in which an increased supply of the
stock for sale is encountered. And, by the same token, a support level may be called
a ‘‘demand area.”

Methods of Forecasting Resistance Levels
We have seen in our previously mentioned trend line action one method of forecasting probable support and resistance points. There are, in fact, a great many
nearby and temporary supports and resistances set up by the various patterns of
price action which we have studied in the preceding sections of this Course, and we
shall take these all up later in the course of this Study. First and foremost among
support and resistance levels in practical trading importance, however, are those
which occur at price ranges which have been marked and identified by the appearance of area formations or price congestions at those same ranges at some preceding
period in the trading history of the stock. Such future developments of support and
resistance are, obviously, the repetition, at a later date, of support or resistance previously manifested at the same levels, since we know that any price congestion or
formation, whether reversal or continuation, reflects in itself some measure of support or resistance.

Resistance Levels Become Future Support Levels
It is important to note at this point, however, that an area formation built by resistance will, if later penetrated, manifest itself as a support level. And, in the same
manner, a support level will, when broken through, show up as a resistance point in
future price movement. Each may repeat in its original role but more often they
exchange roles. In other words, an area formation, whether originally one of resistance or support, may repeat later on in the same or the opposite position, tending
to check whatever movement happens to approach its level from either above or
below.

Logical Explanation for Reversal Levels
Any logical explanation for support and resistance levels must take into account
– 304 –

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE LEVELS

various natural as well as artificial causes. One natural explanation lies in the fact
that the public, and all trading elements, tend to remember previous area levels and
thus make them important. While a stock is changing its price level rapidly, day after
day, the public will be buying and selling at widely divergent levels and there will
be no unanimity, or strong memory impression, in such changing prices.
But if the stock has formed an area, has held within a fairly narrow range for some
time, then public purchases and sales tend to bunch up on that range and the public remembers that particular price level. The longer the time which the stock spent
in that range, therefore, and the greater the total volume of transactions which took place therein, the
The public and trading
greater becomes the importance of that range for
elements tend to
future technical consideration.
remember previous area
If a stock advances very rapidly, for instance, from
levels and thus make
75 to 100 there is not enough time spent at any parthem important.
ticular price range for it to become significant. But if
the stock now meets resistance and fluctuates for a
month between 95 and 100, then the public will be much more likely to remember
that particular price range in connection with that stock and to be governed thereby
at a later date. And, obviously, this range will have been especially impressed on the
many who bought or sold within it.
Now suppose that the stock again advances on up in a fairly straight and rapid
movement and then forms another long area range around 125. The 125 range now
assumes much greater importance than any of the prices between 100 and 125. At
those two levels, at 100 and at 125, we have now had formed area formations and
thus resistance or support points.

The Memory Factor Comes into Play
Let the stock whose theoretical movements we followed in the preceding paragraphs now begin to react from 125 back toward 100. There will not be nearly as
much public interest in its successively declining price levels on the way down as
there will be when the price again strikes that previous area range at around 100.
When that price is reached, however, people will begin to buy who recall seeing the
price there before and who, meanwhile, have wished they had bought at that earlier
level. Now they see a second opportunity to buy there and many of them do.
Or there may be many traders who went short of the stock the first time it hesitated at 100, who foolishly failed to protect themselves with stop-loss orders, and
who worried about their paper losses while the stock went up to 125, and are now
glad to be able to cover their short sales by repurchase without loss, as the stock gets
back again to the 100 level. Thus from various natural tendencies, there is built up
– 305 –

STUDY IX

greater buying or demand which becomes technical support at the 100 level, which
was formerly a resistance point.
If we assume that this support level around 100 reverses the price trend once
more, then the stock will meet resistance to further advance when it again
approaches that former resistance level of around 125. At that level, many who
wished they had sold out the first time the stock hit 125 and before it started back
down to 100, now find they have a second opportunity to sell at 125 and do so. Short
traders, who, while the stock was going down to 100, wished they had sold short at
the 125 level, now find that they, too, have another opportunity to sell short at that
price. Thus there is clear logic to the importance of resistance and support levels,
simply from rather natural considerations.

Artificial Factors Also Occasionally Effective
Other reasons may be found, however, in a consideration of more artificial movements, such as may be produced by the plans of professional operators. Inside
groups work not only with such natural ideas in view as those we have just noted,
but they also have usually very definite ideas of the price levels at which they wish
to accumulate most of their stock and where they wish to distribute it. Such a campaign assumes advance formulation of a definite and organized plan to buy a large
block of stock at around a certain price level and sell it around another price level.
If the operators buy most of their line of stock around 100 and decide to sell it out
at around 125 they are hardly likely to sell it all the first time the stock hits 125. It is
more likely that they will be able to sell perhaps only two-thirds of their holdings the
first time the price reaches that goal. Exhausting the buying power at 125, temporarily, they will let the stock drift lower of its own accord, unless it is weaker than
they thought and gets within striking distance of 100 again. In that case their best
procedure might well be to buy back some of the stock they sold at 125, thus check
the decline at 100, and start the issue back up again. But when the new advance
approaches 125 once more, they will begin to sell the rest of their holdings, in accordance with the original plan of buying around 100 and selling around 125.
Thus we see how support and resistance levels, once established, may well continue to exercise important and dependable influence on future movements.
