
33

c02.indd 33

1/13/09 9:56:19 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

traded in the USD/CHF currency pair with only $250 in trading account margin. This is assuming that the maximum leverage of 400:1 is utilized. In other words, for every $1 that a trader
has invested in a forex account, that trader can control a whopping
$400 in a currency trade. In this particular example, the $250 in the
trader’s trading account can control a trade of $100,000, using 400:1
leverage.
Of course, like many good things in life, the massive amount
of leverage offered in foreign exchange trading can be viewed as
the proverbial double-edged sword. The fact that a small amount of
money controls a large amount of money in forex trading can certainly serve to magnify profit potential. But on the flip side of the
coin, the amount of risk inherent in highly leveraged trading like
this is equally magnified.
Therefore, it is advisable to use caution when trading with the
substantial leverage common in forex trading. Highly leveraged trading is aggressive trading that is characterized by both high risk and
high potential reward.

M argin Call — Insufficient Funds
The risk that is assumed when trading aggressively in currencies is
primarily confined to the dreaded margin call. But contrary to the
popular opinion that a margin call represents the worst-case scenario for a trader, this is far from the truth. The worst case could be
far worse.
A margin call is actually a safeguard to protect the trader from
losing 100%, or even more, of the money in a trading account.

34

c02.indd 34

1/13/09 9:56:19 AM

Margin Call—Insufficient Funds

To owe additional funds to a broker is actually the worst-case scenario, and this uncomfortable situation is largely avoidable because
of the existence of the margin call.
Unlike in the world of traditional stock trading, a margin call
in foreign exchange trading is not actually a physical call from the
broker to add additional funds to the margin account when equity
is running low. In forex, if a trader no longer has enough equity in
the trading account to keep the open position(s) viable, the trading platform software automatically closes out all open positions and
immediately realizes all losses at the prevailing market rates.
Although this may seem a bit cold-hearted, there are good reasons for automated margin calls in foreign exchange trading. Prices
can move extremely fast in the forex market, and because of the
high leverage involved, every price move is magnified. Therefore,
when a trader’s equity runs low, the account can become depleted
quickly and there is usually not enough time to call for more funds.
As a safeguard measure, the forex margin call closes all open positions to help ensure that the trader does not lose the entire account,
or worse.
So when exactly is a margin call triggered? This depends entirely
on the number and size of the lot(s) traded, the leverage chosen,
and the equity in the account. But generally speaking, a margin call
is triggered when a trading account no longer has sufficient equity
available to maintain the required margin for the positions that are
currently open.
For example, suppose a trader has $2500 in a trading account,
and leverage of 100:1 with a standard lot size of 100,000 units per
trade have been chosen as the settings for this account. If this trader

35

c02.indd 35

1/13/09 9:56:20 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

wishes to buy one lot (or GBP£100,000) of the GBP/USD pair,
USD$1970 in margin is required to be put up, as per the exchange
rate at the time of this writing. This is because £1000 is needed to
control £100,000 at 100:1 leverage. But since the trading account
is denominated in U.S. dollars, this £1000 needs to be converted
into the U.S. dollar equivalent (which, at the current exchange rate,
comes out to around $1970).
Each minimum price movement, or pip (explained in the
next section), is worth exactly USD$10 in this scenario. If we
assume that this trader does not place any stop losses and the market goes against the position, every price movement against the
position will bring down the account equity by $10. So, once
again, if the trader has an initial $2500 in a trading account and
the margin required to keep the trade open is $1970, the account
will experience a margin call and the position will automatically
be closed once equity dips below $1970, which is $530 below the
initial account equity. At $10 per pip, this constitutes a potential
pip loss of around 53 pips (minus the spread) before margin call is
reached.
The obvious problem with the example just given is that the
trader entered into an inordinately large trade for the amount of
funds in the trading account, and the trader also failed to use a stop
loss. Of course, margin calls and even more horrible doomsday scenarios can easily be avoided just by using some good old-fashioned
trading prudence. This includes using stop losses and only entering trades that are sized appropriately in proportion to the size of
the trading account. This will be discussed further in the section
covering risk and money management in Chapter 6.

36

c02.indd 36

1/13/09 9:56:20 AM

P i p s — T h e C u r r e n c y o f C u r r e n c y Tr a d i n g

P ips — The Currency of Currency Trading
Up to this point, pips have been lightly touched upon but not properly defined. An extremely important concept in foreign exchange
trading, a pip is simply the smallest unit of price movement in the
exchange rate of a currency pair. Pip can stand for “percentage in
point” or “price interest point.” But regardless of the exact acronym definition, its practical meaning is clear. Traders trade foreign
exchange in order to earn pips. Earned pips are the reward for a
good trade, while lost pips are the punishment for a bad trade.
Loosely akin to the “tick” found in other financial markets, a pip
most often refers to the smallest change in the fourth decimal place
of most major currencies. This would be the equivalent of 1/100th of
one percent, or one basis point. The notable exception to this would
be currency pairs denominated in Japanese yen, or JPY, in which a
pip would constitute the smallest change in the second decimal place.
So, for the vast majority of currency pairs like EUR/USD or
GBP/CHF or AUD/NZD, the exchange rate format would look
like x.xxxx, where a change of 0.0001 would constitute a pip movement. On the other hand, for the handful of currency pairs featuring the yen, like USD/JPY or GBP/JPY, the exchange rate format
would look like xxx.xx, where a change of 000.01 would constitute
a pip movement.
Calculating the exact value of each pip for the currency pair
and lot size traded is the job of the broker’s trading platform, which
should include some kind of pip calculator created expressly for this
purpose. In its absence, however, here is a simple calculation:
Value Per Pip = [Lot Size] ⫻ [Number of Lots] ⫻ [Pip Size]

37

c02.indd 37

1/13/09 9:56:20 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

The result of this equation will be denominated in the quote
currency (the second currency in the pair). No currency conversion
is needed for U.S. dollar-denominated trading accounts if the quote
currency is already USD. To obtain the dollar value per pip if the
quote currency is anything other than USD, however, the result must
be converted to dollars using the current exchange rate between the
quote currency and the U.S. dollar. Here are a few examples:
Example 1: Pip value for 1 standard lot of USD/JPY = 100,000
[Lot Size] ⫻ 1 [Number of Lots] ⫻ 000.01 [Pip Size] = ¥1000
(quote currency in Japanese yen)
Dollar pip value = ¥1000 ÷ 101.00 [current USD/JPY exchange
rate] = $9.90/pip
Example 2: Pip value for 1 standard lot of EUR/GBP = 100,000
[Lot Size] ⫻ 1 [Number of Lots] ⫻ 0.0001 [Pip Size] ⫽ £10
(quote currency in British pounds)
Dollar pip value ⫽ £10 ⫻ 1.9750 [current GBP/USD exchange
rate] = $ 19.75/pip
Example 3: Dollar pip value for 1 standard lot of EUR/USD ⫽
100,000 [Lot Size] ⫻ 1 [Number of Lots] ⫻ 0.0001 [Pip Size] ⫽
$10/pip (quote currency already in U.S. dollars)
This may all seem very confusing at first to the beginning trader,
but again, most forex trading platforms come well-equipped with
a pip calculator that provides all pip values. If this calculator is not
offered, it helps to keep in mind that all currency pairs ending in
USD (as the quote currency) will be $10/pip for a standard lot,

38

c02.indd 38

1/13/09 9:56:20 AM

Spreading the Wealth—Spreads or Commissions

$1/pip for a mini lot, and $0.10/pip for a micro lot. This includes
heavily traded pairs like EUR/USD, GBP/USD, and AUD/USD.
For other key pairs like USD/JPY, USD/CHF, and USD/CAD,
their exchange rates as of this writing conveniently place their pip
values in the same approximate vicinity as the pairs ending in USD.
For a standard lot, these pairs are currently at $9.87/pip, $9.99/pip,
and $9.80/pip, respectively.
Finally, it should be kept in mind that while the lot size, amount
of lots traded and specific currency pair traded will certainly affect
pip value, the leverage chosen by the trader, whether it is 50:1, 400:1
or somewhere in between, has absolutely no bearing whatsoever on
pip value.

S preading the Wealth — Spreads or
Commissions?
Closely related to pip value is the much-discussed topic of spreads.
Futures and equities traders have been accustomed to paying commissions to their brokers on each and every trade, pretty much since
the beginning of time. Within the past decade or so, retail foreign
exchange brokers began emerging with their promises of no
commissions.
Most recipients of this still-enduring marketing message eventually come to realize that the broker must somehow make money, if
not through the “commissions” label. The moniker for forex broker
revenue is therefore known as the spread.
A spread is simply the difference in pips between the bid price
(exchange rate at which a trader can sell a currency pair) and the

39

c02.indd 39

1/13/09 9:56:20 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

ask price (exchange rate at which a trader can buy a currency pair).
Often, one may view an exchange rate quoted much like the following: 1.5850/53. This type of quote provides first the bid price
and then the ask price as a variation of the bid. In this case, the two
prices are separated by three pips.
These pips represent the spread, which is essentially the payment
made to the broker for services rendered, in lieu of commissions.
With most forex brokers, the spread is manifested immediately on
trade entry. That is, once a trade is entered, whether it is a buy or
sell, the open position immediately displays a running loss equivalent to the magnitude of the spread.
The spread deficit then needs to be overcome by favorable price
movement before the trader can break even and have the opportunity to profit off the position. It should be made clear that this
spread is charged only once on an entire trade cycle, from the open
of the position to the close. Spreads are never charged twice on a
single round-turn trade.
Most spreads on the major currency pairs, including EUR/USD,
USD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF, are usually in the vicinity of
two to five pips wide. Looking back to the previous section on pip
values, we can easily extrapolate the spread cost per trade.
For example, if trading one mini lot of EUR/USD, which may
have a spread of 3 pips with a certain broker, the spread value for
this trade would be USD $3.00 (as each pip on a EUR/USD mini
lot is worth USD $1.00). This would constitute the primary transaction cost incurred for making the trade.
Generally speaking, spreads can either be variable or fixed. Many
of the variable-spread brokers will advertise their tight spreads that

40

c02.indd 40

1/13/09 9:56:21 AM

Interest—Giving and Receiving

prevail during quiet markets, but then widen the spreads considerably and without notice during the faster, more volatile markets.
These faster markets usually occur around relatively frequent economic news announcements. Widened spreads during trading can
potentially wreak havoc on open and/or pending positions. This
could potentially include missed or prematurely triggered trade
entries, stop losses, profit limits, or even margin calls.
Fixed-spread brokers, on the other hand, usually offer spreads
that are slightly wider, but then actually keep those spreads fixed
at a constant level, regardless of market conditions. This offers the
clearly significant advantages of increased price certainty and fewer
surprises. If a trader plans on ever buying and/or selling currencies
during any type of fast market, it may perhaps be in the trader’s best
interest to choose a fixed-spread broker.
As for whether spreads or commissions are better, the jury is still
out. As mentioned earlier, spreads and commissions both effectively
represent a transactional payment by a customer for services offered
by a broker. Assuming the amount is comparable, there is little difference beyond their labels. As of this writing, the vast majority of
forex brokers continue to use the spread model, and this situation
appears unlikely to change significantly within the near-term, foreseeable future.

I nterest — Giving and Receiving
Though spreads are certainly the primary transactional cost in foreign
exchange trading, there can also be a secondary cost that depends
upon the currency pair traded, direction of the trade, and length of

41

c02.indd 41

1/13/09 9:56:21 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

time the position is held. Interestingly enough, this potential secondary cost can either be avoided altogether or even turned into a highyielding positive. In foreign exchange trading, this phenomenon is
known variously as “swap,” “cost of carry,” or simply “interest.”
There is actually an entire trading strategy called carry trading
that is based on earning highly leveraged, high-yield interest returns
through holding strategic currency positions. This method will
be discussed in-depth in Chapter 5, which covers specific trading
strategies.
For now, though, a simple example will help illustrate the concept of interest in foreign exchange trading. At the time of this writing, the Reserve Bank of Australia shows a relatively high central
bank interest rate for the Australian dollar at 7.25%. The Bank of
Japan, on the other hand, has kept the rate on the yen very low at
0.50%. The differential between these two rates (6.75%) is where the
potential opportunity, as well as the potential cost, resides.
As described towards the beginning of this chapter in the section
“Going Long and Selling Short,” if a trader buys the AUD/JPY pair,
that trader is essentially buying the Australian dollar (with the currently high interest rate) while simultaneously selling the Japanese
yen (with the currently low interest rate). The net effect is that the
position would earn the high rate while paying the low rate. This
creates a net-positive interest yield for the trader that is approximately based on the rate differential between the two currencies. In
this AUD/JPY example, the yield is based on the current 6.75% differential (minus an interest spread cost).
Conversely, if the trader sells the AUD/JPY pair, that trader is
essentially selling the Australian dollar while simultaneously buying

42

c02.indd 42

1/13/09 9:56:21 AM

Interest—Giving and Receiving

the yen. The net effect is that the position would earn the low rate
(JPY) while paying the high rate (AUD). This creates a net-negative
interest deficit for the trader that is approximately based upon
the rate differential between the two currencies. In this AUD/JPY
example, the deficit is based upon the current 6.75% differential
(plus an interest spread cost).
Usually, traders would hardly get excited about the prospect of
earning or paying seemingly insignificant sums due to interest, especially within the fast-paced, volatile world of currency trading.
But an extremely key point here that does often succeed in
exciting traders is that the interest earned or paid is based on the
leveraged amount traded, and not just upon the trader’s fractional
margin amount. In other words, to use the same AUD/JPY example, differential-based interest is actually earned or paid on the leveraged A$100,000 in the standard lot (100:1) trade, and not just on
the A$1000 that the trader puts up in margin to make the trade.
This can have enormous implications for traders who routinely hold
their positions open, as the potential profit or loss every day due to
interest alone can be very substantial.
Whether the trader pays or earns the interest, it is calculated
daily according to the leveraged net interest rate differential of the
trader’s open position(s), taking into account the inevitable interest rate spread cost. With most foreign exchange brokers, the daily
amount paid or charged to the trader (depending on the direction
of the position(s), long or short) is added to or subtracted from the
trader’s account each day when open positions get “rolled over” (as
described in Chapter 1). This process generally occurs at the same
time every trading day, and is usually at the end of each business day,

43

c02.indd 43

1/13/09 9:56:21 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

but the specific time varies among the different foreign exchange
brokers.
Whether a trader seeks to avoid interest charges, gain interest
payments, or neither, it is extremely important to be aware of how
interest may affect all foreign exchange positions.

H edging — Two Sides of the Same Coin
The final topic for this chapter on basic foreign exchange trading
mechanics may not be quite as basic as the other topics in this chapter.
Hedging is a rather specialized trading function that not every trader
utilizes. In fact, most foreign exchange brokers do not even offer it on
their trading platforms. But if available, hedging can be a useful tool
for those traders who have specific strategies for employing it.
To hedge is to be long and short in the same currency pair at
the same time. For example, if a trader buys one lot of USD/JPY
and sells one lot of USD/JPY at the same time, that trader can be
said to be in a perfectly hedged trading situation that is completely
profit/loss-neutral. In other words, any price movement in the currency pair—up, down, or sideways—would not exert the least bit of
influence on a hedged trade.
So why, then, would a trader utilize a trading functionality that
mimics not taking a position at all? Some traders have developed
strategies—especially those geared toward exploiting news-driven
price spikes—that involve the strategic use of hedging. For the
majority of traders that do not employ hedging, though, it is sufficient at least to be aware that hedging exists, and that it can potentially be used for protecting a one-sided currency position.

44

c02.indd 44

1/13/09 9:56:21 AM

Chapter Summary

Those brokers that do not offer hedging simply close the original one-sided position if an opposite position in the same currency
pair is initiated. For the hedging brokers, however, opposite positions in the same currency pair are treated as two open positions
that effectively cancel out each other’s running profit/loss.
One final note about hedging is that since two exactly opposing positions are profit/loss-neutral, and therefore create essentially
a riskless trading scenario, brokers that offer hedging usually require
margin on only one side of the hedge. The other, opposing side is
a margin-free trade. This means that none of the trader’s trading
equity needs to be used to open and sustain the second leg of a
hedge.

C hapter Summar y
Since currencies are always traded in pairs, their value is determined
by the market on a relative basis rather than an absolute basis. In
forex trading, one currency can only have value if it is compared
and contrasted to another currency. Because of this fact that forex is
all about trading one against another, both going long (buying) and
selling short (selling) always involve betting on one currency while
simultaneously betting against another. So being long EUR/USD
means buying EUR while selling USD, and being short EUR/
USD means selling EUR while buying USD.
There are a few methods for entering into forex trades. A market order opens a trade at the current market price. An entry order
places an order to open a trade if price reaches a certain level predetermined by the trader. Similar to the way trades are entered, they

45

c02.indd 45

1/13/09 9:56:22 AM

B a s i c F o r e i g n E x c h a n g e Tr a d i n g M e c h a n i c s

can also be exited. This can be accomplished through manually closing the trade, which is the exiting equivalent of the market order
entry, or through predetermined stop losses and profit limits.
Factors that affect trading significantly include lot size and leverage. Lot size is the actual amount that is being traded, while leverage
is the degree to which a trader’s financial power can be magnified in
order to control more in a trade with less capital.
A margin call is a safety measure that occurs when a trader no
longer possesses enough equity in the trading account to support
open position(s). In this event, all open positions are automatically
closed at the prevailing market rates, thereby preventing even further
catastrophic account losses.
Pips are the smallest unit of currency movement, and they serve
as the primary measure of profit or loss in currency trades. Spreads,
which are the main transaction cost incurred by traders when trading with the vast majority of forex brokers, are measured in pips.
A spread is simply the difference between the price at which a currency pair is bought and the price at which it is sold. This difference,
which varies with each broker, is automatically deducted once from
each round-turn trade (open and close).
Interest represents another potential cost of trading, although
traders may also earn interest on their trading positions. Depending
on the specific currency pair and the direction in which it is traded
(long or short), interest can either represent a significant expense on
positions that are held overnight, or a way to generate daily income
from holding open trades.
Finally, hedging is a more advanced topic that involves the simultaneous buying and selling of the same currency pair at the same
