
Chaikin Money Flow

The Chaikin Money Flow (CMF) indicator, developed by Marc Chaikin, is
based on the principle that rising prices should be accompanied by expand-
ing volume, and vice versa. The formula emphasizes the fact that market
strength is usually accompanied by prices closing in the upper half of their
daily range with increasing volume. Likewise, market weakness is usually
accompanied by prices closing in the lower half of their daily range with
increasing volume. This indicator can be calculated with any time span; the
longer the period, the more deliberate the swings. Money flow indicators
calculated with a short-term time frame, such as 10 periods, are therefore
much more volatile.

When prices consistently close in the upper half of their daily high/low
range on increased volume for the period under consideration, the indi-
cator will be positive (above the zero line). Conversely, if prices consistently
close in the lower half of their daily high/low range on increased volume,
the indicator will be negative (below the zero line).

It’s possible to construct overbought and oversold lines, crossovers of
which are used as buy and sell alerts, but the indicator really comes into it
own with divergence analysis. In Chart 23-12 of National Semiconductor, we
can see some good examples in practice. In early 1994, the Chaikin was
falling sharply as the price ran up to its final peak. At the time of the actual
high, it was barely above the equilibrium line. This showed that the quality
of the last few weeks of the rally left a lot to be desired. At the end of 1995,
the divergence was more blatant since the indicator was barely able to 1I8€
above the zero line at a time when the price was making a new high. Both
these examples were followed by long downtrends.

Volume Oscillators 423

Chart 23-12 National Semiconductor, 1993-1997, and CMF. (From www.pring.com.)

=r = ===

—_——

National Semiconductor

184
Chaikin Money Flow

op eps figs?

11886

Positive divergences also work quite well, as we can see from the early 1996
bottom. See how the price makes a marginal new low, but the oscillator is
“-. hardly below zero. This compares to the late 1995 bottom, where it was at
an extremely oversold condition. Of course, this is merely a positive momen-
tum characteristic; we still need to witness some kind of trend reversal in
price to confirm this event.

Divergences are not uncommon in momentum indicators. What sets the
Chaikin Money Flow indicator apart from the rest is that the divergences
- are usually far more blatant than, say, the relative strength indicator (RSI)
or ROC. Asa result, it can provide clues of probable trend reversals that may
hot be apparent elsewhere.

One of the ways in which I like to use this indicator is to study trading ranges,
and then compare the price action to the oscillator to see if it is giving a clue
as to the direction of the eventual breakout. Chart 23-13 shows American
Business Products with a 20-week CMF. The price was experiencing a sideways
. wading range in 1987. During the formation of the rectangle, the CMF indi-
cator violated an up trendline and, later in the September—October period,
diverged very negatively with the price. This combination indicated vulnera-
~ bility, so it was not surprising that the price subsequently experienced a nasty
decline. Later, the price traced out another trading range, but this ime the
CMF rallied the moment the trading range started, thereby suggesting that
the sideways pattern would be resolved in a positive way.

BS



424 Part II: Market Structure

Chart 23-13 American Business Products, 1986-1991, and CMF. (From www.pring.com,)

rican Business Products
10-5

Chaikin Money Flow (20-week)

Volume in the Stock Market

Upside/Downside Volume

Measures of upside/downside volume try to separate the volume in advanc
ing and declining stocks. The adoption of this technique makes it possible
to determine in a subtle way whether distribution or accumulation is tak-
ing place. The concept sounds impressive, but in practice I find volume
momentum based on ROC or trend-deviation data to be more reliable.
The upside/downside volume data are published daily in The Wall Street
Journal and weekly in Barron’s, and they are provided by many data services
such as Reuters, CSI, and Dial data. Upside/downside volume is m
in two ways.

The Upside/Downside Volume Line The first is a cumulative indice
tor similar in construction to advance/decline lines. It is known as the
upside/downside volume line. It is constructed by cumulating the difference
between the daily plurality of the volume of advancing and declining stocks.

Since an indicator of this type is always started from an arbitrary point, itis

a good idea to begin with a fairly large number. Otherwise, there is the P*
sibility that if the market declines sharply the line will move into negative
territory. If a starting total of 500 million shares is assumed, the line will be
constructed as shown in Table 23-1.

Volume Oscillators 425

Table 23-1 Calculation for the Upside/Downside Volume Line

Volume of Volume of
advancing declining
stocks, in stocks, in Upside/downside
Date millions millions Difference line
Jan. 1 101 51 +50 5050
2 120 60 +60 5110
3 155 155 0 5110
4 150 100 +50 5160
5 lll 120 9 5151

