
THE BIGGER VISION: WHERE TREND TRADING CAN TAKE YOU

313

great integrity and generosity of spirit. I’m convinced that
they are that way, at least in part, because of their trading.
Funny thing about trading: it has this odd way of reinforcing virtuous habits of character.
Let me suggest ﬁve ways in which trading can help
you improve your presence in this world. Is your spouse
anxious now that you are thinking about taking up trading
for a living? Then hand him or her this part of the book.
Spouses might be surprised to learn that the people they
are married to may well become better spouses as a result
of their trading careers.

Trading Teaches Patience
Probably the most obvious lesson you can learn from trading is to be more patient. Whether you are planning to
hold a trade for several weeks or only a few minutes, successful trading requires patience. Patience means the goodnatured willingness to suffer (the Latin root of the word
patience means “to suffer”) from the delay of an anticipated
good. In trading, the good anticipated is a healthy proﬁt.
Oftentimes market conditions are such that that good is
delayed or even negated altogether. What do impatient
traders do? They act impulsively; they panic; they make
mistakes. They trade in and out when they should be holding. They dump small losers just before they turn into winners, and they dump small winners just before they turn
into jackpots. No, impatient, impulsive traders will never
win at the trading game. Then who wins? Those with the
fortitude—a cardinal virtue, by the way, according to St.
Thomas Aquinas—to wait out the markets day in and day

314

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

out as they patiently apply their time-tested trend-trading
systems.
In addition to trading, I am also a runner. I’ve run one
marathon (and will never do that again!) and dozens of 5K
and 10K races, and I put in 20 to 30 miles per week on the
roads around our home. Running is a great deal like trading. On a long training run, it is imperative that you settle
into a quiet, efﬁcient pace in order to put in the miles
needed to build up the capacity to endure the faster pace
of the race. Go out too quickly and you risk breaking down
before your goal distance. The correct pacing on a long run
requires patience: the runner must hold himself back, not
impulsively surge forward, in order to complete the goal.
The same is true with trading. The trading game is a marathon run, not a sprint, and to win it you must patiently
pace yourself.

Trading Teaches You How to Listen
To read a chart properly, you have to pay close attention to
what the chart is trying to say. You have to develop the skill
of listening to something other than yourself. Too many of
us today are great at tuning in to ourselves. We engage for
blissful hours in self-dialogue, and when speaking with
others we are constantly thinking of ways to turn the conversation back to what we really want to talk about. Few of
us are very good at listening. Do you want to be a great
trader? Then you must become a great listener.
The chart is a pictorial form of language. The price
patterns, the indicators, the ebb and ﬂow of volume: these
are the words charts use to speak to us. The trader must be

THE BIGGER VISION: WHERE TREND TRADING CAN TAKE YOU

315

able to hear what is said and respond appropriately. Sometimes charts just speak noise. We avoid those charts. Sometimes charts speak beautiful music. Those are the charts
we play. In either case, we need to listen attentively to hear
what the charts have to say.
Listen to this, men: according to all the polls, what do
women want most in a man? No, not that! What women
want most is a man who will listen to them, pay attention
to them, a man who will “get” them. Guys, write this
down: trading can make you a better listener, and that can
make you downright sexy!

Trading Teaches You How to Be Forgiving
Imagine this scenario: you run your scans, you eyeball your
charts, and after several hours of intensive research you
come up with what looks to be the best trade of the week.
In fact, this chart is the best-looking chart you have seen
in a long time. The markets have been choppy and tough
to trade lately, but this setup looks like a sureﬁre winner.
So at the open you ﬁre off your stop-limit order to enter
the trade, and sure enough, half an hour later it executes.
You are now long XYZ in size. It closes the ﬁrst day with a
⫹3 percent proﬁt—not a bad start. It closes the second day
at a ⫹5 percent proﬁt, and the third day at ⫹7 percent. All
is well, and you envision the trade hitting your ⫹15 percent
proﬁt target by the end of next week. That evening, however, the company comes out with some bad news: earnings
are not going to be as great as everyone expected and so
the company is lowering its guidance ﬁgures by a considerable amount. The next day, the stock opens below your

316

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

entry price and proceeds very quickly to trade down
through your stop-loss. You are out of the trade with a loss.
In a quick Wall Street minute your hopes have been
dashed.
How do you feel at this point? I’ll tell you how you
feel. You feel betrayed and resentful. The company’s management let you down. They are bumbling idiots. It’s all
their fault! Or, if you are a neurotic like me, you will blame
yourself. You should have done more research. You should
have taken some proﬁts while you had the chance. You
should have seen that internal weakness in the chart. If only
this, and if only that, you will say. Regret and shame color
your mood.
Now, those are perfectly understandable emotional
responses to a disappointing experience. But are they the
best way to respond to a trade gone bad? Of course not.
Over time, those negative experiences (and at times they
will come in large batches) will eventually drive you out of
the trading game if you can’t get a handle on them. This is
precisely what trading teaches us to do: in order to get
beyond the blame game or the “woe is me” game, we need
to learn the art of forgiveness. Forgive the company for
mishandling a bad quarter. Forgive the chart for not drawing your attention more strongly to that hidden pocket of
weakness. Forgive yourself for not being diligent enough,
or prescient enough, or whatever enough. Forgive and forget and move on to the next trade. It is an essential lesson
to learn in life—to forgive the mistakes of others as well as
your own—and it is an essential lesson to learn in the process of trading for life.

THE BIGGER VISION: WHERE TREND TRADING CAN TAKE YOU

317

Trading Teaches You to Hold Your
Biases Loosely
A bias is simply a partiality I hold toward some expected
outcome. Negatively, biases can hinder us from evaluating
a situation objectively. Positively, a bias is often the only
reason I would evaluate a situation in the ﬁrst place. Let me
illustrate. It is often said that there is a liberal bias in the
media today. For the sake of argument, let’s assume that
that is true. Negatively, this means that media investigations of an event may not provide us with an objective reading of what actually happened. Instead, what we get is an
assessment from the liberal perspective, not the whole
story. But positively, that liberal bias is likely what initiated
the investigation in the ﬁrst place. Without that bias, there
might not have been enough interest to generate a news
story at all. Hence, biases can play a productive role if kept
in check: they generate the initial interest in an outcome
and give that outcome its signiﬁcance.
Statistics deﬁnes accurate results as results that are
free of all bias. Science deﬁnes a well-designed study as one
that is free of all bias. But stock trading is not so objective.
We need an initial bias—bullish, bearish, or something in
between—in order to generate our initial interest in, and
then our directional commitment toward, a particular trading outcome. We need a sense of where we see the markets
headed over the short term at least so that we can apply the
most proﬁtable trading systems for that market type. And
we need to know whether the chart we are scrutinizing is
more likely to move up, down, or sideways in the near

318

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

future. This is why trend traders use technical analysis:
moving averages, trendlines, candlesticks, and indicators all
help us build a rational, probabilistic bias toward the markets in general as well as toward our individual trades.
Traders get into trouble, however, when they cling too
closely to their biases. Learn this market mantra: “Let the
markets do what they want to do!” If our bias gets us into a
trade and it turns out that our bias was wrong, we need to
cling loosely enough to it to let it go. Too strong a bias will
prevent us from doing what we should be doing with a
trade gone bad: taking the quick loss and moving on. Biases
can also hurt us with our winners. How many times have
we held on to a nice winner, believing in our bias that it
would be a big jackpot win only to see those paper proﬁts
dwindle to nothing? All too often, no doubt. So again,
traders need to hold an initial bias toward the markets and
truly commit themselves to it in the form of real-money
trades, but they must also refuse to cling to that bias when
it proves to be a misread.

Trading Teaches You to Be Humble
This brings us to our last lesson: along with holding loosely
to our biases, trading teaches us to hold loosely to our
pride. The markets are just too big for any mere mortal to
conquer. There are too many vectors, too many inputs, too
many inter- and intramarket relationships, for any single
person to get a handle on them all—but put together a
string of healthy winners and you will soon feel like you
are (blast the fanfare) Master of the Market Domain! Strike
down that attitude as soon as you feel it creeping up on

THE BIGGER VISION: WHERE TREND TRADING CAN TAKE YOU

319

you. No one—not Buffett, not Cramer, not Seykota, not
Soros—masters the market. The best we can do is to learn
time-tested systems that put as much probability on our
side as possible, and then be diligent in applying those systems day in and day out.
Trading psychologist Bennett McDowell suggests in
an online article that a humble, submissive posture toward
the power of the markets is of much greater beneﬁt than
an aggressive stance. He writes:
Some new traders who had to be aggressive in
their chosen businesses tend to think they need
to be aggressive with the markets. It seems logical. In fact, that is what made them successful
before as sales people, managers, executives, doctors, business owners, entrepreneurs, etc. In
trading however, this aggressive type of behavior can actually be your biggest weakness. The
belief that you can force the market to do what
you want and make your trade work, just won’t
happen! The markets are too big. In fact some of
the most successful traders I know approach the
market passively! They tend to “Follow” the markets and not force an outcome.
Again, learn this maxim: “Let the markets do what they
want to do!” This book gives you the tools necessary to do
just that and earn a great living from them. In truth, trend
trading is really all about trend following. You will note that
in nearly every setup we offer here, a trend is already in
place—either in price, in the indicators, or in both—before

320

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

we enter the trade. The prideful trader wants to glory in
trying to outthink the markets, to buy when everyone is
selling and to sell when everyone is buying in the hopes of
catching the reversal before anyone else sees it. But unless
you have insider information, or you are as business savvy
as a Warren Buffett or a Peter Lynch, it is best to stick with
what works. What works in trend trading is a humble posture toward the market, letting it tell us as clearly as possible what it is likely to do next.
Another area where pride needs to be swallowed and
humility adopted is that of sticking ﬁrmly to your trading
systems. Let me give you an example from one of the worst
trades I’ve made in recent memory. While my trading systems normally require that we sell prior to an earnings
announcement, I decided to hold one of my positions over
the announcement in the hope that the company, like it did
in the previous two quarters, would beat Street estimates.
The company closed trading at a price of 25.48, a full ⫹12
percent over our entry price. Our subscribers happily
logged their nice gain and moved on. I, however, woke the
next morning to ﬁnd the same stock trading below 20.00
after both earnings per share (EPS) and guidance came in
below the Street. And when the dip buyers failed to come
to my rescue (the stock traded brieﬂy under 18.00), I ﬁnally
sold my position for a very embarrassing loss.
This kind of agonizing mistake happens even to the
best of traders, but it cannot happen to successful traders
very often. What caused me to hold overnight? Well,
greed, pure and simple, yes, but also pride—the prideful
attitude that led me to believe that I knew better than my
own trading systems. Imagine that! So in short, for the sake

THE BIGGER VISION: WHERE TREND TRADING CAN TAKE YOU

321

of your trading success, adopt a humble attitude toward
both the markets and your various trading disciplines. Both
know better than you do.

DR. STOXX’S BIG VISION:
MAKE EVERYONE A TRADER
Several years ago I sat in a commuter’s café in New York
City’s Grand Central Station with my brother-in-law,
Tony. As the caffeine began to whirl in our brains, we
talked of our mutual love for trading and how we both were
looking for ways to take our trading to the next level. By
that time I had developed most of the systems taught in this
book, and my online trading store, Befriendthetrend.com,
had just been launched. Tony is a computer programmer,
among other things (including owning his own ISP), and
he suggested that there might be a way to automate my
nightly research routine. He described the possibility of
software that would screen for each of our setups, suggest
entry prices and stop-losses, and even connect to an OLB
to send in the trade orders automatically. In this way, you
could truly trade for a living while being completely occupied with some other activity (such as your day job).
That conversation never did get much further than
that, unfortunately. I am still waiting for Tony to sell his
business and devote himself full-time to programming our
software. But the conversation started me thinking of ways
I could expand the outreach of our services. Over the next
year, I began writing up various how-to manuals on different trading strategies including swing trading, day trading,
and e-minis trading. All of these have sold very well over

322

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

the years, and they are still hard to keep in stock. Then we
held a four-hour online seminar for over 200 beginning
traders. The seminar was so successful, we put on a second
seminar for intermediate to advanced traders the next
month. Soon I started getting calls from traders to serve
as their personal trading coach. Then came requests that I
set up a hedge fund for our clients who were too busy to
trade for themselves. So we did, and the Befriend the Trend
Fund was born (now approaching its fourth year). Then
there were requests for articles to trading publications. And
now this book. In short, my passion for trading quite
quickly became a small cottage industry.
Now, as we head into our seventh year in business at
Befriendthetrend.com, I ﬁnd myself asking, “What’s next?
Where does the dream go from here?” Well, I’m not sure
where it will go from here, but I can tell you where I’d like
it to go. Let me in summary form lay out a vision of where
I hope to see the trend-trading phenomenon go over the
next decade (and Befriendthetrend.com along with it).

Trading Centers
I’d love to see the development of trading and educational
centers across the United States and abroad. I’m not talking here about the notorious “prop shops” of the 1990s, so
many of which either went bankrupt or were indicted for
fraud. What I envision instead is a series of franchiseworthy storefronts, located in suburban shopping malls as
well as downtown business districts, that would house trading stations, plenty of ﬂat panels showing ﬁnancial news, and
overhead monitors to ﬂash market updates and charts of
interest on large screens. These would be cool, hip places—

THE BIGGER VISION: WHERE TREND TRADING CAN TAKE YOU

323

with attention paid to interior design—where traders could
hang out together, talk stocks, trade their accounts, and
along the way, learn a thing or two. Managers of each center would be highly adept at technical analysis and reading
between the lines of money ﬂow and would be available to
traders for advice and training. Stocks showing promising
technical setups would be called out over loudspeakers and
their charts ﬂashed up on the screens. In back rooms, seminars would be taught each day for those wanting to
strengthen their trading skills. Espresso would be served
during market hours and then microbrews after the close.
Heck, forget about trading; it would just be a lot of fun to
hang out there, wouldn’t it?
I’m not sure what the best business plan would be to
make sure these centers are proﬁtable. Perhaps they could
come under the wing of some of the bigger Wall Street
banks as an extension of their private client services.
What’s in it for them? A number of things: increased customer base, enhanced customer loyalty, positive branding
(think Goldman Sachs meets Starbucks), investment diversiﬁcation (through owning commercial property), and certainly an increase in commission revenue, to name a few.
Monthly membership fees, a cut on the commission structure, and sales from beverages, music, seminars, and educational materials would likely make the individual shops
an attractive franchise.

Automated Money Machines
Well, one problem with the trading centers idea is that market hours are usually when everyone has to work, doggone
it. Not everyone can (yet) trade for a living. Some of us

324

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

have to keep the old day job. So who is going to spend time
there on a Tuesday morning at 10 a.m.? Mostly retirees and
the unemployed, both groups that tend not to have the kind
of discretionary funds needed to open a trading account.
So here is an alternative that would also serve the same
purpose of bringing more people into the trading game:
build software for use at home that would completely automate the trading process. If we can ﬁnd a way to mechanize the setup screening, and if we can ﬁnd a way to enter
orders automatically, and if the same software can then
update those orders at each market close, in effect we will
have created an automatic money machine. We will have
turned all my years of hard work into a regular ATM.
Is this possible? Sure it is. Currently there exist chart
pattern recognition software, technical parameter screening software, and automated order entry and order management systems. Why couldn’t all these be put together
into a single package? Why couldn’t we design software to
(1) determine the general market type (as mentioned previously), (2) screen for trade setups to match the market
type, and (3) enter and exit those setups automatically, in
hands-off fashion? Certainly this can be done. Any software engineers out there in need of a job?
Okay, there is one glaring problem facing the creation
and marketing of such a trading machine. Let’s say we were
successful in building an automatic money machine that
would screen for and trade only the most ﬁtting of all our
trend-trading setups. And let’s say we then wanted to offer
this software to the public. So we hire a top-notch advertising ﬁrm and get the word out. We put on e-mail campaigns; we send out direct-mail ﬂiers; we buy radio and

THE BIGGER VISION: WHERE TREND TRADING CAN TAKE YOU

325

even television time. And soon the orders come streaming
in. We sell 500 copies . . . and then 1,000 . . . and then word
of mouth kicks in and we are quickly up to 5,000, then
10,000. Then we make a few reﬁnements, bring out the 2.0
version, and sell another 10,000 copies. So now there are
20,000 traders out there using our money machine to trade
their accounts automatically. That’s a reasonable ﬁgure for
a piece of software that might retail for around $2,000 (plus
the monthly data fee).
Do you see where this is going? Let me spell it out.
Say the machine issues a signal to buy KLAC at 50.00 per
share. KLAC is a pretty heavily traded stock. The average
number of shares traded is around 5 million per day. But
look what happens when 20,000 traders get the same signal to buy KLAC at 50.00 per share. If each trader takes an
average position of 500 shares (some a lot more, some a lot
less), that makes for 10 million shares aiming at a single
entry price of 50.00. That’s over twice the average daily
volume trying to enter the market in the ﬁrst minute of
trading. Is that going to happen? No way. Either KLAC
will gap up and over 50.00 and not look back, or it will gap
open at 50.00, run up a bit, then collapse once all that volume is assimilated. Neither scenario provides a proﬁtable
trading environment.
Is there a solution? Yes there is, and it’s called diversiﬁcation. We need to come up with not one money machine
but dozens of them. We need to have money machines for
day traders, scalpers, swing traders, overnight and position
traders; for those with high-risk and those with low-risk tolerances; for large account and small account traders; for
professional money managers; and for the average Joe trad-

326

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

ing his IRA. Then come the sector money machines, the
ETF money machines, the e-mini money machines, the
Forex money machines—and on and on it goes. In this way
we spread the wealth, the order ﬂow, and, hence, the risk
as well.

Personal Trading Coaches Network
One last dream I have for trend trading over the next decade
is to establish a network of personal trading coaches. These
coaches would be trained at one of several training facilities
(see the trading centers idea mentioned previously) to serve
individual traders in need of private coaching. And why not?
Today we have ﬁtness coaches, weight loss coaches, childbirth coaches, and motivation coaches. We hire coaches to
help us learn how to cook, knit, do yoga, and get closer to
God. Why not hire a coach to help us learn how to trade?
I envision a network of dedicated, licensed professional traders who, as a means to supplement their income,
would travel to the client’s home for a series of one-on-one
sessions. In this private setting, every aspect of trading
could be covered, from setting up the watch lists to screening out the best trades. Higher-level skills such as tape
reading, spread trading, and hedging could be taught to
more advanced clients. And all clients would beneﬁt from
various trading visualization exercises led by the coach in
order to bolster the healthy trader’s mindset.
I know that this kind of one-on-one mentoring really
works well for taking a mediocre trader, even a losing
trader, to a high level of trading success. I’ve been privileged to coach several of our clients personally, in their
