
recognize when risk levels have changed, when
few stocks are attractive, and when simply
leaving most of our trading capital in cash is
the best course of action.
We have no idea how long the current credit
crunch will affect the market. In fact, it’s already
gone on longer and been much more brutal than
we had guessed. Nevertheless, adhering to the
techniques featured in this book has kept us
from committing the bulk of our trading capital
to failing stocks. We will weather this market
with the majority of our trading capital intact
and even make a little money by shorting a few
stocks or buying some short or double-short
exchange-traded funds. Thanks to the tools we
show you in this book, we will be ready to trade
aggressively when the technical condition of
stocks begins improving.

Short-term swing trading
Swing traders work within much shorter time frames than position traders, rarely
holding stocks for more than a few days and looking for sharp moves that technical analysis uncovers. Even though we don’t show you the specifics of how
to become a swing trader, we nevertheless discuss the basics of swing trading
and its strategies in Chapter 16. You can also read about the basics of technical
analysis and money management strategies, both of which are useful topics to
check out if you plan to become a swing trader. However, you definitely need to
seek additional training before deciding to pursue this style of trading — reading
Swing Trading For Dummies by Omar Bassal (Wiley) would be a good start.

Day trading
Day traders never leave their money in stocks overnight. They always cash
out. They can trade into and out of a stock position in a matter of hours,
minutes, or even seconds. Many outsiders watch day traders in action and

13

14

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
describe it as more like playing a video game than trading stocks. We discuss
this high-risk type of trading in Chapter 17, but we won’t be showing you the
specifics of how to do it. If day trading is your goal, this book will only take
you part of the way there. You’ll discover the basics of technical analysis, but
you need to seek out additional training before engaging in this risky trading
style — check out Day Trading For Dummies by Ann C. Logue (Wiley).

Going Long or Short
Before you start trading, you absolutely have to know what stocks you want
to buy and hold for a while, which is called going long, or holding a long stock
position. You likewise have to know at what point holding that stock is no
longer worthwhile. Similarly, you need to know at what price you want to
enter or trade into a position and at what price you want to exit or trade out
of a position. You may be surprised to find out that you can even profit by
selling a stock without ever owning it, in a process called shorting. We discuss
these vital trading strategies in Chapter 13.
You can even make money buying and selling options on stocks to simulate
long or short stock positions. Buying an option known as a call enables
you to simulate a long stock position, in much the same way that buying an
option known as a put enables you to simulate a short stock position. You
make money on calls when the option-related stock rises in price, and you
make money on a put when the option-related stock falls in price.
When placing orders for puts and calls, you’re never guaranteed to make
money, even when you’re right about the direction a stock will take. The
values of options are affected by how volatile stock prices are in relationship
to the overall direction (up or down) in which they are headed. We discuss
options and how they work in greater detail in Chapter 18.

Managing Your Money
Managing your trades so that you don’t lose a bunch of money is critical.
Although we can’t guarantee that you’ll never lose money, we can provide
you with useful strategies for minimizing your losses and getting out before
your stock portfolio takes a huge hit. The key is knowing when to hold ’em
and when to fold ’em, and we cover that in great detail in Chapter 12.

Chapter 1: The Ups and Downs of Trading Stocks
One thing that we can’t emphasize enough is that you must think of your
trading as a business and the stocks that you hold as its inventory. You can’t
allow yourself to fall in love with and thereby hang on to a stock out of loyalty.
You’ll find it especially hard to admit you’ve made a mistake; nevertheless,
you have to bite the bullet and exit the position before you take a huge hit.
You’ll discover that housecleaning and developing successful strategies for
keeping your inventory current are important parts of managing a trading
portfolio.
Setting a target price for exiting a position before ever trading into it is
the best way to protect your business from major losses. Stick with those
predetermined exit prices and you’ll avoid a major pitfall that many traders
face — holding a position too long and losing everything. You obviously
don’t want to turn a profit into a loss, so as your position in a stock produces
a profit, you can periodically raise your target exit price while continuing to
hold the position to ensure that you keep most of that profit.
Understanding your risks — market risks, investment risks, and trading
risks — helps you to make better trading decisions. We review the different
kinds of risks as they relate to specific situations at several points throughout
the book.

Understanding Fundamental Analysis
You’ve probably heard the phrase, “It’s the economy, stupid.” Well that’s
true, and we show you how understanding the basics of the business cycle
can help you improve your trading successes. In Chapter 5, you find out how
to identify periods of economic growth and recession and how these differing
periods impact bull and bear stock markets. We also explore sector rotation
and how to use it to pick the right sectors for your trading activities.
You can also discover plenty of information about how money supply,
inflation rates, deflation, joblessness, and consumer confidence impact the
mood of the market and stock prices and how the economy can be driven
by how confidently (or not) political and monetary leaders speak out about
it. We discuss the role of the Federal Reserve (Fed) and how when the Fed
Chairman speaks, the markets listen.
Understanding how the economy works isn’t the only fundamental analysis
tool that’s important to you. You also need to read financial statements to
understand the financial status of the companies you want to buy. We delve
into financial statements in Chapter 6.

15

16

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
A company’s income statements, on the other hand, give you a look at the
results of the most recent period and provide a basis for comparison with
prior years and periods. You can use these statements to look at whether
revenues are growing, and if they are, by what percentage. You also can see
how much profit the company is keeping from the revenue it generates. The
cash flow statement shows you how efficiently a company is using its cash
and whether it’s having problems meeting its current obligations. The
balance sheet gives you a snapshot of a company’s assets and liabilities and
stockholder’s equity.
You can use this information to develop your own estimate of a company’s
growth and profit potential. In Chapter 6, we show you how to do a few
basic ratio calculations that you can use to compare similar stocks and then
choose the one with the best potential.
Analysts use this information to project a company’s financial growth and
profits. You never should depend entirely on what analysts say, but you
always should do your own research and collect the opinions of numerous
analysts. One of the best ways to find out what analysts are saying and what
aspects of the financial statements may raise a red flag is the analyst call. In
Chapter 7, we explain how you can listen in on these calls and understand the
unique language used in them to make better choices when selecting stocks.
We also discuss the pros and cons of using analyst reports.

Getting a Grip on Technical Analysis
You use fundamental analysis to determine what part of the business cycle
the economy is in and what industries offer the best growth potential. Then
you use that information to select the best target companies and identify
prices at which you’d want to buy their stocks.
After choosing your targets, you then use technical analysis to follow trends
in the prices of the target stocks, so you can find the right time to get in and
ultimately to get out of a stock position. These targets become part of your
stock-watch list. After you’ve established that list, you then use the tools of
technical analysis to make your trades.
In Chapter 8, we introduce you to the basics of technical analysis, how it
works, and how it needs to be used. Although some people think of technical
analysis as no more than fortune-telling, others believe it yields significant
information that can help you make successful trades. We obviously believe
that technical analysis provides you with extensive tools for your trading
success, and we show you how to use those tools to be profitable.

Chapter 1: The Ups and Downs of Trading Stocks
Your first step in technical analysis is finding out how to create a chart. We
focus on the most popular type — bar charting. In Chapter 9, you discover
the art of deciphering simple visual stock patterns and how to distinguish
between trends and trading ranges, all so you’re able to spot when a stock
moves from a trading range into either an upward or downward trend and
know when you need to act.
In Chapter 10, we show you how to use your newfound skill of identifying
trends to locate areas of support and resistance within a trend that ultimately
help you find the right times to make your move. You find out how to read
the patterns in the charts to identify trading signals and what to do whenever
you’ve acted on a failed trading signal.
Chapter 11 fills you in on moving averages and how to use them to identify
trends. You also find out about oscillators and other indicators that traders
use for recognizing trading signals. As a newbie trader, you’ll probably find
that your greatest risk is paralysis of analysis. That’s where you may find
that you’re having so much fun reading the charts or are just so confused
about which chart has the right signal that you feel paralyzed by the variety
of choices. We show you how to create and use a tiny subset of tools that is
available in today’s charting software packages to simplify your life and make
your choices easier. You’ll likewise discover how to use such odd-sounding
but critical tools as an MACD indicator or a stochastic oscillator, and we help
you take advantage of the powerful concept of relative strength.

Putting Trading Strategy into Practice
After you get used to using the tools, it’s time to put your new skills into
practice making money. In Chapter 13, we show you how to put your newfound
affinities for fundamental analysis and technical analysis together to develop
and build your trading strategy. Using fundamental analysis, you can
✓ Determine which part of the economic cycle is driving the market.
✓ Determine which sector makes the most sense for stock trading.
✓ Figure out which sectors are in the best positions to go up.
✓ Find out which stocks are leading in the ascending sectors.
✓ Evaluate where the Fed stands on the economy and which potential
moves by the Fed can impact the strength of the market.
✓ Evaluate and hopefully anticipate potential shocks to the market.
Although doing so may seem like gazing into a crystal ball, you really
can pick up some signs by checking out the key economic indicators. We
show you what they are.

17

18

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
After you complete your fundamental analysis, we show you how to use
your new technical analysis skills successfully. Using them, you find out how
you can
✓ Trade within the overall technical conditions.
✓ Confirm which economic cycle a market is in by using index charts.
✓ Determine whether an ascending sector is stuck in a range or ready to
enter a new upward trend.
✓ Determine whether leading stocks are stuck in ranges or ready to break
out in upward trends.
Finally, we show you how to use your newfound skills to manage risk, set up
a stop-loss position, and choose your time frame for trading.
After honing your skills, you’re ready to start trading. So in Chapter 14, we
focus on the actual mechanics of trading by
✓ Discussing how to enter or trade into a position
✓ Explaining bid and ask prices
✓ Discussing the risks of market orders
✓ Explaining how to use limit and stop orders
We also explore how to exit or trade out of a position and still stay unattached
emotionally, when to take your profits, and how to minimize your losses, in
addition to discussing potential tax hits and how to minimize them.
Now that you know how to research the fundamentals, effectively use
the technical tools, and mechanically carry out a trade, the next step is
developing and managing your own trading system. We explore the basic
steps to developing the system, which include
1. Designing and keeping a trading log.
2. Identifying reliable trading patterns.
3. Developing an exit strategy.
4. Determining whether you’ll use discretionary trading methods or
mechanical trading. We explore the pros and cons of each.
5. Deciding whether to develop your own trading system or buy one of
the ones available off the shelf.
6. Testing your trading systems and understanding their limitations
before making a major financial commitment to your new system.

Chapter 1: The Ups and Downs of Trading Stocks
We also discuss assessing your results and fixing any problems.
After you’ve designed, built, and tested your system, you’re ready to jump in
with both feet. The key to getting started: Make sure you begin with a small
sum of money, examining your system and then increasing your trading
activity as you gain experience and develop confidence with the system that
you develop.

Trading at Higher Risk
Some traders decide they want to take on a greater level of risk by practicing
methods of swing trading or day trading or by delving into the areas of
trading derivatives or foreign currency. Although all of these alternatives are
valid trading options, we steer clear of explaining even the basics of how to
use these high-risk trading alternatives, and instead, we provide you with a
general understanding of the ways these trading alternatives work and the
risks that are unique to each of them.
If you decide, however, that you want to take on these additional risks,
don’t depend on the information in this book to get started. Use the general
information that we offer you here to determine what additional training you
need to feel confident before moving into these trading arenas.

Remember: Have Fun!
Although you are without question considering the work of a trader for the
money you can make, you need to enjoy the game of trading. If you find that
you’re having trouble sleeping at night because of the risks you’re taking,
then trading may not be worth all the heartache. You may need to put off
your decision to enter the world of trading until you’re more comfortable
with the risks or until you’ve designed a system that better accommodates
your risk tolerance.
You may find that you need to take a slower approach by putting less money
into your trades. You don’t need to make huge profits with your early trades.
Just trading into and out of a position without losing any money may be a
good goal for you when you’re just starting out. If you notice your position
turning toward the losing side, knowing that you can trade your way out of
it before you take a big loss may help you build greater confidence in your
abilities.

19

20

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
Remember, making a losing trade doesn’t mean that you’re a loser. Even the
most experienced traders must at times face losses. The key to successful
trading is knowing when to get out before your portfolio takes a serious hit.
On the other side of that coin, you also need to know how to get out when
you’re in a winning or profitable position. When you’re trying to ride a trend
all the way to the top, it sometimes starts bottoming out so fast that you lose
some or possibly even all of your profits, causing you to end up in a losing
position.
Trading is a skill that takes a long time to develop and is perfected only after
you make mistakes and celebrate successes. Enjoy the roller coaster ride!

Chapter 2

Exploring the Markets and
the Stock Exchanges
In This Chapter
▶ Discovering the markets
▶ Understanding the exchanges
▶ Reviewing order basics

B

illions of shares of stock trade in the United States every day, and each
trader is looking to get his or her small piece of that action. Before
moving into the specifics of how to trade, we first want to introduce you not
only to the world of stock trading, but also to trading in other key markets —
futures, options, and bonds. In this chapter, we also explain differences and
similarities among key stock exchanges and how those factors impact your
trading options. After providing you with a good overview of the key markets,
we delve into the different types of orders you can place with each of the key
exchanges.

Introducing the Broad Markets
You may think the foundation of the United States economy resides inside
Fort Knox where the country holds its billions of dollars in gold, or possibly
that it resides in our political center, Washington, D.C. But nope. The country’s
true economic center is Wall Street, where billions of dollars change hands
each and every day, thousands of companies are traded, and millions of
people’s lives are affected.
Stocks are not the only things sold in the broad financial markets. Every
day, futures, options, and bonds also are traded. Although we focus on
stock exchanges in this chapter, we first need to briefly explain each type of
market.

22

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Stock markets
The stocks of almost every major U.S. corporation and many major foreign
corporations are traded on a stock exchange in the United States each day,
and none of the money involved in these trades goes directly into the
companies being traded. Today numerous local and international stock
exchanges trade stocks in publicly held corporations; moreover, the only
major corporations not traded are those held privately — usually by families
or original founding partners that chose not to sell shares on the public
market. Forbes magazine’s top privately held corporations are Cargill, Koch
Industries, Chrysler, GMAC, Price Waterhouse Coopers, and Mars. Many of
the large private corporations that are not traded publicly do have provisions
for employee ownership of stock and must report earnings to the SEC, so
they straddle the line of public versus private corporations.
A share of stock is actually a portion of ownership in a given company. Few
stockholders own large enough stakes in a company to play a major decisionmaking role. Instead, stockholders purchase stocks, hoping that their investments rise in price, so that those stocks can be sold at a profit some time in
the future.
For the majority of this chapter, we focus on the three top stock exchanges
in the United States: the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), NASDAQ (the
National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation system), and
the American Stock Exchange (Amex). We also introduce you to the evolving
world of electronic communication networks (ECNs) on which you can trade
stocks directly, thus bypassing brokers.

Futures markets
Futures trading actually started in Japan in the 18th century to trade rice and
silk. This trading instrument was first used in the United States in the 1850s
for trading grains and other agricultural entities. Basically, futures trading
means establishing a financial contract in which you try to predict the future
value of a commodity that must be delivered at a specific time in the future.
Yup, if you had a working crystal ball, it would be very useful here. This type
of trading is done on a commodities exchange. The largest such exchange in
the United States today is the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Commodities
include any product that can be bought and sold. Oil, cotton, and minerals
are just a few of the products sold on a commodities exchange.

Chapter 2: Exploring the Markets and the Stock Exchanges
Futures contracts must have a seller (usually the person producing the
commodity — a farmer or oil refinery, for example) and a buyer (usually a
company that actually uses the commodity). You also can speculate on either
side of the contract, basically meaning:
✓ When you buy a futures contract, you’re agreeing to buy a commodity
that is not yet ready for sale or hasn’t yet been produced at a set price
at a specific time in the future.
✓ When you sell a futures contact, you’re agreeing to provide a commodity
that is not yet ready for sale or hasn’t yet been produced at a set price
at a specific time in the future.
The futures contract states the price at which you agree to pay for or sell a
certain amount of this future product when it’s delivered at a specific future
date. Although most futures contracts are based on a physical commodity,
the highest volume futures contracts are based on the future value of stock
indexes and other financially related futures.
Unless you’re a commercial consumer who plans to use the commodity, you
won’t actually take delivery of or provide the commodity for which you’re
trading a futures contract. You’ll more than likely sell the futures contract
you bought before you actually have to accept the commodity from a
commercial customer. Futures contracts are used as financial instruments by
producers, consumers, and speculators. We cover more about those players
and futures contracts in much greater depth in Chapter 18.

Bond markets
Bonds are actually loan instruments. Companies sell bonds to borrow cash. If
you buy a bond, you’re essentially holding a company’s debt or the debt of a
governmental entity. The company or government entity that sells the bond
agrees to pay you a certain amount of interest for a specific period of time in
exchange for the use of your money. The big difference between stocks and
bonds is that bonds are debt obligations and stocks are equity. Stockholders
actually own a share of the corporation. Bondholders lend money to the
company with no right of ownership. Bonds, however, are considered
safer, because if a company files bankruptcy, bondholders are paid before
stockholders. Bonds are a safety net and not actually a part of the trading
world for individual position traders, day traders, and swing traders. While
a greater dollar volume of bonds is traded each day, the primary traders for
this venue are large institutional traders. We want to mention them here but
don’t discuss them any further in this book.
